CERTAIN necessary Directions, as well for the Cure of the Plague, as for
preventing the Infection; With many easy Medicines of small charge, very
profitable to his Majesty's Subjects.

Set down by the College of Physicians by the Kings MAJESTY'S special
command.

With sundry Orders thought meet by his Majesty, and his Privy Council, to
be carefully executed for prevention of the Plague.

Also certain select Statutes commanded by His Majesty to be put in execution
by all Justices, and other officers of the Peace throughout the Realm;

Together with His Majesty's Proclamation for further direction there in: and a
Decree in Star Chamber, concerning buildings and In-mates.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1636.



To the Justices of Peace.
AS the want of Laws occasioneth wrongs to be committed wittingly; And want of
knowledge of Laws carries men into offenses ignorantly: So are Laws themselves
a burden when they are too many, and their very number is a cause that few are
executed: where Penal Laws have otherwise no life, but in their execution.
And certainly that Magistrate who knows but few, and causes those to be
duly observed, deserves better of the Commonwealth, then he that knows
many, and executes but few. Therefore is the Composition of this Volume, that
those few Laws, and other ordinances being most needful for the time, may be
easily had, soon known, and duly executed; Which is required by His MAJESTY.

The Contents of this BOOK.
AN Advice set down by the College of Phisicians, for prevention and cure of
the Plague. 2 Orders concerning health. 3 A Proclamation for quickening the
Laws made for the relief of the poor, and the suppressing, punishing, and
settling of the sturdy Rogues and Vagabonds. 4 An Act for the relief of the
poor. 5 An Act for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners. 6 An Act
for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars. 7 An Act for the
charitable relief and ordering of persons infected with the Plague. 8 A Decree
of Star Chamber against Inmates and ne^ Buildings.
At Whitehall 22. April, 1636. Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty.
L. Archbishop of Cant. Lord Keeper. Lo. Duke of Lenox. L. Chamberlain. Earl
of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Holland. Lord Viso. Wilmot. Lord
Cottington. Lord Newburgh. M. Treasurer. M. Comptroller. M. Vicechamberlaine.
M. Secretary Coke. M. Secretary Wind^ba^^.

IT was this day ordered, that the Justices of Peace of Middlesex and Surrey,
shall forthwith meet together, and shall seriously consider of and set down
such rates as are fit for the raising of moneys to build Pest-houses, or to
provide other convenient habitations, or places of aboade for infected People,
and to furnish them with all other necessaries for their relief, and shall
take order for levying, and collecting the same accordingly.

It is likewise thought fit and ordered, that the Justices of Peace of
Middlesex shall repair unto, and join with the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of London, in making additionall orders (to those heretofore printed) to
be forthwith printed for preventing, so much as may be, the increase of the
infection; And shall be hereby authorized from time to time hereafter to make
such orders as they shall think fit and convenient for the purposes aforesaid.

Also the Church wardens and Overseers of the poor, and Constables of every
Parish, are hereby required and enjoined to provide themselves with books for
their directions.

Lastly, the Physicians of the City of London are to renew the former book
touching their Medicines against the Infection, and to add unto and alter the
same as they find the present times and occasions to require, and to cause the
said book to be forthwith printed.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
WHereas it has pleased your MAJESTY, out of your Royal care of the safety
and welfare of your Subjects, by your special Command, as also by Order from
the Lords of your MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council to enjoin the
College of Physicians to renew their former book touching their medicines
against the infection, and to add unto and alter the same, as they find the
present times and occasion to require: We, the President and College of
Physicians, in all obedience to your Royal Command, have often met and maturely
considered of the premises, and upon serious reuiew of our former book, have
made such additions and alterations as we judged most requisite for the
present occasion; which we have caused to be printed, and now most humbly
present unto your most Gracious MAJESTY.

An advice set down by the College of Physicians, by his MAJESTY'S special
Command, containing certain necessary Directions, as well for the cure of the
Plague, as for preventing the Infection; with many easy Medicines and of small
charge, the use whereof may be very profitable to his MAJESTY'S Subjects.
Doctors, Apothecaries and Chirurgions.
THe Church orders for prayers being first observed as in former times, it is
thought necessary that by the government of the City there be appointed six or
four Doctors at least, who may apply themselves to the cure of the Infected:
and that these Doctors be stipendiaries to the City for their lives: and that
to each Doctor there be assigned two Apothecaries and three Chirurgions, who
are also to be stipended by the City, that so due and true care may be taken in
all things, that the people perish not without help, and that the Infection
spread not, while none take particular care to resist it, as in Paris, Venice,
and Padua, and many other Cities.

And if any Doctor, Apothecary or Surgeon stipended by the City shall happen
to die in the service of the attendance of the Plague, then their widows
suruiuing shall have their pensions during their lives.

Men or goods from foreign infected places.
IT is likewise necessary that there be care taken that neither men nor goods
may come from any suspected places beyond the seas or in the land, without
certificate of health, or else either to be sent suddenly away, or to be put
to the Pesthouse or some such like place for forty days (according to the
custom of Italy,) till the certainty of their soundness may be discovered.

Two places for entertainment are to be provided; one for the sound and
another for those who are infected.

That all established good orders be revived.
THat the Statutes and good Orders made and formerly published against common
Beggars, against all manner of Plays, Bowling-allies, Inmates, Tipling-houses,
Lestalls, against the sale of corrupt flesh or fish, may be revived and
strictly executed, and that the Skauengers in general, and every particular
householder take care for the due and orderly cleansing of the streets and
private houses, which will avail much in this case.

That Dogs, Catts, Conies and tame Pigeons be destroyed about the Town, or
to be kept so sparingly that no offense may come by them, and that no Swine be
permitted to range up and down the Streets, as they frequently do, or rather
not to keep any at all.

It were also to be wished that the Slaughter-houses were utterly put from out
the liberties of the City, being in themselves very offensive, And that
tunnells in Church-vaults be considered of, and the depth of graves.

To be ca^tolous upon any suspicion.
IT is to be feared, because every one desires his own liberty, that none
will give notice of any suspicion of the Plague against themselves; wherefore
that must be the Overseers care, upon any notice or suspicion of Infection, by
the help of the Doctors, Chirurgions, Keepers or Searchers, to find out the
truth thereof, and so to proceed accordingly, but not to depend upon the
Testimony of women Searchers alone.

The care to be taken when a house is visited.
THat upon the discovery of the Infection in any house, there be present
means used to preserve the whole, as well as to cure the infectted. And that
no sick person be removed out of any house, though to another of his own,
without notice thereof to be given to the Overseers and to be by them approved:
or if the whole be to be removed, that notice be given to the Overseers of
their remove, and that caution be given that they shall not wander about till
they be sound.

The house that is known to be infected, though none be dead therein, to be
shut up, and carefully kept watched by more trusty men then ordinary warders,
till a time after the party be well recovered, and that time to be forty days
at the least.

Caution concerning flying into the Country.
BEcause many masters of families, presently upon the visiting of their houses
before any be dead, fly into the country to their friends, by which means the
plague is often carried into the country: That no man shall depart his house
except it be to an house not inhabited, and that it be to an house of such
distance as that he may conveniently travel thither without lying by the way,
much less that he send his children or servants and this to be done, by the
approbation of the Overseers under their hands.

That such also as remove into the Country before their houses be visited,
have a certificate from the Overseers of their parish, under their hands and
seals, testifying, that such persons were not visited before their remove,
that by virtue thereof they may the freeli^r travel in the Country, and be
more readily entertained.

That no infected person be secretly conveyed out of any house: and in any such
misdemeanour the master of the house, both from which the sick party is sent,
as also the master of the house into which the party shall be received without
the license of the Overseers of both parishes respectively, shall be severally
punished at the discretion of the Overseers.

Because it is likely that the better sort will not call to them such Doctors
as are deputed to the Care of the plague, upon the first fulling sick of any in
their houses, lest thereby they might draw greater infection upon themselves*
if therefore any house so bring other Doctors shall happen to be visited, that
then the Doctor, who shall ordinarily take the care of that house, shall
presently cause notice of the said infection to be given to the Overseers, that
care may be had thereof by the Physicians deputed.

Burial of the dead.
THat one being dead in any house of the Plague, notice be given to the
Overseers, and that the dead party be buried by night in private manner; yet
not without the priuity of the Minister, Clerk, Bearers, and Constable or
Overseers, and that none enter the visited house but permitted persons, upon
danger to be presently shut up themselves, and that there be a visible mark
set upon the outside of the door, and to stand shut up forty days, and that
there be no tolling or ringing of Bells at such private burialls.

Caution about apparel and housholdstuffe.
THat no apparel nor housholdstuffe be removed or sold out of the infected
house, for six months after the infection is ceased in the house, and that all
the Brokers and inferior Criers for apparel be restrained in that behalf.

Preservatives. Correction of the air.
FOr the correcting of the infectious air, it were good that often Bonfires
were made in the streets, and that sometime the Tower Ordnance might be shot
off, as also that there be good fires kept in and about the visited houses and
their neighbors.

Take Rosemary dried, or Juniper, Baileaues or Frankincense: cast the^ same
upon a Chafingdish, and receive the fume or smoke thereof.

Also to make fires rather in pans to remove about the chamber, then in
chimneies, shall better correct the air of the houses, adding a piece of old
iron to the fire.

Take a quantity of Vinegar very strong, and put to it some small quantity of
Rosewater, ten branches of Rosemary, put them all into a basin, then take five
or six flint stones, heated in the fire till they be burning hot, cast them
into the same Vinegar, and so let the fumes be received from place to place of
your house.

That the house be often perfumed with Rue, Angelica, Gentian, Zedoary,
Setwall, Juniper wood or Berries burnt upon imbers, either simply, or they may
be steeped in Wine vinegar, and so burnt.

Perfume the house and all therein with this: Slake Lime in Vinegar, and air
the house therewith, burn much Tar, Rosen, Frankincense or Turpentine, both in
the private houses, and in the Churches before prayers.

By perfuming of apparel.
SVch apparel as you shall commonly wear, let it be very clean, and perfume
it often, either with some Virginia Cedar burned, or with Juniper, and if any
shall happen to be with them that are visited, let such persons, as soon as
they shall come home, shift themselves, and air their clothes in open air for
a time.

By carrying about of perfumes.
SVch as are to go abroad shall do well to carry Rue, Angelica, or Zedoarie in
their hands to smell to; and of those they may chew a little in their mouths
as they go in the street, especially if they be afraid of any place. It is not
good to be ouer-fearefull, but it cannot be but bad to be ouer-presumptuous and
bold.

Take Rue one handful, stamp it in a mortar, put thereto Wine vinegar enough
to moisten it, mix them well, then strain out the juice, wet a piece of
sponge, a toast of brown bread therein, tie it in a thin cloth, bear it about
to smell to.

Take the root of Angelica beaten grossly the weight of six pence, of Rue and
Wormwood, of each the weight of four pence, Setwall the weight of three pence,
bruise these, then steep them in a little Wine vinegar, tie them in a linen
cloth; which they may carry in their hands, or put it into a Juniper box full
of holes to smell to.

Or they may use this Pomander.
TAke Angelica, Rue, Zedoarie, of each half a dram, Myrrh two drams, Camphire
six grains, Wax and Labdanum of each two drams, more or less as shall be
thought fit to mix with the other things, make hereof a ball to carry about
you: you may easily make a hole in it, and so wear it about your neck with a
string.

The richer sort may make use of this Pomander.
TAke Citron pills, Angelica seeds, Zedoary, red Rose leaves, of each half a
dram, yellow Sanders, Lignum Aloes, of each one scruple, Galliae Moschatae
four scruples, Storax, Calamit, Beuzoni, of each one dram, Camphire six
grains, Labdanum three drams, Gum Tragaranth dissolved in Rose water enough to
make it up into a Pomander, put thereto six drops of spirit of Roses, enclose
it into an Iuory box, or wear it about your neck.

By inward Medicines.
LEt none go fasting forth, every one according to their fortunes, let them eat
some such thing as may resist putrefaction.

Some may eat Garlike with Butter, a Cloue two or three, according to the
ability of their bodies: some may eat fasting, some of the electuary with Figs
and Rue hereafter expressed: some may use London Treacle, the weight of eight
pence in a morning, taking more or less, according to the age of the party;
after one hour let them eat some other breakfast, as bread and butter with
some leaves of Rue or Sage, and in the heat of summer of Sorreli or
Wood-sorrrell.

To steep Rue, Wormwood or Sage all night in their drink, and to drink a good
draught in the morning fasting, is very wholesome, or to drink a draught of such
drink after the taking of any of the preservatives will be very good.

In all summer Plagues it shall be good to use Sorrel sauce to be eaten in the
morning with bread, and in the fall of the leaf to use the juice of Barberies
with bread also.

By Cordialls. Mithridates medicine of Figs.
TAke of good Figs and Walnut kirnels of each twenty four, Rue picked two good
handfulls, of Salt half an ounce or somewhat better: first stamp your Figs and
Walnuts well together in a stone mortar, then add your Rue, and last of all
your Salt, mix them exceedingly well: take of this mixture every morning
fasting the weight of sixteen pence, to children and weak bodies less.

Or this will be effectual also.
TAke twenty Walnuts, pill them, Figs, fifteen, Rue a good handful, Tormentill
roots three drams, Juniper berries two drams, Bole Armoniack a dram and a
half. First stamp your roots, then your Figs and Seeds, then add your
Walnuts, then put to your Rue and Bole, and with them put thereto six drams of
London Treacle, and two or three spoonfuls of wine vinegar, mix them well in a
stone motrer, and take of this every morning the quantity of a good nutmegg
fasting they that have cause to go much abroad, may take as much more in the
evening two hours before supper.

For women with child, children, and such as cannot take bitter things, use
this.
TAke conserve of red Roses, conserve of Wood-sorrell of each two ounces,
conserues of Borage, of Sage flowers, of each six drams, Bole Armoniack,
shauings of Hearts horn, Sorrel seeds, of each two drams, yellow or white
Sanders half a dram, Saffron one scruple, Sirrupe of Wood-sorrell, enough to
make it a moist Electuary; mix them well, take so much as a Chestnut at a time,
once or twice a day, as you shall find cause.

For the richer sort.
TAke the shauings of Hearts horn, of Pearl, of Coral, Tormentill roots,
Zedoarie, true Terra Sigillata, of each one dram, Citron pills, yellow, white
and red Sanders, of each half a dram, white Amber, Hyacinth-stone prepared, of
each two scruples, Bezoar stone, of the East Unicorns horn, of each 24.
grains, Citron and Orange pills canded, of each three drams, Lignum Aloes one
scruple, white Sugar Candy, twice the weight of all the rest, mix them well
being made into a Dredge powder. Take the weight of 12. d. at a time every
morning fasting, and also in the evening about five a clock or an hour before
supper.

With these powders and Sugar there may be made Lozenges, or Manus Christies,
and with convenient conserues they may be made into Electuaries. All which and
many more for their health they may have by the advice and directions of their
own Physicians: or at least Physicians will not be wanting to direct them as
they may have need to the poor for charities sake.

They may also use Bezoar water, or Treacle water distilled, compounded by the
Physicians of London, and known by the name of aqua Theriacalis stillatitia,
which they may use simply; or they may mix them also with all their Antidotes,
as occasion shall require.

The use of London Treacle is good both to preserve from the sickness, as also
to cure the sick, being taken upon the first apprehension in a greater
quantity, as to a man 2. drams, but less to a weak body, or a child, in
Carduus, or Dragon water.

Take of the finest clear Aloes you can buy, in color like to a liver, and
therefore called Hepatica, of Cinnamon, of Myrrh, of each of these the weight
of three French Crowns, or of two and twenty pence of our money, of Cloves,
Maces, Lignum Aloes, of Mastick, of Bole Oriental, of each of these half an
ounce, mingle them together, and beat them into a very fine powder: of the
which take every morning fasting the weight of a groat in white wine delayed
with water.

Take a dry Figg and open it, and put the kernel of a Walnut into the same,
being cut very small, three or four leaves of Rue commonly called Herbgrace, a
corn of Salt, then roast the Figg and eat it warm, fast three or four hours
after it, and use this twice in the week.

Take the powder of Tormentill, the weight of six pence, with Sorrel or
Scabious water in Summer, and in the Winter with the water of Valerian, or
common drink wherein has been infused the fore named herbs.

Or else, in one day they may take a little Wormwood and Valerian with a
grain of Salt, in an other day they may take seven or eight berries of
Juniper, dried and put in powder, and taking the same with common drink, or
with drink in which Wormwood and Rue has been steeped all night.

Also the Treacle called Diatessaroum, which is made but of four things, of
light price easy to be had.

Also the root of Enula Campana taken in powder with drink.

Likewise a piece of Arras root kept in the mouth as men pass in the streets.

Take six leaves of Sorrel, wash them with water and vinegar, let them lie in
the said water and vinegar a while: Then eats them fasting, and keep in your
mouth and Chew now and then either Setwall or the root of Angelica or a little
Cinamom, or four grains of Myrrh or so much of rattle Snake root.

By Medicines Purgative:
IT is good for prevention to keep the body reasonable open, especially with
such things as are easy of operation and good to resist putrefaction, such are
these Pills which are usually to be had at good Apothecaries, and are called
Pestilentiall Pills.

Take Aloes two ounces, Myrrh and Saffron, of each an ounce, Ammoniacum half
an ounce; make them up into a mass with the Juice of Limons, or white Wine
vinegar, to keep the body open, A small Pill or two will be enough taken a
little before supper, or before dynner, but to purge the body take the weight
of a dram made into five or six or more Pills in the morning fasting, and that
day keep your Chamber.

If the Patient be costine and bound in his body, let him take a suppositary
made with a little boiled honey, and a little fine powder of salt, and so taken
in at the fundament, and kept till it move a stool.

For the poor take Aloes the weight of six pence, put in the pappe of an
Apple: and for the Richer, Pills of Ruffus to be had in every Apothecaries shop.

Such as are tied to necessary attendance on the infected, as also such as
live in visited houses shall do well to cause Issues to to be made in their
left Arms or right legs, or both as the Doctor shall think fit.

Blood letting.
IF the Patient be full of blood and strong, let him be let blood upon the
Liuer-veine in the right Arm, or in the Median vein of the same arm (if no
sore appear.)

For bloodletting and strong purging there must be particular directions had
from the Doctors deputed according to the constitution of the parties.

These two last remdies of blood-letting, and strong purgings, are to be used
the first day that the Patient shall fall sick as cause shall be to use the
one or the other, (no sore appearing) In which case, if any sore or spots shall
appear, they are both to be forborne.

Vomits.
To provoke vomit, with two ounces of Rank Oil, or Walnut Oil, a spoonefull
of the Juice of Celendine, and half a spoonful of the Juice of Radish root,
or two spoonfuls of Oxymel of Squils with Posset drink and oil.

Medicines expulsive.
THe poison is expelled best by sweating provoked by posset ale made with
Fennel and Marigolds in winter, and with Sorrel, Buglosse, and Borage in
summer, with the which in both times they must mingle London Treacle, the
weight of two drammes: and so to lay themselves with all quietness to sweat
one half hour, or an hour if they be strong.

For the cure of the Infected upon the first apprehension, Bur seeds,
Cucheneely, powder of Hearts horn, Citron seeds one, or more of them, with a
few grains of Camphire, are good to be given in Carduus or Dragon water, or
with some Treacle water.

Take Burre seeds and Cucheneely, of each half a dram, or to a weak body of
each one scruple, Camphire five grains, mix these with two ounces of Carduus
or Dragon water, half an ounce of Treacle water, sirrup of Wood sorrel a
spoonefull, mix these, give it the Patient warm, cover him to sweat, you may
give him a second draught after twelve hours, let him drink no cold drink,
this posset drink or the like will be good to give the visited liberally.

Take Wood-Sorrell half a handful, Marigold flowers half so much, shavings
of Harts-horne three drams, a fig or two sliced, boil them well in clear
posset drink, let them drink thereof freely, you may put thereto a little sugar.

Take Citron seeds six or eight, shavings of Harts-horne half a dram, London
Treacle one dram, mix them with two ounces of Carduus water, or with three
ounces of the prescribed posset drink. Drink it warm and so lie to sweat.

Take Sorrell-water five or six spoonfuls, Treacle-water one spoonefull,
London-Treacle one dram and a half, mix them well, give it warm, and so lay
the Patient to sweat.

Take Tormentill and Celandine roots of each four ounces, Scabious and Rue of
each one handful and a half, White wine viniger three pints, boil these till
one pint be wasted, strain out the liquor, which reserve for the use of the
Infected: let it be taken thus.

Take of this liquor and of Carduus water of each one ounce and an half,
London Treacle one dram and a half. Bole-Armoniak half a scruple, put
thereto a litte sugar, mix them well, let the party drink it warm, and cover
him to sweat.

In Summer this is good.
TAke the Juice of Wood Sorrel two ounces, the Juice of Lymons one ounce,
Diascordium one dram, Cinamom six grains, Viniger half an ounce, give it
warm, and lay the sick party to sweat. Use this in case of Fluxes of the
belly or want of rest.

Take an Egg and make a hole in the top of it, Take out the white and yolke,
fill the shell with the weight of two french crowns of Saffron, roast the said
Egg thus filled with Saffron under the Embers, until the shell begin to wax
yellow. Then take it from the fire, and beat the shell and Saffron in a mortar
together with half a spoonefull of mustard seed. Take of this powder a French
crown weight, and as soon as you suspect your self infected, dissolve it
into ten spoonfuls of posset Ale, and drink it lukewarm, Then go to bed and
provoke your self to sweating.

Or, Take one dram of the Electuarium de Ouo.
Take five or six handfuls of Sorrel that grows in the field, or a greater
quantity according as you will distill more or less of the water thereof, and
let it lie infused or steeped in good vinegar the space of twenty four hours,
Then take it off and dry it with a linen cloth, and put it into a limbeck, and
distill the water thereof, and as soon as you find your self touched with
the sickness, drink four spoonfuls of the said water with a little sugar,
and if you be able walk upon it until you sweat, if not, keep your bed, and
being well covered provoke your self to sweating.

Take of the root Butter-burre, otherwise called Pestilent* wort one ounce, of
the root of great Valerian a quarter of an ounce, of Sorrel an handful, boil
all these in a quart of water to a pint, then strain it, and put thereto two
spoonefulls of Vinegar, two ounces of good Sugar, boil all these together
until they be well mingled: let the infected drink of this so hot as he may
suffer it, a good draught, and if he chance to cast it up again, let him take
the same quantity straight way upon it, and provoke himself to sweat.

Or the Infected may take one dram of this powder following. Take Sugar of
Roses four ounces, Ginger two ounces, Camphire one ounce, make these into fine
powder, keep it made up into Balls with Wine.

Take of the powder of good Bay-berry, the husk taken away from them, before
they be dried, a spoonful; let the Patient drink this well mingled in a
draught of good stale Ale or Beer, or with a draught of white Wine, and go to
bed, and cast himself into a sweat, and forbear sleep.

Take the inward Bark of the Ash-tree one pound, of Walnuts with the green
outward shells to the number of fifty, cut these small; of Scabious, of Veruin,
of every one a handful, of Saffron two drams, power upon these the strongest
Vinegar you can get four pintes, let them a little boil together upon a very
soft fire, and then stand in a very close pot well stopped all a night upon the
embers, after distill them with a soft fire, and receive the water close kept.
Give unto the Patient laid in bed and well covered with clothes, two ounces of
this water to drink, and let him be provoked to sweat, and every eight hours
during the space of twenty four hours give him the same quantity to drink.

Care must be taken in the use of these sweating Cordialls, that the party
infected sweat two or three hours, if he have strength, and sleep not till
the sweat be over, and that he have been well wiped with warm linen, and
when he has been dried let him wash his mouth with water and vinegar warm,
and let his face and hands be washed with the same: when these things are
done, give him a good draught of Broth made with Chicken or Mutton with
Rosemary, Thyme, Sorrel, Succory and Marigolds; or else Water-grewell, with
Rosemary and Winter-Sauory, or Thyme Panado seasoned with veriuyce or juice of
wood-sorrell. For their drink let it be small Beer warmed with a toste, or
water boiled with Carraway seed, Carduus seed, and a crust of bread, or such
posset drink as is mentioned before in the second medicine; after some
nutriment let them sleep or rest often washing their mouth with water and
vinegar.

These Cordials must be repeated once in eight, ten or twelve hours at the
furthest.

If the party infected vomit up his medicine, then repeat, it presently, or
else give him two or three spoonefuls of Vinegar of Squills, or Oxymel of
Squills with* posset drink, and then after proceed.

Medicines external.
VEsicatories applied to the arms, inside of the thighs, or about the bottom
of the calfe of the leg, will draw forth the venom: but the use of these
requires the direction of the Doctors deputed.

For the swelling under the ears, armepits, or in the groines, they must be
always drawn forth and ripened, and broke with all speed.

These Tumors, and much more the Carbuncles and Blaines do require the care
and skill of the expert Surgeon: but not to leave the poorer sort destitute
of good remedies, these following are very good.

Pull off the feathers from the tails of living Cocks, Hens, Pigeons, or
Chickens, and holding their bills, hold them hard to the Botch or swelling, and
so keep them at that part until they die, and by this means draw out the
poison. It is good to apply a cupping glass or embers in a dish, with a
handful of Sorrel upon the embers.

To break the Tumor.
TAke a great Onion, hollow it, put into it a Fig, Rue cut small, and a dram
of Venice Treacle, put it close stopped in a wet paper, and roste it in the
embers. Apply it hot unto the Tumor, lay three or four one after another, let
one lie three hours

Scabious and Sorrel roasted in the embers mixed with a little strong leaven,
and some Barrowes grease, and a little salt, will draw it and break it.

Take two or three roasted onions, a Lilly root or two roasted, a handful of
Scabious roasted, four or five figs, a piece of leaven and a little Rue, stamp
all these together, if it be too dry, put to it two ounces of oil of Lillies,
or so much salt butter, make a pultesse, apply it hot, after it has lien
three or four hours, take it off and burn it, and apply a fresh pultesse of
the same, if it prove hard to break, add a little burnt copperasse to the
pultesse.

Or this.
TAke the flowers of Elders two handfuls, Rocker seed bruised one ounce,
Pigeons dung three drams: stamp these together, put to them a little oil of
Lillies, make thereof a pultesse, apply it and change it as you did the former.

To draw.
When it is broken, to draw it and heal it take the yolke of an Egg, one
ounce of honey of Roses, Turpentine half an ounce, wheat flower a little,
London Treacle a dram and a half, mix these well, spread it upon leather,
change it twice a day, or take Diachylon cum Gummis.

For the Carbuncle.
Apply an actual or potentiall Cautery, saying a defensatiue of Bole*
Armoniack, or Terra Sigillata, mixed with Vinegar and the white of an Egg,
round about the tumor, but not upon it.

Take three or four Cloves of Garlic, Rue half a handful, four Figs,
strong Leaven, and the Soote of a Chymney in which wood has been burnt, of
each, half an ounce, Mustard Seed two drams, Salt a dram and a half, stamp
these well together, and apply it hot to the sore: You may put thereto a
little salt butter, if it be too dry.

Or this.
Take Leaven half an ounce, Radish Roots the bigger the better, an ounce and
an half, Mustard Seed two drams, Onions and Garlic roasted, of each two drams
and a half, Venice Treacle, or Mithridatum, three drams, mix these in a
mortar, apply it hot thrice a day to the Sore.

But these Sores cannot be well ordered and cured, without the personal care
of a discreet Surgeon.

Take of Scabious two handfuls, stamp it in a stone mortar, with a pestle of
stone if you can get any such, then put into it of old Swines grease salted two
ounces, and the yolke of an egg, stamp them well together, and lay part of
this warm to the sore.

Take of the leaves of Mallows, of Camomyll Flowers, or either of them a
handful, of Linseed beaten into powder two ounces, boil the Mallow leaves
first cut, and the flowers of Camomyll in fair water, standing about a fingers
breadth: boil all them together, until all the water be almost spent, then
put thereunto the Linseed, of wheat flower half a handful, of Swines grease,
the skins taken away, three ounces, of Oil of Lillies two ounces, stir them
still with a stick, and let them all boil together on a soft fire without
smoke, until the water be utterly spent: beat them altogether in a mortar
until they be well incorporated, and in feeling, smooth and not rough. Then
take part thereof hot in a dish, set upon a Chafindish of coals, and lay it
thick upon a linen cloth, applying it to the sore.

Take a white Onion cut in pieces, of fresh butter three ounces, of leaven the
weight of twelve pence, of Mallows one handful, of Scabious, if it may be
had, one handful, of Cloves of Garlic the weight of twenty pence: Boil them
on the fire in sufficient water, and make a pultesse of it, and lay it warm to
the sore.

Another.
Take two handfuls of Valerian, three roots of Danewort, an handful of
Smallage or Lovage. Sees them all in Butter and water, and a few Crumbs of
bread, and make a pultesse thereof, and lay it warm to the sore till it break.

Another.
If you cannot have these herbs, it is good to lay a loaf of bread to it
hot, as it comes out of the Oven (which afterward shall be burnt or buried in
the earth) or the leaves of Scabious or Sorrel roasted, or two or three Lilly
roots, roasted under Embers, beated and applied.

Orders thought meet by his MAJESTY and his Privy Council, to be executed
throughout the Counties of this Realm, in such Towns, Villages and other
places as are, or may be hereafter Infected with the Plague, for the stay of
further increase of the same.
AS the most loving and gracious care of his Majesty for the preservation of
his People, has already been earnestly showed and declared by such means and
ways as were thought expedient to suppress the grievous Infection of the
Plague, and to prevent the increase thereof, within the City of LONDON, and
parts about it; so whatsoever other good means may be yet remaining which may
extend and prove behouefull to the Country abroad (where his Majesty is sorry
to understand that the Contagion is also in many places dispersed) it is
likewise His gracious pleasure, that the same be carefully provided and put in
practice. And therefore having taken knowledge of certain good Orders that
were upon like occasion published in time past, together with certain Rules
and medicines prescribed by the best and most learned Physicians, and finding
both of them to serve well for the present time, his Majesty is pleased, that
the same shall be renewed and published: And withal straightly commands all
Justices of the Peace, and others to whom it may appertain, to see the said
Orders duly executed.

At the Court at Ha^pton Court this 30. of July. 1603.
Infection of the Plague.
INprimis, All the Justices in every County, as well within the Liberties as
without, immediately upon knowledge to them given, shall assemble themselves
together at some one general place accustomed, being clear from Infection of
the Plague, to consult how these Orders following may be duly put in execution:
not meaning that any Justices dwelling in or near places infected, shall come
thither, whiles their coming may be doubtful. And after their first general
assembly, they shall make a distribution of themselves to sundry Limits and
divisions, as in other common services of the County they are accustomed to
do, for the prosecution thereof.

2 First, they shall enquire, and presently inform themselves by all good
means, what Towns and villages are at the time of such assembly infected
within every their Counties, and in what Hundred or other Division the said
Towns and Villages are, and how many of the same places so infected are
Corporate Towns, Market Towns, and Villages, and shall consider of what
wealth the inhabitants of the same towns and Parishes are, to be able to
relieve the poor that are or shall be infected, and to be restrained in their
houses.

3 Item, thereupon after conference used according to the necessity of the
cause, they shall devise and make a general taxation, either by charging the
Town infected with one sum in gross, or by charging the special persons of
wealth within the same, to be forth with collected for the rate of one month
at the first, and so if the sickness shall continue, the collection of the
like sum, or of more or of less, as time and cause shall require, and the
same to be every first, second, third or fourth week employed to and for the
execution of the said Orders. And in case some of the said Towns Infected,
shall manifestly appear not to be of sufficient ability to contribute
sufficient for the charges requisite, then the Taxation or Collection shall be
made or further extended to other parts, or in any other further limits, as by
them shall be thought requisite, where there shall be any such Towns or
Villages so infected, and unable to relieve themselves. And if the said Towns
be situated in the borders and confines of any other shire, then as the
Justices shall see cause and need for the greatness of the charge requisite,
that the parts of the shire joining to the Towns infected be not able, they
shall write their letters to the next Justices of the other Shire so confining,
to procure by collection some relief, as in like cases they are to relieve
them, in respect of near neighborhood of the place, and for that the same
Infection may be the better stayed from the said adjoining places, though they
be separated by name of the County.

4 Item, they shall cause to be appointed in every Parish as well infected as
not infected, certain persons to view the bodies of all such as shall die,
before they be suffered to be buried, and to certify the Minister of the
Church and Churchwarden, or other principal Officers, or their substitutes of
what probable disease the said persons died: and the said viewers, to have
weekly some allowance, and the more large allowance where the Towns or
Parishes be infected, during the infection, toward their maintenance, to the
end they which shall be in places infected, may forbear to resort into the
company of others that are sound: and those persons to be sworn to make true
report according to their knowledge, and the choice of them to be made by
direction of the Curate of the Church, with three or four substantial men of
the Parish. And in case the said viewers either through favor or corruption*
shall give wrong certificate, or shall refuse to serve being thereunto
appointed, then to cause them to be punished by imprisonment, in such sort as
may serve for a terror to others.

5 Item, the houses of such persons out of the which there shall die any of the
Plague, being so certified by the viewers, or otherwise known, or where it
shall be understood, that any person remains sick of the Plague, to be
closed up in all parts during the time of restraint, viz. six weeks, after
the sickness be ceased in the same house, in case the said houses so infected
shall be within any Town having houses near adjoining to the same. And if the
infection happen in houses dispersed in Villages, and separated from other
houses, and that of necessity, for the serving of their cattle, and manuring
of their ground, the said persons cannot continue in their houses, then they
be nevertheless restrained from resorting into company of others, either
publicly, or privately during the said time of restraint, and to wear some
mark in their uppermost garments, or bear white rods in their hands at such
time as they shall go abroad: if there be any doubt that the masters and
owners of the houses infected, will not duly observe the directions of
shutting up the doors, specially in the night, then shall there be appointed
two or three Watchmen by turns, which shall be sworn to attend and watch the
house, and to apprehend any person that shall come out of the house contrary to
the order, and the same persons by order of the Justices, shall be a competent
time imprisoned in the stocks in the high way next to the house infected: and
furthermore, some special mark shall be made and fixed to the doors of every
of the infected houses, and where any such houses shall be Innes or Alehouses,
the Signs shall be taken down for the time of the restraint, and some cross,
or other mark set upon the place thereof to be a token of the sickness.

6 Item, they shall have good regard to choose honest persons, that either shall
collect the sums assessed, or shall have the custody thereof, and out of the
said collection to allot a weekly proportion for the finding of victual, or
fire, or medicines for the poorer sort, during the time of their restraint. And
whereas some persons being well disposed to yield alms and relief, will be
more willing to give some portions of victual, as corn, bread, or other meat,
the same shall be committed to the charge of some special persons, that will
honestly and truly preserve the same, to be distributed as they shall be
appointed for the poor that are infected.

7 Item, to appoint certain persons dwelling within the Towns infected, to
provide and deliver all necessaries of victuals, or any matter of watching or
other attendance, to keep such as are of good wealth being restrained, at their
own proper costs and charges, and the poor at the common charges: and the
said persons so appointed to be ordered, not to resort to any public assembly
during the time of such their attendance, as also to wear some mark on their
upper garment, or to bear a white rod in their hand, to the end others may
avoid their company.

8 Item, that in the shire town in every County, and in other great towns
meet for that purpose, there may be provision bespoken and made, of such
Preservatives and other remedies, which otherwise in meaner towns cannot be
readily had, as by the Physicians shall be prescribed, and is at this present
reduced into an Advice made by the Physicians, and now printed and sent with
the said Orders, which may be fixed in Marketplaces, upon places usual for
such public matters, and in other Towns in the bodies of the parish
Churches, and chapels: in which Advice only such things are prescribed, as
usually are to be had and found in all Countries without great charge or cost.

9 Item, the Ministers and Curats, and the Churchwardens in every parish, shall
in writing certify weekly to some of the Justices, residing within the
Hundred or other limit where they serve, the number of such persons as are
infected and do not die, and also of all such as shall die within their
Parishes, and their diseases probable whereof they died, and the same to be
certified to the rest of the Justices at their assemblies, which during some
convenient time would be every one and twenty days, and thereof a particular
book kept by the Clerk of the Peace, or some such like.

10 Item, to appoint some place apart in each Parish for the burial of such
persons as shall die of the Plague, as also to give order that they be buried
after Sun setting, and yet nevertheless by day light, so as the C^eate be
present for the observation of the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed by the Law,
foreseeing as much as coueniently he may, to be distant from the danger of
infection of the person dead, or of the company that shall bring the corpse to
the grave.

11 Item, the Justices, of the whole County to assemble once in one and
twenty days, to examine whether those Orders be duly executed, and to
certify to the Lords of the Privy Council their proceedings in that behalf,
what Towns and Villages be infected, as also the numbers of the dead, and the
diseases whereof they dyed, and what sums of money are taxed and collected to
this purpose, and how the same are distributed.

12 Item, the Justices of the Hundred, where any such infection is, or the
Justices next adjoining thereunto, to assemble once a week, to take account of
the execution of the said Orders, and as they find any lack or disorder,
either to reform it themselves, or to report it at the general assembly
there, to be by a more common consent reformed.

13 Item, for that the contagion of the Plague grows and increases no way
more, then by the use and handling of such clothes, bedding and other stuff as
has bin worn and occupied by the Infected of this disease, during the time of
their disease: the said Justices shall in the places infected take such order,
that all the said clothes and other stuff, so occupied by the diseased, so
soon as the parties diseased of the plague are all of them either well
recovered or dead, be either burnt and clean consumed with fire, or else aired
in such sort as is prescribed in an especial Article contained in the advice
set down by the Physicians. And for that peradventure the loss of such
apparel, bedding, and other stuff to be burnt, may be greater then the poor
estate of the owners of the same may well bear: it is thought very good and
expedient, if it be thought meet it shall be burnt, that then the said
Justices, out of such Collections as are to be made within their Counties for
the relief of the poorer sort that be infected, allow also them such sum or
sums as to them shall be thought reasonable, in recompense of the loss of
their said stuff.

14 Item, the said Justices may put in execution any other Orders that by them
at their general assembly shall be devised and thought meet, tending to the
preservation of his Majesty's Subjects from the infection. And to the end their
care and diligence may the better appear, they shall certify in writing the
said Orders newly devised: and if any shall wilfully break and contemn the
same, or any the Orders herein specified, they shall either presently punish
them by imprisonment, or if the persons so contemning them, shall be of such
countenance as the Justices shall think meet to have their faults known to His
Majesty, or to the Council, they shall charge and bind them to appear
before Us, and the contempt duly certified, that there may be a more notorious
sharp example made by punishment of the same by order of His Majesty.

15 Item, if there be lack of Justices in some parts of the Shire, or if they
which are Justices there, shall be for the time absent, in that case the more
number of the Justices at their assembly shall make choice of some convenient
persons to supply those places for the better execution hereof.

16 Item, if there be any person Ecclesiastical or Lay, that shall hold and
publish any opinions (as in some places report is made) that it is a vain thing
to forbear to resort to the Infected, or that it is not charitable to forbid
the same, pretending that no person shall die but at their time prefixed, such
persons shall be not only reprehended, but by order of the Bishop, if they be
Ecclesiastical, shall be forbidden to preach, and being Lay, shall be also
enjoined to forbear to utter such dangerous opinions upon pain of imprisonment,
which shall be executed, if they shall persevere in that error. And yet it
shall appear manifestly by these Orders, that according to Christian charity,
no persons of the meanest degree shall be left without succor and relief.

17 And of these things above mentioned, the Justices shall take great care, as
of a matter specially directed and commanded by his Majesty upon the princely
and natural care he has conceived toward the preservation of his Subjects,
who by very disorder, and for lack of direction do in many parts wilfully
procure the increase of this general Contagion.

Orders conceived and agreed to be published by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London, and the Justices of Peace of the Counties of Middlesex and
Surrey, by direction from the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
WHereas in the first year of the Reign of our late Sovereign, King James of
happy memory, over this Realm of England, an Act was made for the charitable
relief and Ordering of persons infected with the Plague: whereby Authority is
given to Justices of Peace, Majors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers, to
appoint within their several Limits Examiners, Searchers, Watchmen, Keepers,
and Buriers for the persons and places infected, and to minister unto them
Oaths for the performance of their Offices. And the same Statute also
authoriseth the giving of other Directions, as unto them for the present
necessity shall seem good in their discretions. It is therefore upon special
consideration thought very expedient for the preventing and avoiding of the
Infection of Sickness (if it shall please Almighty God) which is now
dangerously dispersed into many places within the City and Suburbs of the
same: that these Officers following be appointed, and these Orders hereafter
prescribed be duly observed.

Examiners to be appointed in every Parish.
FIrst, It is thought requisite and so ordered, that in every Parish there be
one, two, or more persons of good sort and credit, chosen and appointed by the
Alderman, his Deputy, and Common Council of every Ward, and by the Justices of
Peace in the Counties, by the name of Examiners, to continue in that Office the
space of two months at least: and if any fit persons so appointed as
aforesaid, shall refuse to undertake the same, the said parties so refusing, to
be committed to prison until they shall conform themselves accordingly.

The Examiners Office.
THat these Examiners be sworn by the Alderman, or by one of the Justices of
the County, to enquire and learn from time to time what houses in every parish
be visited, and what persons be sick, and of what Diseases, as near as thy
can inform themselves, and upon doubt in that case, to command restraint of
access, until it appear what the Disease shall prove: and if they find any
person sick of the Infection, to give order to the Constable that the house be
shut up: and if the Constable shall be found remiss or negligent, to give
present notice thereof to the Alderman, or the Justice of Peace respectively.

Watchmen.
THat to every Infected house there be appointed two watchmen, one for the day
and the other for the night: And that these Watchmen have a special care that
no person go in or out of such infected houses, whereof they have the charge,
upon pain of severe punishment. And the said Watchmen to do such further
Offices as the sick house shall need and require: and if the Watchman be sent
upon any business, to lock up the house and take the Key with him: and the
Watchman by day to attend until ten of the clock at night: and the Watchman by
night till six in the morning.

Chirurgions.
THat there be a special care, to appoint women Searchers in every parish,
such as are of honest reputation, and of the best sort as can be got in this
kind: And these to be sworn to make due search and true report, to the utmost
of their knowledge, whether the persons, whose bodies they are appointed to
Search, do die of the Infection, or of what other diseases, as near as they
can. And for their better assistance herein, forasmuch as there has been
heretofore great abuse in misreporting the disease, to the further spreading of
the Infection: It is therefore ordered, that there be chosen and appointed
three able and discreet Chirurgions, besides those three, that do already
belong to the Pesthouse: amongst whom, the City and Liberties to be quartered,
as the places lie most apt and convenient: and every of these six to have one
quarter for his Limit: and the said Chirurgions in every of their Limits to
join with the Searchers for the view of the body, to the end there may be a
true report made of the disease.

And further, that the said Surgeons shall visit and search such like
persons as shall either send for them, or be named and directed unto them, by
the examiners of every Parish, and inform themselves of the disease of the
said parties.

And forasmuch as the said Chirurgions are to be sequestered from all other
Cures, and kept only to this disease of the Infection: It is ordered, that
every of the said Chirurgions shall have twelve pence a body searched by them,
to be paid out of the goods of the party searched, if he be able, or otherwise
by the Parish.

Orders concerning infected houses and persons sick of the Plague.
Notice to be given of the Sickness.
THe Master of every house, as soon as any one in his house complains, either
of Botch, or Purple, or Swelling in any part of his body, or falls otherwise
dangerously sick, without apparent cause of some other disease, shall give
knowledge thereof to the Examiner of health within two hours after the said
sign shall appear.

Sequestration of the sick.
AS soon as any man shall be found by this Examiner, Surgeon or Searcher, to
be sick of the Plague, he shall the same night be sequestered in the same house.
And in case he be so sequestered, then though he afterward die not, the house
wherein he sickned, shall be shut up for a month, after the use of due
Preservatives taken by the rest.

Ayring the Stuff.
FOr sequestration of the goods and stuff of the Infected, their Bedding, and
Apparel, and hangings of Chambers, must be well ayred with fire, and such
perfumes as are requisite within the Infected house, before they be taken
again to use: this to be done by the appointment of the Examiner.

Shutting up of the house.
IF any person shall have visited any man, known to be Infected of the Plague,
or entered willingly into any known infected house, being not allowed: the
house wherein he inhabiteth, shall be shut up for certain days by the
Examiners direction.

None to be removed out of infected houses, but etc.
ITem, that none be removed out of the house where he falls sick of the
infection, into any other house in the City, Borough, or County (except it be
to the Pesthouse or a Tent, or unto some such house, which the owners of the
said Visited house holds in his own hands, and occupies by his own
servants) and so as security be given to the Parish whither such remove is
made, that the attendance and charge about the said Visited persons, shall be
observed and charged in all the particularities before expressed, without any
cost of that Parish, to which any such remove shall happen to be made, and this
remove to be done by night: And it shall be lawful to any person that has two
houses, to remove either his sound or his infected people to his spare house
at his choice, so as if he send away first his sound, he may not after send
thither the sick, nor again unto the sick the sound: And that the same which
he sends, be for one week at the least shut up, and secluded from company
for fear of some infection, at the first not appearing.

Burial of the dead.
THat the burial of the dead by this Visitation be at most convenient hours,
always either before Sun rising, or after Sun setting, with the priuitie
of the Churchwardens or Constables, and not otherwise, and that no neighbors
nor friends be suffered to accompany the Coarse to Church, or to enter the
house visited, upon pain of having his house shut up, or be imprisoned.

No infected stuff to be uttered.
THat no Clothes, Stuff, bedding or garments be suffered to be carried or
conveyed out of any Infected Houses, and that the Criers and Caries abroad of
Bedding or old Apparel to be Sold or Pawned, be utterly Prohibited and
restrained, and no Brokers of Bedding, or old Apparel be permitted to make
any outward Show, or hang forth on their Stalles, Shop-boords or Windows,
toward any Street, Lane, common Way or passage, any old Bedding or Apparel
to be sold, upon pain of Imprisonment: And if any Broker or other person
shall buy any Bedding, Apparel, or other Stuff out of any Infected House,
within two months after the Infection has been there, his house shall be
shut up as Infected, and so shall continue shut up twenty days at the least.

No person to be conveyed out of any Infected house.
IF any person Visited do fortune, by negligent looking unto, or by any other
means, to come or be conveyed from a place infected, to any other place, the
Parish from whence such Party has come, or been conveyed, upon notice thereof
given, shall at their charge cause the said party so Visited and escaped, to
be carried and brought back again by night, and the parties in this case
offending, to be punished at the direction of the Alderman of the Ward, and the
Justices of the Peace respectively: and the house of the receiver of such
visited person to be shut up for twenty days.

Every Visited house to be marked.
THat every house visited be marked with a Red Cross of a foot long, in the
middle of the door, evident to be seen, and with these usual Printed words,
that is to say, Lord have mercy upon us, to be set close over the same Cross,
there to continue until lawful opening of the same house.

Every Visited house to be watched.
THat the Constables see every house shut up, and to be attended with Watchmen,
which may keep them in, and minister necessaries unto them at their own
charges (if they be able) or at the common charge if they be unable: the
shutting up to be for the space of four weeks after all be whole.

That precise order be taken that the Searchers, Chirurgions, Keepers and
Buriers are not to pass the streets without holding a red Rod or Wand of three
foot in length in their hands, open and evident to be seen, and are not to go
into any other house, then into their own, or into that whereunto they are
directed or sent for, but to forbear and abstain from company, especially
when they have been lately used in any such business or attendance.

And to this end it is ordered, that a weekly Tax be made in every Parish
visited: If in the City or Borough, then under the hand of the Alderman of the
Ward, where the place is visited: if in either of the Counties, then under the
hands of some of the Justices next to the place visited, who, if there be
cause, may extend the Tax into other Parishes also, and may give warrant of
distress against them which shall refuse to pay: and for want of distress, or
for assistance, to commit the offenders to prison, according to the Statute in
that behalf.

Orders for cleansing and keeping of the Streets sweet.
The streets to be kept clean.
FIrst, it is thought very necessary and so ordered, that every house-holder do
cause the Street to be daily pared before his door, and so to keep it clean
sweptall the week long.

That Rakers take it from out the houses.
THat the sweeping and filth of houses be daily carried away by the Rakers, and
that the Raker shall give notice of his coming by the blowing of a Horn, as
heretofore has been done.

Laystals to be made far off from the City.
THat the Laystals be removed as far as may be out of the City, and common
passages, and that no Night-man or other be suffered to empty a Vault into any
Garden near about the City.

Care to be had of unwholesome Fish, or Flesh, and of mustie Corn.
THat special care be taken, that no stinking Fish, or unwholesome Flesh, or
mustie Corn, or other corrupt fruits, of what sort soever, be suffered to be
sold about the City or any part of the same.

That the Bruers and Tippling houses be looked unto, for mustie and unwholesome
Caske.

That order be taken, that no Hogs, Dogs, or cats, or tame Pigeons, or Conies
be suffered to be kept within any part of the City, or any Swine to be, or
stray in the Streets or Lanes, but that such Swine be Impounded by the Beadle
or any other Officer, and the owner punished according to the Act of Common
Council, and that the Dogs be killed by the Dog killers, appointed for that
purpose.

Orders concerning loose Persons, and idle assemblies.
Beggars.
FOr as much as nothing is more complained on, then the multitude of Rogues and
wandering Beggars, that swarm in every place about the City, being a great
cause of the spreading of the infection, and will not be avoided,
notwithstanding any Order that has been given to the contrary: It is therefore
now ordered, that such Constables, and others whom this matter may any way
concern, do take special care, that no wandering Beggar be suffered in the
Streets of this City, in any fashion or manner whatsoever upon pain of the
penalty provided by the Law to be duly and severely executed upon them.

Plays.
THat all Plays, Beare-baitings, Games, Singing of Ballads, Buckler-play, or
such like causes or Assemblies of people, be utterly prohibited, and the
parties offending, severely punished, by any Alderman, or Justice of the peace.

Tippling houses.
THat disorderly Tippling in Tauernes Alehouses and Cellers, be severely looked
unto, as the common sin of this time, and greatest occasion of dispersing the
Plague: and where any shall be found to offend, the penalty of the Statute to
be laid upon them with all severity.

And for the better execution of these Orders, as also for such other
directions as shall be needful, It is agreed that the Justices of the City and
the Counties adjoining do meet together once in ten days either at the
Sessions house without Newgate, or some other convenient place, to confer of
things as shall be needful in this behalf.

And every person neglecting the duty required, or willingly offending against
any Article or clause contained in these Orders, he to be severely punished by
imprisonment, or otherwise, as by the law he ought.

God save the King.

By the KING.
A Proclamation for quickening the Laws made for the relief of the poor, and
the suppressing, punishing, and settling of the sturdy Rogues and Vagabonds.
WHereas many excellent Laws and Statutes with great judgment and providence
have been made in the times of Our late dear and Royal Father, and of the
late Queen Elizabeth, for the relief of the impotent and indigent Poor, and
for the punishing, suppressing, and settling of the sturdy Rogues and Vagabonds,
which Laws and Statutes, if they were duly observed, would be of exceeding
great use for the peace and plenty of this Realm, but the neglect thereof is
the occasion of much disorder, and many insufferable abuses. And whereas it is
fit at all times to put in execution those Laws which are of so necessary, and
so continual use: yet the apparent and visible danger of the Pestilence,
(unless the same by Gods gracious mercy, and Our provident endeavors be
prevented) does much more require the same at this prsent.

We have therefore thought it fit, by the advice of Our Privy Council, by
this Our public Proclamation, straightly to charge and command, that all our
loving Subjects in their several places, do use all possible care and
diligence as a principal means to prevent the spreading, and dispersing of
that contagious sickness, to observe and put in due execution, all the said
Laws made and provided against Rogues and Vagabonds, and for the relief of
the truly poor and impotent people. And in the first place, We strictly
charge and command, that in Our Cities of London, and Westminster, and Suburbs
thereof, and places adjacent thereunto, and generally throughout the whole
Kingdom, that there be careful Watch, and Ward kept for the apprehending and
punishing of all Rogues and Vagabonds, who either in the streets or high ways,
under the names of Soldiers, or Mariners, Glasse-men, Pot-men, Pedlars, or
Petty-Chapmen, or of poor or impotent people, shall be found either wandering,
or begging.

And We do further strictly charge and command, that all Constables,
Head-boroughs, and other Officers, do use all diligence, to punish, and pass
away according to the Law, all such Wanderers, or Beggars, as shall be
apprehended, either in the Cities, or places aforesaid, or in any other Cities,
Towns, Parishes, or places within this Realm, and take great care that none
pass under the color of counterfeit Passes. And that all Irish Rogues, and
Vagabonds be forthwith apprehended, wheresoever they shall be found, and
punished, and sent home according to a former Proclamation, heretofore
published in that behalf. That all Householders of whose persons, or at whose
houses any such Vagrants shall be taken begging, do apprehend, or cause them
to be apprehended, and carried to the next Constable, or other Officer to be
punished, according to the Laws. And that they forbear to relieve them,
thereby to give them encouragement to continue in their wicked course of life.

That the Justices of Peace in their several places throughout this Kingdom
be careful either by Provost Marshals, or by the high Constables, or otherwise
by their good discretions effectually to provide, that all Rogues and Vagabonds
of all sorts be searched for, apprehended, punished and suppressed according to
the Law. And that once every month at the least, a convenient number of the
Justices of Peace in every several County and Division, shall meet together
in some convenient place in that diuiuision, and take account of the high
Constables, petty Constables, and other Officers within that Division, how they
have observed the Laws and Our commandment touching the Premises.

And that they severely punish all such as shall be found remiss or negligent
in that behalf. And We do hereby strictly charge and command as well all and
singular Justices of Peace, Constables, Headboroughs, and other Our Officers
and Ministers, as also all Our loving Subjects of what estate or degree soever,
to use all diligence, that all and every houses or places which are or shall
be visited or infected with the sickness, be carefully shut up, and Watch
and Ward kept over them, that no person or persons within those places do go
abroad, or depart from thence, during the time of such Visitation. And We do
hereby command all and singular Our Judges of Assize in their several Circuits
to give special charge, and make special enquiry of the defaults of all and
every the Justices of Peace who shall not observe their meetings in the
several Counties and Divisions aforesaid, or shall not punish such Constables
or other Officers as being informed either by their own view and knowledge, or
otherwise are or shall be found remiss or negligent in the Premises, or in
leauying such penalties and forfeitures as the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm require against the parties offending herein. And thereof to inform Us
or Our Privy Council, to the end that such due course may be taken either by
removing out of the Commission such negligent Justices of the Peace, or
otherwise by inflicting such punishment upon them as shall be due to such as
neglect their own duties, and Our Royal command published upon so important
an occasion.

And We do hereby will, require and command all and every Our Judges of
Assize, Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables, Headboroughs and
other Our Officers, Ministers and Subjects whom it may concern that they
carefully and effectually observe and perform all and every the Premises, as
they will answer the neglect thereof at their uttermost perils.

And whereas We have lately commanded a Book to be printed and published
containing certain Statutes made and enacted heretofore for the relief of the
Poor, and of Soldiers and Mariners, and for punishment of Rogues and
Vagabonds, and for the relief and ordering of persons infected with the
Plague, and also containing certain Orders heretofore and now lately conceived
and made concerning health: All which are necessary to be known and observed
by Our loving Subjects, that thereby they may the better avoid those dangers
which otherwise may fall upon their persons or estates by their neglect
thereof: We have thought it fit hereby to give notice thereof to all Our
loving Subjects, to the end that none may pretend ignorance for an excuse in
matters of so great importance. And we do hereby declare, that whosoever
shall be found remiss or negligent in the execution of any part of the
Premises, shall receive such condign punishment for their offense, as by the
Laws of this Realm, or by Our Prerogative Royal can or may be justly
inflicted upon them.

Given at our Court at White Hall the three and twentieth day of April, in the
sixth year of Our Reign of England, Scotland, France and Ireland. God save the
King.
Anno xliii. Reginae Elizebethae.
An Act for the relief of the poor.
BE it enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, The Churchwardens
of every Parish, and other substantial householders yearly to be nominated at
Easter, to be Overseers for the poor.
that the Churchwardens of every parish, and four, three, or two substantial
householders there, as shall be thought meet, having respect to the proportion
and greatness of the same Parish and Parishes, to be nominated yearly in Easter
week, or within one month after Easter, under the hand and Seal of two or
more Justices of the peace in the same County, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, dwelling in or near the same Parish or division, where the same Parish
does lie, shall be called Overseers of the poor of the same parish.

And they, or the greater part of them shall take order from time to time,
Children of the poor to be set to work.
by and with the consent of two or more such Justices of Peace as is aforesaid,
for setting to work of the children of all such whose parents shall not by the
said Churchwardens and Overseers, or the greater part of them, be thought able
to keep and maintain their children. And also for setting to work all such
persons married, or unmarried, having no means to maintain them, use no
ordinary and daily trade of life to get their living by, and also to raise
weekly or otherwise (by taxation of every inhabitant, Parson, Vicar and other,
and of every occupier of Lands, Houses, Tithes impropriate, or Propriations of
tithes, Cole-mines, or saleable underwoods in the said Parish, in such
competent sum and sums of money, (...) stock of (...)axe and Hemp (...) to
be raised.
as they shall think fit (a convenient stock of flax, hemp, wool, thread,
iron, and other necessary ware and stuff to set the poor on work, and also
competent sums of money, for, and toward the necessary relief of the lame,
impotent, old, blind, and such other among them being poor, and not able to
work, and also for the putting out of such children to be apprentices, to be
gathered out of the same Parish, according to the ability of the same Parish
and to do and execute all other things, as well for the disposing of the said
storke, as otherwise concerning the premises, The Churchwardens and Overseers
to meet together once every month.
as to them shall seem convenient. Which said Churchwardens and Overseers so
to be nominated, or such of them as shall not be let by sickness, or other
just excuse, to be allowed by two such Justices of Peace or more, as is
aforesaid, shall meet together at the least once every month in the Church of
the said Parish, upon the Sunday in the afternoon, after divine Service, there
to consider of some good course to be taken, and of some meet order to be set
down in the premises, and shall within four days after the end of their
year, and after other Overseers nominated as aforesaid, Account to be given by
the Overseers to two Justices of Peace.
make and yield up to such two Justices of Peace as is aforesaid, a true and
perfect account of all sums of money by them received, or rated and sessed,
and not received, and also of such stock as shall be in their hands, or in
the hands of any of the poor to work, and of all other things concerning
their said office, and such sum or sums of money as shall he in their
hands, shall pay and deliver over to the said Churchwardens and Overseers, newly
nominated and appointed as is aforesaid, upon pain that every one of them
absenting themselves without lawful cause as aforefaid, from such monthly
meeting for the purpose aforesaid, or being negligent in their office, or in
the execution of the Orders aforesaid, being made by and with the assent of the
said Justices of Peace, or any two of them before mentioned, to forfeit for
every such default of absence, or negligence, twenty shillings.

And be it also enacted, Other Parishes within the Hundred, to be taxed toward
the relief of poor parishes.
that if the said Justices of Peace do perceive that the Inhabitants of any
Parish are not able to levy among themselves sufficient sums of money for
the purposes aforesaid: that then the said two Justices shall and may tax,
rate and assesse, as aforesaid, any other of other Parishes, or out of any
Parish within the Hundred where the said Parish is to pay such sum and sums of
money to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the said poor parish, for the said
purposes, as the said Justices shall think fit, according to the intent of
this Law. And if the said Hundred shall not be thought to the said Justices,
able, and fit to relieve the said several Parishes not able to provide for
themselves as aforesaid; Then the Justices of Peace at their general quarter
Sessions, or the greater number of them, shall rate and assesse, as aforesaid
any other of other Parishes, or out of any Parish within the said County for
the purposes aforesaid, as in their discretion shall seem fit.

And that it shall be lawful as well for the present as subsequent
Churchwardens, and Overseers, or any of them, by warrant from any two such
Justices of peace as is aforesaid, to levy as well the said sums of money and
all arrerages of every one that shall refuse to contribute according as they
shall be assessed, How to levy money of such as refuse to pay.
by distress and sale of the offenders goods, as the sums of money, or stock
which shall be behind upon any account to be made as aforesaid, rendering to
the parties the overplus, and in defect of such distress, it shall be lawful
for any such two Justices of the Peace, to commit him or them to the common
Goal of the County, there to remain without bail or mainprise, until
payment of the said sum arrerages and stock. Punishment of such as will not
work.
And the said Justices of Peace, or any of them, to send to the house of
correction or common Goal such as shall not employ themselves to work, being
appointed thereunto as aforesaid: And also any two such Justices of Peace, to
commit to the said prison, every one of the said Churchwardens and Overseers,
which shall refuse to account, there to remain without bail or maineprise,
until he have made a true account, and satisfied and paid so much as upon the
said account shall be remaining in his hands.

And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the said Churchwardens
and Overseers, or the greater part of them, by the assent of any two Justices
of the Peace aforesaid, Poor children to be put apprentices by the
Churchwardens and Overseers.
to bind any such children as aforesaid, to be apprentices, where they shall
see convenient, till such man child shall come to the age of four and twenty
years, and such woman child to the age of one and twenty years or the time of
her marriage: The same to be as effectual to all purposes, as if such child
were of full age, and by Indenture of covenant bound him or herself, And to
the intent that necessary places of habitation may more conveniently be
provided for such poor impotent people, Be it enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful for the said Churchwardens and
Overseers, or the greater part of them, by the leave of the Lord or Lords of
the Manor, whereof any waste, or Common within their Parish is or shall be
parcel, and upon agreement before with him or them made in writing under the
hands and seals of the said Lord and Lords or otherwise, according to any
order to be set down by the Justices of Peace of the said County at their
general Quarter Sessions, or the greater part of them, by like leave and
agreement of the said Lord or Lords, in writing under his or their hands and
seals. To erect, build and set up in fit and convenient places of habitation,
Dwelling places for impotent poor to be built.
in such Waste or Common, at the general charges of the Parish, or otherwise
of the Hundred or County as aforesaid, to be taxed, rated and gathered, in
manner before expressed, convenient houses of dwelling for the said impotent
poor, and also to place Inmates or more families then one in one Cottage or
house, One Act made in the one and thirtieth year of her Majesty's Reign,
entitled, An Act against the erecting and maintaining of Cottages, or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Which Cottages and
places for Inmates shall not at any time after be used or employed to or for any
other habitation, but only for impotent and poor of the same Parish, that
shall be there placed from time to time by the Churchwardens and Overseers of
the poor of the same Parish or the most part of them, upon the pains and
forfeitures contained in the said former Act made in the said one and thirtieth
year of her Majesty's reign.

Provided always, Order for such as are geieue with any Sesse or Tax.
that if any person or persons shall find themselves grieved with any Sesse or
Tax, or other Act done by the said Churchwardens and other persons, or by the
said Justices of Peace, that then it shall be lawful for the Justices of
Peace, at their general quarter Sessions, or the greater number of them, to
take such order therein as to them shall be thought convenient, and the same to
conclude and bind all the said parties.

And be it further enacted, Parents, etc. being able, shall maitain their own
poor.
That the Father and Grandfather, and the Mother, and Grandmother, and the
children of every poor, old, blind, lame, and impotent person, or other poor
person, not able to work, being of a sufficient ability, shall at their own
charges relieve and maintain every such poor person in that manner, and
according to that rate, as by the Justices of Peace of that County where such
sufficient persons dwell, or the greater number of them, at their general
quarter Sessions shall be assessed, upon pain that every one of them shall
forfeit twenty shillings for every month which they shall fail therein.

And be it further hereby enacted, (...)
That the Majors, Bailiffes, or other head Officers of every Town, and place
Corporate, and City within this Realm, being Justice or Justices of Peace,
shall have the same authority by virtue of this Act, within the limits and
precincts of their Jurisdictions, as well out of Sessions as at their Sessions,
if they hold any, as is herein limited, prescribed, and appointed to Justices
of Peace of the County, or any two or more of them, or to the Justices of Peace
in their quarter Sessions, to do and execute for all the uses and purposes in
this Act prescribed, and no other Justice or Justices of Peace to enter or
meddle there. Every Alderman in the city of London (...) authority as two
Justices of Peace.
And that every Alderman of the City of London within his Ward, shall and may
do and execute in every respect, so much as is appointed and allowed by this
Act to be done and executed by one or two Justices of Peace of any County
within this Realm.

And be it also enacted, That if it shall happen, any Parish to extend it self
into more Counties then one, or part to lie within the Liberties of any City,
Town, or place Corporate, and part without, that then as well the Justices of
Peace of every County, as also the head Officers of such City, Justices. etc.
to meddle only in their own Liberties.
Town, or place corporate, shall deal and intermeddle only in so much of the
said Parish, as lies within their liberties, and not any further. And every of
them respectively within their several Limits, Wards and Jurisdictions, to
execute the ordinances before mentioned concerning the nomination of Overseers,
the consent to binding Apprentices, the giving warrant to levy taxations
unpaid, the taking account of Churchwardens and Overseers, and the committing
to prison such as refuse to account, or deny to pay the arrerages due upon
their accounts.

And yet nevertheless, A double account to be made.
the said Churchwardens and Overseers, or the most part of them of the said
Parishes, that do extend into such several Limits and Jurisdictions, shall
without dividing themselves, duly execute their office in all places within
the said Parish, in all things to them belonging, and shall duly exhibit and
make one account before the said head Officer of the Town or place Corporate,
and one other before the said Justices of Peace, or any such two of them as is
aforesaid.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, (...) for (...).
That if in any place within this Realm there happen to be hereafter no such
nomination of Overseers yearly as is before appointed, that then every Justice
of Peace of the County dwelling within the division, where such default of
nomination shall happen, and every Mayor, Alderman, and head Officer, of City,
Town, or place Corporate, where such default shall happen, shall lose and
forfeit for every such default five pound, to be employed toward the relief
of the poor of the said Parish, or place Corporate, and to be levied as
aforesaid of their goods by warrant from the general Sessions of the Peace of
the said County, or of the same City, Town, or place Corporate, if they keep
Sessions.

And be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, Penalties and forfeitures
to be employed to poores use.
that all penalties and forfeitures, before mentioned in this Act to be
forfeited by any person or persons, shall go and be employed to the use of the
poor of the same Parish, and toward a stock and habitation for them, and
other necessary uses and relief as before in this Act are mentioned and
expressed, and shall be levied by the said Churchwardens and Overseers* or one of
them, by warrant from any two such Justices of Peace, or Mayor, Alderman, or
head Officer of City, Town or place corporate, respectively within their
several limits by distress and sale thereof, as aforesaid, or in defect
thereof, it shall be lawful for any two such Justices of Peace, and the said
Aldermen and head Officers within their several limits, to commit the offender
to the said prison, there to remain without bail or maineprise, till the said
forfeitures shall be satisfied and paid. Parishes to be rated at the general
^^^^ions.


And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Justices of
Peace of every County or place corporate, or the more part of them in their
general Sessions to be holden next after the feast of Easter next, and so
yearly as often as they shall think meet, shall rate every Parish to such a
weekly sum of money as they shall think convenient, so as no Parish be
rated above the sum of six pence, nor under the sum of a halfepeny,
weekly to be paid, and so as the total sum of such taxation of the
Parishes in every County, amount not above the rate of two pence for every
Parish within the said County. Leuying of sums of money rated.
Which sums so taxed, shall be yearly assessed by the agreement of the
Parishioners within themselves, or in default thereof, by the Churchwardens and
petie Constables of the same Parish, or the more part of them, or in default of
their agreement, by the order of such Justice or Justices of Peace as shall
dwell in the same Parish, or (if none be there dwelling) in the parts next
adjoining. And if any person shall refuse or neglect to pay any such portion of
money so taxed, it shall be lawful for the said Churchwardens and Constables, or
any of them, or in their default for any Justice of Peace of the said limite,
to levy the same by distress, and sale of the goods of the party so refusing
or neglecting, rendering to the party the overplus, and in default of such
distress, it shall be lawful to any Justice of that limit, to commit such person
to the said prison, there to abide without bail or maine prise, till he have
paid the same.

And be it also enacted, That the said Justices of the Peace at their general
quarter Sessions to be holden at the time of such taxation, shall set down,
what competent sums of money shall be sent quarterly out of every County or
place corporate, Relief of the prisoners in the Kings Bench, Marshalsey,
hospitals, etc.
for the releife of the poor prisoners of the Kings Bench, and Marshalsey, and
also of such Hospitals, and alms houses, as shall be in the said County, and
what sums of money shall be sent to every one of the said Hospitals, and alms
houses, so as there be sent out of every County yearly xx. s. at the least to
each of the said prisons of the Kings Bench, and Marshalsey, which sums
ratably to be assessed upon every parish, the Churchwardens of every Parish
shall truly collect and pay over to the high Constables: in whose division
such Parish shall be situate, from time to time quarterly ten days before the
end of every quarter, and every such Constable at every such quarter Sessions
in such County shall pay over the same to such two Treasurers, or to one of
them, as shall by the more part of the Justices of Peace of the County, be
elected to be the said Treasurers, to be chosen by the Justices of Peace of the
said County, City, or town, or place corporate, or of others which were
sessed and taxed at five pound lands, or ten pound goods at the least, at the
tax of Subsidy next before the time of the said Election to be made.
Treasurers for (...) to (...) up their account at the years end.


And the said Treasurers so elected to continue for the space of one whole year
in their office, and then to give up their charge with a due account of their
receipts and disbursements, at the quarter Sessions to be holden next after the
feast of Easter in every year, to such others as shall from year to year, in
form aforesaid successively be elected Treasurers, L chief Justice* Knight
Marshall.
for the said County, City, Town, or place corporate, which said Treasurers
or one of them shall pay over the same to the Lord chief Justice of England,
and Knight Marshal for the time being, equally to be divided to the use
aforesaid, taking their acquittance for the same, or in default of the said
chief Justice, to the next ancientest Justice of the Kings Bench as aforesaid.

And if any Churchwarden or high Constable, (...)
or his executors or administrators, shall fail to make payment in form above
specified, then every Churchwarden, his executors or administrators, so
offending, shall forfeit for every time the sum of ten shillings, and euerp
high Constable, his executors or administrators, shall forfeit for every time,
the sum of xx. s. the same forfeitures together with the sums behind, to be
levied by the said Treasurer and Treasurers, by way of distress and sale of
the goods as aforesaid, in form aforesaid, and by them to be employed toward
the charitable uses comprised in this Act.

And be it further enacted, (...) surplusage shall be bestowed.
That all the surplusage of money which shall be remaining in the said Stock,
of any County, shall by discretion of the more part of the Justices of Peace in
their quarter Sessions, be ordered, distributed and bestowed for the relief of
the poor Hospitals of that County, and of those that shall sustain losses by
fire, water, the Sea, or other Casualties, and to such other charitable
purposes, for the releife of the poor, as to the more part of the said
Justices of Peace shall seem convenient.

And be it further enacted, That if any Treasurer elected, Refusing to be
Treasurer to give the relief appointed.
shall wilfully refuse to take upon him the said office of Treasurership, or
refuse to distribute and give relief, or to account according to such form as
shall be appointed by the more part of the said Justices of peace, That then it
shall be lawful for the Justices of Peace in their Qarter Sessions, or in
their default, for the Justices of Assize, at ye Assizes to be holden in the
same County, to fine the same Treasurer by their discretion: the same fine not
to be under three pound, and to be levied by sale of his goods, and to be
prosecuted by any two of the said Justices of Peace, whom they shall authorize.

Provided always, that this Act shall not take effect until the Feast of
Easter next.

And be it enacted, A former Statute for relief of the Poor.
that the Statute made in the nine and thirtieth year of her Majesty's Reign,
entitled, An Act for the relief of the poor, shall continue and stand in
force until the Feast of Easter next. And that all Taxations heretofore
imposed and not paid, nor that shall be paid before the said feast of Easter
next, And that all Taxes hereafter before the said Feast, to be taxed by virtue
of the said former Act, which shall not be paid before the said Feast of
Easter, shall and may after the said Feast of Easter, be levied by the
Overseers and other persons in this Act respectively appointed, to leuy
taxations by distress, and by such warrant in every respect, as if they had
been taxed and imposed by virtue of this Act, and were not paid.

Provided always, (...).
that whereas the Island of Fowlenesse in the County of Essex, being environed
with the Sea, and having a Chapel of ease for the inhabitants thereof, and yet
the said Island is no Parish, but the Lands in the same are situated within
diverse Parishes, far distant from the same Island, Be it therefore enacted by
the authority aforesaid, that ye said Justices of peace shall nominate and
appoint Inhabitants within the said Island to be Overseers for the poor people
dwelling within the said Island, and that both they the said Justices, and the
said Overseers shall have the same power and authority to all intents,
considerations and purposes, for the execution of the parts and articles of
this Act, and shall be subject to the same pains and forfeitures, and likewise
that the inhabitants and occupiers of lands there, shall be liable and
chargeable to the same paiments, charges, expenses, and orders in such manner
and form as if the same Island were a Parish. In consideration whereof, neither
the said inhabitants, or occupiers of land within the said, Island, shall not be
compelled to contribute toward the relief of the poor of those parishes,
wherein their houses or lands which they occupy within the said Island are
situated, for, or by reason of their said habitations or occupyings, other then
for the relief of the poor people within the said Island, neither yet shall
the other inhabitants of the Parishes wherein such houses or lands are
situated, be compelled, by reason of their resiancie or dwelling, to
contribute to the relief of the poor inhabitants within the said Island. The
Defendants plea in a suite commenced against him.


And be it further enacted, that if any Action or Trespass, or other suite
shall happen to be attempted and brought against any person or persons for
taking of any distress, making of any sale, or any other thing doing, by
authority of this present Act: The defendant or defendants in any such action
or suit, shall, and may either plead not guilty, or otherwise make Auowry,
Cognizance, or Justification, for the taking of the said distresses, making of
sale, or other thing doing, by virtue of this Act, alleging in such Auowry,
Cognizance, or Justification, That the said distress, sale, trespass, or
other thing whereof the plaintiff or plaintiffes complained, was done by
authority of this Act, and according to the tenor, purport, and effect of
this Act, without any expressing or rehearsal of any other matter of
circumstance contained in this present Act. To which Auowrie, Cognizance, or
Justification, the Plaintiff shall be admitted to reply, That the Defendant
did take the said Distress, made the said sale, or did any other Act or
Trespass, supposed in his declaration of his own worng, without any such
cause alleged by the said Defendant, whereupon the issue in every such Action
shall be joined, to be tried by verdict of twelve men, and not otherwise, as is
accustomed in other personal actions. And upon the trial of that issue, the
whole matter to be given on both parties in evidence, according to the very
truth of the same. And after such issue tried, for the Defendant or non suite
of the Plaintiff, after appearance, the same Defendant to recover treble
damages, by reason of his wrongful vexation in that behalf, with his Costs
also in that part sustained, and that to be assessed by the same Jury, or writ
to enquire of the damages, as the same shall require. Provided always that
this Act shall endure no longer then to the end of the next Session of
Parliament.

Anno xliij. Reginae Elizabethae.
An Act for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners.
WHereas in the five and thirtieth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign that
now is, An Act was made, entitled, an Act for the necessary relief of
Soldiers and Mariners: And whereas in the nine and thirtieth year of her
Majesty's Reign, there was also made another Act, entitled, An Act for the
further continuance and explanation of the said former: Be it enacted by
authority of this present Parliament, that both the said Acts shall be, and
continue in force until the feast of Easter next, and shall be from and after
the said feast discontinued. And forasmuch as it is now found more needful
then it was at the making of the said Acts, to provide relief and maintenance
to Soldiers and Mariners, that have lost their Limbs, and disabled their
bodies in the defense and service of her Majesty and the State, in respect the
number of the said Soldiers is so much the greater, by how much her Majesty's
just and honorable defensive wars are increased: To the end therefore, that
they the said Soldiers and Mariners may reap the fruits of their good
deseruings, and others may be encouraged to perform the like endeauours:

Be it enacted by the authority of this present Parliament (...).
that from and after the said feast of Easter next, every parish within this
Realm of England and Wales, shall be charged to pay weekly such a sum of
money, toward the relief of sick, hurt, and maimed Soldiers and Mariners,
that so have bin as before is said, or shall lose their, Lims, or disable their
bodies, having bin Pressed, and in pay for her Majesty's service, as by the
Justices of Peace, or the more part of them, in their general quarter Sessions,
to be holden in their several counties, next after the feast of Easter next,
and so from time to time at the like quarter Sessions, to be holden next after
the feast of Easter, taxation (...) parish.
yearly shall be appointed, so as no parish be rated above the sum of ten
pence, nor under the sum of two pence weekly to be paid, and so as the
total sum of such taxation of the Parishes, in any County where there shall
be above fifty Parishes, do not exceed the rate of six pence for every Parish
in the same County, which sums so taxed, shall be yearly assessed by the
agreements of the parishioners within themselves, or in default thereof, by the
Churchwardens and the pety Constables of the same parish, or the more part of
them, or in default of their agreement, by the order of such Justices, or
Justice of Peace, as shall dwell in the same parish, or if none be there
dwelling, in the parts next adjoining.

And if any person shall refuse or neglect to pay any such portion of money so
taxed, Refusing to pay the money taxed.
it shall be lawful for the said Churchwardens and pety Constables, and every
of them, or in their defaults, for the said Justices of Peace, or Justice, to
leuy such sum by distress and sale of the goods or chattels of the party so
refusing or neglecting, rendering to the party, the overplus raised upon such
sale.

And for the collecting and custody of the sums taxed in form aforesaid.
Churchwardens shall pay to the high Constables the money taxed.
Be it enacted, that the Churchwardens, and pety Constables of every parish,
shall truly collect every such sum, and the same shall pay over unto the high
Constable, in whose division such parish shall be situate, ten days before the
quarter Sessions, to be holden next before, or about the feast of the Nativity
of S. John Baptist next, in the County where the said parish shall be situate,
and so from time to time, quarterly within ten days before every quarter
Sessions. And that every such high Constable, at every such quarter Sessions in
such County, shall pay over the same to two such Justices of Peace, or to one
of them, or to two such other persons, or one of them, as shall be by the more
part of the Justices of peace of the same Countey elected, to be Treasurers of
the said Collection, the same other persons, to be elected Treasurers, to be
such, as at the last taxatio^ of, the Subsidy next before the same election,
shall be valued, and sessed at ten pounds in lands yearly, or at fifteen
pounds in goods: which Treasurers in every Countey so chosen, shall continue
but for the space of one whole year, and then give up their charge, with a du
account of their receipts and disbursments, at their meeting in Easter quarter
Sessions; or within ten days after, to such others, as shall from year to
year in the form aforesaid, successively be elected.

And if any Churchwarden, Churchwardens, etc. failing to make payment.
petty Constable, or high Constable, or his executors, or administrators,
shall fail to make payment in form about specified, their every Churchwarden,
and petty Constable, his executors or administratours so offending* shall
forfeit the sum of twenty shillings. And every high Constable, his executors,
or administrators, the sum of forty shillings, to be levied by the
Treasurers aforesaid, by distress and sale in manner before expressed, and to
be taken by the said Treasurers, in augmentation of their stock, to the uses
aforesaid.

And if any Treasurer, A Treasurer failing of account, or neglecting his charge.
his executors or administrators, shall fail to give up his account within the
time aforesaid, or shall be otherwise negligent in the execution of his
charge, then it shall be lawful for the more part of the Justices of Peace,
of the same County in their Sessions, to assesse such Fine upon such Treasurer,
his executors or administrators, as in their discretion shall seem convenient,
so it be not under the sum of five pounds.

And for the true and just distribution and employment of the sums so
received, To which treasurer the Soldier shall repair for relief.
according to the true meaning of this Act, Be it enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that every Soldier or Mariner, having had his or their limbs lost,
or disabled in their bodies by service, being in her Majesty's pay, as above is
mentioned, or such as shall hereafter return into this Realm, hurt, or
maimed, or grievously sick, shall repair, if he be able to travel, and make
his complaint to the Treasurers of the County, out of which he was pressed, or
if he were no pressed man, to the Treasurers of the County where he was borne,
or last inhabited by the space of three years, at his election. And if he be
not able to travel, to the Treasurers of the County where he shall land, or
arrive, and shall bring a certificate unto any of the Treasurers aforesaid, Who
shall make the Soldiers certificate.
under the hand and Seal of the General of the Camp, or Governor of the
Town wherein he served, and of the Captain of the Band, under whom he
served, or his Lieutenant, or in the absence of the said General or Governor,
from the Marshall or Deputy of the Governor, or from any Admiral of her
Majesty's Fleet, or in his absence, from any other General of her Majesty's
ships at the Seas, or in absence of such General, from the Captain of the
ship wherein the said Mariners or Soldiers did serve the Queens Majesty,
containing the particulars by his hurts and services, Allowance of the
Certificate.
which Certificate shall be also allowed of the general Mustermaster, for the
time being, resident here within this Realm, or Receiver general of the
Muster Rolls, The Treasurer and Controller of her Majesty's Navy, under his
hand, for the avoiding of all fraud, and Counterfeiting: Then upon such
Certificate, Treasurers shall assign relief to soldiers.
such Treasurers as are before expressed, shall according to the nature of his
hurt, and commendation of his service, assign unto him such a portion of
relief, as in their discretions shall seem convenient for his present
necessity, until the next quarter Sessions, at the which it shall be lawful
for the more part of the Justices of Peace under their hands, to make an
Instrument of grant of the same, or like relief, to endure, as long as this
Act shall stand or endure in force, if the same Soldier or Mariner shall so
long live, and the same pension not be duly revoked or altered, Justices shall
grant relief to Soldiers.
which shall be a sufficient warrant to all Treasurers for the same County, to
make payment of such pension unto such persons quarterly, except the same
shall be afterward by the said Justices revoked or altered. How much relief
shall be assigned.
So that such relief as shall be assigned by such Treasurers or Justices of
Peace to any such Soldier or Mariner, having not borne office in the said
wars, exceed not the sum in gross nor yearly pension of ten pounds. Nor
to any that has borne office under the degree of a Lieutenant, the sum of
fifteen pounds. Nor to any that has served in the office of Lieutenant, the
sum of twenty pounds.

And yet nevertheless, The Justices may alter soldiers relief.
it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices of Peace and others,
having authority by this Act, to assign pensions to Soldiers and Mariners,
upon any just cause, to revoke, diminish, or alter the same from time to time,
according to their discretions in the general quarter Sessions of the Peace,
or general assemblies for Cities or Towns corporate, where the same pension
shall be granted.

And whereas it must needs fall out, that many of such hurt and maimed
Soldiers and Mariners, Soldiers ariuing far from the place where they are to
have relief.
do arrive in Ports, and places far remote from the Counties, whence they
are by virtue of this Act, to receive their yearly Annuities, and pensions, As
also they are prescribed by this Act, to obtain the allowance of their
Certificates from the Mustermaster, or Receiver General of the Muster Rolls,
who commonly is like to abide about the Court or London, so as they shall need
at the first, provision for the bearing of their charges, to such places: Be it
therefore enacted, that it may be lawful for the Treasurers of the County
where they shall arrive, in their discretion upon their Certificate (though not
allowed) to give them any convenient relief for their iourny, to carry them to
the next County, with a testimonial of their allowance, to pass on toward
such a place. And in like manner shall it be lawful for the Treasurer of the
next County to do the like, And so from County to County (in the direct way)
till they come to the place where they are directed to find their maintenance,
according to the tenure of this Statute.

And for the better execution of this Act in all the branches thereof, Be it
enacted, that every the Treasurers, in their several Counties, The Treasurers
book of Computation, and Register.
shall keep a true book of computation, of all such sums as they levy, and
also a Register of the names of every such person unto whom they shall have
disbursed any relief, And shall also preserve, or enter every Certificate, by
warrant whereof, such relief has been by them disbursed, And also that the
Mustermaster, or Receiver general of the Muster Rolls, shall keep a book,
wherein shall be entered the names of all such, whose Certificates shall be by
him allowed, with an abstract of their Certificates, And that every Treasurer
returning, or not accepting the Certificate brought unto him from the said
Mustermaster, shall write and subscribe the cause of his not accepting, or not
allowing thereof, under the said Certificate, or on the back thereof.

And be it further enacted, A Treasurer refusing to give relief.
That if any Treasurer shall wilfully refuse to distribute and give any
relief, according to the form of this Act, That it shall be lawful for the
Justices of peace, in their quarter Sessions, to Fine such Treasurers, by their
discretions, as aforesaid, The same Fine to be levied by distress and sale
thereof, to be prosecuted by any two of them, whom they shall authorize.

And be it also enacted, A Soldier begging, or counterfeiting a Certificate.
that every Soldier or Mariner that shall be taken begging, in any place
within this Realm, after the Feast of Easter next, Or any that shall
counterfeit any Certificate in this Act expressed, shall for ever lose his
Annuitie or pension, and shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged as a common
Rogue, or Vagabond person, and shall have, and sustain the same, and the like
pains, imprisonment and punishment, as is appointed and provided for common
Rogues and Vagabond persons.

Provided always and be it enacted, that all the surplusage of money which
shall be remaining in the Stock of any County, The surplusage of the stock.
shall by the discretion of the more part of the Justices of Peace, in their
quarter Sessions be ordered, distributed and bestowed upon such good and
charitable uses, and in such form as are limited and appointed in the Statutes
made and now in force, concerning relief of the poor, and punishment of
Rogues and Beggars.

Provided always that the Justices of peace within any County of this Realm
or Wales, Chief Officers in Corporate Towns.
shall not intromit or enter into any City, Borough, Place, or Town corporate,
where is any Justice of Peace for any such City, Borough, Place or Town
corporate, for the execution of any Article of this Act: But that it shall be
lawful to the Justice and Justices of the peace, Majors, Bailiffes, and other
head Officers of those Cities, Boroughs, Places, and Towns corporate where
there is any Justice of Peace to proceed to the execution of this Act, within
the precinct and compass of their liberties, in such manner as the Justice of
Peace in any County may do, by virtue of this Act. And that every Justice of
Peace within every such City, Borough, Place or Town corporate, for every
offense by him committed, contrary to the meaning of this Statute, shall be
fineable, as other Justices of peace at the large in the Counties are in this
Act appointed to be. And that the Mayor and Justices of Peace in every such
Borough, Place and Town corporate, shall have authority by this present Act,
to appoint any person, for the receiving of the said money, and paying the same
within such City, Borough, Place or Town corporate; which person so
appointed, shall have authority to do all such things, and be subject to all
such penalties, as high Constables, by virtue of this Act should have or be.

And be it enacted, How the forfeitures shall be employed.
that all forfeitures to be forfeited by any Treasurer, Collector, Constable,
Churchwarden, or other person, for any cause mentioned in this Act, shall be
employed to the relief of such Soldiers and Mariners, as are by this Act
appointed to take and have relief, And after that relief satisfied, then the
overplus thereof, with the overplus of the stock, remaining in any the said
Treasurers hands, shall be employed as is before mentioned, to the charitable
uses, expressed in the said Statutes, concerning the relief of poor, and for
punishment of Rogues and Beggars, (except the said Justices, or the more part
of them, shall think meet to reserve and keep the same in stock for the
maintenance and relief of such Soldiers and Mariners, as out of the same
County may afterward be appointed, to receive relief and pensions.) And that
the relief appointed to be given by this Act, shall be given to Soldiers and
Mariners, out of the County or place where they were pressed, so far forth as
the Taxation limited by this Act, will extend. And if the whole Taxation there,
shall be before employed, according to the meaning of this Act, or that they
shall not be pressed men, then out of the place where they were borne or last
inhabited, by the space of three years, at his or their election.

Provided always, Pensions assigned, to stand in force, though the Statutc be
repealed.
and be it enacted, that every pension assigned heretofore to any Soldier or
Mariner, or that shall be assigned before the said Feast of Easter next,
notwithstanding the discontinuance of the said two former Acts, shall stand in
force, and shall yearly from and after the said feast of Easter next, be
satisfied and paid, out of such Taxations and forfeitures, as shall be made,
collected, and levied by force of this Act, so long as the said pension shall
remain in force, without such reuocation or diminishing, as is before in this
Act mentioned. Which clause of reuocation or diminishing before mentioned,
shall extend as well to pensions heretofore assigned, as to such as at any time
hereafter, before, or after the said feast of Easter, shall be assigned to any
person or persons.

And be it also enacted, Taxations made and not levied.
that all arrerages of Taxations heretofore made, by virtue of the said former
Statutes, or any of them, which shall be or remain, at the said feast of
Easter next, vncollected, and not received, or levied, shall, and may by
authority of this Act, be had, received, and levied, by such persons, and in
such manner and form, as in every respect, Taxations made by virtue of this
Act, are appointed to be collected, received and levied, and shall be employed
to the uses expressed in this Act, and no otherwise.

Provided always, If the rate be not sufficient for Soldiers in London.
and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if the said rate shall be
thought not to be sufficient for the relief of such Soldiers, and Mariners,
as shall be to be relieved within the City of London, That then it shall be
lawful for the Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen of London, or the more part of
them, to rate and tax, such reasonable tax, sum and sums of money, for
the said relief, as shall be to them thought fit and convenient. So as such
sum and sums of money, so to be rated, do not exceed three shillings
weekly out of any Parish, and so as in the total, the sum shall not exceed,
or be under twelve pence weekly out of every Parish, one with another, within
the said City and the Liberties thereof. This Act to endure to the end of the
next Session of Parliament and no longer.

Anno xxxix. Reginae Elizabethae.
An Act for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars.
FOr the suppressing of Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdie Beggars, be it enacted by
the authority of this present Parliament, that from, and after the feast of
Easter next coming, All former statutes concerning Rogues, etc. revealed.
all Statutes heretofore made for the punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, or
sturdie Beggars, or for the erection or maintenance of houses of correction, or
touching the same, shall for so much as concerns the same be utterly
repealed: and that from, and after the said Feast of Easter, from time to time
it shall and may be lawful to, and for the Justices of Peace of any County or
City in this Realm or the Dominions of Wales, assembled at any Quarter
Sessions of the Peace within the same County, City, Borough, or Town
corporate, or the more part of them, to set down order to erect, and to cause
to be erected one or more houses of Correction within their several Counties
or Cities: Justices of Peace shall set down order for erection and maintenance
of houses of correction.
for the doing and performing whereof, and for the providing of stocks of
money, and all other things necessary for the same, and for raising and
governing of the same, and for correction and punishment of offenders thither
to be committed, such orders as the same Justices, or the more part of them,
shall from time to time take, reform, or set down in any their said Quarter
Sessions in that behalf, shall be of force, and be duly performed and put in
execution.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Who shall be
adjudged Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars.
that all persons calling themselves Scholars, going about begging, all Sea
faring men pretending losses of their ships or goods on the Sea, going about
the country begging, all idle persons, going about in any country, either
begging or using any subtle craft, or unlawful games and plays, or faining
themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomie; Palmestry or other like crafty
Science, or pretending that they can tell Destinies, Fortunes, or such other
like fantastical imaginations: All persons that be, or utter themselves to be
Proctors, Procurers, Patent-gatherers, or Collectors for Gaoles, prisons or
Hospitals: All Fencers, Bearewards, Common Players of Interludes, and
Minstrels, wandering abroad (other then Players of Interludes belonging to any
Baron of this Realm, or any other honorable personage of greater degree, to
be authorized to play under the hand and Seal of Arms of such Baron or
personage) all Iuglers, Tinkers, Pedlars, and pety Chapmen wandering abroad,
all wandering persons and common Laborers, being persons able in body, using
loytering, and refusing to work for such reasonable wages, as is taxed or
commonly given in such parts, where such persons do, or shall happen to dwell
or abide, not having living otherwise to maintain themselves: All persons
delivered out of Gaoles that beg for their Fees, or otherwise do travail
begging: All such persons as shall wander abroad begging, pretending losses by
fire, or otherwise: And all such persons not being felons, wandering and
pretending themselves to be Egyptians, or wandering in the habit, for^^^, or
(...) counterfeit Egyptians, shall be taken, adjudged, and deemed Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy beggars, and shall sustain such pain and punishments,
as by this Act is in that behalf appointed.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, The punishment of a Vagabond.
that every person which is by this present Act declared to be a Rogue,
Vagabond, or sturdy beggar, which shall be at any time after the said Feast of
Easter next coming, taken begging, vagrant, wandering or misordering themselves
in any part of this Realm, or the Dominion of Wales, shall upon their
apprehension by the appointment of any Justice of the Peace, Constable,
Headborough or Tythingman of the same County, Hundred, Parish, or Tything,
where such person shall be taken, the Tythingman or Headborough being assisted
therein with the advice of the Minister, and one other of that parish, be
stripped naked from the middle upwards, and shall be openly whipped until his
or her body be bloody? and shall be forthwith sent from parish to parish, by
the Officers of every the same, the next straight way to the parish where he
was borne, if the same may be known by the parties confession or otherwise.
And if the same be not known, then to the parish where he or she last dwelt
before the same punishment by the space of one whole year, there to put him or
her self to labor, as a true subject ought to do: Or not being known where
he or she was borne, or last dwelt, then to the parish through which he or she
last passed without punishment.

After which whipping, A testinoniall after punishment.
the same person shall have a testimonial subscribed with the hand, and sealed
with the seal of the same Justice of the peace, Constable, Headborough or
Tythingman, and of the Minister of the same parish, or of any two of them,
testifying that the same person has been punished according to this act, and
mentioning the day and place of his or her punishment, and the place whereunto
such person is limited to go, and by what time the said person is limited to
pass thither at his peril. And if the said person through his or her default
do not accomplish the order appointed by the said testimonial, then to be
eftsoons taken, and whipped, and so as often as any default shall be found in
him or her contrary to the form of this statute, in every place to be whipped,
till such person be repaired to the place limited: The substance of which
testimonial shall be registered by the minister of that parish, in a book to
be provided for that purpose, upon pain to forfeit 5. shillings for every
default thereof, and the party so whipped, and not known where he or she was
borne, or last dwelt by the space of a year, shall by the officers of the said
Village where he or she so last past through without punishment, be conveyed to
the house of Correction of the limit wherein the said Village stands, or to
the common Jail of that County or place, there to remain and be employed in
work, until he or she shall be placed in some service, and so to continue by
the space of one year, or not being able of body, until he or she shall be
placed to remain in some Almeshouse in the same County or place.

Provided always, Rogues which be dangerous, or will not be reformed.
and be it enacted, If any of the said Rogues shall appear to be dangerous
to the inferior sort of people where they shall be taken, or otherwise be
such as will not be reformed of their roguish kind of life by the former
provision of this Act, that in every such case it shall and may be lawful to
the said Justices of the limit where any such Rogue shall be taken, or any two
of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum to commit that Rogue to the house of
correction, or otherwise to the Jail of the County, there to remain until
their next quarter Sessions to be holden in that County, and then such of the
same Rogues so committed, as by the Justices of the Peace then and there
present, or the most part of them, shall be thought fit not to be delivered,
shall and may lawfully by the same Justices, or the most part of them, Rogues
to be banished the Realm, or committed to the Galleys.
be banished out of this Realm, and all other the dominions thereof, and at
the charges of that Country, shall be conveyed unto such parts beyond the
Seas as shall be at any time hereafter, for that purpose assigned by the Privy
Council unto her Majesty her heirs or successors, or by any six or more of
them, whereof the L. Chancellor, or L. Keeper of the great Seal, or the L.
Treasurer for the time being to be one, or otherwise be judged perpetually to
the Galleys of this Realm, as by the same Justices or the most part of them it
shall be thought fit and expedient.

And if any such Rogue so banished as aforesaid shall return again into any
part of this Realm or dominion of Wales without lawful license or warrant so
to do, Rogues returning after banishment, to be reputed Felons.
that in every such case, such offense shall be Felony, and the party offending
therein suffer death as in case of felony: The said felony to be heard and
determined in that County of this Realm or Wales, in which the offender shall
be apprehended.

And be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid that if any Town, The
forfeiture of a Constable etc. not doing his duty.
Parish, or Village, the Constable, Headborough or Tythingman be negligent and
do not his or their best endeauours for the apprehension of such Vagabond,
Rogue or sturdy Beggar, which there shall be found contrary to the form of
this present Act, and to cause every of them to be punished and conveyed
according to the true meaning of this present Act, that then the said
Constable, Headborough, or Tithingman, in whom such default shall be, shall
lose and forfeit for every such default ten shillings.

And also if any person or persons do in any wise disturb or let the
execution of this Law, Disturbing the execution of this Statute.
or any part thereof, concerning the punishment or conueying of Rogues,
Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, or the relief or settling of poor impotent persons
in any manner of wise, or make rescous against any Officer or person authorized
by this present Act for the due execution of any the premises, the same person
so offending shall forfeit and lose for every such offense the sum of five
pound, and shall be bound to the good behavior.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Bringing into this
Realm of Irish, Scottish or Manniske Vagabonds.
That no person or persons having charge in any voyage, in passing from the
Realms of Ireland or Scotland, or from the Isle of Man into this Realm of
England, do wittingly or willingly bring or convey, or suffer to be brought or
conveyed in any Vessel or Boat from and out of the said Realm of Ireland,
Scotland, or Isle of Man, into the Realm of England or Wales or any part
thereof, any Vagabond, Rogue, or Beggar, or any such as shall be forced or very
like to live by begging within the Realm of England or Wales, being borne in
the same Realms or Island, on pain of every such person so offending, to
forfeit and lose for every such Vagabond, Rogue, Beggar, or other person like
to live by begging.xx. s. to the use of the poor of the said Parish in which
they were set on land. And if any such Manniske, Scottish, or Irish Rogue,
vagabond, or beggar, be already, or shall at any time hereafter be set on land,
or shall come into any part of England or Wales, the same after he or she shall
be punished as aforesaid, shall be conveyed to the next Port or Parish in or
near which they were landed or first came, in such sort as Rogues are
appointed to be by this present Act, and from thence to be transported at the
common charge of the County where they were set on land, into those parts from
whence they came or were brought. And that every Constable, Headborough, and
Tythingman, neglecting the due performance thereof, shall forfeit for every
such offense ten shillings.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Diseased persons resorting
to Bath and Buxton.
that no diseased or impotent poor person shall at any time resort or repair
from their dwelling places to the City of Bath, or Town of Buxton, or either
of them to the Baths there for the ease of their griefs, unless such person
do forbear to beg, and be licensed to pass thither by two Justices of the
Peace of the County where such person does or shall then dwell or remain, and
provided for to travail with such relief, for and toward his or her
maintenance, as shall be necessary for the same person, for the time of such his
or her travail and abode at the city of Bath, and town of Buxton, or either of
them, and return thence, and shall return home again, as shall be limited by
the said license, upon pain to be reputed, punished, and used as Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars declared by this present Act. And that the
inhabitants of the same City of Bath, and Town of Buxton shall not in any wise
be charged by this Act with the finding the relief of any such poor people.

Provided always, The Justices within Towns Corporate shall only intermeddle.
That the Justices of Peace within any County of this Realm or Wales, shall not
intromit or enter into any City, Borough, or Towns corporate, where be any
Justice or Justices of the Peace for any such City, Borough, or Town
Corporate, for the execution of any Branch, Article or sentence of this Act,
for or concerning any offense, matter, or cause growing or arising within the
Precincts, Liberties, or Jurisdiction of such City, Borough, or Towns
Corporate, But that it may and shall be lawful to the Justice and Justices of
the Peace, Majors, Bailiffes, and other head Officers of those Cities,
Boroughes, and Towns Corporate, where there be such Justices of the Peace, to
proceed to the execution of this Act, within the precinct and compass of their
Liberties, in such manner and form as the Justices of Peace in any County may
or ought to do within the same County, by virtue of this Act, Any thing in
this Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to the poor people for the time being in the Hospital, S. Thomas
Hospital in Southwarke.
called Saint Thomas Hospital, otherwise called the Kings Hospital, in the
Borough of Southwarke near adjoining to the City of London, but that the
Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London for the time being,
shall and may have the rule, order, and government of the said Hospital, and
of the poor people therein for the time being, Any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, The Jurisdiction of John Dutton of Dutton reserved.
That this Act or any thing therein contained, or any authority thereby given,
shall not in any wise extend to dis-inherit, prejudice, or hinder John Dutton
of Dutton, in the County of Chester Esquire his heirs or assigns, for,
touching or concerning any liberty, pre-eminence, authority, jurisdiction, or
inheritance, which the said John Dutton now lawfully uses, or has, or
lawfully may or ought to use within the County Palatine of Chester, and the
County of the City of Chester, or either of them, by reason of any ancient
Charters of any Kings of this land, or by reason of any prescription, usage, or
title whatsoever.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, In what sort the
forfeitures shall be employed.
That all fines and forfeitures appointed or to grow by this present Act,
(except such as are otherwise limited and appointed by this present Act shall
wholly go and be unployed to the use of the reparations and maintenance of the
said houses of Correction, and stock and store thereof, or relief of the
poor where the offense shall be committed, at the discretion of the Justices
of the Peace of the same limit, City, Borough, or Town Corporate: And that all
fines and forfeitures appointed or to grow by conviction of any person
according to this present Act, shall by warrant under the hands and seals of
any two or more of the Justices of the Peace of the same County, City, Borough,
or Town Corporate, bel^ied by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of
the offender, which sale shall be good in the Law against such offender. And
that if any of the said offenses shall be confessed by the offender, or that the
same shall be proved by two sufficient and lawful witnesses, before such two
or more Justices of the Peace, That then every such person shall forthwith
stand and be in the Law convicted thereof.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Justices of Peace
may hear and determine the causes of this Statute.
that any two or more Justices of the Peace within all the said several Shires,
Cities, Boroughes, or Towns corporate, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall
have full power by authority of this present Act, to hear and determine all
causes that shall grow or come in question by reason of this Act.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Commissioners to
enquire for money gathered.
that the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time
being, shall and may at all times hereafter by virtue of this present Act,
without further warrant, make and direct Commission or Commissions under the
great Seal of England, to any person or persons, giving them or some of them
thereby authority, as well by the oaths of good and lawful men, as of
witnesses or examination of parties, or by any other lawful ways or means
whatsoever, to enquire what sums of money or other things have been or shall
be collected or gathered for or toward the erection of any houses of
Correction, or any Stocks or other things to set poor on work, or for the
maintenance thereof at any time after the seventeenth day of November, in the
eighteenth year of the Reign of the Queens most excellent Majesty, and by
whom the same were or shall be collected or gathered, and to whose hands
commen, and to what use, and by whose direction the same was or shall be
employed. And to call all and every such person and persons, and their
sureties, and every of their executors or administrators to an account: And to
compel them and every of them by attachment of their goods or bodies to
appear before them for the same, and to hear and determine the same, and to
levy such money and things as they shall find not to have been duly employed
upon the said houses of Correction, or stocks, or upon other like uses, having
in such other like uses respect of things past by the said Commissioners to be
allowed of, either by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such
persons as they shall think fit to be chargeable or answerable for the same,
or by imprisonment of their bodies at their discretion: And that the said
Commissioners shall have full power and authority to execute the same
Commission according to the tenor and purport thereof: And that all their
proceedings, doings, judgments, and executions by force and authority thereof,
shall be and remain good and available in the Law: which said money so levied
by the said Commissioners, shall be delivered and employed for the erecting or
maintenance of the same.

Provided always nevertheless, A provision for poor Seafaring men.
That every Seafaring man suffering shipwreck, not having wherewith to
relieve himself in his travails home wards, but having a Testimonial under
the hand of some one Justice of the Peace, of, or near the place where he
landed, setting down therein the place and time, where, and when he landed,
and the place of the parties dwelling or birth, unto which he is to pass, and
a convenient time therein to be limited for his passage, shall and may without
incurring the danger and penalty of this Act, in the usual ways directly to
the place unto which he is directed to pass, and within the time in such his
testimonial limited for his passage, ask and receive such relief as shall be
necessary, in, and for his passage.

Provided also, Glassemen not begging.
that this Statute, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to any
children under the age of seven years, nor to any such Glassemen as shall be
of good behavior, and do travail in or through any Country, without begging,
having license for their travailing under the hands and seals of three
Justices of the Peace of the same County where they travail, whereof one to be
of the Quorum.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this present
Act shall be proclaimed in the next quarter Session or Sessions in every
County, This Act to be proclaimed.
and in such other market Towns or places, as by the more part of the Justices
of the Peace in the said Sessions shall be agreed and appointed. This Act to
endure to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

Certain branches of the Statute made in the first year of the Reign of King
JAMES, concerning Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars.
FOrasmuch as sithence the making of the Act of 39. Eliz. diverse doubts and
questions have been moved and grown by diversity of opinions, taken in and
upon the letter of the said Act: For a plain declaration whereof, Be it
declared and enacted, That from henceforth no Authority, to be given or made
by any Baron of this Realm, No authority given by any Baron, etc. shall free
others from the offense and punishment of the Statute of 39. Eliz.
or any other honorable Personage of greater degree, unto any other person or
persons, shall be available to free and discharge the said persons, or any of
them from the pains and punishments in the said Statute mentioned, but that
they shall be taken within the offense and punishment of the same Statute.

And whereas in the said Statute, Glassemen brought within the compass of the
Statute.
there is a Prouiso contained, that the said Statute, nor any thing therein
contained, shall extend to any such Glassemen as shall be of good behavior,
and shall travel in or through any County without begging, having License for
their traveling, under the hands and Seals of three Justices of the Peace of
the same County, where they travel, whereof one to be of the Quorum, as by
the Statute more at large appears: By reason of which liberty, many
notorious Rogues and Vagabonds, and evil disposed persons have undertaken, and
do profess the trade of Glassemen; and by color thereof do travel up and
down diverse Counties of this Realm, and do commit many Pickeries, petty
Felonies, and other misdemeanors: For the auoding of which inconvenience, Be
it established and enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That
from and after two months next after the end of this present Session of
Parliament, all such person and persons, as shall wander up and down the
Country to sell Glasses, shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken as Rogues and
Vagabonds, and shall suffer the like pain and punishment in every degree, as
is appointed to be inflicted upon Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, by the
intent and true meaning of the said Statute, made in the nine and thirtieth
year of the Reign of the said late Queen Elizabeth, and shall be set down
limited, and appointed by this present Act, Any thing in the said Statute of
the nine and thirtieth year of her said Reign to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as one branch of the Statute of 39. Rogues branded with an hot
iron R.
Eliz. is taken to be some what defective, for that the said Rogues having no
Mark upon them to be known by, notwithstanding such judgment of Banishment,
may return or retire themselves into some other parts of this Realm where
they are not known, and so escape the due punishment which the said Statute did
intend to inflict upon them: For remedy whereof, Be it ordained and enacted,
That such Rogues as shall after the end of two months next after the end of
this Session of Parliament, be adjudged, as aforesaid, incorrigible or
dangerous, shall also by the judgment of the same Justices, or the more part
of them then present, in their open Sessions of the Peace, be branded in the
left shoulder with an hot burning Iron of the breadth of an English shilling
with a great Roman R upon the Iron, and the branding upon the shoulder to be
thoroughly burned, and set on upon the skin and flesh, that the Letter R be
seen, and remain for a perpetual Mark upon such Rogue during his or her
life, Glassemen brought within the compass of the Statute.
and thereupon be sent by the same Justices to the place of his dwelling, if
he have any, if not, then to the place where he last dwelt by the space of a
year, if that can be known by his confession or otherwise: And if that cannot
be known, then to the place of his birth, there to be placed in labor as a
true Subject ought to do: And after such punishment of any such Rogue as
aforesaid, if any Rogue so punished shall offend again in begging or wandering
contrary to the said Statute, or this present Act, That then in every such
case, the party so offending shall be judged a Felon, and shall suffer as in
Cases of Felony without benefit of Clergy, the same Felony to be tried in the
County where any such offender shall be taken.

Anno primo Iacobi Regis.
An Act for the charitable relief and ordering of persons infected with the
Plague.
FOrasmuch as the Inhabitants of diverse Cities, Boroughs, Towns corporate, and
of other Parishes and places being visited with the Plague, are found to be
unable to relieve the poorer sort of such people so infected, who of necessity
must be by some charitable course provided for, lest they should wander abroad,
and thereby infect others: And forasmuch as diverse persons infected with that
disease, and others inhabiting in places infected, as well poor people and
unable to relieve themselves, that are carefully provided for, as other which
of themselves are of ability, being commanded by the Magistrate or officer, of
or within the place where the Infection shall be, to keep their houses, or
otherwise to separate themselves from company, for the avoiding of further
Infection, do notwithstanding very dangerously and disorderly demean
themselves:

Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, Taxing
others for the relief of the sick of the Plague.
That the Mayor, Bailiffes, head Officers, and Justices of the Peace, of every
City, Borough, Town corporate, and places Privileged, where any Mayor and
Bailiffes, head Officers, or Justices of Peace are or shall be, or any two of
them, shall have power and authority from time to time, to tax and assesse all
and every Inhabitant, and all Houses of habitation, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments within the said City, Borough, Town corporate, and places
Privileged, or the liberties or precincts thereof, at such reasonable taxes
and paiments, as they shall think fit for the reasonable relief of such
persons infected, or inhabiting in houses and places infected in the same
Cities. Boroughs and Towns corporate, and places privileged, and from time to
time levy the same Taxes, of the goods of every person refusing or neglecting
to pay the said Taxes, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the Mayor and
Bailiffes, and head Officers aforesaid, or two such Justices of Peace, to be
directed to any person or persons for the execution thereof. And if the party
to whom such Warrant is or shall be directed, shall not find any Goods to leuy
the same, and the party taxed, shall refuse to pay the same Tax, That then
upon return thereof the said Mayor, Bailiffes, head Officers or Justices of
Peace, or any two of them, shall by like Warrant under their hands and Seals,
cause the same person so taxed to be arrested and committed to the Jail,
without Bail or Maineprise, until he shall satisfy the same taxation, and
the Arrerages thereof.

And if the Inhabitants of any such City, The Inhabitants unable to relieve
the Infected.
Borough, Town corporate, or place privileged, shall find themselves unable
to relieve their said poor infected persons, and others, as aforesaid, That
then upon Certificate thereof by the Mayor, Bayliffe, head Officers, and other
the said Justices of Peace, or any two of them, to the Justices of Peace of the
County of, or near to the said City, Borough, Town corporate, or
privileged place so infected, or any two of them to be made, the said Justices
of, or near the said County or any two of them, shall or may tax and assesse
the Inhabitants of the County within five miles of the said place Infected, at
such reasonable and weekly Taxes and Rates as they shall think fit to be
levied by warrant from any such two Justices of Peace, of, or near the
County, by sale of Goods, and in default thereof, by imprisonment of the body
of the party taxed, as aforesaid.

And if any such Infection shall be in any Borough, Town corporate, or
piuiledged place, where there are or shall be no Justices of peace, or in any
Village or Hamlet within any County, That then it shall and may be lawful for
any two Justices of peace of the said County, wherein the said place infected
is or shall be, to tax and assesse the inhabitants of the said County, within
five miles of the said place infected, at such reasonable weekly taxes and
rates as they shall think fit for the reasonable relief of the said places
infected, to be levied by warrant from the said Justices of Peace of the same
County by sale of goods, and in default thereof, by imprisonment of the body of
every party so taxed, as aforesaid: The same taxes made by the said Justices
of Peace of the County, for the relief of such Cities, Boroughs, towns
corporate, and places privileged, where there are no Justices of Peace, to be
disposed as they shall think fit. And where there are Justices of Peace. Then
in such sort as to the Mayor, Bailifs, head officers, and Justices of Peace
there or any two of them shall seem fit and convenient. All which taxes and
rates made within any such City, Borough, town corporate, or place
privileged, shall be certified at the next quarter Sessions to be holden within
the same City, Borough, Town corporate, or place privileged; And the said
Taxes and Rates made within any part of the said County, shall in like sort be
certified at the next quarter Sessions to be holden in and for the said
County, and that if the Justices of Peace at such quarter Sessions
respectively, or the more part of them shall think it fit, the said tax and
rate should continue or be enlarged, or extended to any other parts of the
County, or otherwise determined, then the fame to be so enlarged, extended or
determined increased, or taxed and levied, in manner and form aforesaid, as to
the said Justices at the Quarter Sessions, respectively shall be thought fit
and convenient* And every Constable, and other Officer that shall wilfully make
default in leuying such money, as they shall be commanded by the said Warrant
or Warrants, shall forfeit for every such offense ten shillings, to be employed
on the charitable uses aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, An infected person commanded to keep his house,
disobeyeth.
That if any person or persons infected, or being dwelling in any house
Infected, shall be by the Mayor, Bayliffes, Constable, or other head Officer
of any City, Borough, Town Corporate, Privileged place, or Market Town, or
by any Justice of Peace* Constable, Headborough or other Officer of the
County, (if any such Infection be out of any City, Borough, Town Corporate,
Privileged place, or Market Town) commanded or appointed, as aforesaid, to
keep his or their house, for avoiding of further Infection, and shall
notwithstanding wilfully and contemptuously disobey such direction and
appointment, offering and attempting to break and go abroad, and to resist,
or going abroad, and resisting such Keepers or Watchmen as shall be appointed,
as aforesaid, to see them kept in, That then it shall be lawful for such
Watchmen, with violence to enforce them to keep their houses. And if any hurt
come by such enforcement to such disobedient persons, That then the said
Keepers, Watchmen, and any other their assist assistants, shall not be
impeached therefore. Infected persons how Felons.
And if any infected persons as aforesaid, so commanded to keep house, shall
contrary to such Commandment, wilfully and contemptuously go abroad, and shall
converse in company, having any infectious Sore upon him uncured, That then
such person and persons shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged as a Felon, and to
suffer pains of death, as in case of Felony, But if such person shall not
have any such sore found about him. Then for his said offense, to be punished
as a Vagabond in all respects should, or ought to be, by the Statute made in
the nine and thirtieth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen
ELIZABETH, for the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds; And further to be bound
to his or their good behavior for one whole year.

Provided, That no attainder of Felony by virtue of this Act, shall extend to
any attainder or corruption of blood, or forfeiture of any Goods, Chattels,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall be
lawful for Justices of Peace, Majors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers
aforesaid, to appoint within the several Limits, Attendants appointed upon the
infected persons.
Searchers, Watchmen, Examiners, Keepers, and Buriers for the persons and
places respectively, infected as aforesaid, and to (...) unto them Oaths for
the performance of their Offices of Searchers, Examiners, Watchmen, Keepers,
and Buriers, and give them other directions, as unto them for the present
necessity shall seem good in their discretions. And this Act to continue no
longer then until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

Provided always, and be it enacted by authority of this present Parliament,
that no Mayor, Bayliffes, head Officers, or any Justices of Peace, shall by
force or pretext of any thing in this Act contained, do or execute any thing
before mentioned, The Universities, Cathedral Churches, Caron, Winchester.
within either the Universities of Cambridge or Oxford, or within any
Cathedral Church or the Liberties or Precincts thereof, in this Realm of
England, or within the Colleges of Eaton or Winchester, But that the
Vicechancellor of either of the Universities for the time being, within either
of the same respectively, and the Bishop and Deane of such Cathedral Church,
or one of them, within such Cathedral Church, and the Provost or Warden of
either of the said Colleges within the same, shall have all such power and
authority, and shall do and execute all and every such Act and Acts, thing and
things in this Act before mentioned, within their several Precincts and
Jurisdictions abouesaid, as wholly absolutely, and fully to all intents and
purposes, as any Mayor, Bayliffes, head Officers, or Justices of Peace within
their several Precincts and Jurisdictions, may elsewhere by force of this Act
do and execute.

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem, vicesimo die Octobris, Anno Regni
Reginae ELIZABETHAE quadragesimo, etc.
Praesentibus,
Thoma Egerton mil. Dn^o Cultod. Magni Sigilli Angliae. Dn^o North. Dn^o
Buckhurst. Iohanne Fortescue milite Cancellar, Scaccarij. Archiepiscopo
Cantuariens. Popham milite Capitali Justice. de Banco Regis. Anderson milite
Capitali Justice. de Communi Banco.
THIS day Rice Griffin and John Scrips were brought to the Bar, against whom
Edward Coke Esquire, Her Majesty's Attorney General, did inform, That the
said Griffin had unlawfully erected and built one Tenement in Hog-lane in the
County of Middlesex, which he divided into two several rooms, wherein were
now inhabiting two poor Tenants, that only lived and were maintained by the
relief of the Parishioners there, and begging abroad in other places: And that
the said John Scrips had in like sort divided a Tenement in Shordich, into, or
about seventeen Tenancies or dwellings, and the same inhabited by diverse
persons of very poor and base condition, contrary to the intent and meaning of
her Highness Proclamation, published and set out the seventh day of July 1580.
in the two and twentieth year of Her Highness Reign, whereby the same, and
such manner of buildings and divisions, are altogether forbidden and
prohibited, as by her Majesty's said Proclamation more at large appears.

Moreover, her highness said Attorney further informed this Honorable Court,
that sithence the said Proclamation, sundry Decrees have been made and (...)
this Court, as well for the prostrating, pulling down, and defacing of diverse
new buildings: as also for reformation of divisions of Tenements: All which
notwithstanding, sundry wilful and disobedient persons, continue in their
contemptuous manner of buildings and divisions: by means whereof, the city of
London, and Suburbs thereof, are ouercharged, and burdened with sundry sorts of
poor, beggarly, and evil disposed persons, to the great hinderance and
oppression of the same; So as the Magistrates and Officers in and about the
city, to whom the execution of the aforesaid Decrees and Orders chiefly
appertains, cannot perform and do the same, according to the purport and
tenor thereof: And in regard thereof: Her Highness said Attorney humbly
prayed, that the said Griffin and Scrips might receive, and have inflicted on
them, some condign and fit punishment, and that at the humble petition of the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, and other the Justices of Peace
of the County of Middlesex and Surrey, the Court would be pleased to set down
and Decree, some last and general Order in this and in all other like Cases of
new buildings, and divisions of Tenements. Whereupon the Court gravely
considering the great growing evils and inconveniences that continually breed
and happen by these new erected Buildings and divisions made and divided
contrary to Her Majesty's said Proclamation, and well weighing the reasons of
the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said city, and Justices of the Counties
aforesaid in that behalf, greatly tendering the ouerburdened and distressed
estate of the inhabitants that dwell in sundry the Parishes where the said new
buildings and divided Tenements are, being for the most part but of small
ability to bear and sustain the great charge which is to grow there, by
means of the poor placed in sundry of the new erected and divided Tenements,
Have therefore by the whole and general consent of all the honorable presence
here sitting, hearing the accusations aforesaid, and the answers, defenses,
and allegations of the said Griffin and Scrips, ordered and decreed, that the
said Griffin and Scrips, shall be committed to the prison of the Fleet, and pay
twenty pounds a piece for a Fine to Her Majesty. And as for the pulling
down, or reforming of any house new built or divided sithence and contrary to
the said Proclamation, within the City of London, or the compass of three
miles thereof, in which any poor or Impotent persons now do, or hereafter
shall dwell or abide, for that if the same houses should be pulled down,
destroyed, or reformed, other Habitations must be provided for them at the
charge of the Parishes where they be, or shall be dwelling. The Court does as
yet think fit to forbear and respit the doing thereof, and have ordered and
adjudged that all and every such poor and impotent persons, which dwell or
shall dwell and (...) in any new buildings, or divided tenements erected and
divided, contrary to the effect and intent of her Highness said proclamation,
and are or shall in any wise be driven to live by begging or to be relieved
(...) within the City of London, or any other place within the compass of
three miles thereof, shall and may during the time of his or their life or
lives, abide and dwell in the same, without giving or paying any manner of Rent
service or other recompense unto the Landlords or any other, for, and in
respect of the same, and not be thence (...) they shall after become able to
live of themselves, And that the said Landlord, owner, or any other that (...)
to, or for any Rent or Rents growing, ar^^ng, or payable for any of the said
new Buildings, or divided Tenements, to inhabited or to be inhabited with
poor people as aforesaid, shall (...) enjoined, and upon this (...) and
Decree, take sufficient notice and warning, that he or they do not (...)
encumber, disquiet, or moldst any of the said poor Tenants, for any Rents,
Covenants, Conditions, promises or agreements, touching, or in any wise
concerning the said Tenements, new buildings, or any of them, for the leuying
or recovering of any Rent, service, or other consideration in lieu of any Rent.
And for that the new, buildings and divisions of sundry houses, within the
City of London and three miles compass thereof contrary to the tenor of the
said Proclamation, has been and is the occasion of great charges unto the
Parishes of the said City and Precinct aforesaid, whereby the said Parishes are
still overmuch burdened with poor and impotent persons, It is therefore
Ordered and Decreed, That all such Landlords or owners of such Buildings or
Divisions whersoeuer they should dwell, shall contribute and give such like
ratable and reasonable allowance with the said Prishioners where such Buildings
and divisions are, toward the finding and maintaining of the poor of the
Parish, in which such Buildings are, is, or shall be erected or divided
contrary to the said Proclamation, as should be apportioned and allotted him
or them to pay, if he or they were dwelling in the said Parish.

And it is further Ordered and Decreed by this honorable Court, that after the
death or departure of such poor people as do or shall inhabit the same
houses or divided Tenements aforesaid, the houses thereby being become void,
Then the Lord Mayor and Justices of Peace near unto the City adjoining, hereby
are commanded to reform the said divided Tenements, and to prostrate, pull
down and deface the said new buildings in such sort, as the same be no more
left fit for habitation, and the timber and wood thereof to be converted and
disposed in such manner as by the said Proclamation is required: As also to
take order in all other the premises, That this Decree be duly observed and
kept: And if any shall be obstinate, then to bind such Landlords as that shall
obstinately and wilfully disobey this said Decree, to appear in this
Honorable Court of Star Chamber to answer their contempt therein.

This Decree was afterward read in the Court of Star Chamber the 29. of
November 1609. and then confirmed and straightly commanded by all the Lords
present to be duly put in execution. In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem,
vicessimo nono die Nouembris, Anno septimo Iacobi Regis.
Praesentibus,
Thoma Egerton milite Dn^o Ellesmere, Dn^o Canc. Ang. Comite Sarum Dn^o
Thesaurario Ang. Comite Northampton. Comite Exon. Dn^o Zouch. Iul. Caesare
milite Cancellar. Scaccarij. Archiepiscopo Cant. Fleming milite Capitali
Justice. de Banco Regis. Coke milite Capitali. Just. de com. Banc. Yeluerton
milit. Justice. de banc. Reg. Williams milit, Justice. de banc. Reg. Foster
milite Justice. de communi Banc.
THis day Sir Henry Montague, Knight, Recorder of London informed this most
honorable Court, that where there have been diverse Proclamations as well in the
time of our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, as also since his Majesty's most
happy Reign, and also diverse Orders and Decrees taken in this honorable Court
for the restraining and reforming of the multitude of new erected and divided
Tenements, and taking in of Inmates, yet nevertheless the same do so daily
increase and multiply in every place in and about this City of London and the
Suburbs thereof, infinite number of people being pestered together breeding and
nourishing Infection, so that the same tends to the great imminent danger of
the government and safety of this City, and consequently to the peril of his
Majesty's Sacred person, the Queens Majesty, and their Royal Issue, and the
Lords of the State here ordinarily residing, with many other great enormities,
if the same be not carefully and speedily prevented. And therefore it was
humbly desired, that this honorable Court would revive a Decree of this Court,
made the twentieth day of October, in the fourtieth year of our said late
Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, taken and established for restraining and
reforming of such new erected Buildings and divisions.

And that the said Decree might be put in present execution for the speedy
refor- of the said enormities, whereupon the said Decree being openly read, this
honorable Court, and all the whole Presence here sitting, taking tender care
and consideration of the Good and Safety of the said City, and gravely
foreseeing the imminent danger and evils which do grow and increase, and do
chiefly arise through overmuch neglect in due execution of those former
Proclamations, Decrees and ordinances which are not looked into as they ought
to be, Does therefore Decree and Order, that the said former Decree taken the
said twentieth day of October in the said fortieth year of our late Sovereign
be presently, and from time to time hereafter, more severely looked into, and
put in execution.

And his Majesty's learned Council, and also the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of
London, together with all Justices of Peace, and other his Majesty's Officers
whatsoever which the same may any way concern, are hereby straightly charged and
required, that they and every of them do from time to time hereafter
diligently and strictly cause and see the said Decree to be in all points
duly observed and put in execution, and Tearmely to make Certificate to his
Honorable Court of their proceedings therein, and of such persons as they
shall find to offend in that behalf; Whereupon this Court does purpose to
proceed against them for their contempts with very severe punishment.*

LONDON, Imprinted by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty Anno Dom. 1626.


