For the Alderman of the Ward.
Means devised for better execution of the Statute for relief of the poor,
and redressing the disorders of persons vagarant and begging in the City of
London.

THat every Constable or his deputy always attending in the parish, shall
continually from time to time make it known to the Surueyor hereafter mentioned
in what place such Constable or his deputy shall be upon any occasion ready
to be found.

Item, that the inhabitants of every parish, at a vestrie or assembly to be
holden every sunday, shall every Sunday wekely, appointe for the whole seven
days next followyng, or and for every parish in his ward, one or mo surueyors
for every day, according to the quantity of the parsh, the same surueyors to
be chosen of the honest inhabitants of the parish.

Item, the same choice of Surueyors shall be every sunday also signified by
writing to every person so chosen, and also to the Constable or his deputy,
together with the day that such surueyor is appointed to attend.

Item, every such Surueyor shall by himself or his Deputy every such day for
which he is appointed, attend in some convenient place or places of the parish
where he thinks best for that purpose, to see if any persons shall be found
vagarant in that parish contrary to the statute.

Item, the Surueyor finding any such person vagarant, shall forthwit give
notice thereof to the Constable or his deputy.

Item, the Constable or his deputy having such notice, or himself espying any
such person vagarant, shall apprehend such vagarant, and convey the same to the
next Constable, according to the form of the statute, and so to be conveyed
from Constable to Constable, to such place as they are to be sent by the
statute.

Item, that every Constable make his ordinary vewes, and do all other things
according to the statute.

Item, that every Constable with one Churchwarden at the least, and the bedle
attending on them once in every xiiij. days at the least, view all the houses
of poor persons in allies and such like, and there search if any new inmates
be received, or any new tenantes not able to live without burdening the parish,
or any poor that by the statute are to be sent to other places, and thereof
every second Saturday at the furthest or oftener upon occasion, to give
certificate in writing to the Alderman or his deputy.

Item, that every person chosen Surueyor, or appointed to any charge ^y these
ordinances, and refusing or failing to do his duty therein, shall be committed
to ward by the Alderman or his deputy.

Item, that there be convenient cages for committing of unruly vagarantes in
every ward.

Item, that convenient order and punishment be provided for such watermen as
shall transport vagarants from Southwarke, Lambehith, and such places.

Imprinted at London by John Day.


