SUNDRY CHRISTIAN PASSIONS CONtained in two hundred Sonnets. Divided into two
equal parts: The first consisting chiefly of Meditations, Humiliations, and
Prayers. The second of Comfort, Joy, and Thanksgiving. By H. L.

Call upon me in the day of trouble: So will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Imprinted at London by Richard Field. 1593.

To the rIght Renowned Virtuous VIrgin ELIzabeth, Worthy QVeene of Happy
EngLanD, her Highness faIthfVL Subject, Henry Lok, Wishes Long Life, With
eternaL Bliss. June. VII.
MY worthless pen Presumes to devise,
To eternize Your peerles vertu^us fame,
In holy flame Of zeal my heart does rise,
Which does despise A th^ame of vulgar frame,
The sacred dame The graces have select,
That should protect The heir Muses hill,
Whose Phoenix quil Does heavenly Crown affect,
And those has dect Which Roman Trophies fill.
Heavens do distill Their happy influence,
As come from thence, You there your portion have,
Jove long you save, Whose Scepters you dispense,
For whose defense, True English hearts he gave,
Venus would crave, And Dian does that due,
Which Pallas wills Me yield alone to you.
To the Christian Reader.
WHo so shall duly consider the whole Progress of man's estate from life to
death, shall find it gentle Reader, to be nothing else but a very pilgrimage
through this earth to another world; for whether we observe the common course
of all flesh, which from the mothers womb to the grave, is still traveling
with change of bodily constitution, from youth to age, from health to
sickness, and so from one estate to another. Or if we behold the particular
incounters which each man finds in himself, in the variable change of his
hopes and crossing of his purposes: In both it shall by a general experience
of all men's calamities be assuredly confirmed to be too true. But how much more
may we find in the direction of our souls to the pr^per h^uen of their
habitation (even to heaven) a multitude of adversaries lying in the way to
hinder our travel to that promised land; how many afflictions of the mind,
frailties of the flesh, bayts of the world, and snares of Satan, are bent
against us, to slacken (if not clean to divert, our due course thitherwardes,
in such sort as if God of his infinite mercy and providence did not oftentimes
prevent and stop our wills and powers, and bridle the malice of these
adversaries, we should all assuredly perish by the way. But now (such is his
fatherly care and love to us in Christ) that he has left us a direction and
ready way of saftie in the midst of all ass^ults ^r ^fflictio^s how peri^^ous
soever, even prayer; which being formed accor^ing to the rules prescribed unto
us by his son, and with feruencie of faith offered up unto him: are of power
to penetrate the heaven, purchase our safety, p^y our debts, and procure us
peace of heart in the midst of all e^rt^ly perils: yea (knowing our coldness
herein, and fear of our own guils, deterring us from his presence) he does
not only license us to this boldness, but allureth us by many sensible
blessings felt in our own consciences. And calls us by a supernatural
courage, sometimes with confidence to come unto him, and even to hope against
hope in our most desperate necessities. He does direct our tongues oftentimes
herein before our minds, and our minds before our hearts; being himself
readier to give then we to ask, and giving with more regard of our good, then
we can crave or conceive: for all which he expects nothing else at our hands,
but continually to fly unto him, and to yield him due praise: to rely on him
only in the day of trial, and to encourage others thereto, for in this sort
alone he will be honored of us. This our earthly pilgrimage being then so
dangerous to all flesh, and so ready a way prescribed unto us for our safer
passage therein, he were very unwise that would not furnish himself with such
prou^sion (which costs so little as our wills to have it) and more uncharitable
that would not do his best to assist his companion in his iourny, with both
counsel and comfort of the same. For this cause (gentle Reader) I having
(through Gods great goodness) fels in the direction and protection of my
unstable youth, a plentiful portion of the wonderful care he has over us,
and of the unspeakable force of prayer and thansgiuing in all extremities: the
more to stir up my self to a memory thereof, have thought good to set down
these abrupt passions of my passed afflictions, as witnesses of the impediments
most stopping me in my Christian pilgrimage, and testimonies of the means of
my evasion hitherto, which may serve for presidents for my self in the like
future occasions: and not be altogether unprofitable for others to imitate. In
which (as in a glass) may be seen, the state of a regenerate soul, sick
with sin, sometimes (Agus-like) shiuering with cold despair, straight ways
inflamed with seruencie of faith and hope. One while yielding under the burden
of sin to eternal death, and presently encouraged to run cheerfully
forward the appointed course of this his pilgrimage, and like a practiced
traveler, used to the change of company, diet, heat, cold, pain, pleasure,
plenty, and want, not to amaze himself long with any change: but by a
consideration of pleasures passed or rest expected, patiently to pass over
this world full of incomberances, from a sense and feeling whereof in some
measure, no true child of God is any long time (as I suppose) exempt. Now
although I doubt not but even these reasons will carry the judgment of the
godly Christian Reader to a favorable interpretation of my purpose herein,
and to some delight in the taste thereof, to whom no person or occasion, style
or phrase, will seem unseasonable, being imployd to the glorifying of God, and
profit of the Church, or proceeding from a zeal of that effect: yet the
consideration that the greater number to whose hands this Treatise may happen
to come, are either not so well affected, or so discreet and temperate as were
to be wished, makes me think it needful to say something in declaration of
my purpose herein: not in excuse of my exercising my self in such theames which
indeed ought to be the common action in some measure of all men, as often as
necessary affairs of this life will permit them, neither in that I make
common with others this my exercise which seems in secret only to be
practiced by my self: for that I take it not to be always a token of pride or
vain glory, to make known for a common good to others, that which may breed
a suspect of ambition in the Author among the profane or cauelling multitude,
though how herein I am carried my self, I leave to God the searcher of hearts
to judge: only I would satisfy them first in the cause of my writing them in
verse, then of the confused placing of them without special titles. To the
first I was induced, for that I find many oftentimes (specially such as had
most need to pray and meditate) to read books rather for the affection of
words then liking of matter, and perhaps more to control the compiling, then
commend the contents, such yet (so as they read) shall give me all that I
crave, and find I hope that they looked not for, if not in all, yet in some
among many of these Sonnets. As for the apt nature of Poetry, to delight, to
contriue significat^^^ly in few words much matter, to pearce and penetrate
^^^ections of men, with the aptness thereof, for help of ^e^orie, I will not
say much: but for my deducing t^ese passions into Sonnets, it answers (as I
suppose) best for the shortn^sse, to the nature of passions, and common burner
of men, who are either not long touched with so good motions, or by their
worldly affairs not permitted to continue much reading; as for the cause of my
so preposterous placing of them and division only into two sorts, I confess
indeed I am persuaded their disorder does best fit the nature of mankind, who
commonly is delighted with contraries, and exercised with extremes, and also
as they were by God ministered to my mind, to set down by sundry accidents in
my private estate and feeling; so I suppose my providence could not by a
formal placing of them, so soon hit the affections of every Reader as Gods
direction (by that which men call chance) might this way encounter the common
inconstant form of reading, which is by starts to turn over books, and
peruse only, what by the praise of others told, is commended unto them, or not
sought for, falls into their view. As they are therefore, I recommend them to
thy courtesy in reading, and thee to Gods holy spirit in the perusing of them,
if they may have the same working in thee, that I praise God some of them had
in me, they shall not be utterly unprofitable. If in matter they iumpe not to
thy passions in all points, think among the great Arsenall of Satan's armor,
he has choice of weapons for sundry assaults, and disposes of them diversely
according to the strength or weakness of the party he besieges. Which (being
as indifferent in particular persons as Gods gifts are to them) thou shall do
well to thy ability to reform or supply my defect, who hereby do only inuit
the better able to employ in so fit a Theme their more fruitful spirit. If in
manner of the verse or style, they be (as I doubt not) to be amended much: I do
not greatly seek the praise of a curious Architect or, neither (without
neglect of more necessary duty) could I attain to the required obseruances
that way: and therefore crave that thy dis^ression may regard my intention. And
thus recommending my self to ^^y favorable acceptance, who herein have rather
followed the force of mine own inward feeling, then outward ornaments of
Poetical fictions or amplifications, as best beseeming the naked clothing of
simple truth, and true Analogy of the nature of the Histories whereto they
alude, and harmony of scriptures whence they are borrowed. I heartely commend
thee to the Almighty.

(...)

(...)

THE FIRST PART OF CHRISTIAN PASsions containing a hundredth Sonets of
meditation, humiliation, and prayer.
PREFACE.
IT is not Lord the sound of many words,
The bowed knee or abstinence of man,
The filed phrase that cloquence affordes,
Or Poets pen that heavens do pearce or can:
By heavy cheer, of color pale and wan,
By pined body of the Pharisay,
A mortal eye repentance often does scan,
Whose judgment does on outward shadows stay.
But thou (o God) do hearts intent bewray,
For from thy sight Lord nothing is conceald,
Thou formdst the frame fro out the very clay,
To thee the thoughts of hearts are all reueald,
To thee therefore with heart and mind prostate,
With tears I thus deplore my sinful state.
SONET I.
HOw should my soul Lord clad in earthly mold,
(The prison where it ready is to pine,
Where vilde affections captive it do hold.
And threaten naught, but ruin in the fine)
Unto one thought of hope or help incline.
Or raise the eyes unto the heavens bright?
How may it, Lord take hold on mercies thine,
Or press it self in presence of thy sight:
Or how can thou therein at all delight,
If mercy be not spokesman in this case,
If merit of thy son should not acquit
The common gilt of Adams sinful raze?
Which since by faith alone man may attain,
Grant me first grace not faithless to remain.
SON. II.
FRo out the darkness of this sea of fear,
Where I in whale remain deuourde of sin,
With true remorse of former life I rear
My heart to heaven, in hope some help to win:
I do confess my fault, who did begin
To fly from thee o Lord, and leave undone
Thy service which of right should first have bin
performd, by woich so many should be won
To praise thy name. But fear alas begun,
To represent to me my iourny long.
The dangers of the world my life should run,
Which made me to my soul to offer wrong.
But since by show of death thou caldst me back,
Thy gracious help at need let me not lack.
SON. III.
WIthin this arc wherein my soul does dwell,
My body floting on worlds troubled wave,
Which winds of fierce affections cause to swell,
And hardly can my power from sinking save,
I cry to thee o Lord and comfort crave:
Close up this fountain of this flowing sin,
Let me by faith again once footing have
On fruitful earth, and holy life begin;
Lighten the burden so unclean within,
Of brutish vices raging in my mind,
Let clean affects the greater party win,
And so increase that plenty I may find
Of sacrifices pleasing in thy sight,
Of faith and love which are thy souls delight.
SON. IIII.
IN humble wise as fitteth best my state,
An abject wretch deuoyd of all desert,
I here approach before thy mercy gate,
O Lord of life with broke and contrite heart
I need not to reveal to thee my smart,
A lump of sin and shame I am I know,
Wounded so deep with deadly poisoned dart,
Of serpents sting which did from parents grow,
That now my humors so do ouerflow,
With foul affections of my feeble mind,
As presses down my eyes on earth so low,
As dares not search the heavens true help to find.
Yet since thou have made known to me my grief,
Guide me by grace to fountain of relief.
SON. V.
Unto thy princely wedding Lord are bed,
Of every sort some guests to feast with thee,
One that a spouse but late before had wed,
One oxen bought, one taken land to fee:
They from the banquet therefore absent be,
Regarding not thy messengers of grace,
In number of the like, Lord hold not me,
But let me have I crave the offered place,
Yet ere that I appear before thy face,
A wedding garment first I must put on,
My own unrighteous clothing is too base,
And merchandise of merits now are gone,
Then since thou cal'st, with faith do thou me cloth
A lame blind beggar Lord, do thou not loath.
SON. VI.
IN pride of youth when as unbridled lust
Did force me forth, my follies to bewray,
I challenged as patrimony just,
Each vain affection leading to decay:
And trusting to that treasure, post away
I wandered in the worlds alluring sight,
Not reason, virtue, shame, or fear could stay,
My appetite from tasting each delight.
Till want and weariness began me bite,
And so perforce to father I retire,
To whom I prostrate kneel (unworthy wight)
To name of son not daring to aspire,
Receive me yet, sweet savior of thy grace,
Poor penitent, into a servants place.
SON. VII.
LAme of my limbs, and senseless of my state,
Near forty years. Lord have I groueling line,
Before Bethesda poole, yet still too late,
To wash me in the fountain I incline,
Whence health would come, when Angel gives the sine:
If any one to aid me ready were,
But helpless thus, I ready am to pine,
My self unable duly up to rear.
Vouchsafe thou then me to this bath to bear,
By the assistance of thy heavenly grace,
Let not the force of foul affects me fear,
To prease forth first when Christ appears in place,
Who is the fountain, Angel, and the man,
That bath, that bliss, that cure my senses can.
SON. VIII.
THy thundering voice and Angel Lord of long,
Has called my soul from slumber where it lay,
The harmony of heavenly musickes song,
Has made my wandering feet at last to stay:
Direct thou me also the ready way,
Unto thy church, that in thy holy place
Thy word and law I may in heart ^bay,
And worship thee before thy peoples face.
Grant me I say, such measure of thy grace,
That greedily by faith I swallow up
The book of truth, and so thy word embrace,
That frutefully I taste saluations cup.
Thou who do rule the earth, the sea and land:
In my defense, with power and glory stand.
SON. IX.
AMong thy sheep o Lord I seemd to feed,
By Sacraments received into thy flock,
By preached word I watered was indeed,
And works with fleece did seem inritch my stock:
But at my door true faith did never knock,
(Which should be shepherd of my souls defense)
But thiefelike fond affections reason mock,
And by the window of my wilful sense
Do enter to my heart and steal from thence,
Each motion of amendment which does rise,
And shepheardlesse of grace transported hence
By Satan (ravening woolfe) in fearful wise,
I call to thee (sweet Savior) shepherd true,
Teach me to know thy voice and thee ensue.
SON. X.
BEhold o Lord the City thou have built,
Jerusalem this fleshly frame of mine,
By sin (Assyrians sword) is almost spilt,
And like to yield to Rabsake in fine:
Yet lo alas my soul does much repine,
To see proud Satan so blaspheme thy name,
To threaten ruin to this temple thine,
Since thou art praysd and honored in the same.
Thou able art the rage of lust to tame,
The force of pride and fury to subdue,
Against Senacherib thy Angel came,
And all his host in one night overthrew.
So let thy holy spirit me defend,
And to my plaints and prayers comfort send.
SON. XI.
SInce with Goliath I am now to fight,
And lack the flight of holy David's sling,
Arm thou me Lord with heavenly armor bright,
Which power of flesh and world to foil may bring.
Thy righteous brestplate gird on me with truth,
Prepare my feet with Gospel of thy peace,
The shield of faith (which fiery darts bear forth,
Of wicked Satan, whose assaults not sease)
The helmet of salvation and the sword
Of spirit which is founded on thy law;
All these my prayers are, that thou afford
To make me steadfast, spite of lions claw,
Who roaring, daily seeks as wished pray,
My silly soul from thee to take away.
SON. XII.
NOw that thou have prepared me to confess,
Thy service Lord the which I undertake,
I thee beseech, my purpose so to bless,
That I a good account to thee may make:
A Nazarit I am, who do forsake
The delicacies of the worlds delight,
Whose thirst thy purest fountain still shall slake,
With faith and truth the which with sin shall fight.
I will not taste the wine of Satan's slight,
Which does confound all reason and all sense,
My vow shall be to serve thee day and night,
And trust in thee shall be my true defense,
Till death dissolve this promise made to thee,
Whose strength herein thy heavenly graces be*
SON. XIII.
I Seek o Lord to show thy powrefull hand,
Which has converted this my sinful heart,
Into a rod of strength which still might stand,
Strong in thy truth, who powrefull only art:
But Iamnes pride, and Iambres lustful heart,
By slight imposture of sly Satan's might.
Two Serpents frame, which will not thence depart,
But seek against thy powrefull hand to fight.
But let my faith their fury put to flight,
And virtue thine, devour these imps of sin,
Let not these fleshly fruits appear in sight
Of truth, which only can the conquest win.
Let faith show forth the finger of thy hand,
And clean consume, each power does it withstand.
SON. XIIII.
BEhold o Lord a tree by high way side,
Unfruitful yet of any food for thee,
In high way side as yet I do abide,
Where passers to Jerusalem I see:
Though summer grow, I cannot fruitful be,
Unplanted by thy grace in garden thine,
I do confess I am a wild fig tree,
For want of moisture which am like to pine,
Unto my prayers Lord do thou incline,
Remove me home into thy garden fair,
Let me behold the face of thy sun shine,
Which may my withered leaves with life repair.
So may thou taste a fruit of wholesome kind,
And leave a mark of mercy great behind.
SON. XV.
Within thy garden Lord I planted was,
And watered well with thy most careful hand,
But yet unfruitful I remaind alas,
And these thy blessings did not understand:
In vain I did employ possessed land,
Ten times three years thy servants did replant
My stock, and sought to bend my crooked wand,
And did supply each aid I seemed to want.
At length my fruits which daily grew more scant,
Wild thee resolve to have me weeded out,
My foul affections were with folly brant,
My root of faith was shakt with fear and doubt.
And lo I pine, sweet Savior water me,
Paul and Appollos work, else lost will be.
SON. XVI.
A Wicked Pharisie I long have been,
Whom sight of mercies thine allure to thee,
A shamed Lord of my fair clothed sin,
In secret uight I seek thy face to see:
That thou art God, thy works reveal to me,
That thou art mine, thy son does me assure,
Vouchsafe, that I regenerate may be,
And that my prayers pardon may procure.
Purge by thy sprite and faith, fair fountain pure,
The senses dull that cannot understand,
The heavenly birth which shall in bliss endure,
Not subject unto Satan's sinful band.
And with thy son let worlds affections die,
My soul from hell, with him ascend on hie.
SON. XVII.
Five foolish virgins in my senses dwell,
And seek to make me slumber over long,
They dream, that all my deeds do fall out well,
Whereas indeed I headlong run to wrong:
To vanities their humors do belong,
And sin who does their fancy chiefly feed,
They cheined are to linkes of lust so strong,
That their best soil, brings forth but bitter weed.
They lack the oil which should be used in deed,
To lead them to the everlasting light:
It grows not Lord in fruit of humane seed,
Man sleeps all day and gropes his way at night.
Unless thou lend thy hand and fill our lamps,
Our light goes forth with smothering sinful damps
SON. XVIII.
OVt of the fountain of eternal life,
I poor Samarytan here ready stand,
(To sinful lust an old betrothed wife)
With pitcher ready in my trembling hand,
To draw a draught of liquor most divine,
To quench the thirst of my inflamed heart
With heavenly de^: ere that my soul do pine,
And qualify the rigor of my smart.
A Prophet true thou art I understand,
Or rather father of all truth thou art,
A stranger I from fair Iudaea land,
With these thy blessings crave for to impart,
Then guide my hand and teach my soul to taste,
True faith the fountain where all bliss is plast.
SON. XIX.
A Wicked soul sold to all fleshly sin,
Lord here I prostrate at thy feet to lie,
To gather crummes of grace, souls health to win,
Which Lord to give me do thou not deny:
The precious oil of penitence will I
Power forth with tears fro out my melting eyes,
o bath thy feet, and after will I dry
Them with my hairs (which balms no treasure bies)
Though worldly love when he my fact espies,
Repine to see my soul so well inclind:
To my defense o Lord vouchsafe to rise,
And fructify this first fruit of my mind.
Vouchsafe to sup with humble servant thine,
And that of service, better choice be mine.
SON. XX.
A Poor Arabian whom base Agar bare,
First borne of flesh, but last of promised grace,
Of basterd kind, bred up with mothers care,
In wilderness of world for a long space:
And famishing before my parents face,
Whose works unable were to lend me aid,
A bondsman unto sin as fleshly race,
To whom heavens heritage thy laws denaide.
Amidst my wandering course by thee am staide,
And have a promise not to die but live,
Thy covenant Lord abundantly is paid,
If grace to seed by faith thou do me give.
My bondage thus release, make thou me free,
My barren branch shall fruit bring forth to thee
SON. XXI.
A Merchant I, full long abroad have straide,
By sea and land true happiness to gain,
The riches of the earth my eyes have waide,
And see their profit to be light and vain.
Such trifling trash my soul does now disdain,
And Jewels of more value I espy,
Among the rest, one does all other stain,
Which with my wealth I wish that I might buy.
But this rare pearl is of a price so hie,
As all the earth cannot esteem the same,
Much less to purchase it, can it come nie,
Yet does the love thereof my heart inflame.
Be thou the pledge (sweet Savior) then for me,
That heavenly bliss shall so my riches be.
SON. XXII.
AMong the prease of many that draw near,
Unto the feast of grace in temple thine,
A silly widow I also appear,
With humble heart o Lord, who here incline,
And unto thee an offering of mine,
Present as precious, to my poor estate,
The herds or flocks, the store of corn and wine,
Without obedience Lord thou aye did hate,
But broken hearts and souls which lie prostrate
Before thy throne of grace, and mercy crave,
Do mercy find, though it be near so late,
Thy promise this assurance to us gave,
In trust whereof, obeying thy behest,
My prayers to thy praise, o Lord are pressed,
SON. XXIII.
INto thy vineyard Lord unworthy I,
Desire to come, to travel out the day,
Thou calledst me thereto, and did epsy
Me loytring idle, by the worlds high way:
At first to come my follies did me stay,
Whom cold and hunger now to work compel,
Though half my days be spent, say me not nay,
The other half to try, employed well.
I do not hope my pains so dear to sell,
As they that bear the brunt of heat of day,
They merit most whose travels most excel,
My slender service craves but single pay.
But if thy bounty give, behold me pressed,
With thanks thy grace to taste, among the rest.
SON. XXIIII.
AS thou art pure and just in all thy ways,
(O Lord) so should thy offerings also be:
The tongue unclean, cannot set forth thy praise,
The wanton eye may not thy secrets see.
The lame of faith, the blind of skill not he,
That thou alotst thy sacrifice to slay,
The heart that is found clean in each degree,
Is fittest for thy church, wherein to stay,
Such is no flesh, o Lord the truth to say,
But as thou please them to purify,
By faith and by repentance every day,
Who then with Christ, may boldly thee come nie.
Behold me then, thus thy adopted child,
Let me not from thy temple be exilde.
SON. XXV.
I Follow thee o Lord but far behind,
As Peter did, when he did see thee led
To prison where the traitors did thee bind,
Amazed much with worldly seat and dred:
When as I saw the world all over spread,
With hatred and disdain unto the just,
My courage it was quayld and quickly fled,
And had no liking to thy help to trust.
But Lord I know perforce I forward must,
If I intend to gain the crown I crave,
I must abandon flesh and fleshly lust,
And in thy promise all my hope must have.
Grant thou me boldness then and constant will,
To persevere in thy obedience still.
SON. XXVI.
OF parents first, two brothers borne that were,
The body and the soul did represent,
The elder Cain who Henocks walls did rear,
The younger Abell dwelt in silly tent:
First man with plough the virgins soil he rent,
The other served and shore the silly sheep:
To worldly lusts of flesh the one was bent,
Thy heavenly laws the other sought to keep.
A deadly discord twixt them so did creep,
The elder did the giltlesse younger slay;
That ancient hatred grounded is so deep,
It strives in me (alas) unto this day.
Accept my sacrifice, Lord me defend,
My powers unto thy holy pleasure bend.
SON. XXVII.
LIke pined child o Lord from nurses breast,
Whom churlish stepdame over soon does waine.
By wicked will alas I am oppressed,
And cry to cruel flesh behold in vain:
Who lets me languishing in sin remain,
And sends no comfort to support my need,
My faults I know, I do confess them plain,
That folly does my weak affections feed.
I see my ruin near at hand in deed,
And cannot call for aid whose tongue is dum,
My feet so feeble cannot help at need,
Although I see at hand thy vengeance come,
Unless thou give me grace to see and fear,
To pray in faith and thou thy hand forbear.
SON. XXVIII.
POlluted with the curelesse leprosy
Of sin, which is heriditarie now,
So loathsome grown that I dare not come nie
Thy holy temple where my heart does bow:
I crave o Lord, it please thee to allow,
The high Priest Christ thy son to view my sore,
Whose holy hand may guide and teach me how
To cure this grief it may return no more.
I know o Lord thou have of mercy store,
And only thou do pity man's estate,
Which though my stubburne heart refusde before,
Repentance yet and faith comes not too late.
These sparrowes of repentance I present
An offering through this worldly desert sent.
SON. XXIX.
A Virgin pure o Lord by birth I was,
The daughter of thy church adopt by grace:
But loth^ome lust (foul feend) did me alas,
Pursue and sought with me his dwelling place.
As many virtues as did seek my grace,
By wedding^ band to me to be vnight,
So many did this seend, first night deface,
So often I was deprived of my delight.
Seven times a widow, I with shame and spite
Am left, and live now hopeless of redress:
Till thou with Raphaell send that medicine bright,
Of God to give me grace sin to suppress.
Thy son my spouse shall be, who shall restore
Tobias sight, wealth, comfort, lost before.
SON. XXX.
OF sinful raze of man's licentious seed,
Whilst heavenly offspring with fair humane kind:
Do join affects, where wicked lusts do breed,
And so pollute the fruits of virtuous mind.
A bastard brood my self alas I find,
Whose nature does in tyranny consist,
Of grace and reason grown so dull and blind,
That I in wrong with stubburnesse persist.
Who seeing father Nature ere he wist,
A sleep with sottish wine of worldly love:
To hide his shame by wisdom had no list,
Which justly curse of God on me did move.
A slave to sin, therefore I did pursue
(Like Nymrod) grace of God, which now I rue.
SON. XXXI.
AS often as thou by grace would draw me back,
From sin, whereto I am by nature thrall:
So often alas I find my will to lack,
And power to follow thee when thou do call.
From sin to sin, I headlong thus do fall,
And quench repentance by a perverse will,
I see my fall, but have no fear at all,
And to my vomit dog-like turn I still.
My frailty does thy wrathful cup fulfill,
With flowing measure of revenge and woe:
When I return a little back from ill,
To wallow in the mire again I go.
No power is in me Lord, my life to mend,
Unless thy hand from heaven me comfort send.
SON. XXXII.
Feign would I fence this feeble flesh of mine,
From Satan's fury who me thus assailes,
Which does besiege my soul and means to pine,
My conscience which my sin so sore bewailes.
His busy brain to win me never fails,
And leaves no stratagem at all untried:
My fainting hope I know not what it ailes,
But it does fear the battery to abide.
The safest way must be what ere betide,
To set a watch to look unto my ways:
Lest pride or lust, or wrath do let him slide,
Into my heart which yet vnyeelded stays.
But like a thief he steals me upon,
Watch thou me (Lord) each hour else I am gone.
SON. XXXIII.
MY sins behold (o Lord) are manifold,
Which do incamp my soul each hour about.
Still me entrenched with distrust they hold.
So that no fruits of faith can issue out:
Their fleshly champion is a soldiar stout,
Who is assist by world and Satan's aid,
And foul affections ready are in rout,
To further force to lust, but hardly staide.
The earthly treasures are with pleasure paid,
The hateful Army which does have to hell:
My native power their passage not denaide,
Which makes their pride and perverse will to swell.
I see no way to help to shun decaie,
But on thy graces rescue Lord to stay.
SON. XXXIIII.
THe greediness of this my corrupt mind,
Which tastes not but of the earthly gain,
And in thy glory can no profit find,
But seeks with symonie my soul to stain:
Makes me alas for carnal treasor vain,
Like Elizeus servant to desire,
A present of worlds pleasure mixed with pain,
As recompense of heavenly comforts hire.
I sorcerer like do also often require,
Like merchandise thy graces for to buy,
Supposing moral virtues may aspire,
To save my soul and sin to mortify.
But lo I see souls leprosy herein,
And crave that prayers may my pardon win.
SON. XXXV.
Void of true life, and buried in the grave,
Of wicked flesh alas I long have bin,
No earthly comfort can my conscience have,
Which was corrupted with all loathsome sin.
My sister virtues to despair begin,
Of ever seeing once my life's restore,
Ne is there any other way to win
True life indeed, which shall decay no more,
But prostrate Lord thy help for to implore,
And crave thy gracious presence at the last,
To aid the soul thy son has loved before.
For time of grace with thee is never past.
Roll back hard stony heart, bid him arise,
Who slave to sin in earthly coffin lies.
SON. XXXVI.
MY body Lord the house which has been long.
Possessed with spirits to ruin of the same,
Which forced me forward unto open wrong,
Of conscience by defacing of thy name:
Has found some comfort since thy message came
Unto my soul, which in thy word was sent,
Whose powerful truth has bound and seeks to tame
The furious lusts which to my ruin bent.
Grant Lord from heart I may indeed repent,
And thereby chase these feends fro out of me,
Sweep clean my house fro out of which they went,
And garnished with graces let it be.
Let puissant faith henceforth possess the place,
Lest sin return with legions of disgrace.
SON. XXXVII.
AMidst this famine of Sarepta soil,
Where I a widow dwell, poor and abject:
Compeld by sin, by sweat of brows to toil,
To gather sticks, from cold me to protect:
Behold me Lord, a caitiue thus neglect.
Whom sin has banished thy blessed land:
Who yet in heart thy Prophets do affect,
And with thy church to life and death will stand.
I offer all my treasures here in hand,
That little spark of grace yet left behind,
Increase it Lord unto a great firebrand,
Of faith which may a fruitful harvest find.
My meal and Oil, o Lord do thou increase,
My self and son, shall praise thee so in pease.
SON. XXXVIII.
BOrne blind I was, through sinful Adams fall,
And never since could see with carnal eyes:
Ne know I where or how for help to call,
From out of sin to holy life to rise.
It pleased thee o Lord that in this wise,
Thy power and glory might to man appear:
Who graceless groueling in earths darkness lies,
And wants the eyes of faith his soul to cheer.
But since thou sentst thy son my Savior dear,
To shine in light to those in darkness wear:
To dvm the worldly wisdom seeming clear,
And sinful souls from hell to heaven to rear.
Touch thou my eyes with faith, wash me with grace,
In Sylo po^ (...) (thy word) which I embrace.
SON. XXXIX.
HOw drunken are my humors all alas,
With wine of vanity and sensual lust,
Which from one sin do to an other pass,
And after evil daily more do thurst.
Of force my faults for shame confess I must,
My lavish usage of thy graces sent:
My souls consent to action so unjust,
As death of Prophets teaching to repent.
Like Herod I about the matter went,
To please the follies of my flesh delight:
Incest'ous I to sin so much was bent,
That offered mercy pleased not my sight.
But Lord prepare my heart to see my sin,
That sorrow may away to mends begin.
SON. XL.
THough with thy Saints o Lord I choice have made,
To spend my days in praising of thy name:
And in the study of thy word to wade,
To feed my faith with portion of the same.
Yet can I not my choice so rightly frame,
Amidst the spacious fields where truth does grow:
But whilst to gather healthful herb I came,
A bitter bud I found of fearful show
Which threateth me with death and overthrow,
Unto my soul which hungerly does feed,
On sin the weed which Satan did bestow,
By poisoned taste thereof to pine in deed.
But Christ thy son by faith me health shall bring*
Discharge the law, and bruise this deadly sting.
SON. XLI.
ACcording to the promise of thy word,
To give the victory o Lord to those,
That fight thy battles with a faithful sword,
Against the world, flesh, devil and thy soes:
So seek I Lord proud Ierico t'inclose,
Incouragde by thy graces from above,
My shoes of soul affects I pray thee lose,
Before on holy earth my path I move.
Thy powerful hand by prayer let me prove,
Which daily seven times I to thee direct:
Shake thou the walls of sin for my behoue,
And in this skirmish do thou me protect.
The fruits of flesh, pride, lust, and error all,
So shall be wract, sin shall not raise a wall.
SON. XLII.
AMidst the graves of death these many a year,
My soul (possessed with all sorts of sin)
Has lived and held that fruitful place so dear.
That from the same no counsel could me win:
To beat my self my follies never lin,
No reason can with chains bind so my will,
But to unloose my lusts I do begin,
With help of furious feend who aides me still.
But since thy son appears me until,
I crave I may no more tormented be,
Lest that my soul eternally he kill,
But from the force of Satan make me free.
These brutish sins in swine more fit to dwell,
Drown in repentant seas of tears which swell.
SON. XLIII.
IN deadly sleep o Lord sin has me cast,
Wherein secure I lie and so remain,
Raise me o Lord out of this dream at last,
And let me sight and light of heaven attain:
The heavy humors which my judgment stain,
And dazell so the reason of my mind,
Grant that they may their proper use attain,
And comfort in thy grace and promise find.
All fleshly wisdom of it self is blind,
Till thou by knowledge clear their wandering sight,
Out of the snare of sin flesh cannot wind,
Unless by faith they see thy son so bright.
Him let me still, both see and eke admire,
And thee in him o Lord I thee desire.
SON. XLIIII.
MY wicked flesh o Lord with sin full freight,
Whose eye does lust for every earthly thing,
By coueti^e allurde has bit the baight,
That me to Satan's servitude will bring,
By violence I virtues right would wring,
Out of possession of the soul so weak,
Like vineyard which the wicked Acab king,
Possessed by tyrants power which laws do break.
Let Prophets thine Lord to my soul so speak,
That in repentant sackcloth I may moan,
The murder of thy grace which I did wreake,
Whilst to my native strengh I trust alone.
And let my Savior so prolong my days,
That henceforth I may turn from sinful ways.
SON. XLV.
IF thou vouchsafst Lord of thy goodness rare,
To sanctify with holy presence thine,
The Cana marriage where thou do not spare,
First miracle of water turned to wine,
Then be thou present at this wedding mine,
Which twixt thy church and me by faith is meant,
To see the want in me thy eyes incline,
Whose wine of grace by wanton youth is spent.
But being touched with view thereof repent,
And crave that water of earthes healthles well,
May issue forth from heart with sorrow rent,
And turned to wine, may so with grace excel,
That all that see and taste this change in me,
May grant this work of thee alone to be.
SON. XLVI.
SInce it has pleased thee o Lord to send.
Now in my barren age of hope and grace:
Repentant child from ruin to defend,
My name and soul to live before thy face,
Thy blessings I do thankfully embrace,
And in thy fear will frame his tender year,
The worlds regard in me shall have no place,
If once thy word and will my heart do hear.
And when thou calst, we both will then appear,
Before thy Altar in Moriath land:
To offer up thy gift my son so dear,
Obedient child to faithful fathers hand.
Which sacrifice not worthy gift for thee,
With Christ my Savior sufferings quit let be.
SON. XLVII.
OF every creature unclean to fore,
Whereof thy holy people might not taste,
Thou did present o Lord to Peter store,
Which were from heaven in sheet before him plast,
Which he at first refusde with mind most chaste,
Not touching things polluted or defilde:
But afterward thy counsel he embrast,
And saw himself had been before beguilde,
To think all sinners were for aye exilde,
From presence of thy mercies which abound,
Whom often thou do receive as father mild,
If faith in Christ thy son in them be found.
By prayers faith, by faith thy grace does grow,
Cornelius blessing (Lord) on me bestow.
SON. XLVIII.
HOw hard it is o Lord for man to frame,
His mind corrupt, to be preparde for thee:
With tongue unclean to praise thy holy name,
With fleshly eyes thy glory for to see:
Homeward I bring thy blessings unto me:
And make my soul their dwelling place to rest:
But so forgetful of thy laws we be,
That this my action Lord I see not blessed,
Pride and contempt the ways have so oppressed,
That danger is the carriage overthrow,
Grant that thy grace to stay it may be pressed,
That so my soul thy saving health man ^now.
Por to my flesh unsanctified to trust,
Were aie to hasten death by iudge^^^^ just.
SON. XLIX.
MY traitrous heart which long time has rebeld
Against thy spirit, which should feed me still*
A secret counsel in it self has held,
To contrary thy known revealed will*
Whose mutiny my senses so do fill,
With deeds repining to thy holy law,
That raging pride and lust lead me to ill,
Forgetting tokens of thy wrath they saw.
As Dathan and Abyram had no awe
Of Moses and of Aron thine elect,
But sought away thy people for to draw,
And Prophets thine by pride for to reject:
So does my soul alas thy grace resist*
And in the follies of the flesh persist.
SON. L.
A Tenant most untrue o Lord to thee,
In vineyard of my body have I bin:
To crave thy rent thy servants came to me,
But nothing but entreaty bad they win:
My travel therein was to nourish sin,
And wast the wine of thy abounding plant;
The more to call me back thou did begin*
The more to thee my gratitude did want.
Ne would my lack of grace let me recant,
When thou thy only son to me did send.
For sin and Satan did me so supplant,
That to his ruin I did also bend.
But Lord me lend In time repentant heart,
That from this vineyard I may not depart.
SON. LI.
WHilst in the garden of this earthly soil,
My self to solace and to bath I bend,
And fain would quench sins heat which seems to boil
Amidst my secret thoughts which shadow lend:
My sense and reason which should me defend,
As judges chosen to the common weal,
Allurde by lust my ruin do pretend,
By force of sin which shameless they reveal.
They secretly on my affections steal,
When modesty my maids I send away,
To whom for help I chiefly might appeal,
Whom grace did strengthen yet to say them nay,
Whom me accusde now Lord, and die I shall,
If Christ my Daniell be not judge of all.
SON. LII.
I Justly am accusde, and now am brought
By law and gilt of conscience I confess,
Before thy throne convict by deed and thought,
Of sinful lust which did me so possess,
That quickening graces thine I did suppress,
By fading love of world procliue to ill,
Whose dome eternal death and nothing less
My soul does see, and threatens to me still.
But since that frailty so the world does fill,
That no one fleshly wight thereof is free:
For mercy Lord to thee repair I will,
Who see the heart and can best comfort me.
Quit me from death, grant I may fall no more,
But remnant of my days thy grace implore.
SON. LIII.
A Husbandman within thy church by grace,
I am o Lord and labor at the plough,
My hand holds fast, ne will I turn my face,
From following thee although the soil be rough.
The love of world does make it seem more tough.
And burning lust does scorch in heat of day:
Till fainting faith would seek delightful bough,
To shade my soul from danger of decaie.
But yet (in hope of grace from thee) I stay,
And do not yield, although my courage quail,
To rescue me be pressed, I do thee pray,
If sinful death do seek me to assail.
Let me run forth my race unto the end,
Which by thy help o Lord I do entend.
SON. LIIII.
A Base borne son to sin by kind I am,
From native soil by want of grace exilde:
Of idle fancies captain I became,
Whilst I in Tob my resting place did bilde.
With worldly vanities I was defilde,
Till home thou calst me by thy heavenly word:
Who trusting to my self was soon beguilde,
When I sought works to be a conquering sword,
Whose vows did seem a present to afford,
Of fruit of victory at my return:
Which rashness has a mischief great incurd,
Compelling me my own deserts to burn.
And now I mourn, and better fruit do crave,
The blessing of thy son Lord let me have.
SON. LV.
WHen thou vouchsafedst Lord to raise my state,
From base degree of common humane kind:
And gave me knowledge and a will to hate,
Each wickedness contrary to thy mind,
By promise thou did me most strictly bind,
To slaie each wicked seed which does possess,
My sinful flesh (A malekite most blind)
Which virtue and thy grace seeks to suppress.
But wretched I alas I do confess,
Have kept a part of that accursed spoil
Undaunted, which thou see nere the less,
And therefore wilt accurse my sinful soil.
And take from me the kingdom thou did give,
Except thy mercy do my soul relieve.
SON. LVI.
THe only daughter Lord of my delight,
Dina the virtue of my judgment best:
Is ravished alas by Satan's might,
Whilst I secure in Hiuits country rest
In worldly vanities a wandering guest,
Amongst the wicked I remainde a while,
Where silly the, by foolish will addressed,
Gazde on those godless youths which her beguile:
For lustful Sichem son to sin most vile,
Did lay a train of love which led to shame:
Whose flattering speech did modesty exile,
And left a spot of guilt and soul defame.
But faith and zeal (the first fruits of my strength)
By grace shall venge my honor just at length.
SON. LVII.
THe silly babe the motion of the mind,
Which native virtue seeks forth to bring,
Concupiscence (the midwife most unkind)
To deadly sin and Satan straight does fling:
The mothers power suffiseth not to wring,
Out of this tyrants hands her dying child,
Her moan to see, it is a pittious thing,
When reason laws so leaudly are defilde.
But if thy favor Lord be reconcilde,
By love unto thy son, by him to me:
Then though my hope of grace be near exilde,
Yet thou a child Of faith wilt let me see.
A coffin Lord of comfort for me make,
Where safe I may swim in the worlds wild lake.
SON. LVIII.
WHere shall I build o Lord a quiet rest,
To bring forth birds of turtle Pigeons kind*
My wearied wings do wander without rest,
And cannot gain a harbor to my mind.
The Swallow Lord a settling place does find,
Within thy temple free from Eagles claw,
Not moved with tempestuous storms of wind,
Or dangers which their kind does stand in awe.
A place as fit for me, my faith once saw,
Whereas my soul might safely be inclosd,
Thy Church invisible to which I draw,
My life retirde therein to be reposd.
Make fruitful Lord my barren heart therein,
Shield me from storm of still assailing sin.
SON. LIX.
WHilst in the vale of carnal sense I dwell,
Foul Sodom sink of sin and badge of shame,
Of whose polluted nature I do smell,
And aptly bend my self to them to frame:
Sent by thy mercy Lord thy Angels came,
And did vouchsafe a harbor to accept,
Within my soul which did profess thy name;
But Satan who a watch on me had kept,
When as these guests within my conscience slept,
Environed with lust my harbor weak,
For sorrow of this sin my soul it wept,
Whilst violently my bodies bands they break.
But strike thou blind their fury, them expel,
Take me Lord from the flame of burning hell.
SON. LX.
MY body Lord infected long with sin,
Whose running issue is almost past cure,
Which help by humane physic cannot win,
And without comfort cannot long endure,
By viewing mercies thine becomes sure,
If but thy gracious hem my hand may reach,
That love in Christ my pardon shall procure,
And reunite in strength healths former breach.
Through press of worldly lets, faith shall me teach.
To seek my safety in thy promise true,
Vouchsafe thou eke repentance so to preach,
That I no more offending, health ensue
Thy virtue Lord, which bidding me be clean,
To yield me health of soul is ready mean.
SON. LXI.
NOw that I see o Lord my open shame,
Convict of sin and void of clothing pure:
Which cover might my soul which naked came
Of grace, and me from storm of world assure.
I do mistrust my self long to endure,
The heat and cold which fear and frailty bring,
And clothing of my own works to procure,
I find in deed to be a frutelesse thing.
To hide my self under thy mercies wing,
I therefore hasten now in hope of grace:
Grant I beseech the world no more me wring,
Out of thy hands, but let me see thy face,
With faith and comfort clothed by thy hand,
And Christ thy son in my defense to stand.
SON. LXII.
WHilst that the chosen chieftaines of thy word,
Do bend their power by preaching to subdue
The fleshly Canaan, and put sin to sword,
And give the soul to be possessed a new
With righteous Israel, unto whom of due,
Those earthly blessings rather do pertain:
They send two spies my secret thoughts to view,
The law and Gospel which discover plain
My fainting force in fear for to remain,
Where yet repentant Rahab ready is
To lodge them safe, whilst Satan seeks in vain,
To slaie these messengers of heavenly blis.
I crave therefore sweet Savior for a sine,
Faith bearing fruits as pledge of safety mine.
SON. LXIII.
HOw often o Lord with more then tender care,
Have thou by Prophets called me to repent,
How great thy love by son which did not spare,
To stay me back from hell whereto I went:
Who to that end from heaven to earth was sent,
Whose graces daily preached offered peace,
And sought to stop my course to ruin bent,
And me from guilt of death for to release:
Like as the hen whose voice does never cease,
To clock her chickens close under her wings,
When furious souls on silly pray do prease,
And would devour alas the helpless things.
O Lord thy care I feel and love of me,
That thrall to Satan would not have me be.
SON. LXIIII.
WHilst with the wholesome food of heavenly truth,
The Manna which thy written word does give,
Thou soughts o Lord to feed my wandering youth,
That it in plenteous peace by grace might live:
By lust to Satan sought my soul to give,
To break obedient bands unto thy law,
Which my offenses I protest do grieve
My helpless heart, the which delight did draw.
The memory of Egypts store I saw,
Of vanities which carnal senses feed,
And wished at length to fill again my maw,
With dishes such as to destruction lead.
Thou in thy wrath with quails did cloy me so,
That plagued with sin my error now I know.
SON. LXV.
SInce thou have raysd my poor abiected spright,
From threshing floor, where captive I did stand.
And call me thy battles for to fight,
Against sin the Madianite which wastes thy land.
Give me a token by thy mighty hand,
O Lord whereby my faith may be assurde,
And be to me a pledge of former band,
That victory by me shall be procurde:
Let heavenly dew by prayer be allurde,
To moysten this my freewill fleece of wool,
Then dry the dregs thereof to sin inurde,
Whose heavy weight makes grace and virtue dull.
And offering mine of prayers to thy name,
Acc^^t, and with a holy zeal inflame.
SON. LXVI.
WHilst that in wealth and ease I did possess
The Empire of thy many blessings sent,
I took in hand poor virtue to suppress,
And pride with lust my powers they wholly bent,
To conquer reason which thy grace had lent,
And quite forgetting worlds late flood for sin:
To build a tower of trust, wherein I spent
The strength of flesh and blood, high heaven to win:
As though in natures strength the force had bin,
To shield themselves from flood or heavenly fire,
But now confusion just my soul is in,
Makes laboring flesh from folly such retire.
And craves alone within thy church to dwell,
Whose walls of faith and truth may death expel.
SON. LXVII.
THe Temple Lord of this my body base,
Where thou vouchsafdst to place my soul to dwell,
And promisest to make thy chosen place,
Whence sacrifice of praises thou would smell,
Behold against thy laws does now rebel,
By worldly vanities thereto allurde,
Where couetise and pride their pack does sell.
At such a price as flesh and sin afford,
But since o Lord thy promise has assurde
My soul, that thou art always pressed to hear
The plaints of penitents, which has procurde
Thy son himself in temple this t'appeare.
Whip forth, fling down, this worldly wicked pack,
Fro out my soul, repel thou satan back.
SON. LXVIII.
WIthin thy house this body base of mine,
It pleased thee o Lord my soul to plant,
A steward of the gifts the which were thine,
And nature filled with measure nothing scant,
Of body or of mind, no blessings want,
And fortunes favors sharde with me no less,
In such proportion Lord I needs must grant,
As thou do give when thou do use to bless:
But wantonly I wasted, I confess,
Thy treasure put into my hands of trust,
And now alas though late I seek redress,
Wise steward like to live, when dye I must.
I cast my count by Christ, my debt to pay,
And fruits of faith from hell my soul shall stay.
SON. LXIX.
NOw that it pleases thee Lord of thy grace,
To pluck me forth of sinful Sodoms lake,
Where I have dwelt alas this life long space,
Since I of holy Abram leave did take.
Vouchsafe I pray thee for thy mercies sake,
To grant thy church be refuge for my life,
The Zoar where I may my dwelling make,
Safe from revenging Angels bloody knife.
And though the frailty of Lots lingering wife
Looked back, with love, on sinful worlds delight,
(Which common weakness to all flesh is rife)
Yet keep me constant by thy heavenly might,
And let me not grow drunk with blessings thine,
To procreate sin on lustful daughters mine.
SON. LXX.
WHilst in this worldly wilderness about,
For want of faith I back am forced to go,
Afraid of sins which Giant-like are stout,
And soul affections, which like cruel foe
Of Esawes race, their might and power bestow,
To stop my passage to the promised land:
I gin to saint and to repine also,
Against the power of thy most mighty hand.
For which the Serpent Satan now does stand,
In readiness my silly soul to sting,
And close me up in deaths eternal band,
Unless to me thy mercy succor bring.
That brazen Serpent Christ nayld on the tree,
Whose sight by faith alone is cure to me.
SON. LXXI.
WHat am I else Lord but a sinful wretch,
In sin and in iniquity begot,
In conscience guilty of the common breach,
Of every law that may my honor spot:
Thy blessing given me, I regarded not:
Thy threatened iugdements I did not esteem,
My vows to thee I wholly have forgot,
My sins no sins to hardened heart do seem.
Like to my self I did thy power deem,
Because thou did forbear thy rod a while,
I sought by Idols aid to heaven to clime,
Whilst worlds delight my senses did beguile:
But helpless now, alas I turn to thee,
To stay my race, let grace Lord succor me.
SON. LXXII.
THou formedst me at first out of the clay,
Unto the image of thy glorious frame,
O Lord of might thou shewdst to me the way,
To magnify thy pure and holy name.
Like Potters vessel first my model came,
Out of a rude unformed lump of earth,
To holy use it pleased thee me reclaim,
Before my life took use of carnal breath.
Thou fedst me in the common humane dearth,
Of knowledge of thy will, with such a taste
Of pleasing fruit, as filled my soul with mirth,
And ready makes me now no more to wast,
Thy offered mercies, which so bless in me,
Or glory that I may a vessel be.
SON. LXXIII.
A Servant Lord even from my day of birth,
I vowed was by parents unto thee,
A Nazarit I lived on the earth,
And kept the vows as grace did strengthen me,
Till satan made me worlds deceit to see,
And trapt my senses with forbidden lust,
As Eve did taste of the restrained tree,
So fond affections did me forward thrust:
A sinful Philistine of faith unjust,
To like, to love, to crave, to wed, to wife,
Thy grace my strength to her reveal I must,
Till she to Satan sell my slumbring life.
A prisoner I thus scornd and void of sight,
Sins house to overthrow, crave heavenly might.
SON. LXXIIII.
WHilst in the plenty of thy blessings sent,
I seek to solace Lord my self secure,
And gazing on worlds beauty long I went,
In pridefull tower which did prospect procure:
I saw the baytes of sin, which did allure
My idle thoughts to follow wicked lust,
My kindled passions could not long endure,
But unto furious flames break forth they must,
I did pollute my soul, by fraud unjust,
And rest thy grace from his true wedded wife,
And that I might away all mendment thrust,
I did bereave my knowledge of his life.
Whose bastard fruits slaie Lord, but let her live,
That penitent we may thee praises give.
SON. LXXV.
A Servant sold to sin o Lord I am,
Whom Satan (Syrian proud) does sore assail,
Nine hundred Chariots of desire there came,
Armed with lust which sought for to prevail:
And to subdue my strength they cannot fail,
Unless thou raise my fainting strength by grace,
Let constant faith the flying fury nail
To ground, where groueling is his resting place:
Then shall my soul with Debora embrace,
In thankful wise thy mercies I receive,
And so pursue the fleshly Canaans race,
Till I the fury of the same bereave.
And with my song thy servants shall accord,
To yield due praise to thee the living Lord.
SON. LXXVI.
MY soul like silly Joseph Lord was sold,
By fleshly brethren his, (unkind alas,)
To vanities the merchants which behold
From far they saw to Egypt, which do pass.
A servant unto Ismaels seed it was,
And sold from sin to death, and so to hell,
Of humane frailty Lord a looking glass,
In which all soul affections long did dwell.
Yet lo alas when sin seeks most to excel,
And have my mind consent to traitrous lust,
With grace o Lord, that enemy repel,
And hear my prayers, who in thee do trust.
Who though a space in bodies prison stays,
Yet Lord at length vouchsafe to heaven to raise.
SON. LXXVII.
SO blind o Lord have my affections bin,
And so deceitful has bin Satan's slight,
That to give credit I did first begin,
To pride and lust as heavenly powers of might:
I offered all my senses with delight,
A sacrifice to feed those Idols vain,
Of all the presents proffred day and night,
Naught vnconsumde I saw there did remain;
Till that thy Prophets by thy word made plain,
The falsehood by the which I was deceived,
How Satan's kingdom made hereof again,
And wickedness my hope and faith bereaved.
But now the sifted ashes of thy word,
Bewraies Bells Priests: slaies dragon without sword
SON. LXXVIII.
A Wicked thief that often have robbed and slain,
Thy graces of their fruit, my self of bliss,
Now on the cross of conscience I remain,
To die the death the which eternal is:
I see no way to quit my self of this,
Unless thou Lord whose kingdom is above,
Remember me and cansell life amiss,
Out of thy memory through Christ thy love:
Who in my flesh with me like death did prove,
That guiltless he, might guilties ransom be,
Love to my soul it was, that did him move,
The bands of death to bide to make us free:
Bless thou my tongue, increase thou faith in me,
This night to be in paradise with thee.
SON. LXXIX.
IN bondage long to Satan have I bin,
A maker of the brick of Babell tower,
By birth a thrall to gross and filthy sin,
Whom lusts taskmakers does attend each hour,
Affection to the flesh does clean defloure,
The memory and love of promised lands,
The fiend even Pharo seeks to devour
My soul, and chain me to his dreadful bands:
But Lord receive me safe into thy hands,
Protect me from the rigor of his might,
Quench thou the force of lusts inflamed brands,
In my defense give me true faith to fight.
Send Moses Lord with power of heavenly sword,
And Aaron to direct me by thy word.
SON. LXXX.
AMoabit I was of cursed kind,
Unkind unto thy church Lord, and to thee,
Who sought by aid of foolish Balaam blind,
To captiuate the soul that should be free,
Incestuous fruits of that high climing tree,
Which does subdue all reason and all grace,
A carnal kinsman by a near degree
Unto the soul, the which I have in chase.
Whom I with loathsome sin sought to deface,
And basterdise with carnal fond affect,
Whose offspring thou unto the tenth man's race
Did once out of thy sanctuary reject.
Yet now by faith made free of Jury land,
A suter here before thy throne does stand.
SON. LXXXI.
LO how I groueling under burden lie,
Of sin, of shame, of fear Lord of thy sight,
My guilt so manifold dare not come nie
Thy throne of mercy, mirror of thy might:
With hidden and with ignorant sins I fight.
Dispairing and presumptuous faults also,
All fleshly frailty on my back does light.
Original and actual with me go.
Against a stream of lusts my will would roe
To gain the shore of grace, the port of peace,
But floods of soul affections ouerfloe,
And sink I must, I see now no release:
Unless my Savior dear this burden take,
And faith a ship of safety for me make.
SON. LXXXII.
FRom Judah wandering Lord to Jericho,
From holy law of thine to carnal lust,
Whilst midst the prease of leaud affects I go,
I robbed am, of raiment pure and just
And wounded lie Lord groueling in the dust,
Not any passer by can give me aid,
In fleshly strength, or friendship is no trust,
By high way seen, to help me few have staide:
But since my Savior Christ on cross has paid,
A ransom rich to cure my bleeding sore,
By faith to crave the fruits I Am not affraide,
In hope my health thereby for to restore.
Bind up my wounds with balm, lead me to rest,
Give me such gifts of grace as like thee best.
SON. LXXXIII.
THis slender City Lord of strength behold,
Wherein I dwell, Bethulia my bower,
Of flesh whereto sin lays a battry bold,
And seeks with sword and dearth my souls deuowen
Suppress thou hellish Holofernes power,
Who prides himself in pray of children thine,
I have no trust in mountains, walls, nor tower,
For want of faithes true fountain we shall pine.
Raise up this femalde couragde heart of mine,
Strengthen my hand to reave this monsters head,
Let me not taste deceiptfull follies wine,
Nor be polluted with worlds sinful bed.
But constantly by faith fight in defense
Of feeble flesh, and drive thy enemies thence.
SON. LXXXIIII.
NOt that my faith does faint a while is cause,
That I so instant am on thee to call,
O God of life, but yielding to thy laws,
Before thy fight, my soul these tears lets fall:
Which in thy bottle kept I know are all,
And quench the fury of thy burning ire,
Which sin enflamde, and quallifie it shall
The quarrel which has set thy wrath on fire,
If seruently the child due food desire
Of father, he will not give him a stone,
If of the wicked, justice man require
Importunely, some justice will be shown.
More righteous judge and father thou to me.
Art Lord indeed, and far more kind wilt be.
SON. LXXXV.
THe many trials Lord that I have found,
Since out of Egypt darkness I am brought,
Might witness well how in thee still abound,
Power, mercy, truth, whereby thy works are wrough^*
But soul despair against my faith has fought,
Amidst the wilderness wherein I stay,
And daintier food my fond affections sought,
Then Manna which thou sentst me every day,
The desert Zyn does fountain pure denay,
Of grace wherewith to quench my fainting ghost,
Eternal death expects my soul as pray,
And lust assalts me with a hideous host.
Stretch forth hand lord, smite thou my heart of stone,
With rod of true repentance, grief and moan.
SON. LXXXVI.
THou have o Lord of mercy me enricht,
With flocks of favor, and of graces great,
Since I in Bethell first the pillar pitched,
Of praises to thy name and mercies seat,
Yet fleshly Esawes foul affections threat,
A ruin to the fruit faith should forth bring,
With pleasing humors him for to entreat,
I fear it be too soul a dangerous thing.
Shield me Lord under thy protecting wing
Of mercy, which may save from Satan's rage,
My heart and voice shall still thy praises sing,
If thou the malice of my foes assuage.
In Sychem shall my heart an alter rear,
The mighty God to love, to serve, to fear.
SON. LXXXVII.
THe talent which thou please Lord to give,
To me thy servant that I should bestow,
Whilst in thy service on the earth I live,
My diligent increase thereof to show,
I have abused Lord too long I know,
And fear thy coming to be nigh at hand,
I see for breach of duty what I owe,
And of thy judgments do in terror stand:
Thy grace has left me in a foreign land,
Where inexpert of virtue I do straie,
I shall be thrown to Satan's thralfull band,
Void of thy heavenly joy and bliss for aye,
Unless thou help, for thou do use to give,
Grace unto grace, and faith from faithless drive.
SON. LXXXVIII.
SInce that it pleases thee thy self to show,
A just revenger Lord of Heathenish sin,
And bring the pride of bold Philistines low,
Who thee defame, when holy Arc they win.
Now that to fetch it home I do begin,
And in the temple of my heart to place,
Grant so I may thy secrets see therein,
That plagues for my presumption do not chase
It so from me, as they that fled the face
Of glory thine, which therein did appear:
Let faith and love draw home by trusty trace,
The constant cart whose carriage is so dear;
And let me order so this holy work,
That dregs of sin not in my deeds may lurk.
SON. LXXXIX.
IN famine great of grace, and comfortless,
Thy servant Lord does in Samaria dwell,
For Lord fierce Aram does with sin oppress
The city where my soul to harbor fell:
I want the strength his armies to repel,
Of lust and of affections most unclean,
My mind whose love does mother like excel,
Her childre^s (thoughts of me^dment) sees so leave:
That forced by famine she can find no mean,
To feed them long, her faith so poor is grown,
That native pity now secluding clean,
Her greedy nature does devour her own.
Relieve in time this siege, Lord cause a fear
Of thee, this camp of cruel sin to rear.
SON. XC.
ON sweet and sauorie bread of wholesome kind,
Which in thy word thou offrest store to me,
To feed upon the flesh does lothing find,
And leaves to lean o Lord only on thee:
The leaven of the Pharisees will be,
The surfeit to my soul and death in fine,
Which coveting to taste forbidden tree,
To carnal rules and reasons do incline:
So lauishly my lusts do taste the wine,
Which sowrest grapes of sin filles in my cup,
That lo my teeth now set on edge I pine,
Not able wholesome food to swallow up.
Unless thou mend my taste, and heart do frame,
To love thy laws, and praise thy holy name.
SON. XCI.
OVt of thy flock o Lord through my defect,
A silly sheep my self behold am lost,
To seek me forth in time do not neglect,
Since I so precious price to thee have cost:
By many bypath Lord my seete have crossed,
And cannot find the way unto thy fold,
Through many storms of deep despair thus tossed.
To crave thy aid at last I now am bold:
If thou of silly groat that count do hold,
That thou do search the house to find the same.
No doubt my soul to sin by nature sold,
May mercy find by calling on thy name.
The Saints in heaven conuertits gain rejoice,
On earth thy praise is song, in heart and voice.
SON. XCII.
BEhold amidst worlds desert all alone,
Seduced by the frailty of the sprite,
Accompanied with fleshly comfort none,
My soul with sin compelled is to fight
Where suddenly alas before my sight,
I Satan see, me ready to assail,
By two his servants which are most of might,
Presumption and despair, which seldom fail,
The best perfection of man's strength to quail,
By pride, or want of faith, or couetise,
By lust or gluttony, or fained veil
Of virtue, which does many sins disguise.
But chase him Lord away by written word,
Which is more sharp then his two edged sword.
SON. XCIII.
THe dream which thou to Pharo did reveal,
Thou in my self have made me see in deed,
The state alas of man's weak common weal,
Whereas affections of all sorts do feed,
The fruitful soil of grace some whiles did breed,
Full fair effects in truth of heavenly kind,
But many barren thoughts alas succeed,
And threaten famine to a virtuous mind.
Store of such years alas I fear behind,
Which Lord will starve the comfort of my faith,
Unless thy mercy and thy wisdom find,
A store house to lay up what scripture faith.
In hope of which thy goodness lo I live,
Which of thy grace Lord do thou to me give.
SON. XCIIII.
THe seed which thou the husbandman have sowde,
Within my soul o Lord by Prophets hand,
Has taken root at last by deaw bestowde,
From heavenly grace which fructifies my land:
But lo I saw the worlds deceit to stand
In readiness to mingle tares therein,
Whilst sleeping, me in vanities he sand,
He made my fruits to ouerflow with sin:
But ere thy harvest to approach begin,
Vouchsafe to weed these frailties so away,
That when thy corn is to be gathered in,
I may be clean and in thy garner stay.
Burn Lord with chastisement my fleshly lust,
And cleanse my life by faith both pure and just.
SON. XCV.
WHat strength has man? wherein may he repose
A power to stay him in a virtuous way?
To love thy flock thou Lord my soul have chose,
Whom to obey my vows and words did say:
But in my power alas there is no stay,
For light temptations made me clean forget
My duty to my Lord, and to denay
Him who thus long I have too lightly set:
But now my heart with tears my cheeks does wet,
In sorrow of my so inconstant faith,
Repentance has my sin before me set,
And conscience now my error duly way'th.
Grant that thy word crow thrice and thrice to me,
And warn me of my duty unto thee.
SON. XCVI.
THe malice of this monster ancient foe
Of man, and of the church which thou did plant
Even Satan Herod-like about does go,
To make my fruits of faith to grow more scant,
Whilst yet with weakness feeble youth does pant,
And wants grace to strengthen their estate,
The motions of the mind does straight recant,
To see souls safety which sin feign would hate.
The counsels of affections do debate,
And do conclude to murder virtues breed,
Lust, pride and envy, open wide the gate,
To furious flesh, that does the wicked deed.
My soul (their mother) mourns o Lord their end,
My future fruits of grace do thou defend.
SON. XCVII.
SO foolish Lord have my affections bin,
So careless of the blessing thou do give,
So prove my nature unto every sin,
So thanklesse of thy grace by which I live,
That violently thy love away I drive,
And sell the patrimony to ensue,
I carry water in an open sieve,
And change for lentil pottage birthright due.
Too late alas my folly I do rue,
Who worlds delight preferred have so long,
Rejecting heavenly knowledge treasure true,
Unto my soul imposing open wrong,
Yet not so late o Lord I pardon crave,
But yet one blessing thou for me wilt have.
SON. XCVIII.
A Sinful Syrian Lord my father was,
Exilde from Paradise by just desert,
I wandered into Egypt, there alas
To find in world some food to please my heart:
Where seruill bondage unto sin and smart,
I suffered so long through Satan's rage,
That heavenly aid I craved thence to depart,
Which only able was my grief t'asswage.
From silly servant and an abject page,
Thou broughtst me forth to knowledge of thy truth
(The blessed land) and showdst me on a stage,
A pattern how to guide my wandering youth,
Such fruits therefore as faithful soil does yield,
I offer here first crop of blessed field.
SON. XCIX.
I See alas, proud Satan has too long
Defrauded thee, o Lord of that is thine,
And love of world has drawn me unto wrong,
Whose heart thy off^ings to bestow repine:
My outward knees unto thee do incline,
My tongue does promise present of my store,
I say these gracious gifts are none of mine,
But will them all thy Altar lay before.
But vanities does press me evermore,
And want of faith to leave some part behind,
Although I see death ready at the door,
My hollow heart and leaud deceit to find.
Grant that I may my soul, my power, my will,
Present o Lord to serve thee only still.
SON. C.
SInce thou by grace out of wild Olive stock,
Have pleased me Lord within thy church to plant,
And reckon me as of thy proper flock,
Who else all pleasant fruit by nature want.
Vouchsafe my thankful fruits be not so scant.
As cause thee to reject me back again,
Of former bounty Lord do not recant,
But let me in thy garden still remain:
By mercy not by merit I attain,
This blessing promised so long before,
Let not this gift of thine return in vain,
But let thy goodness multiply the more.
Make sweet the fruits which bitter are by kind,
Increase thy grace in body and in mind.
CONCLUSION.
Mourn thou no more my soul, thy plaint is hard,
The bill is canseld of the debt it owes,
The veil is rent, which thee before debard,
And Christ his righteousness on thee bestows.
Thus comfort to the patient always grows,
If they attend the time God has assignde,
Our strength to bear, our maker best he knows,
And at a need is ready for to find.
Our Savior is so merciful and kind,
Unto our selves he will not leave us long,
He castes our faults through love his back behind,
And turns our plaints into more pleasant song.
And when we are even at the gates of hell,
His glory, mercy, power, does most excel.
THE SECOND part of Christian passions, Containing a hundred Sonets of comfort,
joy, and thanksgiving.
PREFACE.
SOme men do mourn for suddeine joy, they say,
And some likewise in midst of sorrow sing,
Such diverse fruits do passion often bring,
As reason cannot course of Nature stay,
And happy sure he is (I not denay)
That both these motions has from heart contrite,
When frailty of his flesh appears to sight,
And mercy calling him back from decay.
Who can behold the flesh and spirit fight,
The doubtful issue and danger of the thing,
The loss whereto our nature might us fling,
And gain which grace does give, through Sauiors might,
And not delight, To glorify his name,
And yet lament to see his native shame.
SONET I.
AS through a mist, or in a cloud a far,
I see a glimse of heavenly grace to shine,
And to revive the fainting faith of mine,
And spirits which with darkness shadowed are.
The fleshly fog of sin did judgment bar,
Of proper use, of power of reason sound,
Which in first patents franckly did abound,
And better part of natures strength did mar.
But since my eyes of grace a sight have found,
Of that eternal light which does incline,
Fro out these fogs of fear I hope t'vntwine,
And force of fainting faith for to confound,
And on a ground More sin will build my trust,
And that in Christ whose promises are just.
SON. II.
CLeng'd are the clouds and darkness fled away,
And now in triumph does my savior ride,
Sin, hell, nor death, dare not his fight abide,
The world nor Satan can his progress stay.
This piercing light of truth shall so bewray
Each stratagem their practice does devise
Against my soul, that there shall not arise
One cloud of care to darken this my day.
But that my thoughts (like to the Pilate wise)
Shall look about, lest that my heart should slide,
And by this son my course so constant guide,
That all their slightes shall not my soul disguise,
Which now espies The malice they me owe,
Which long they clothd with shade of plesa^t show.
SON. III.
WHen as my conscience lays forth before
My thoughts the sins which daily I commit,
I think my self an instrument unfit,
To witness forth thy glory any more:
But when I see that sin was first the door,
By which death entered and such hold did take,
That death did first our want apparent make.
And want first cause that man did aid implore.
That prayers first thy mercies do awake,
That mercies do renew our dulled wit,
That ioyed heart should not unthankful sit.
And thanks to thee does fleshly glory shake,
It straight does slake The fear which bad me stay,
And bids me still proceed to praise and pray.
SON. IIII.
SInce to so holy use I consecrate
The silly talent Lord thou lentst to me,
That it a trumpe unto thy praise might be,
And witness of their woe that thou do hate.
Thou will o Lord forget the abject state
Of flesh and blood, base mettle of my frame,
And since that thou have sanctified the same.
Thou will give grace my weakness to abate.
Thou that my former wandering will do tame,
And me prepare in mind to honor thee,
Can give me gifts the which thereto agree,
How ere my proper power be weak and lame,
So shall thy name Be precious in my sight,
And in thy praise shall be my whole delight.
SON. V.
WOuld God I were as ready to confess,
And yield thee praise sweet Savior day by day,
As for to crave my wants I Am forward ay,
And seruently at need I do thee press,
To beg of thee alone, thou will no less,
Because thou only able art to give,
And with each needful thing by which we live,
Thou promisest our prayers for to bless;
But we with use of them should not so stay,
And only seek to thee when need does drive,
(Whose blessings running through an open sieve,
No praise for recompense unto thee pay)
But when we pray, We should thee laud also:
Our thankful hearts with bounty thine should go.
SON. VI.
I Have begun o Lord to run the race,
Where flesh and blood against the world, must fight,
On heavenly kingdom gazing with my fight,
Where is appointed scope of resting place,
Wingd with the will of zeal of heavenly grace,
I do endeavor always to proceed,
In constant course unto the arc indeed,
Where in thy mercies I behold thy face.
A seruent faith it does my courage feed,
And make my heavy limbs become more light,
When in thy son I see thy glory bright,
The pledge unto my soul that hope shall speed,
This blessed seed Thou have Lord sown in me,
And all the fruits shall to thee offered be.
SON. VII.
WHere shall I find fit words or proper phrase,
Wherewith to witness all the love I owe?
Whose grateful mind in thankfulness does grow,
And to the world thy worthiness would blase.
Vnfrutefully the greater sort do gase,
Upon thy works and blessings they receive,
And carelessly thy honor they bereave,
And suffer chance or wit thy same to raze,
Whilst vnacknowledged thy love they leave,
Forgetting all the gifts thou do bestow,
Whose blinded nature so does ouerflow,
That most unkind to thee, themselves they show.
But since I know By grace thy blessing great,
My pen thy praises always shall repeat.
SON. VIII.
THe more I seek to dedicate my power,
In celebrating of thy honor great,
Whose throne is fixed in thy mercies seat,
The more my duty grows every hour,
Some times with Eagles sight aloft I tower,
And seem to see the glory of thy son,
But ere my willing wings have scarce begun
To mount, they drop with clog of heavy shower:
Upon the hill of truth I footing won,
By faith which labors with fervent heat,
Of worthy praises thine for to entreat,
But ere I have begune my work is done,
So far I run, In seeking to begin,
I cannot write, such maze my muse is in.
SON. IX.
AS fares with the man the which has bin
In peril but of late to have been drowned,
Though afterward he do recover grownd.
Knows not at first the safety he is in:
So when I think upon the floods of sin,
Wherein I was near drenched ouerhed,
What time all hope of comfort clean was fled,
And I into despair to sink begin.
My fainting faith with fear even well nigh dead.
My mind amazed it does so confound,
That though thy mercies freely do abound,
In port of peace I am not free from dred,
But being led Fro out the perils sight,
I shall enjoy more pleasure and delight.
SON. X.
SInce thou o Lord have given to me at last,
The victory against the deadly foe,
Who like a lion roaring still does go,,
My soul (poote Lot my kinsman dear) to wast
Since grace at length his pride has now defast,
And by the hand off i^h he is subdude,
And that my strength by thee is so renude.
That his affections almost are displast.
Since thy high Priest with present me pursude
Of bread and wine, the which he did bestow,
And with the same the blessing gave also,
Whence life, whence liberty, whence peace ins^de,
I have indude As proper unto thee,
Thy church with tithe of faith thou gave to me.
SON. XI.
IF he to whom his Lord did but remit
A silly debt was thankful to him found,
And that the more the sins forgiven abound,
The more he loves that pardond is of it,
Then sure it seems it were good reason fit
That I whose soul was sold to death and hell,
Whose sins in multitude did so excel,
With idle brain should not ungrateful sit:
But as thy flowing favors daily swell,
So should my voice thy praises ever sound;
And since thou have powrde oil into my wound.
I should not spare thy mercies forth to tell.
And so as well as thou shall give me grace,
I will thee laud, each season, time and place.
SON. XII.
NOw that I have some safety Lord attaind,
Fro out the laberinth wherein I was,
Since grace as guide therein to me did pass,
And love was line with me my issue gaind:
Since that my wandering steps faith has refraind,
And that thy word was Sybils branch to me,
Through hell and death away to let me see,
To Elizian fields where bliss for aye remaind,
I must not Lord so much unthankful be,
To break the vows which once I made alas,
But I will show thy mercies in a glass,
That by thy words men may acknowledge thee.
The only he Has any power to save,
And raisd my soul fro out the very grave*
SON. XIII.
I Shame to see how large my promise are,
How slow my deeds that should perform the sam^,
I know the constant meanings whence they came,
But will and power are fallen at strife and jar,
What soul begins to do does body mar,
What love would build, distrust would overthrow,
A plenteous offering, zeal does bid bestow,
But fainting faith likes not to set it far.
My will at least his good intent shall show,
Which thou o Lord cause unto better frame,
A free will offering Lord thou will not blame,
Of such weak fruits as are on earth below.
Which yet shall grow More fruteful by thy grace.
And as they be, wilt in thy son embrace.
SON. XIIII.
THe end whereto we all created were,
And in this world were plast to live and dwell,
(If we with judgment do observe it well)
Was nothing else but God to serve and fear,
In which we b^dges of his glory bear,
To yield him right the most our weakness may,
Which to our strength we ought not him denay,
Who out of earth to heaven this dust shall rea^e:
Which when within my self I deeply way,
I do condemn the dullness which befell
To me, whose gifts in nothing do excel,
By which I might his glory great display,
On whom do stay All things that being have,
Who to each creature all things freely gave.
SON. XV.
AS is the treasure frutelesse which is hid,
And bliss no bliss a man does not enjoy,
But rather is a mean to work annoy,
To him that carefully preserve it did:
So often times the wisest sort have slid,
Into like error whilst they do conseale
The gifts of grace, which God did them reveal,
And hide the talent which is them forbid:
As frutelesse is it to the common weal,
That men respectively become too coy,
And triflingly their time away do toy,
And without good to others let it steal,
I therefore deal To world and do impart,
These silly fruits which grow on feeling heart.
SON. XVI.
THe pleasures of this new possessed land,
Fore-promised long since to children thine,
Whereto I have arrived safe in fine,
And to enjoy the same assured stand,
To paint with praises I would take in hand,
That so I might encourage many more,
To follow forth the conquest where is store
Of corn, of wine, and oil, for faithful band:
Our Joshua Christ himself is gone before,
And shows the clusters of the healthful wine,
Whereof who tastes, shall not with famine pine,
Nor starve when plenty is at City door:
Ne need deplore The strength of Anaks race,
For he the power of hell will clean deface.
SON. XVII.
BEtwixt two strong extremes my thoughts do fly,
Twixt heat and cold, twixt height and depth below,
And b^^h of them from one desire do flow,
The s^rest way to saving health to try.
Faith bids me mount unto the heavens hie,
Upon the merits of my savior dear,
A guilty conscience bids me not come near,
Lest in consuming jealousy I die.
A heart contrite does will me to appear,
With works of righteousness true faith which show
Faith says, that god my strength and power does know,
And that I cannot find salvation here,
But bids me cheer My soul, and nothing fear,
Love in his son will make him me forbear.
SON. XVIII.
FRom far I see the stars which guide the way,
From East to West, to find my savior out,
I well might wander all the world about,
To seek salvation and in no place stay:
If shining truth did not his house bewray,
Which in his word points forth his dwelling place.
By which directed, I will walk a pace,
Whilst yet I do enjoy the light of day.
And when I come before his blessed face,
To offer up my presents will not doubt,
Although their baseness all the world should flout,
So that by faith I may him once embrace,
Which gives grace And makes accepted well,
Mean works as much as those which more excel.
SON. XIX.
NOw will I dance o Lord before the train,
Of those which following thee seek home to draw
Thy holy Arc the treasor of thy law,
That it with us may pledge of peace remain,
I care not though the world my deed disdain,
And think it not beseeming thing for me,
In such a work an instrument to be,
Whose years they deem more fit for other vain.
For so I Lord thy saving health may see,
And escape the harm of cruel Satan's paw,
Though all the scorners of the world me saw,
Yet would I not ashamed be of thee,
For being free Of holy promised land,
I care not how my stare on earth do stand.
SON. XX.
NO recompense o Lord is fit for thee,
If duly thy desert we do regard,
Ne have thou want or need of man's reward,
At whose command all creatures ready be:
Yet if our thankful minds thy goodness see,
Confessing whence to us these blessings flow,
And in the use of them obedience show,
Although alas it be in mean degree,
Thou yet do frame thy love to ours below,
And as thou findst the giuers heart preparde.
Who to his power his present has not sparde,
So do thou cansell debt which he did owe,
And do bestow More graces then we crave,
For which naught else but thi^ks thou lookst to have
SON. XXI.
HOw precious are the prayers of thy Saints,
Which able were thy threatened wrath to stay,
And make the sun return in pride of day,
When as Josias heart for fear it faints,
Thy favor unto Abram us acquaints,
Of how great force repentant heart is found,
When (having viewd vile Sodom to confound)
To stay at servants suit thy wrath thou daints.
By prayers man has power even death to wound,
By prayer he may move a mount away,
A faithful seruent prayer finds no nay,
If that the thing we crave be pure and sound,
Yea God has bound Him self by them to man,
Whose worthy praise no tongue forth utter can.
SON. XXII.
THanks will I always study Lord to pay,
To thee, the giver of all good and grace,
And thankfully thy mercies will embrace,
And witness forth thy works from day to day,
My heart, my mouth, my pen they never stay,
To take occasion freshly to renew,
The memory of praises to thee due,
Lest natures weakness let them pass away:
My frailty in this point indeed I rue,
Who till I see new blessings in the place,
Forget the favors late before my face,
And mercies thine, fro which such bounty grew,
For it is true So dull our senses are,
That often thy blessings do our judgments mar.
SON. XXIII.
WHere so I cast about my wandering eye,
By chance or choice, by hap, or else by will.
Before my sight some object is there still,
Wherein thy power and love I do espy.
In view whereof, if I my thoughts do try,
To raise my heart in joy, I matter find,
And unto thee my love so firm to bind,
That tongue nor pen should never idle lie;
Whose grace unto thy creatures is so kind,
As patrons of the same the world does fill,
Who made not only, but do still instill,
Some feeling of the same unto the mind,
Which is not blind, Or too much obstinate,
Which later natures chiefly thou do hate.
SON. XXIIII.
WHilst I do study fitly to begin,
To utter forth some part of my intent,
Which to thy praise with zeal and love is bent,
Far freeing me from due reward of sin,
I find a laberinth that I am in,
Of many merits which do me enclose,
Which as this holy motion in me role,
Of diverse subjects for to treat do win.
Among the rest my heart has chiefly chose,
To give thee thanks for comfort to me sent,
In staying me the wandering course I went,
And feeling faith with knowledge where,
And though I lose Therewith the world*
Yet will I joy in hope of heavenly sight.
SOX. XXV.
SInce thou have Lord vouchsaft to send me aid,
By holy spirit thine in time of need,
(As Philip to the Eunuch came in deed)
Which in my wandering iourny me has stayde;
Since he has taught me what thy Prophets said,
And what humility was in thy son,
Whose patience like a lamb has freedom won,
Unto my soul, for which he ransom paid.
I see no earthly things should stay undone,
The duties which requirde of me I reed.
By faith upon thy promises I feed,
And to thy Sacraments for strength I run,
And thus begun, I will continue still,
To learn thy laws, and to obey thy will.
SON. XXVI.
HOw can I limit well my tongue or pen?
Within what bownds may I my self enclose?
Who such a theme to write upon have chose,
Whereon the more I muse, more grows it then,
It fares with me herein, even right as when
A hasty mind forgets what to speak,
When sta^mering words the perfect sense do break,
And makes us not be understood of men.
Such worthy matter in my mind there grows,
So plentiful, and I of skill so weak,
(...) pleasing to me, and so proper cake,
(...) choice of them I judgment lose,
(...) even as those Want matter silent be,
(...) plenty of thy praise confounds me.
SON. XXVII.
NOw that thy mercies do so much abound,
As thou vouchsafest Lord with me to dwell,
And glorious Arc of hope which does excel,
Drawn home by hungry faith my heart has found,
Since power thereof, did sinful Dagon wound,
And yet disdaineth not my humble state,
I freely open Lord, my lowly gate
Of lips and tongue, which may thy praises sound.
Thy blessings seem to flow to me of late,
Since in my soul thy word I did embrace,
My zeal refreshed is with heavenly grace,
My comfort, wealth that hell cannot rebate,
In such a rate Thy favor I do find,
As binds me love a father found so kind.
SON. XXVIII.
WHat should I render thee my Savior dear*
For all the gifts thou do on me bestow*
Whose gracious measure so does ouerflow,
As power of recompense cannot appear,
I do embrace thy gifts with joyful cheer,
And to thy alter speedily will run,
To follow forth thy praise but new begun,
Till all thy people may thy mercies hear.
Thy glorious image shines in the son,
Thy love to man did his obedience show,
His love and mercy unto man has won
The gifts of grace, whence faith and comfort grow,
Where through we know That we are thy elect.
And these our feeble fruits wilt not reject.
SON. XXIX.
THe powerful pen the which records thy praise,
O Lord of life, has many volumes made,
Thy wondrous works each leaf does ouerlade,
Which aye increase as growing are my days,
Unsearchable indeed are all thy ways,
In multitude thy numbers do exceed,
In glory they do admiration breed,
Their goodness power of recompense denayes.
The hungry thou with plenteous hand do feed,
Thy savor to thy creatures does not fade.
The more in view of all thy works I wade,
The more I find my sense confound indeed,
But yet instead of Echo to thy fame,
I will give thanks and laud unto thy name.
SON. XXX.
THis stately stage wherein we players stand,
To represent the part to us assignde,
Was built by God, that he might pleasure find,
In beauty of the works of his own band,
All creatures of the air, the sea and land,
Are players at his appointment of some thing,
Which to the world a proper use may bring,
And may not break assigned bownds or band:
Some do in joy still forth his praises sing,
Some mourn and make their moan with heavy mind,
Some show the fruits of nature weak and blind,
Some show how grace base sin away does fling,
God (like a king) Beholds, Christ does attire,
The plaiers with the shape, their states require.
SON. XXXI.
WHo so beholds with constant fixed eye,
The favor and perfection of my choice.
He cannot choose but must in heart rejoice,
That mortal sight may heavenly bliss epsy,
All earthly beauty he will straight defy,
As things too base to occupy his brain,
Whose fading pleasures so are paid with pain,
That they true taste of pleasure do deny.
But who so can this perfect sight attain,
Cannot contain, but yield with cheerful voice.
An echo to the Angels heavenly noise,
Who to his praise do singing still remain,
They then are vain Who fix their sight so low,
That such a glorious God they will not know.
SON. XXXII.
O Heavenly beauty of love the fountain true,
Whose shining beams do penetrate my soul,
With such a zeal as former thoughts control,
And draws heart, power, and will thee to ensue,
Thou make my fainting sight for to renew,
And dazeling eyes new strength thus to attain,
To whom alone perfection fair is due,
Thou make earths bewtious shadow seem but vain,
Thy works of glory, and of power remain,
Engraven in thankful hearts which them inroll;
Thy love and mercy made thee pay the toll,
Which to our dying souls true life did gain.
Thy love does wain, My thoughts from baser love,
And make my heart and mind to sore above.
SON. XXXIII.
IF beauty be as men on earth suppose,
The comely shape and colors which agree,
In true proportion to the thing we see,
Which grace and favor both do never lose.
If white and red be borrowed from the Rose,
If bright and shining to the son compared,
If high and straight to godliness w'award,
And beauty have such base descriptions chose,
Then let the wise this beauty true regard,
Where all perfections in one subject be,
Surpassing fruit of the forbidden tree,
Which but to taste man suffered deaths reward,
Which is prepared, And offered to our sight.
In Christ to love and feed us day and night.
SON. XXXIIII.
HOw may this be that men of searching mind.
Whose curious eyes in beauty do delight.
The pleasing object of their fancies sight,
In outward shape and color, comfort find:
And yet the better beauty leave behind
Unsought, or unregarded of at all,
Compard to which, none can it beauty call,
Unless a buzzard whom affections blind,
This earthly form of flesh it is so small
Of worth to charm the sense of noble spright,
As is a star before fair Phoebus bright,
Whose glory does their borrowed beauti' apall,
Thus wise men fall, Whom carnal eyes do guide,
Whose judgments may not virtues sight abide.
SON. XXXV.
O Heavenly love with God thou dwelst for aye,
Thou passest faith and hope in dignity,
Thou keepst the law, thy feet step not awrie,
In all men's danger, thou the surest stay,
To our request, thou never say nay,
Ne wrath, ne envy, move thee ere a whit,
Thou multitude of sins in man do quit,
Thou law and Gospel both do over sway:
Thou do with God aloft in heavens sit,
With God in counsel thou art always by,
Thou causest Christ man's weakness to supply,
And make us receive the fruit of it,
And every whit Of goodness that we have,
Love made him send, who love therefore does crave
SON. XXXVI.
THe shining face of my fair Phoebus dear,
Whose glory does eclipse each other light,
Presents himself unto worlds open fight,
Their blinded eyes with joyful view to cheer,
But sluggish so the greater sort appear,
That sleeping in self-love and mind secure,
The clear aspect of truth they not endure,
Nor of their blindness willingly would hear.
But so my senses do his beauty allure,
To gaze upon his lovely favor bright.
That therein only have I my delight.
Where is all happiness I do assure,
He does procure A plenteous increase,
Unto my soul, of perfect love and peac^.
SON. XXXVII.
Avaunt base thoughts incomber me no more,
By laying forth these earthly wants of mine,
As though thou would persuade me to repine,
Because of wealth I have not needless store,
If thou did know thy nakedness before,
He clothed thy soul, and fed thy fainting mind,
(With righteousness and faith in Savior kind)
Thou would that former state much more deplore.
And then confess the comfort thou do find,
By peace of conscience in this flesh of thine,
Is greatest riches truly to define,
(So that contentment be not left behind)
These gifts me bind To praise his holy name,
And place chief wealth in knowledge of the same.
SON. XXXVIII.
I Will not fear with feruency of zeal.
To follow forth this fair affect of mine,
(To love of thee which does my soul incline)
O Savior dear, who sure my grief wilt heal,
Unto thy proffred kindness I appeal,
Who of thy self did call me unto thee,
And promisedst I should thy darling be,
Made free within thy Church and common weal.
Disparidgement there is not now in me,
Ne shall distrust forbid me to be thine,
But faith shall fly aloft to thee in fine,
Where all thy treasures safely I may see,
And happy he Bestows his love so well,
Whose hope is paid with pleasures that excel.
SON. XXXIX.
Love then I will, and love thee Lord alone,
For fellowship in love there may not be,
Love for thy love o Lord shall be thy see,
For other recompense thou crauest none.
My vows and deeds they shall be always one,
All dedicated to adore thy name,
My heart, my soul, my strength shall do the same,
Thy love shall be my faithes true corner stone;
The love of thee shall my affections frame,
To follow that may pleasing be to thee,
My eyes no beauty but in thee shall see,
And thy regard my wandering will shall tame,
Yea I will blame, And scorn each other thing*
Save what shall me unto thy favor bring.
SON. XL.
Feign would I praise thee Lord with such a zeal,
And feruencie as might my love express,
Feign would my love yield unto thee no less,
Due praise then thou did love to me reveal,
But wanting power thereto I yet appeal,
To that thy goodness which thee first did move,
In fragill flesh of mine the strength to prove,
Whose weakness thou by heavenly power did heal.
Man's wit in words comes short in this be^oue,
To recompense, nay only to confess,
The many ways thou do our bodies bless.
Much more our souls which freely thou did love,
Thy trusty done, Thy holy spright of grace,
Makes yet our weakness stand before thy face.
SON. XLI.
O Perfect Sun, whereof this shadow is
A slender light, though it some beauty show,
On whom thy influence thou do bestow,
Whose constant course still shines in endless bliss*
To scan thy glory, wit of man does miss,
How far thy mercies beams abroad extend,
Tongue cannot speak, nor wit can comprehend,
And humane frailty is bewrayd in this;
The fire, air, water, earth they wholly bend,
The host of heaven, and creatures below,
To pay their duty unto thee they owe,
Which did their being and their virtue send,
And I intend With them (in what I may)
To witness forth thy laud and praise for aye.
SON. XLII.
WHat present should I bring of worthy prise,
To witness well the love to thee I owe,
I nothing have but what thou did bestow,
Ne likest thou the toys of man's devise.
I would not spare my power in any wise,
No treasure seems to me for thee too dear,
The pleasures of the world the which are here,
Too base they are, how ere wit them disguise.
To yield thee faith, it does the best appear,
But it is very weak alas I know,
To yield thee praise, does make a decent show,
But to thy merit neither does come near,
With garment clear Yet clothd of righteous son,
My self to offer unto thee, I run.
SON. XLIII.
WHo so beholds the works o Lord of thine,
The stretched heavens, the seat where thou do dwell
the earth thy footstool, which dares not rebel,
Which all unto thy will do aye incline,
The Sun and Moon by day and night which shine,
The changing floods, the firm and fruitful land,
The Planets which do firm for ever stand,
All which against thy behest dare not repine.
The host of Angels in thy heavenly band,
The infernal feends with Lucifar which fell,
The fish, the foul, the beast agreeing well,
And all obedient to thy heavenly hand,
May understand Thy glory, love, and power,
Without whose help, ma could not live one hour.
SON. XLIIII.
AS does the Moon by daily change of hew,
By growing, or decreasing, beauty show,
The influence, the greater lights bestow,
Whose absence, or whose presence, her renew,
So must all flesh confess, and think most true,
The faith or fear they have for to proceed,
From heavenly grace, which heavenly gifts does feed,
Without whose face blind darkness does ensue.
Man's proper power is so obscurde indeed,
With shades which rise from earthly thoughts below,
That nothing but blind ignorance would grow,
Unless this son did shining comfort breed,
Which serves in steed Of fire unto the same,
Fro whence this light of faith receives his flame.
SON. XLV.
IF Saba Queen a journey took in hand,
From South to North, wise Solomon to hear,
If humane wisdom was to her so dear,
That she did visit thus this holy land,
Then do I muse why men so idle stand,
In pride of youth when wit and means abound,
Their tender brains to feed with wisdom sound,
Far passing that this Queen for travel found.
This error is the scarre of Adam^ wound,
Who sought his knowledge not in fountain clear,
To whom forbidden skill did best appear,
Neglecting graces him enclosing round,
But on the sound And written word I build,
Not Solomon such Oracles could yield.
SON. XLVI.
HOw fond a thing it is which men do use,
To beat their brains, and so torment their heart,
In compassing the thing which breeds their smart,
And do not know what is the thing they choose,
They childishly the name of love abuse,
And would define the nature of the same,
By passions which belong to hatreds name,
Wherein to pine with pleasure they do choose.
Who ever saw that figs on thorn tree came,
Or thistles roses bear by any art?
With pain, with grief, with shame, with loss impart,
Their passions which they for their love do frame,
With judgment lame; Love is a heavenly thing,
Where being plast, it perfect love does bring.
SON. XLVII.
LEt earthly things in earth their love repose,
For flesh and blood on faith they cannot feed.
It is a fruit indeed of heavenly seed,
Which who disgesteth well life cannot lose;
The soul fro out of other matter grows,
And unto other matter turns again,
Immortally to live in joy or pain,
As grace to sundry uses it has chose.
Then is it time my thoughts at length to waine,
For laying up my treasure for my need,
Where mothes and canker do so common breed.
As in the world whose wealth is merely vain,
If I attain, But faith laid up in store,
In Christ my Savior, I desire no more.
SON. XLVIII.
Fie fainting faith dissuade me not so much,
From following of my lovely heavenly choice,
To think on whom, I can sot but rejoice,
Whose name or memory ^y heart does touch,
What travel ere befall, I will not grutch,
Through fire and water I will him pursue,
Whose sight my fainting soul does straight renew.
His love and mercy both to me are such:
If I should dye for him it were but due,
By him I live, and follow will his voice,
Regarding lightly fame or common noise,
Which threaten pain and travel to ensue,
There are but few That pass the narrow way,
But crown of honor does their travel pay.
SON. XLIX.
I Find my heart is bent for to amend,
And follow thee forsaking wonted way,
From wickedness, my footsteps for to stay,
And to thy will my works henceforth to bend:
But yet the cause which makes me this intend,
I find is rather fear then love of right.
Yet free will offerings do thee more delight,
And to such works thou do thy blessing send.
It is not ill to set before my sight,
Thy heavy plagues for sin from day to day,
But I had rather forth thy favor lay,
And for their love in quarrel thine to sight,
Which if I might By fervent zeal attain,
Then should I hope the victory to gain.
SON. L.
NO sooner love entirely me possessed,
But see how jealousy does me assail,
She seeks with deep distrust my faith to quail,
And to remove from conscience quiet guest.
She tells me my Lord does sin detest,
And that my deeds they too unworthy are,
That from his favor they will me debar,
Whose love is fixed only on the best.
Fear had begun to work in me so far,
That to amaze my mind it could not fail,
Till to my love my state I did bewail,
Who shining sweetly like the morning star,
Did stay their jar, And bid my soul to rest
In Christ, by whom I surely shall be blessed.
SON. LI.
HE is unworthy to receive a gift,
From any man, that him mistrusts before,
I will not ought of thee Lord doubt therefore,
Although no reason can my hope vplift,
I know in deed it is fly Satan's drift,
To lay before me this my vilde estate,
Which being sinful, thou of force must hate,
And I rejected be without all shift.
But when I with my self thy works debate,
Which have examples of thy mercies store,
His reasons are of force with me no more,
Because that faith sets open wide the gate,
To me of late, Which leads to treasure thine,
Where in thy son thou do in mercy shine.
SON. LII.
Feign would I follow thee through sea and land,
My lovely Savior whom far off I see,
Zeal makes my mind with speed to have to thee,
But native weakness makes me doubtful stand,
If to my aid thou gave not forth thy hand,
And by thy word incouragde me to row,
I should so shun affections which do flow,
That fear should bend my faith like feeble wand.
But by thy offered grace now strong I grow,
And through the troubles of the world will be
Bold to proceed, and faith shall succor me,
To witness forth the thankfulness I owe;
Thou do bestow On me both power and will.
And with them both, I will thee honor still.
SON. LIII.
AS do the stars amidst the firmament,
With borrowed light bear reccord unto thee,
(O Lord of might) in which we men do see,
The image of thy power to them but lent,
So when our weak endeavors Lord are bent,
To publish forth thy praises which excel,
These silly sparks of light which in us dwell.
Do show thy grace which us this motion sent.
Although therefore no speech or tongue can tell.
How infinite thy glory ought to be,
Which passes humane sense by high degree,
As wisest men to grant, they do compel,
Yet thou like well, We show herein our will,
Which I have vowed unto thy service still.
SON. LIIII.
CAll me o Lord, for lo I do attend,
To follow thee where so thou do direct,
I know thou will not my intent reject,
Who gladly would proceed where so thou send,
I doubtful stand, which way my course to bend,
Because I find such ignorance of skill,
To follow forth according to my will,
A fruitful course the which I did intend,
As thou with forward zeal my mind did fill,
So show me Lord whereto I am select,
And I shall carefully the same effect,
And fervently thereto go forward still,
Depend I will, Upon occasion fit,
That faithfully I may accomplish it.
SON. LV.
LIke silly babes such must thy servants be,
In innocence and obedience still,
Unto thy holy laws o Lord and will,
From wrath, pride, malice, lust, and envy free,
With Serpents eyes of wisdom must they see,
And stop their ears which Satan would deceive,
With charms of pleasure which a scar do leave,
And lend obedient care only to thee.
Yet with simplicity of done receive,
The yoke of law whose rule they must fulfill,
And suffer patiently the word to kill
The force of sin, which would souls health bereave,
Such thou will heave, And hold in heavenly arm,
And with protecting hand, defend from harm.
SON. LVI.
WHo so could like to Steu'n behold and see,
The throne triumphant where our Savior fits,
In Majesty aloft, as best him fits,
A Judge and Savior to his Saints to be,
Coe^quall with his father in degree,
Possessor of the place for us prepared,
Who ready stands our weak works to reward,
And from the fury of the world to free.
He were but base if ought he did regard,
This transitory honor which so flits,
Which to attain so much does tire our wits,
And yet so niggardly to man is shard,
And afterward Does leave a sting behind,
Of care of conscience, and of grief of mind.
SON. LVII.
WHo seeks not with all his power and might,
To eternize unto himself his states?
That chance or time may not his bliss rebate,
Or death it self may not dissolve it quight.
Thus some therefore for honor fiercely fight,
And some for wealth do travel far and nigh,
Some worldly wisdom with great study buy,
To make them famous in this vain worlds sight.
Which is the readiest way they do espy,
To keep their name from death which so they hate,
Yea all suppose posterity the gate,
T'immortalize this flesh, whose flower must dye,
But all go wry, wealth, honor, wit have end,
And children pass, faith only life does lend.
SON. LVIII.
WHat wealth may be to this alone comparde,
To be co-heire with Christ of fathers love?
To have (...) ^arthly thoughts so raysd above,
That world and worldly things we not regard?
To see by faith a kingdom rich preparde
For us, which shall eternally remain,
Aye free from worldly cares and troubles vain,
Which is for children his, a due reward?
Who can discouragde be with earthly pain,
Or tedious combats which the flesh does prove?
Since care of us our Partner Christ did move,
To share our griefs, his joy to us to gain:
Which thoughts should waine Our wills from base desire
And us encourage higher to aspire.
SON. LIX.
IF Paradise were such a pleasant soil,
Where all things flourished and prospered aye,
Wherein who lived, never could decay,
Till sin by Satan's slight gave man the foil:
Which blessings afterward did clean recoyle,
And left man naked in reproach and shame,
To dust to turn again from whence he came,
On barren earth to live with sweat and toil.
Then is our state much better then that fame,
Our Paradise a place of bliss to stay,
Our Savior (Abrams bosom) does displaye
Wherein our souls shall rest free from all blame,
Where he our name Has writ in book of life,
To be exempt from fear of care, or strife.
SON. LX.
WHat is felicity whereof men wright?
Which to attain, our studies still are beat,
Which to procure, such time and pain is spent,
By endless travel therein day and night:
Sure if it be naught else but firm delight,
And that delight consist in peace of mind,
Then here on earth this treasure none shall find,
Whose pleasures quickly vanish out of sight.
The earth does change, as seas do rise with tide,
And storms ensue the calm before that went,
This happiness but for a time is lent,
And paid often times with penance more unkind
By fortune blind. True bliss consists herein,
To love the Lord, and to abandon sin.
SON. LXI.
HOw many privileges great and rare,
Do we enjoy that do thy name profess?
Even many more by far I do confess,
Then we observe, or how to use be ware:
To give thy only son thou did not spare,
Us to redeem from deaths eternal wound,
The sting of hell and sin he did confound,
And way to heaven for us he did prepare.
Yea so his mercies do to us abound,
That all the worldly creatures more and less,
Yea heavenly Angels do themselves address,
To serve man's needful use are ready found,
He does propound, In Christ all these to man,
And having him, no want annoy us can.
SON. LXII.
BY many gifts o Lord thou do declare,
Thy mercies unto man whom thou will save,
The use of all the which in Christ we have,
By hand of faith, that precious blessing rare,
That does his righteousness for us prepare,
Our stubbornness with his obedience hide,
His patience does our gross impatience guide,
His temperance with our intemperance share,
His continence our frailty lets not slide.
(For changing nature ours, his strength it gave)
Our pride it hides, and hopes with faithless wave,
And shades our heart with love which still shall bide,
Thus every tide, It ready is at hand,
For our defense a buckler for to stand.
SON. LXIII.
HOw should the quiet mind in peace and rest,
Possessed of the thing it most desirde,
(A thing so precious none durst have aspirde,
To gain, unless the giver had him blessed)
How may she mourn, how may she be oppressed,
Who has the bridegroom always in her sight:
Who in her love does take so great delight,
As by his bounty hourly is expressed?
The doleful darkness fitteth blinded night,
The shining Sun has clouds of care retirde,
O heavenly hear my heart it has aspirde,
Since in thy son I saw thy favor bright,
The which did fight, As champion strong for me,
From clouds of darkness and from sin to free.
SON. LXIIII.
WHo so of perfect temperature is framde,
Must needs delight in heavenly harmony,
His senses so shall be renude thereby,
As savage beasts by Orpheus harp were tamde,
Young David's harp Saul's furious spirit shamde,
And Dolfins did Aryons music bear,
Such sympathy in all things does appear,
That never music was by wisdom blamde,
But he that could conceive with judgment clear*
The sweet records that heavenly motions cry,
Their constant course that never swarues awry.
But by discords, whose concords after cheat,
Would hold so dear, The mouer of the same.
That love of him should base affections tame.
SON. LXV.
GReat is thy power, and more then we conceive,
Thy glory more then can discerned be:
Man's greatest gift is yet that he may see,
Or know, that virtue thine does his bereave,
His dazeling eyes each shadow does deceive,
His judgment builded on inconstant ground,
His strength but weakness in it self is found,
His glory, greater glory must receive
From thee, in whom all glory does abound:
What majesty dare man compare with thee,
To whom all creatures bow obedient knee?
Whose contemplations thou do clean confound,
Upon this ground? True bliss and wisdom stand,
To know our wisdom flows from thy hand.
SON. LXVI.
AS but vain hope it is for man to trust,
To thing not promised, or not in power,
Of speaker to perform at pointed hour,
Which is the case of flesh and blood unjust:
So call that hope no wise man can or must,
Which is performance of expected thing,
When as possession does assurance bring,
Of thing whereafter we tofore did lust.
The Saints in heaven in joyful rest do sing,
Whom hope nor fear do raise or yet deuower,
But men on earth have hope a resting tower,
To shield them from despightfull Satan's sting.
Faith is the wing Makes me to hope ascend,
And truth in Christ shall make my hope have end.
SON. LXVII.
GReat are the gifts o Lord thou do bestow
On sinful man, by thy abounding grace,
Who when they want do never hide thy face,
But still a patron of thy bounty show:
Which makes us both thy power and mercy know,
And so with shame and sorrow to repent,
Our thanklesse natures so unkindly bent:
So slack to pay the praises which we owe.
But when I do consider thou have sent
Thy son himself for to supply our place,
Whose patience did the death on cross embrace,
Those to acquit, who did with faith assent:
All speeches spent, Seem then to me in vain,
And only I admyring do remain.
SON. LXVIII.
I Have been blind, and yet I thought I saw,
And now I see, yet fear that I am blind,
No blindness like to that is of the mind,
Which does the soul to deadly danger draw:
My careless steps did stumble at a straw,
And yet supposd my walk had been so ware,
That to have erred had been a matter rare,
When every thought did violate thy law.
But since to search my self I do prepare,
So dark of sight my soul and sense I find,
That if thy Christ (my love) were not more kind,
Eternal death I see should be my share.
But now I dare In spite of wicked foe,
A better course with constant courage go.
SON. LXIX.
WHy should he faint or think his burden great,
That has a partner to support the same?
Why coward-like should he his honor shame,
That has a champion ready at entreat,
Who can and does death and confusion threat,
To all impediments which stop our way?
On whom repose our trust we boldly may,
He being judge and plast in mercies seat?
He sees our thoughts, and knows what we would say,
He does our mouths to fit petitions frame,
He hides our errors if our faith be lame,
And he himself does also for us pray,
We need but stay, And trust to his good will,
And we are sure he will our want fulfill.
SON. LXX.
ALthough the world do seek to stop my way,
By many stumbling blocks of fear and doubt,
And bid me seek a farther way about,
And on the staff of carnal strength to stay,
Though sin, though hell, though death do me denay,
That any power shall bridle their intent,
But would compel me walk as worldlings went,
The hedlong path of pleasure to decay,
Yet will I not this purpose mine repent,
So long as faith will be my soldier stout,
To overthrow this fearful thronging rout.
Whom to subdue, this grace was to me sent,
Ne shall be spent, In vain this pain of mine,
Hope against hope, shall win the field in fine.
SON. LXXI.
IT were unfit a concubine to keep,
Or that her children should possession have,
Among the fruits which lawful wedding gave,
By virtuous spowse which in the soul does sleep;
And yet behold how shamefully do creep,
Into possession of my power and will,
These thoughts and works which motions are to ill,
And trench themselves in fleshly fortress deep:
Whose base society will with vices fill,
The holy brood which grace would spotless save,
In such a doubt my young affections wave,
That they consent I should them foster still,
But that would spill, More virtuous heritage,
Therefore exilde these be, though hell do rage.
SON. LXXII.
SOmetimes my nature seems to repine,
To see the pleasure and the plenteous store,
The wicked do enjoy for evermore,
Abounding in their corn, their oil and wine,
But when I see my weakness so incline,
To the abuse of portion I possess,
My heart with joy, full often does confess,
Thy love does much in earthly scarstie shine,
These thing are good and bad, as thou do bless,
Which I dare not directly crave therefore,
Such danger follows them even at the door,
That plenty lightly does the soul oppress,
And as I guess, Contentedness does grow,
In grateful mind though state be near so low.
SON. LXXIII.
IF he unworthy be the sweet to taste,
That shuns the sower as we in proverb say,
To honor, pleasure, profit, in the way
Great peril, pain, and cost, so often plast.
If as unworthy health, he be disgrast,
That will refuse a bitter purge to take,
When he does know it will his fever slake.
So do temptations prove the mind more chaste,
If we with courage do the combat make,
And to the end immovable do stay,
The more that Satan does his spite display,
The more the pride and power of him we shake,
And he will quake, And sin shall have a fall,
And faith in Christ shall triumph over all.
SON. LXXIIII.
TO shun the rocks of dangers which appear,
Amidst the troubled waves of worldly life.
Which in each company are always rife,
Which with souls peril most men buy full dear,
I fear almost to keep my course so near,
The conversation of such tickle tides,
And think him blessed, that banished abides,
In desert, where of sin he may not hear.
But when I note where so a man him hides,
That still affections breed an inward strife,
That nature bears about the bloody knife,
And to the death the proper soul it guides,
That fancy slides Away, and I prepare,
In combats of the world to fight my share.
SON. LXXV.
WEre it not strange, that members of the same
One living body, and one parents child,
Should by the other daily be defilde?
And of unseemly thing should have no shame?
And yet we which of Christ do bear the name,
And children of his father us do call,
At discord with this parent daily fall,
And Christ our eldest brother do defame.
It seems well we be but bastards all,
Though stock be true, we be but Olives wild,
Who thinks us better, he is but beguilde,
Our fruits are bitter, and increase but small,
And who so shall Examine well his works,
Shall see that gall in purest thoughts there lurks.
SON. LXXVI.
IT is no light or curious conceit,
O Lord thou know, that makes me to strain
My feeble powers, which blindfold did remain,
Upon thy service now at length to weight,
But only shame to see man's nature freight,
So full of pregnant speech to little use,
Or rather oftentimes to thy abuse,
Whilst to deceive, they lay a golden baight:
And do not rather think it fit to choose,
By praises thine, true praise themselves to gain,
And leave those fond inventions which do stain
Their name, and cause them better works refuse,
Which does abuse The gifts thou do bestow,
And oftentimes thy high contempt do show.
SON. LXXVII.
FOr common matter common speech may serve,
But for this theme both wit and words do want.
For he that heaven and earth and all did plant,
The fruits of all he justly does deserve,
No marvel then though often my pen do swerve,
In middle of the matter I intend,
Since often so high, my thoughts seek to ascend.
As want of wisdom makes my will to starve.
But thou o Lord who cloven tongs did send,
Unto thy servants when their skills were scant,
And such a zeal unto thy praise that brant,
As made them fearelesse speak, and never bend,
Unto the end, One jot from thy behest,
Shall guide my style, as fits thy glory best.
SON. LXXVIII.
HOw happily my riches have I found,
Which I no sooner sought but it is won,
Which to attain, my will had scarce begun.
But I did find it ready to abound,
The silly faith I had was settled sound
In Christ, although for fear it often did pant.
Which I did wish more constantly to plant.
That it might all temptations so confound,
With feruency this little sparkle brant,
Till it inflamde my zeal and so did run,
Unto the fountain of true light (the son)
Whose gracious soil to feed it was not scant:
Men find more want, The more they covet still,
But if man covet this, it aye does fill.
SON. LXXIX.
WHen desolate I was of worldly aid,
Unable to relieve my self at need,
Thou had a care my fainting soul to feed,
Because my faith upon thy favor stayde,
My dying hope thou have with mercy paid,
And as thou did relieve thy servant dear,
Elias whom the Ravens in desert cheer,
So am I comforted whom sin affrayde.
The cries of little Ravens thine ear does hear,
And slakst their hunger kindly Lord indeed,
When parents do forsake (...),
That so thy providence might more appear,
Which shines clear, In blessings every day,
To me much more then I can duly way.
SON. LXXX.
AMidst this pilgrimage where wandering I,
Do trace the steps which flesh and blood has tred,
My comfort is, that aye mine eyes are led,
By gracious object which in faith I spy,
Whose brightness guides my steps, which else awry
Were like to slide, through Satan's subtle slight,
Against whom his holy Angels always sight,
And suffer not my strength too far to try.
By day his word and works are in my sight.
Like to a cloud to comfort me in dread,
By fife through deserts, and the sea so red,
His hand does govern me in dangerous night,
His favor bright, Conducting this my way,
An host of steps shall not my iourny stay.
SON. LXXXI.
I See a storm me thinks approach a far,
In darkened sky, which threatens woe at hand,
Unto my tackle I had need to stand,
Lest sudden puffs my purposd course debar.
These tempting thoughts full often forerunners are,
Of fierce affections which do move the mind,
Which if resistance not in time they find,
The strongest tackling they do stretch or mar,
I closely therefore will my conscience bind,
And arm (...) vessel with courageous band,
Of (...) do know the land,
Whose (...) safety are most kind:
And in my mind Shall faith the Pylate be,
Whose skill shall make me wished port to see.
SON. LXXXII.
HOw is it that my course so soon would stay,
Before I have begun the thing I thought?
If ease or pleasure I herein had sought.
I had not then made choice of such a way:
More facill^s the course unto decay,
More favor with the world it will attain;
But I mis^^ke the ^^y requit with pain,
And faining words, not meaning as they say.
Men break their sleeps some silly pelse to gain:
With loss of life small honor some have bought,
Yea Philosophers pleasure set at naught,
To win a name of virtue to remain:
Then I will waine My self from earthly rest,
With heavenly crown and honor to the blessed.
SON. LXXXIII.
WHen I begin to faint in my conceit,
To see the little power I have to good,
How sin has virtue in me still withstood,
And frailty on my flesh does always waigh^.
I am confounded and amazed straight,
And readily could turn and fly the field,
And all my travel to the tempter yield,
Before I would adventure more to fight.
But when I duly note whereon I build,
My faith, which watered is with Christ his blood.
Of force sufficient to withstand the flood,
And me from peril and destruction shield,
I easily welde Each burden on me laid,
And of my safety nothing am affrayd.
SON. LXXXIIII.
THe chastisements which often do befall,
Unto the most beloved of God and blessed,
Does breed unto their souls both peace and rest,
And home from wandering thoughts their mind does call,
And sure are tokens not of favor small,
Who father like does us in time correct,
Who else the care of him would soon reject,
And have no heed unto our ways at all.
The good Physician that would life protect,
Cuts of a limb sometimes as it seems best,
And yet the patient does the same digest,
Or any pain that works good effect,
Should God neglect Us then to exercise?
With rods whereby to make us grow more wise.
SON. LXXXV.
HOw should my fear or sorrow long remain,
(Although the world did swell, and ouerflow
With dangers which naught else but death do show)
When I by death do find a present gain:
Faith me assures that all assaults are vain,
That seek to sever me from heavenly blis,
The love of Christ assures me of this,
That I with him shall safely still remain,
What though of earthly pleasures I do miss,
And though the care of them unpleasing grow,
Yet this by good experience I do know,
All things turn to the best to children his,
I therefore kis, The cross with joyful cheer,
Because in chastisement does love appear.
SON. LXXXVI.
ALthough those Gibeonites the native borne,
Of sinful flesh have slily me beguilde,
When as I thought all lust to have exilde,
By showing faynd repentance raggd and torn,
Though flesh and blood unto this league have sworn,
Not asking counsel of the Lord at all,
By which into a snare my soul did fall,
And deep hypocrisy my power did scorn,
Yet mean I them unto account to call,
And since they have my holy thoughts defilde,
Accursed I will hold them and as vilde,
Will hate their offprings all, both great and small,
And be they shall, But bondmen to my soul,
Who daily may their proud attempts controwle.
SON. LXXXVII.
WHen I began a conquest of my will
To make, and yield it unto reasons law,
My reason to the rule of God to draw,
And by that rule to guide my actions still,
It had bine wisdom first the flesh to kill,
Who breeds affections, which do still withstand
The building of the work I have in hand,
And thorns are in my sides to work me ill,
But now my error I do understand,
And must by fear of wrath keep them in awe,
And by the chastisements of sin they saw,
Make them to yield unto obedient band,
Then shall my land With faithful soldiers be
Replenished, and armed strengthen me.
SON. LXXXVIII.
NOt every one that with his lips does pray,
Or praise thy name is grateful in thy sight,
Thy searching eyes have not so much delight,
In those that cry, Lord, Lord each hour of day,
But such as in thy bownds obedient stay,
And make thy will a law unto their mind,
That in thy promises do comfort find,
And follow not the worlds deceitful way,
To such thou showest thy self a father kind,
And do illuminate their heart with might,
Against all powers which do against them fight,
Their fores thou take to cure, and do vpbinde,
Angels assingde, Do them inuiron round,
And to their comfort, mercies do abound.
SON. LXXXIX.
HOw should I quicken up my self indeed,
To true and faithful love even as I ought,
Unless I call to mind whence I was brought,
And by whose aid, who did this kindness breed,
Which when I only weigh, my heart does bleed,
To see that bounty of a God so kind,
And note the dullness of my nature blind,
That should forget the Lord who me does feed.
When I was almost lost he me did find,
When I forgot him clean, on me he thought,
When I was sold to sin then he me bought.
When I was wounded, he my sores did bind,
Yea when I pinde, He gave me plenteous store,
Which gifts I will record for evermore.
SON. XC.
WHy should I faint or fear, or doubt at all.
How fierce so ever fleshly combat show,
Since I so sure a succor ready know,
To shield me safe, what ever do befall?
If he have such regard of sparrows small,
As none of them (till God appoint) do dye,
If to our hairs which fall, he have an eye,
That none of them unnumbered perish shall:
Why should I think him deaffe when I do cry,
As though he had no care of us below,
As though he would not needful things bestow,
Although our patience he delight to try,
Who can deny, But flowers that grow in field,
In glory stain the beauty pride does yield.
SON. XCI.
HOw do Gods blessings to his Saints abound,
Whose gifts of grace although they be but small,
At first yet more and more increase they shall,
As seed well watered in a fruitful ground,
The proof whereof I sinful wretch have found,
Whose faith nigh famished, he now has fed
From heaven, with great increase of fish and bread,
Which strengthen dying soul with comfort sound,
His word for table he did open spread,
His servants for to feed, me he did call,
Their dole so free, I find more fragments fall,
Then in my basket senses home have led,
Yet he has bed To such more to bestow,
As greatest store of former treasor show.
SON. XCII.
I Know not Lord how to discharge aright,
The duty that for graces great I owe,
No need thou have of me at all I know,
Yet in thy service shall be my delight,
To publish forth thy praises day and night,
To serve thy Saints with gifts I shall possess,
Thy wondrous works by all means to confess,
I will employ my substance, wit, and might.
The remnant of my life shall well express,
That dead to sin in Christ to life I grew,
Which shall to world, my mind regenerate show,
Although that I cannot sin clean suppress,
And will adresse My thoughts to thee alone,
Because on earth true joy or bliss is none.
SON. XCIII.
IF I did hope by pen to pattern out
The many merits of thy Majesty,
Which of thy mercies we do daily try,
An endless matter I should go about,
But I alas my strength so much do doubt,
That nothing less then such a thought I have,
To point forth others to a thought I crave,
Whose confidence in skill is much more stout.
Yet dare I say that nature never gave
The power to flesh and blood to look so hye,
Nor gifts of grace full few there are apply,
To give him laud aright that did them save.
How to behave My self herein I learn,
And wish my will might others likewise warn.
SON. XCIIII.
WHat tongue or pen can show it self unkind,
Unto a father full of mercy so,
Who freely does such benefits bestow,
And of your case has such a careful mind?
Before we were, a way he forth did find,
Whereby to purchase us in heaven a place,
When native strength our glory should deface,
A remedy therefore his love assignde:
He gives us knowledge of the same by grace,
Which offered is to them the which will go
Unto the word where saving health does grow,
And says through which our Savior we embrace,
And being base, By birth, and thrall to hell,
He us adopts in childrens room to dwell.
SON. XCV.
WHy should this worldly care have now such power
To quench the comfort which the soul shall find
In this our God, who is to us so kind,
The memory of which should fear deuower?
If faith were watered well with heavenly shower
Of grace, and knowledge of our happy state,
It would the force of all assaults abate,
And be a bulwark strong at trials hour.
If we the world and flesh did truly hate,
And made his will a law unto our mind,
If doubt of power or will, did not us blind,
Which to distrust, sets open wide the gate,
Then would this rate Of worldly care be less,
And he our faith with favor more would bless.
SON. XCVI.
HOw loath this flesh of mine remains still,
To part from sin his old companion dear,
Of death or of a change, he would not hear,
But would embrace him aye with his good will,
The very thought of death his thought does kill,
The very fear thereof his sorrow brings,
So sweet the pleasures seem of earthly things,
That naught else can our fond affections kill.
But who is wise, fro out the snare he wrings,
Before perforce, death does approach him near,
That abstinence no virtue does appear,
When want of power subdues affections stings,
But who so flings, From them when they pursue,
To him pure name of virtue indeed is due.
SON. XCVII.
WHo so would live, of force he first must dye,
Death is the door which leads unto life,
Life which shall be deuoyd of change and strife,
Whose comfort shall our tears of sorrow dry,
The way is straight the which man must go by.
If to the heavens he purpose to ascend,
His gross corruption must to grave descend,
And dead, the power of sin therein must lie,
If he to be regenerate intend,
First must he mortify the motions rise,
Of lust, which kill the soul with cruel knife,
And eke his ruin presently pretend,
For God will send A happy change indeed,
As harvest paies with plenty plow man's seed.
SON. XCVIII.
WHen I with grief sometimes to mind do call,
The woeful loss that sin to man has brought,
And want which to all creatures it has wrought,
By Satan's slight, and Adams fearful fall,
I find no comfort in worlds use at all,
But wish to be dissolved with Christ to dwell,
From whom all blessings flow and do excel,
In thought whereof my comfort is not small.
Yea I do grow by thinking hereof well,
Into a doubt, if that in truth I ought,
More sorrow parents fall, which death has brought,
Or joy the life through Christ to me befell,
Yet truth to tell, I find the change so good,
Our state is better now then when we stood.
SON. XCIX.
IF I can speak and like a coward crake,
If I can tell the thing the which is best,
If I in muster seem to battle pressed,
And yet shrink back when I should trial make,
If I endeavor others to awake,
Fro out the deadly slumber they are in,
And yet my self cannot revolt from sin,
But in the pride thereof do pleasure take,
By all my travel I no game shall win,
Although my pain might prove to others blessed,
But as the Symball sound does to the rest,
I might haps mourn, when others mirth begin,
The feast but thin, Would be unto my share,
Though many dishes to the guests I bare.
SON. C.
FOrtune and chance, blind guides to bliss farewell,
Upon your leasures I no more attend,
I not regard what good or ill you send,
Not in your tents of pleasures wish to dwell,
A greater bliss then ere through you befell,
Ye made me to neglect I now do see,
Whose hope from fear could near continue free,
But aye distrust did against my faith rebel.
The earths delight the which ye promised me,
Could not my soul from sorrow ought defend,
Your sweet with sower was mixed in the end,
So vain and variable both they be,
Then happy he That seeks blessed rest,
In Christ alone, and does the world detest.
CONCLUSION.
WOrds may well want, both Ink and paper fail,
Wits may grow dull, and will may weary grow,
And worlds attaires may make my pen more slow,
But yet my heart and courage shall not quail,
Though cares and troubles do my peace assail,
And drive me to delay thy praise awhile,
Yet all the world shall not from thoughts exile,
Thy mercies Lord by which my plaints prevail.
And though the world with face should grateful smile,
And me her pedlers pack of pleasures show,
No hearty love on her I will bestow,
Because I know she seeks me to beguile,
Ne will defile My happy peace of mind,
For all the solace I in earth may find.
FINIS.
A TABLE DIRECTING by part of the first verse of each, to the
A.
Book. Sonet. A Base borne 1. 54 According to thy 1. 41 A husbandman 1. 53
Although the world 2. 70 Although these 2. 86 Amidst the graves 1. 42 A
merchant 1. 21 Among the prease 1. 22 Among thy sheep 1. 9 Amidst this famine
1. 37 A Moabite 1. 80 Amidst this pilgrimage 2. 80 A poor Arabian 1. 20 A
tenant 1. 50 As thou art pure 1. 24 As often as thou 1. 31 A sinful Syrian 1. 98
A servant Lord 1. 73 A servant sold 1. 75 As through a mist 2. 1 As fares with
2. 9 As is the treasure 2. 15 As but vain 2. 66 As does the stars 2. 53 As
does the M^one 2. 44 A virgin pure 1. 29 Auant base thoughts 2. 37 A wi^ked
Pharisie 1. 16 A wicked thief 1. 78 A wi^ked soul 1. 19 B.
BEhold o Lord the City 1. 10 Behold o Lord a tree 1. 14 Behold a midst worlds
1. 92 Betwixt two strong 2. 17 By many gifts 2. 62 Borne blind I was 1. 38 C.
CAll me o Lord 2. 54 Cleansde are the 2. 2 F.
Feign would I fence 1. 32 Feign would I follow thee 2. 52 Feign would I praise
2. 40 Five foolish virgins 1. 17 F^e fainting faith 2. ^8 For common matter 2.
77 Fortune and chance 2. 100 Fro out the darkness 1. 2 From Judah wandering 8.
81 From far I see 2. 18 G.
GReat are the 2. 67 Great is thy 2. 65 H.
HE is unworthy 2. 21 How should my soul 1. 1 HOw hard it is 1. 48 How often o
Lord 1. 63 How drunken are 1. 39 How precious 2. 21 How can I limit 2. 26 How
may this be 2. 34 How fond a thing 2. 46 How many privileges 2. 61 How should
the quiet 2. 63 How happily 2. 78 How is it that 2. 82 How loath this 2. 96 How
should my 2. 85 How should I 2. 89 How do Gods blessings 2. 91 I.
I Follow thee 1. 25 I seek o Lord 1. 13 I will not fear 2. 38 I justly am 1.
52 I see alas 1. 99 I find my heart 2. 49 I have been blind 2. 68 I have
begun 2. 6 I see a storm 2. 81 I shame to see 2. 13 I know not 2. 92 In
humble wise 1. 4 Into thy vineyard 1. 23 In bondage long 1. 79 In famine great
1. 89 In deadly sleep 1. 43 In pride of you^h 1. 6 If thou vouchsafest 1. 45
If he to whom 2. 11 If Saba Queen 2. 45 If beauty be 2. 33 If Paradise 2. 59
If he unworthy be 2. 73 If I did hope 2. 93 If I can speak 2. 99 It is not
Lord 1. Preface It were unfit 2. 71 It is no light. 2. 76 L.
LAme of my limbs 1. 7 Let earthly things 2. 47 Like pined child 1. 27 Like
silly babes 2. 55 Lo how I groueling 1. 81 Love then I will 2. 39 M
MY body Lord the house 1. 36 My body Lord infected 1. 60 My soul like 1. 76
My sins behold 1. 33 My wicked flesh 1. 44 Mourn thou no more 1. 101 My
traytrous heart 1. 49 N.
NO recompense 2. 20 No sooner love 2. 50 Not that my faith 1. 84 Not euer^e
one 2. 88 Now that thou have 1. 12 Now that I see 1. 61 Now that it pleases 1.
69 Now that I have 2. 12 Now will I dance 2. 19 Now that thy mercies 2. 27 O
O Heavenly beauty 2. 32 O heavenly love 2. 35 O perfect son 2. 41 Of
sinful race 1. 30 Of every creature 1. 47 Of parents first 1. 26 Of sweet and
sauorie 1. 90 Out of the fountain 1. 18 Out of thy 1. 92 P
Polluted with 1. 28 S
SInce it has pleased 1. 46 Since with Goliath 1. 11 Since thou have raisd 1.
65 Since thou by grace 1. 100 Since that it pleases 1. 88 Since to so holy 2.
3 Since thou o Lord 2. 10 Since thou have 2. 25 So blind o Lord 1. 77 So
foolish Lord 1. 97 Some men do mourn 2. 1 Sometimes my nature 2. 72 T.
THe temple Lord 1. 67 The silly bab^s 1. ^7 The greediness 1. 34 The many
trials 1. 85 The dream which thou 1. 93 The seed which thou 1. 94 The malice
of 1. 96 The talents which 1. 87 The only daughter 1. 56 The more I seek 2. 8
The end vvhereto 2. 14 The pleasures of 2. 16 The powerful pen 2. 29 The
shining face 2. 36 The chastisements 2. 84 Thy thundering voice 1. 8 The slender
City 1. 83 This stately stage 2. 30 Thou formedst me 1. 72 Though with thy
Saints 1. 40 Thou have o Lord 1. 86 Thanks will I 2. 22 To shun the rocks 2.
74 V.
Unto thy princely 1. 5 Void of true life 1. 35 W.
WEre it not strange 2. 75 Where shall I build 1. 58 Where shall I find 2. 9
What am I else 1. 71 Whilst in this world 1. 70 Whilst with the wholesome 1.
64 Whilst in the garden 1. 51 Whereso I cast about 2. 23 When thou vouchsafest
1. 55 Whilst in the veil 1. 59 Whilst that the chosen 1. 62 Whilst that in
wealth 1. 66 What strength has 1. 95 When I begin 2. 83 When as my 2. 3 What
tongue or pen 2. 94 What should I render 2. 42 What present 2. 42 What wealth 2
58 What is felicity 2. 60 When I began 2. 87 When I with grief 2. 98 When
desolate I was 2. 79 Who so beholds 2. 43 Whilst in the plenty 1. 74 Whilst I
do study 2. 24 Why should be faeint 2. 69 Why should this 2. 95 Why should I
2. 90 Within this Arc 1. 3 Within thy garden 1. 15 Within thy house 1. 68 Who
will be^old 2. 31 Who so could 2. 56 Who seeks not 2. 57 Who so of perfect
2. 64 Who so would live 2. 97 Would God 2. 5 Words may well want 2.
Conclusion

FINIS.

