Orders taken and enacted, for Orphans and their portions.

Anno MD. LXXX.

Imprinted at London for Gabriel Cawood.

Orders enacted.
AD Commune concilium, te^tum in Guildhaldia ciuitatis Lo^dini. xiii. die
October. Anno regni Eduardi sexti, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae
Regis, fidei defensoris, and in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Hibernicae
supremicapitis, quinto: coram Andrea Iudde Milite, tunc Maiore, and Aldremannis
Ciuitatis illius, ordinata sunt inter alia, inactitata, concessa and stabilita,
omnia and singula subsequentia.
FOrasmuch as the City sof London, is of late years sore decayed, and daily is
like to decay, more and more: A great cause and occasion whereoff among other,
has been, for that free men's children, (Orphans of the said City) sometimes
in the lives of their Parents, and sometimes after their deceases, being left
wealthy and rich, do bestow themselves in ungodly Marriages, for the most part
in their young age, at their own wills and pleasures, without the consent and
against the minds of their friends, saying and affirming, that the Law and
custom of the said City gives unto them their portions, whether they mary by
the assent of their friends or not, and so do daily cast away and undo
themselves, in trust to have their said portions, whether their parents or
friends will or will not. And thereby do they bestow themselves upon simple and
light persons, having neither cunning, knowledge, substance, ne good or honest
conditions. By reason where-of^, such Orphans, inordinately, and insolently,
do spend and consume their patrimony and portions in short time, not only to
the undoing of themselves, and to the great ignomie and shame of their friends,
but also to the great slander of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this city
(who been reputed and taken as Fathers and Protectors of the same Orphans) and
to the great loss and hinderaunce of the said City.

And forasmuch as the said Lord Mayor and Citizens; have by their laws, and
customs, power and authority to make laws and ordinances, by their common
counsel, for redress of the same. It is therefore now (to the intent to
reduce the same to a more godly, more profitable and decent order and
conformity) by the said Lord Mayor, and Communaltie, and Citizens, in this
present common counsel assembled, and by aucthoritye of the same common
Counsel, enacted, ordained, authorized, and established for a Law perpetually
to be observed and kept within the said City. That if any Orphane, or child of
any free man or free woman, of the said City do offend in any the things
hereafter expressed, and be thereoff lawfully convicted, before the Lord Mayor
and the Aldermen or else where, that then they and every of them, shall to al
entents purposes, constructions and meanings; be unabled and barred to demand
and claim their portion or portio^s, and also shall lose and forgo and be
barred for ever, of all and every his, her, or their part or parts, and
portions to him or them belonging, by and after the death of his or their said
father or mother, of ye goods and cattalles, of every such father and mother,
by reason of any Law, custom, ordinance, usage, fraunches, privilege, act of
Common counsale, or other thing, heretofore had or used, within ye said
City. The same Law, Custom, Ordinance, or other thing whatsoever,
heretofore had, made, ordained, allowed, and put in ure, to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. That is to wit. First, if any ma^child, or
woma^child, shall maliciously go about or attempt to do, or cause to be done,
any bodily harm, death, or destruction to his or their Father or Mother: Or if
any manchilde do hereafter mary or contract marriage in the life of his father
or mother (by whom he will claim any portion) under the age of xxi. years,
without ye consent of his said Father, or Mother, by whom he will claim any
portion: Or if any womanchilde do hereafter mary or contract marriage, in the
life of her father, or other parent, by whom she shall claim any portion,
before the age of xviii. years, without the consent of her Father, or such
other Parent by whom she shall or may claim any portion: Or if any
manchilde be a Thief, or a Fellon, or a common whore haunter, a common Diser,
or a common player at unlawful games notoriously known: Or if any womanchilde
shall hereafter commit any whoredom, or be a common Picker, that then every of
ye persons so offending, shall be barred and excluded to have, or demand any
portion.

Provided always, that it shall be lawful, for the father, or mother of any such
child, or children, to give and bequeath in Legacy, to such child or
children, as much as the portion of such child so, offe^ding shall amou^t unto,
by the custom of the said city and then such child thereby to be enabled to
have, and demand the same, as portion, this Act, notwithstanding, so that the
same Legacy be contained in his or their testament in writing, and not
otherwise. And that then, and from thenceforth, his said child, or children,
to be admitted and restored to claim such legacy, or legacies, in such sort,
manner and form, as if there had bon never any such offense done, or committed
by any such child.

Item, it is further ordained, enacted, authorized and established, by the
authority aforesaid, that if any womanchilde, being an Orphane, and under the
age of. xxi. years, at any time hereafter, after ye death of her father, do
ensure or contract her self in marriage, or else according to the Ecclesiastical
laws of this Realine, do perfectly solempnize or consumate Marriage, with any
free man of this City, the consent and agreement of ye Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of this said city of Lond^n for the time being, not obtained and had, that
then for every such default and offense committed or done, by any Orphane or
Orphans, of the said City, the same beeinge confessed or sufficientlye
proved by two witnesses, or otherwise before the said Lord Mayre and Aldermen
of this said City of London, for the time being, at and in a Court of
Aldermen, she or they that so happen to behave her or themselves, as is before
said, shall forfeit, forgo and loose. ij. d of and for every pound, so due or
to be due unto her, or the^, by reason of any such Orphanage, the sum of.
xij. d. of every. li. to go, or to be to the use of the chamber of ye said
city, according to the ancient custom before this time, in such case used.
And if the said contract or marriage of the said Orphan or Orphans, be made
with any foreign, not being free of this City, at the time of any such
contract or marriage made, that then the said Ophan or Orphans, and every of
them shall forfait and loose. iij. s. of every pound, or to be due unto her or
them, by virtue of any Orphanage or custom had and used within the said City.
The one shilling of the said, iij. s. of every pound, to go, or to be, to the
use of the chamber of the said city, in such manner and form as is aforesaid.
And the other. tj. s. so forfeited of every pound, to go to ye use of such
other Orphane, or Orphans, as the^ shall remain unmarried. Or else for default of
such Orphans, or Orphane, to remain to the next of the kindred of the Orphane
so offending.

Also be it further ordained, enacted, and established by authority aforesaid,
for, and in eschewing of diverse varie^ces, contentions, and suits, that daily
heretofore have, and hereafter may ensue: yt if any free man's child, man or
woman fortune to be married hereafter, in the life time of his, or their
father, by his consent, and not fully advanced off, and to his, or her full
part, or porcio^, of his, or her, said Fathers goods, as he shall be worth at ye
time of his disease, according to the ancient laws and customs, of this said
City: that then every such free man's child, so being married in the life time
of his, or her Father shall be to all intents and purposes, disabled to demand
any fur^^er part or portion, of his or her fa^hers goods, after the disease of
his, or ^ir father, but shall be adjudged, repu^ed and taken to be fully
advanced, ac^ording as the law and custom of ^his city, has been long time
out of mind, except his or her said father, do mention certainly in his last
will, or ^estament, or by other writing signed with his own proper name, or
mark ^he certeintie of the sum or sums of money, goods and cattells, and the
value of them that the Father gave, paid ^r departed withal, or otherwise
^ssured or hereafter shall give, pay, ^epart withal, or otherwise make
as^urance off, unto him, or her, before at ^r after the marriage of him or her,
or ^therwise in his life time, for and toward their aduauncements, in the
name of his, or her part, or portion.

And the^ every such Orphane, or child which after the decease of his or her
said Father, can bring forth the said Testament or other writing signed or
marked with ye fathers hand or mark, wherein the certeintie of such mone^
goods, or Cattells, as they have o^ shall have received of their said Father,
or by the same father, assured b^ especialtie, or otherwise shall have a^ much
of the ready money, goods, cattells, and debtes, of the said Father as (with
that which he or they shall have received toward their aduau^cements, in the
life of their said father shall make up a full childs part, o^ his goods and
Cattells, as he shall b^ worth at the time of his decease. The same to be
demanded, asked, and claymed, or sued for against the executor or executors,
administratour, or administratours, of the goods, and Cattells of the said
Father, by bill Original, to be commenced to our sovereign Lord, the kings
court, holden in the utter chamber of the guild-hal^ of the said city, before
the said Lord Mayre and Aldermen of the same city for the time being, any law
or custom, heretofore made, or used to the contrary, notwithstanding. In
which action, no wager of Law, or Essoine. shall be admitted, or allowed.

Provided always and it is further ^nacted, that if any free man's son, ^eeing
of full age (which shall hereafter be married with the consent of his father,
or any other perte^, being of full age, which shall hereafter mary any free
man's daughter) do at the time of the espousalls, or any time after, confess
themselves, by writing fully satisfied, of his, or their portion, or do
otherwise acquit and discharge, the Father of such free man's sounes, or
daughters, of all their part and portion, due, or to be due, by the Law and
custom of the City, that then every such person, so confessing, acquiting, or
otherwise discharging, shall be reputed and taken, as fully advanced, of his, or
their whole part, or portion, and shall not be enabled, to demand any further,
or greater part of ye substance, goods, and cattells, of his or her Father:
this law, or any other law or custom heretofore had, made, or used to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

And further, for as much as it is thought very prejudicial and hurtful the
fatherless children and Orphane when the mother, or mother in law being
executrix of the last will and test^ment of her late husband, by whom after
whose death, the Orphans a^ entitled to an Orphanage, (acco^ding to the said
laudable customs (...) this city) do diverse times marry (...) contract
matrimony, some with for^^ners, and persons unknown, and some (...) Free men,
or ever a just Inuentory (...) the goods, cattels, plate, Iuells, re^dy money
of the Testatours, be by t^^^ brought in: By reason wheroff, man^ times, they
(either for fear or affect^on of their husbands, or for some other sinister
cause) do bring in very susp^tious Inuentories, omitting there^^ either ready
money, Plate, Iuells, o^ debts, or some other thing, or things whereby some
benefit should redoun^ to the fatherless children, to the great loss and
hinderance of ye Orphane^ and sometime slander to the Lord Mayre, and Aldermen
of the City notwithstanding their great care, an^ travail that they take for
the good ordering, and true aunswering of the said Orphans.

It is therefore, by like authority, ordained, established, and enacted, that
if after ye first day of November next ensuing, any widow, which is, or shall
be made executrix of the Testament and last will of her late husband, (being a
free man) or shall take upon her the administration of the goods, and cattells,
of her late husband (being a free man) do not upon her oath bring in, and
exhibit, or cause to be brought in, and exhibited before the Lord Mayre, and
Aldermen of this said City, for the time being at, and in a court of Aldermen,
a just and perfect Inuentory (to their knowledge,) of all the goods, cattells,
plate, and Iuells, ready money, and debts, as were her said husbands, at ye
time of his death, appraysed according to the law of the said city, before she
do ensure her self in marriage, or contract marriage, or else according to the
laws of the Realm, do perfectly solemnize, or consu^mate marriage with any
person, before such time as aforesaid, that the^ every person so offending,
shall forfait and loose viij s. of every pound, of her portion, of the goods of
her late husband, due to her by the laudable custom of this said City, the
same to go to the use of such Orphane, or Orphans, as then shall be entitled to
have or demand any Orphanage, or portion, after the death of his or her late
Father, the same to be demanded, asked, claimed, or sued for, against such
executrix, or administratrix, by bil original of debt, to be commenced, in our
Sovereign Lord the kings Court, holden in the utter chamber of ye Guild Hall,
of the said city, before the Lord Mayre, and Aldermen of the same City, for
the time being, any law, etc. In which Action, no wager. etc.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, for Gabriel Cawood.


