THE DEcree for Tithes, to be paid in London.

Anno M.D. LXXX.

Imprinted at London for Gabriel Cawood.

The Decree for Tithes to be paid in London.
AS touching the paiments of Tithes in the City of London and the Lyberties of
the same: It is fully ordered and decreed by the most reverend Father in God
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of al England.
Thomas Lord Wriothesley and Lord Chancellor of England. William Lord, Saint
John president of the Kings Majesty's Council, and Lord great master of his
highness householde, Ihon Lord Russell, Lord privy seal, Edward Earl of
Hertford, Lord great Chamberlain of England, John viscount Lisle high
Admiral of England, Richard Lister knight chief Justice of England, and Roger
Cholmeley knight, chief baron of his Graces Eschequer, this present twenty and
four day of February, Anno Domini secundum cursum and computationem Ecclesiae
Angelicanae millesimo quinge^tesimo quadragesimo quinto, according to ye
statute in such case lately provided, That the Citizens and inhabitants of the
said City of London and liberties of the same, for the time being, shall
yearly wthout fraud or couin for ever pay their tithes to the Parsons, Vicars,
and Curates of the said City and their successors for the time being, after
the rate hereafter following, that is to wit, of every ten shillings rent by
year of all and every house and houses, shoppes, warehouses, cellers, and
stables, and every of them, within the said City and liberties of the
same.xvi. pence half penny. And of every twenty shillings rent by year of all
and every such house and houses, shops, warehouses, cellars and stables, and
every of them, within the said City and liberties, two shillings and nine
pence: And so above the rent of xx.s. by year, ascending from.x.s. to x.s.
according to the rate aforesaid.

Item yt where any lease is or shall be made of any dwelling house or houses,
shops, warehouses, cellars, or stables, or of any of them, by fraud or couin,
reserving less rent then has been accustomed, or is or that any such lease
shall be made without any rent reserved upon the same, by reason of any fine or
income paid before hand, or by any other frand or couin: That then in every
such case the tenant or fermour, tenaunts or fermoures thereof, shall pay for
his or their tithes of the same, after ye rate aforesaid, according to the
quantity of such rent or rents, as ye same house or houses, shops, warehouses,
celars or stables, or any of them were last letten for, without fraud or couin
before the making of such lease.

Item that every owner or owners, inheritor or inheritors, of any dwelling
house or houses, shops, warehouses, cellers, or stables, or any of them within
the said city and liberties, inhabiting or occupying ye same himself or
themselves, shall pay after such rate of tithe as is abouesayde, after the
quantity of such yearelye rent, as the same was last letten for, without fraud
or couin.

Item if any person or persons have taken or hereafter shall take any mese or
mansion place by lease, and the taker or takers theroff his or their executors
or assigns does or shall inhabit in part theroff, and have or has wtin viii.
years last past before this order or hereafter will or shall let out the
residue of ye same: That then in such case, ye principal fermour or fermors or
first taker or takers thereof, his or their executours or assigns, shall pay his
or their tithes after ye rate aforesaid, according to his or their quantity
therein, and that his or their executors assign or assigns, shall pay his or
their tithes after ye rate abouesaid, according to the quantity of his or
their rent by year.

And yt if any person or persons, have or shall take diverse mansion houses,
shops, warehouses, cellers, or stables in one lease, and lets or shall let
out one or more of ye said houses and keeps or shall keep one or more in his
or their own hands, and inhabiteth or inhabiten in the same: That then the
said taker or takers, and his or their executors or assigns, shall pay his or
their tithes after the rate abouesaid, according to the quantity of ye yearly
rent of such mansion house or houses retained in his or their hands. And that
his assign or assigns of the residue of the said mansion house or houses shall
pay his or their yearly tithes after ye rate abouesaid, according to ye
quantity of their yearly re^ts. Ite^ if such fermour or fermours, or his or
their assigns of any mansion houses, warehouses, shops, cellers, or stables,
has at any time within eight years last past, or shall hereafter let over
all the said mansion house or houses contained in his or their lease to one
person or to diverse persons: That then the inhabitauntes leases or occupiers of
them, and of every of them shall pay their tithes, after ye rate of such rents
as the said inhabitaunts, leases, or occupiers, and their assign or assigns,
ben or shall be charged withal, without fraud or couin.

Item if any dwelling house within eight years last past was or hereafter
shall be converted into a warehouse, Forehouse, or such like, or if a
warehouse, storehouse, or such like wtin the said eight years, was or
hereafter shall be converted into a dwelling house: That the^ the occupier or
occupiers thereoff shall pay tithes for the same after the rate above declared
of mansion house rents.

Item that where any person shall demise any Diehouse or Brewhouse with
implementes convenient and necessary for dying or brewing, reserving a rent
upon the same, as well in respect of such implements as in respect of such
Diehouse or Brewhouse. That then the tenant shall pay his tithes, after such
rate as is abouesaid, the third penie abated. And that every principal house
or houses with key or wharfe, having any Crane or gibet belonging to ye same,
shall pay after like rate of their rents as is aforesaid the third penny abated.
And that other wharfes belonging to houses, having no Crane or gibet, shall pay
for their tithes as shall be paid for mansio^ houses in form aforesaid.

Item that where any mansio^ house with a shop, stable, warehouses, wharfe, with
Crane, timberyard, teinteryard, or garden belonging to ye same, or as parcel of
ye same, is or shall be occupied together, yt if the same be hereafter severed
or divided, or at any time wtin.viij. years last past were severed or divided:
That the^ the farmour or farmours, occupier, or occupiers theroff shall pay such
tithes as abouesayd for such shops, stable, warehouse, wharfe with Crane,
timberyard, teinteryard, or garden aforesaid so severed or divided after ye
rate of their several rentes thereupon reserved.

Item that the said citezens and inhabitants shall pay their tithes
quarterly, that is to say, at the feast of Easter, the Nativity of S. John
Baptist, the feast of S. Michael the Archangell, and the nativity of our Lord
by even portions.

Item that every householder paying ten shillinges rent or above, shall for him
or her self be discharged of their four offeringe days: but his wife,
children, servant or others of their family, taking their rightes of the
Church at Easter, shall pay two pence for their four offeringe days yearly.

Provided always, and it is decreeed, that if any house or houses, which has been or hereafter shall be letten for x. shillings rent by year or more, be or
has at any time within eight years last passed, or hereafter shall be
divided and leassed into small parcels or members, yelding less yearly rent
then x. shillings by year: That then the owner or owners, if he or they dwell
in any part of such house, or else the principal lease or leases, if the owner
or owners do not dwell in some part of ye same, shall from henceforth pay for
his or their tithes, after such rate of rent as the same house was accustomed
to be letten for before such division or dividing into parts or members. And ye
under farmour and farmours, lease and leases, to be discharged of all tithes,
for such small parcels, parts or members rented at less yearly rents then x.
shillings by year, without fraud or couin, paying two pence a piece yearly
for their.iiij offering days.

Provided always, and it is decreede, that for such gardens as apperteyne not to
any mansion house, and which any person or persons, holds or shall hold in
his or their hands for pleasure, or to his own use, that then the person so
holding the same shall pay no tithes for the same. But if any person or
persons, which holds and shall hold any such garden, conteininge half an
Acre or more, does or shall make any yearly profit thereoff by way of sale:
that then he or they shall pay tithes for the same, after such rate of his
rent, as is herein first above specified.

Provided also that if any such gardens now being of the quantity of half an
Acre or more, be hereafter by fraud or couin divided into any less
quantity or quantities, then to pay tith, according to the rate abouesayde.

Provided always that this decree shall not extend to the houses of great men,
or noble men, or noble women, kept in their own hands, and not letten for any
rent, which in time past has paid no tithes, so long as they shall so
continue vnletten, nor to any halls of crafts or companies so long as they be
kept vnletten, so that the same halls in time past have not used to pay any
tithes.

Provided always, and it is decreed, that this present order and decree shall
not in any wise extend to bind or charge any sheddes, stables, cellers,
timber yardes, ne teynter yardes, which were never parcel of any dwelling house,
ne apperteining or belonging to any dwellinge house, ne have accustomed to pay
any tithes: but ye the said Citizens and inhabitants shall thereoff be quiet of
payment, of any tithes, as it has been used and accustomed.

Provided also, and it is decreede, that where less sum thou after the rate
of sixteen pence half penny in the ten shillinges rent, or less sum then
two shillinges and nine pence in the twenty shillinges rent, has been
accustomed to be paid for tithes, that then in such places, the said Citizens
and inhabitants shall pay but only after such rate as has been accustomed.

Item, it is also decreede, yt if any varyaunce, controversy, or striefe do or
shall hereafter arise in the said City for no payment of any tithes: or if
any variaunce or doubt arise upon the true knowledge or division of any rent or
tithes within the liberties of ye said city, or of any extent or assemblant
thereoff, or if any doubt rise upon any other thing contained within this
decree: that then upon complaint made by the party grieved to ye Mayre of ye
city of London for ye time being, the said Mayre by the advice of counsel
shall call the said parties before him, and make a final end in the same,
with costs to be rewarded at the discreation of the said Mayre and his
assistants, according to the intent and purpose of this present decree.

And if yt the said Mayre make not an end thereoff within two months after
complaynte to him made, or if any of the said parties find themselves
grieved: That then the Lord Chancellor of England for the time being upon
complainte to him made within three months then next following. shall make an
end of the same, with such costs to be rewarded as shall be thought convenient,
according to the intent and purporse of this said decree.

Provided always, that if any person or persons take any tenement for a less
rent then was accustomed to be letten for, by reason of any great ruin and
decay, burning, or such like occasions or misfortunes: That then such person or
persons, his executors or assigns shall pay tithes only after the rate of the
rent reserved in his or their lease, and none otherwise, as long as the same
lease shall endure.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, for Gabriell Cawood. 1580.


