arms THE ORDER OF MY LORD MAYOR, The Aldermen, and the SHERIFFS, For their
meetings and wearing of their Apparel thoroughout the whole year.

Printed by R. Young, Printer to the Hon: City of London. 1629.

THE TABLE.
Upon Midsomer day, for the election of the Sheriffs of London etc. 1 On
Bartholomew Even for the Fair in Smithfield. 4 On Bartholomew day for
wrestling. 5 For our Lady day in Southwarke. 6 For the swearing of the
Sheriffs upon Michaelmasse Even. 7 Upon Michaelmasse day, for the election of
my Lord Mayor. 8 For the presenting of my Lord Elect to the Lord Chancellor. 12
The morrow after Michaelmasse day, for the Sheriffs going to Westminster.
ibid. The order for Simon and Iudes day. 15 On the morrow after Simon and Iudes
day, for my Lords going to take his oath at Westminster. 17 For going to Paul's
on All Saints day, Christmasse day, Twelfth day, and Candlemasse day. 20 Upon
S. Thomas day. 21 For the Chrismasse Holidays. ibid. Upon Innocents day. ibid.
For Monday after Twelfth day. 22 For Good Friday. ibid. For Monday and Tuesday
in Easter week. 23 For Wednesday in Easter week. ibid. For Low Sunday. 24 For
Whitsunday. ibid. For Monday and Tuesday in Whitson week. ibid. For the Lord
Mayors Knighthood. 25 For going to Paul's the first Sunday of every Term.
ibid. For election of Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament. 26 For the Lords
of the Council coming down for Subsidies. 27 For the election of Master
Chamberlain and Bridge Masters, if any of them depart within the year. ibid.
For the Coronation of a King. 28 The use of my Lords Cloak. ibid. For the
first day of every Quarter Sessions. 29 For the burial of Aldermen. 30 For the
nomination of an Alderman. ib. For the Orphans Court. 31 At the election of
Governors for Christ's Hospital. ibid. Courts of Aldermen. 32
FINIS.
Upon Midsommer day, for the election of the Sheriffs of London. etc.
MY Lo: Mayor and the Aldermen, with the Sheriffs, meet at the Guildhall at
eight of the clock in the morning, apparelled in their Violet Gowns lined,
and their Cloakes of Scarlet lined, without their Horses.

And when they have been together in the Council Chamber a certain time,
concerning the Nomination of certain persons to be Elected, my Lord and the
Aldermen come out, and put on their Cloakes in the Orphans Court, and then go
down in order to the Hustings Court, and there being set, master Recorder
stands up, and makes his obeisance: first to my Lord, and then unto the
Commons, and declares unto them, wherefore they are assembled together,
showing unto them that it is for the election of one of the Sheriffs of
London, and the Sheriff of Middlesexe, for the year next ensuing, and the
confirmation of the other Sheriff, nominated by my Lord Mayor, according to
his prerogative: and also for master Chamberlain, and other Officers.

But my Lord and the Aldermen go up to my Lords Court, and there remain
until the Sheriff be named and chosen, the door shut to them.

Then M. Sheriffs, M. Chamberlain, master common Sergeant, master
Towne-Clearke, and the Counselors of the City, and other Officers, remain
still in the Hustings Court, to take and receive the Name of him that shall
seem by their judgments, freely and with one consent, to be nominated and
elected, and justly tried out, not only by voice, but also by hands, to be
sheriff for the year following.

Then the commons go to the election of master Chamberlayne, the two
Bridge-masters, the Auditors of the City, and Bridge-house accounts, and the
Surueyers of Beer and Ale, according to the accustomed manner.

That done, the Sheriffs, ma. Chamberlain, ma. Common Sergeant, M.
Town Clerk, the counselors of the City, the two Secondaries, and the Wardens
of the head companies, mast. Common Crier going before them with his Mace,
carry up the report to my Lord and the Aldermen of their said election.

Which report received, my Lord and the Aldermen come down again to the
Hustings Court, and there being set in order and placed, master Recorder
stands up as he did before, and makes rehearsal of the names of those whom
they have nominated and chosen, asking them whether it be their free election,
yea or no. And they grant yea, yea. Then mast. Recorder gives them thanks,
and so they arise and depart home.

On Bartholmew Even for the Fair in Smithfield.
THe Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at the Guildhall Chapel at two
of the clock after dinner, in their violet Gowns lined, and their horses,
without cloakes, and there hear Evening Prayer: which being done, they take
their horses and ride to Newgate, and so forth of the gate, entering into the
cloth Fair, and there make a proclamation: the proclamation being made, they
ride thorough the cloth Fair, and so return back again thorough the
Churchyard of great S. Bartholomews to Aldersgate, and so ride home again to
the Lord Mayors house.

On Bartholomew day for wrestling.
SO many Aldermen as do dine with my L. Mayor and the Sheriffs be apparrelled
in their scarlet Gowns lined, and after dinner their Horses he brought to
them where they dine and those Aldermen which dine with the sheriffs, ride with
them to my Lords house to accompany him to the wrestling. Then when the
wrestling is done, they take their horses and ride back again through the
Fair, and so in at Aldersgate, and so home again to the said Lord Mayors
house.

The next day, if it be not Sunday, for the shooting, as upon Bartholomew day:
but if it be Sunday, the monday following.

For our Lady day in Southwarke.
Embroydered cap, pearl sword, collar of Esses without whood.
My Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, ride to S. Magnus Church in those scarlet
Gowns lyned, without their Cloakes, after dinner at ii. of the clock, and
there the Aldermen meet my Lord, and after the Evening Prayer, they ride
thorough the Fair, till they come unto Saint Georges Church, and further to
Newington Bridge, or to S. Thomas of Waterings, to the stones that point out
the Liberties of the City (if it be so their pleasures) and they return back
again, unto the Bridge-house, and have a banquet there, and then over the
Bridge, and there the Aldermen take their leave of my Lo. and depart the next
way, every one to his house. And after all is done, and my Lord brought home,
my L. Majors Officers have a Supper made them by the Bridgemasters.

For the swearing of the Sheriffs upon Michaelmas even.
What day soever it falls, so many of the Aldermen as be bidden to dinner to
either of the Sheriffs come thither to Breakefast, or else to drink, at eight
of the clock in the Morning, in their violet Gowns furred, with their violet
Cloakes furred, brought with them, without horses: and if the Sheriff be an
Alderman, then they must put on their cloakes, and the sheriff likewise his
cloak, and so go to the Guild Hall between two of the gray cloakes: and if
the Sheriff be no Alderman, then to come between two of the Aldermen without
cloakes, and the sheriff his Livery gown and his hood. And after when he is
sworn, then to put on his violet Gown and Cloak, and his chain thereon: and
the Aldermen must bring him home to his place, with their cloakes, to Dinner,
and so after Dinner take their pleasure.

Upon Michaelmas day, for the election of my Lo: Mayor.
All the Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at eight of the clock in the
morning at Guildhall, in their scarlet Gowns and their cloakes furred, and
their horses: and after they have been a certain time together in the counsel
Chamber, they come forth into the Orphans Court, and put on their Cloakes, and
so go in order to the Chapel, there hearing Service and Sermon, and my Lord
with certain Aldermen, receive the Communion.

And then after the Communion ended, and have offered, return again into the
Council Chamber, and pausing a while, return to the place where the Hustings
is kept: and being set in order, master Recorder arises up, and makes his
obeisance first to my Lord, and after to the Commons, and declares unto them
that they of old custom know that the cause of their assembly and meeting
together, is for the election of the Lord Mayor for the year ensuing:
Declaring unto them diverse Graunts from the Kings Progenitors, for this their
Election from time to time. That done, my Lord and the Aldermen go up into my
Lords Court, and there tarry (the door being shut to them) till the
election be brought to them. Then stands up master Common Sergeant (the
Sheriffs standing on either side of him) and by the Sheriffs, M. Chamberlain
M. Towne-clearke, the two Secondaries, and the counselors of the city, in the
said Hustings court before the Commons. And he the said common Sergeant,
makes a short rehearsal of that M. Recorder had spoken to them before, saying:
There rests no more for him to say but to put them in remembrance, in what
order and sort they should use themselves in their election, that is, how they
must nominate and choose two, of the which two my Lord and the Aldermen must
confirm one: which two being nominated, elected and chosen, master Common
Sergeant, the Sheriffs, with the rest before named, and certain of the head
Wardens of the chief Companies go up to my Lord and the Aldermen, and there
present the names of those two which the Commons have nominated in their
election.

Then the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen proceed by scrutinie to elect one of
those two persons, which the said Commons had before nominated. Then comes
down my Lord again to the Hustings Court, and he whom they have chosen, on
his left hand, and so my Lord and the Aldermen sit down again in order: but
he who is chosen, sits next unto my Lord, on his left hand. Then stands
master Recorder up, and reads unto them the names of such persons whom they
have nominated and chosen: of which my Lord and the Aldermen have admitted one,
whose name is N. asking them whether it be their free Election, yes or no: And
the Commons answer Yea, yea. Then the Sword Bearer takes off his Tippet, and
has it for his labor, and puts on his Chain, and the Mayor new elected
stands upon the Hustings Court, and gives them thanks, etc. That being
done, the old Mayor does likewise give them thanks etc. Then they arise up, and
put off their cloakes, and my Lord Mayor has the Lord Elect riding with him to
the eldest Sheriffs to dinner.

For presenting of my Lo. Elect to the L. Chancellor (or Keeper.)
THen after dinner, my Lord Elect goes to my Lord Chancellor, if he be at
home at his place, Or Lord Keeper.
or near unto it, with five or six of the Aldermen, and master Recorder with
him, in their violet Gowns, either by foot or by water, as the dwelling place
of the Chancellor requires. The common Hunt, with the extraordinary Officers,
and those that be at liberty, attend on him.

The morrow after Michaelmasse day for the Sheriffs going to Westminster.
ALl the Aldermen must be at the two Sheriffs houses in the morning at eight
of the clock, in their violet Gowns furred, and their Horses, without Cloaks:
but my Lord, master Recorder, and the two Sheriffs must be in their scarlet
Gowns furred, and their cloaks borne to Westminster with them, and so ride to
the Guild Hall, and from thence to the Vinetree, and there taking Barge, land
at Westminster-bridge, and in the Hall put on their cloakes, and so go up to
the Exchequer: and there the two new Sheriffs be presented, and the old sworn
to their account.

Then they put off their cloaks, and taking Barge, land again at the Vinetree,
and there take horse: and my Lord Mayor rides to the eldest Sheriffs to
dinner, master Recorder and the Sheriffs riding next my Lord, the two Sheriffs
carrying two white rods in their hands, and their Hench men going after them.

For Simon and Iudes day.
THe old Mayor shall have so many of the Aldermen as dine with him come to his
place at viii. of the clock in the morning, in their violet Gowns furred, with
their violet Cloaks furred, and Horses, and the Sheriffs to fetch him to the
Hall, and there tarry in the Council Chamber until the new Mayor comes,
and the rest of the Aldermen come, with the company of either of the Lords
before them: and after they have bin together a certain space, come forth into
the Orphans Court, and put on their furred Cloaks, and go to the Hustings
Court: and there being set in order, the common Crier makes Proclamation,
commanding every man to keep silence.

Then master Towne-Clerke gives him his oath: and when he has taken his oath,
the old Lord arises, and gives the new Lord his place, the old Lord taking
the new Lords place: and then master Chamberlain delivers first to him the
Scepter, next the Keys of the common Seal, lastly, the Seal of the office of
the Maioraltie, after, master Sword Bearer gives him the Sword. Then they
arise and put off their cloakes and the old Lord rides home with the new Lord
to his place, and there leaves him, and as many of the Aldermen as dine with
him. And the old Lord, with the rest of the Aldermen, ride to his place, the
sword borne before him, and so after dinner, the Aldermen depart home at their
pleasure.

On the morrow after Simon and Iudes day, for my Lord going to take his Oath at
Westminster.
ALl the Aldermen and the Sheriffs come to my new Lord at eight of the clock
in their scarlet Gowns furred, A Velvet whood. Cap of Maintenance.
and their cloakes borne with them, and their horses, and so ride to the
Guild Hall, and the Batchellors and the Livery of my Lords Company before him.

But the old Lord rides from his own place to the Hall alone, having no
Officers to wait upon him, but the common Hunt, as a Gentleman Usher going,
and those officers that be at liberty, and the common Hunt his man, A Velvet
whood for both Mayors.
(with his own men following him) and so tarrieth at the Hall.

And after they be come all together, they take their horses, and ride to the
Vinetree, and there take Barge to Westminster bridge.

And after they be landed, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen put on their Cloaks
within the Palace, and go round about the Hall, making courtesy in the Hall,
and so go up to the Exchequer to be sworn. Then after the oath taken in the
Exchequer, they come down again, and go first to the Kings Bench, then to the
common Place, and so put off their Cloaks, and go about the Kings Tomb in
Westminster Abbey, and then take Barge again: And being landed, rides to the
Guild Hall to dinner, and all the Companies of this City with him: and at their
coming into the Hall, the new Lord Mayor, with two of the ancient Aldermen,
master Recorder and the Sheriffs, go up to my Lords Table to bid them welcome;
and likewise all the other guests there, and from thence to the Lady Maioresse
Table, and so come out to the Gentlewomens Table, and to the Judges, and so
from thence my said new L. Mayor goes into the Chamberlaines Office, where he
dineth, and the old Lord Mayor at their first coming into the Hall, goes up
to the high Table in the Hustings, and there keeps the State for that Feast.
And after the Hall is almost served of the second, then the new Lord Mayor
goes with ma^^er Recorder and those Aldermen that dine with him, to bid the
old Lord and all the guests in the Hall welcome. Then after dinner goes to
Paul's with all the Companies waiting before my Lord.

For going to Paul's or All Saints day, Christmasse day, Twelfth day, and
Candlemasse day.
A Velvet whood for both. All Saints day is the last day that the old Lord
rides with the new. Capp of Maintenance.
ALl the Aldermen and the Sheriffs come to my Lords place in their scarlet
Gowns furred, and their cloaks and Horses, and from thence ride to the
Guildhall, my Lords company and the Batchellers before him, and there hears
Evening Prayer: and when prayer is done, they ride to Paul's, and there both the
new Lo: Mayor and the old put on their cloakes, and go up to the Quite, and
there hear the sermon: which done, they go about the Church, and there put
off their cloakes where they were put on. Then they take their Horses again,
and the Aldermen bring my L. home, and then they have spice bread and
hypocraffe, and so take their leave of my Lord.

Upon S. Thomas day.
THe Lord Mayor and every Alderman is to sit in his Ward in his violet Gown
and Cloak furred. If it be not Sunday.


For the Christmasse Holydaies.
FOr Christmasse Holidays, until Twelfth day, No Cloak
if my Lord and the Aldermen go abroad to any public meeting, they are to
wear scarlet: but on the working days within the twelve days, if my Lord go
to the Guild Hall, Markets or Streets, they wear black.

Upon Innocents day.
Upon Innocents day the Aldermen dyne at my Lords, No State.
and the Sheriffs, in scarlet: but the Ladies wear black.

For Monday after Twefth day.
MY Lord and the Aldermen meet at the Guild Hall at viii. of the clock in the
morning, in their scarlet Gowns furred, and their Cloakes furred, without
Horse, to receive of their Wards their Indentures of the Wardmote Inquest, and
for the swearing of the Constables and Scauengers.

For Good Friday.
Black Sword.
MY Lord and the Aldermen meet at Paul's Cross at one of the clock to hear
the Sermon, in their pewke Gowns, and without their Chains and Tippets.

For Monday and Tuesday in Easter Week.
ALl the Aldermen and Sheriffs come unto my Lords place before eight of the
clock to breakefast, A Whood for my L.
Capp of Maintenance.
in their scarlet Gowns furred, and their Cloaks and Horses: and after
breake-fast, take their Horses, and ride to the Spittle, and there put on their
Cloakes, and so sit down in order to hear the Sermon: which done, ride
homeward in order, til they come to the Pump within Bishopsgate, and there so
many of the Aldermen as do dine with the Sheriffs, take their leave of my
Lord, and the rest go home with him.

For Wednesday in Easter Week.
LIke as before on the other two days, save that my Lord and the Aldermen must
be in their violet gowns, and suitable cloaks, but the Ladies in black.

For Low Sunday.
ALl the Aldermen meet my Lo: and the Sheriffs at Paul's School in their
scarlet Gowns furred, without their cloakes or horse, to hear the Sermon.

For Whitsunday.
FOr Whitsunday all the Aldermen meet my Lord and the sheriffs at the new
Churchyard, in their scarlet Gowns fined, without cloakes, to hear the
Sermon: which being ended, they depart.

For Monday and Tuesday in Whitson week.
^f his plea^^re be to ^oe.
ALl the Aldermen must meet my Lo: Mayor and the Sheriffs at Paul's in their
scarlet Gowns, without Cloaks, to hear the Sermon.

For the Lord Mayors Knighthood.
ALl the Aldermen meet my Lo: either at the three Cranes (if the King be at
Westminster) or at S. Mary hill (if the King be at Greenwich) by seven of the
clock in the morning, in their scarlet Gowns, and Cloaks borne with them: and
after Morning Prayer they take Barge to the Kings place, where they attend till
that ceremony be ended, and so go home with my Lord Mayor to dinner.

Forgoing to Paul's the first Sunday of every Term.
ALl the Aldermen meet my Lo: and the Sheriffs at Paul's, in their scarlet
Gowns, furted or lyned, without Cloakes or Horse, as the time of the year
requires when the Term begins.

For election of Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament.
ALl the Aldermen meet my Lo: and the Sheriffs at Guildhall at nine of the
clock, in their violet Gowns and their Cloaks, furred or lyned, as the time
of the year when they shall be chosen, requires, and sits in the Huslings
Court while the Commons choose them. The order is, that they must choose master
Recorder for one of their Knights, and one gray Cloak for the other, and two
commoners for the Burgesses: which done, they depart.

For the Lords of the Council coming down for Subsidies.
FOr the Lords and Commissioners coming down to assesse the Subsidies, my L:
Mayor and the Aldermen wear their black gowns as at other times, and the
commissioners are to be warned by master Sheriffs officers.

For the election of Master Chamberlain and Bridge Masters, if any of them
depart within the year.
MY Lord and the Aldermen sit in the Hustings court while they be chosen, in
their violet gowns without their cloaks, and do not remove until the
election be done.

For the Coronation of a King.
My Lord ^n a crim^on velvet Gown, Collar of Esses and Scepter. No cloak
ALl the Aldermen meet my Lo: and the Sheriffs at the three Cranes in the
Vinetree, at the hour of their summons, in their scarlet gowns, and cloakes
borne with them, lined or furred, according to the time of the year, where
taking Barge, they land at Westminster, and there they attend in the Checquer
Chamber (being served with wine and cakes) until they are called by the
Heralds: then they put on their cloaks.

The use of my Lords Cloak.
Beginning upon Michaelmas Even.
FRom Michaelmasse to Whitsontide, violet furred: and from Whitsontide to
Michaelmasse scarlet, lined.

The Lord Mayor and those Knights that have borne the office of Maioraltie,
ought to have their cloaks furred with gray Amiss, and those Aldermen that have
not been Mayors, are to have their cloakes furred with Calabre.

And likewise such as have been Mayors, are to have their cloakes lined with
changeable Taffata, and the rest are to have them lined with green Taffata.

For the first day of every Quarter Sessions.
THe first day of every quarter sessions in the forenoone only, my Lord and the
Sheriffs wear their violet gowns and cloakes furred; but at Midsomer quarter
sessions, the first day they wear violet gowns and scarlet cloaks, and on the
other days black.

For the burial of Aldermen.
THe Aldermen must be in their violet gowns, except such as have of their
friends black gowns. When any Alderman dies, master Sword Bearer is to have a
black gown, or xxxiii. s. iiii. d. in money: and if he gives my Lord a
black gown, master Sword Bearer is to have another, or xl. s. in money the
price thereof, and so carry the sword in black before my Lord.

Master Chamberlain is not to wear his Tippet but when my L. Mayor or the
Aldermen wear their scarlet or violet.

At the nomination of an Alderman.
FOr the nomination of an Alderman, my Lord wears his black gown and violet
cloak, and both the sheriffs black gowns.

For the Orphans Court.
MY Lord and the Aldermen meet at the Guild-hal in their violet gowns without
cloaks, but my L. Mayor must have his cloak: This court the common Crier
warns.

At the election of Governors at Christ's Hospital.
FOr the election of the Governors of the several Hospitals, the L. Mayor and
the Aldermen wear black gowns.

The four Pleaders, the Chamberlain, Town-clerke, Common Sergeant, two Judges
of the Sheriffs Court, the Secondaries, Under Chamberlain and Bridge-masters,
are to attend my Lord at his house before his going abroad upon all festival
times, and general days.

Courts of Aldermen.
COurts of Aldermen in ordinary, are kept at the Guildhall every Tuesday and
Thursday through the whole year, except holy days, the month of August,
until Bartholmew day be past, the week before Christmasse, Shronetuesday, and
the week before Easter.

FINIS.
The names of the several Companies in their order.
Mercers. Grocers. Drapers. Fishmongers. Goldsmiths. Skinners. Merchantaylors.
Haberdashers. Salters. Ironmongers. Vintners. Clothworkers. Dyers. Brewers.
Leathersellers, Pewterers. Cutlers. White-Bakers. Wax Chandlers. Tallow
Chandlers. Armourers. Girdlers. Butchers. Sadlers. Carpenters. Cordwayners.
Barbersurgeons. Painterstayners. Curriers. Masons. Plummers. Inholders.
Fownders. Poulters. Cooks. Coopers. Tylers and Bricklayers Bowyers. Fletchers.
Black Smiths. Ioyners. Weauers. Woolmen. Woodmongers. Scriueners. Fruterers.
Plaisterers. Brown Bakers. Stationers. Imbroyderers. Vpholders. Musitions.
Turners. Basketma^^^^. Glasiers.

