By the Mayor.
THE Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen of the City
of London, considering how the infection of the Plague is dispersed in diverse
and sundry places near about this City, Do for the better prevention of the
increase thereof within the said City, (so far as it shall please God to bless
man's endeauours) hereby straightly charge, and in his Majesty's name command
all manner of persons within the said City and Liberties thereof, to take
notice of, and observe these several Articles ensuing, Viz.

First, that all the several Inhabitants within this City and Liberties
thereof, do from hence forth daily cause their houses to be kept sweet, the
streets and lanes before their doors to be paued, and cleansed of all manner
of soil, dung, and noisome things whatsoever, and the channels thereof to be
kept clean, and washed, by water to be poured down, or let running into the
same.

That no Vagrants or Beggars do presume to come, or press together in
Multitudes to any Burial, or Lectures, or other public meetings, whereby to
seek or gain relief as has been lately used, but that they and every of
them upon every Burial, do repair to such places to receive the Alms,
Charity or Relief, as they shall have notice given them by the Officers of the
Parish, wherein they do reside.

That no idle Vagaband, and vagrant Persons do presume to come, wander or
remain in and about this City and Liberties thereof, either to beg relief
or otherwise. And if any of them shall be found, or taken to offend therein,
Then they and every of them to be apprehended by the Constables and Warders
within this City, and being punished, to be passed away according to the Laws
and statutes of this Realm, in that case made and provided for.

That the Feasts and Meetings at Hals, Tauernes, or other places within this
City or Liberties, used to be made by the Countrymen of any Shire, or other
place within this Realm, Wrastlings, and Fencers Prises, Shows, or the like,
which has been a cause of gathering multitudes together, be now forborne, and
not attempted to be made by any person or persons whatsoever, until the City
and the places adjacent shall be clear of the present infection (which God of
his mercy grant.)

That no Fruiterer or other Seller of Fruit, Cabbages, Roots or Herbs, do
keep or lay up in any their houses, warehouses, or other place within this
City of Liberties thereof, any Apples, Herbs, Roots, Cabbages, or other fruit
whatsoever, other than in the warehouses anciently used for such purpose, lying
in or about Thamestreet, or the places thereunto adjoining.

And for the better and more due performance of all and every the premises,
the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen do hereby straightly charge and command all
Constables, Scauengers, Beadles, and other officers within this City and
Liberties thereof, whom these may any way concern, to use all possible care
and diligence they may, for the due and careful execution and performance of
all and every the said Articles according to the true intent and meaning
thereof, and to acquaint the Lord Mayor of this City, or some other his
Majesty's Justices of Peace within the same of all and every the parties as
shall be found to offend therein, whereby they and every of them may be
punished, and dealt withal according to the quality of the offense as the Law
in such case shall require, As they and every of them will answer to the
contrary at their perils.

Guildhall London this XXII. of April. 1630. God save the King.
Printed by Robert Young, Printer to the honorable City of London, 1630.


