Orders to be used in the time of the infection of the Plague within the City
and Liberties of London, till further charitable provision may be had for
places of receite for the visited with infection.
THat every Alderman call before him his Deputy, and all the Churchwardens,
Constables, Parish Clerks, Sextons and Bedles within his Ward, and give them
straight and earnest charge from time to time to inquire what houses in every
parish and precinct of that Ward be infected. And that every Constable do
bring every day true, distinct, and plain certificate thereof in writing to
the Alderman or his Deputy. And that the Alderman Inquire what houses be
infected. Certificate daily to the Alderman. Surueyers of the Parish. Sick
dying removed.
or his Deputy from time to time send the same certificates to the Surueyers
of the Parishes, to whom it shall appertain, to the intent that they have
understanding thereby to see the orders in that behalf executed accordingly.
And here is to be noted, that every house wherein any shall be sick of the
Plague, is to be judged and used as infected, as well as where any dies
thereof. And likewise every house from whence any person infected shall be
removed to any house or place, shall be judged infected, if any eftsoons
fall sick in the same house.

That in every house infected, the Master, Mistress, or governor, and the
House shut xxviii. days.
whole family and residents therein at the time of such infection, shall
remain continually without departing out of the same, and with the doors and
windows of the hall, shop, or other nether part of the house shut, by the
space of xxviii. days from the death of the party dying of infection, and
until the party sick, and not dying thereof, shall be fully recovered, or
their sore fully healed: and such person recovering, or healed, to tarry shut
up xx. days from such recovery, or full healing. And that during all that
time, no clothes, linen, Sick xx. days after recovery. Provision.
or other like thing, be hanged out, or over into the street.

And that none so to be shut up, shall go abroad out of the said house, during
the time above appointed, but one certain person (and not sundry at sundry
times) to be appointed by the Surueyers of that Parish, for provision of
necessaries for the said family. Which person so to be appointed, shall during
all the time of his, or her being abroad out of such house carry in their hand
openly, upright in the plainest manner to be seen, one red wand of the length
of iii. foot at the least, Red wand.
to be delivered to them by the Surueyers at the charge of the Parish, without
carrying it closely, or covering any part of it with their cloak or garment, or
otherwise: and in their going in the streets and lanes shall always keep the
way close by the channel side, shunning as much as may be, the meeting and
usual way of other people. And shall not in any Way by the Channel. Assembly.
Cage.
wise come into any throng or press of public assembly, on pain of
imprisonment by the space of viii. days without bail or maineprise, in some
of the Cages next to the house so infected.

Provided always, that it shall be free to the owner of any house so infected, and
his said family, residents, or any of them Removing.
at any time within the said xxviii. days, to remove and depart out of this
City, and the Liberties thereof, into any other his, or her house, or abiding
in the Country, or to any house in the City, without being shut up in such
house infected, Returning.
so that every such person so removing, or departing, do abstain from
returning into the said City, or the Liberties thereof, and from going abroad
out of such other house in the City, during the said xxviii. days, and on pain
that every person so returning, or going abroad within the said xxviii. days,
shall suffer imprisonment, as is aforesaid.

That the Churchwardens and Constable in every precinct, provide, and have in
readiness, one, or more sober discreet Prouiders. Women.
women, as the case shall require to be prouiders and deliuerers of necessaries
for the infected houses, and to attend the persons sick and infected, at the
charge of such householders of such houses, if they be able: and if not, then
at the charge Charge. Householders or Parish. Red wands.
of the Parish. And that such women once entering into charge of such provision
and attendance, shall carry red wands, go by the channel side, and forbear
assemblies, as is aforesaid.

That such as have Wells or Pumpes, shall cause every morning before vi. of
the clock, and every evening after Wells. Pumpes.
viii. of the clock, the same to be drawn, and x. buckets of water at the
least to be powered to run down the Channel. And that every morning and
evening at the said hours the streets and Channels be made clean, and swept by
some one Streets.
of every house against the chanel, but so as the water be not in any wise
swept out of the chanel to the sides of the streets nor the stones wet but
within the chanel, excepted only sprinkling for laying of the dust at the
sweeping. And that the mud and filth of the streets be at the said hours
taked up, and swept together in heaps out* of the channel, and not at any
other time of the day. And that it be so drawn up from the channel, that the
water powered down the channels may not carry away, or be mingled with such
filth.

That the streets be made clean by the Scauenger and Raker every day, except
Sunday. Scauenger. Alderman visit Wards.


That the Alderman himself, or his Deputy, do often visit the Ward to view
whether the said orders be duly observed, specially touching cleanenesse of
the streets.

That over the door of every house infected, in a place notorious and plain
for them that pass by to see it, the Clark Lord have mercy upon (...).
or Sexton of that Parish cause to be set one Paper printed with these words,
Lord have mercy upon us, in such large form as shall be appointed. And that
the Constable of the precinct, and Bedle of the Ward, shall daily view and see
that the said Paper remain there during the said term of xxviii. days
without taking away, blotting or defacing. And if any be taken away, blotted or
defaced, that a new be set in the place thereof. And if the same be taken away,
blotted, or defaced, with the consent of the inhabitant of that house, that
then a new such Paper shall be set in place thereof, and the shutting in of
such house with the inhabitants, shall continue xxviii. days more from such
taking away, blotting, or defacing. And whosoever shall take away such Paper,
shall suffer such imprisonment as is aforesaid.

That in or for every Parish there shall be appointed two sober ancient women,
to be sworn to be viewers of the bodies 2. Viewers of bodies dead. 2. Viewers
of sick.
of such as shall die in time of infection, and two other to be viewers of such
as shall be sick, and suspected of infection, which women shall immediately
upon such their viewes, by virtue of their oath, make true report to the
Constable of that precinct, where such person shall die, or be infected, to the
intent that true notice may be given both to the Alderman or his Deputy, and
to the Clarke of the Parish, and from him to the Clarke of the Parish Clerks,
that true certificate may be made as has been used. And that every of the said
women, Constable, or Clarke, failing in the premises, shall suffer
imprisonment as is aforesaid. And every woman so sworn, and for any
corruption, or other respect falsely reporting, shall stand upon the Pillorie,
and bear corporal pain by the judgment of the Lord Mayor Pillorie. Red
wands.
and Court of Aldermen. They at their going abroad to bear red Wands, go
near the Channel, and shun assemblies, as before.

That every woman, or other appointed to any service for the infected, and
refusing, or failing to do that service, shall Pension. Hospital.
not have any pension out of the Hospital or Parish.

That the Lord Mayor cause public Proclamation to be made, that no person from
the sixth day after such Proclamation, Dogs, etc.
shall keep any Dog, or Bitch, but such as they will keep within their own
doors, without suffering them to go loose in the streets not led in slip or
string, nor within their own doors making howling or other annoyance to their
neighbors. And that the common Huntsman shall have special charge to kill
every such Dog or Bitch, as shall be found loose in any street or lane of
this City or the Suburbs thereof. And for the killing of every such Dog or
Bitch, and burying the same four foot deep at the least in the fields, shall
have two pence allowed by the hands of the Chamberlayne of the City. And if he
be remiss and negligent, and wittingly spare and show favor in not killing
any such Dog or Bitch, he shall lose his place and service, and suffer
imprisonment as is aforesaid. And if any Dog or Bitch kept within doors shall
with howling or noise be noyous to any neighbor, the Alderman of the Ward upon
complaint shall commit the offender to ward, till order be taken upon his
submission by the Alderman, and such Dog or Bitch killed.

That no Corpse dying of infection shall be buried or remain in any Church in
time of common Prayer, Sermon, or Corpse dying of infection. Church, Burial
Lecture. And that no children be suffered at time of burial of any Corpse in
any Church, Churchyard, or burying place, to come near the Corpse, Coffin or
Grave. And that all the Graves shall be at the least six foot deep. And that
at the burial dinners, or attendance on the Corpse, or other solemnity of any
dying of infection, there shall be no assembly of people in the house where
such person shall die, within the time of xxviii. days after such death.

That during the said term of xxviii. days: no person be admitted to come
into any such house infected, other then the Resort to houses infected.
persons of the same family, residing therein at the time of the infection, or
such as for necessary relief of the same family shall be appointed by the
Surueyers, on pain that the house shall remain shut in, and the same with the
family be in all things used as infected, for other xxviii. days, from the
time of suffering any other so to come into the same.

That diligent care be had for amending of the pauements where any holes be
wherein any water or filth may stand Pauements.
to increase corruption and infection.

That whosoever shall go abroad with a sore running, shall be imprisoned in the
Cage for xxviii. days, and further grievously Go abroad with sore.
punished by corporal pain, by the judgment of the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen.

That no dunghils out of stables, brewhouses, or other places be suffered to be
made in the street, or other open place Dunghils.
of this City or the Suburbs thereof, on pain of imprisonment of the
offenders, till the same at the offenders charge be removed, and the offenders
bound to the Chamberlain of this City, never to commit the like offense
again.

That restraint be made of Enterludes or Plays, assemblies of Fencers, or
other profane spectacles, and of going Enterludes, Plays, etc.
with Drums, Proclamations, or calling of people to the same within this
City and liberties thereof. And humble suit be made to the most Honorable
Counsel, that the like restraint be in places of other Counties adjoining to
the said City.

That in every Parish there be appointed two substantial and discreet
Citizens, or more as need shall require, to be Surueyer, Clerks, Sextons,
Beadles sworn.
chosen monthly by the Alderman of the Ward, to be Surueyers, which Surueyers
shall daily and diligently see the orders to be observed, as is above said, and
the Surueyers, Clerks, Sextons, and Bedles, shall be sworn before the
Alderman to do their diligence faithfully therein. And if any such person so
appointed, shall refuse or fail to take his oath, or being sworn, shall
neglect his duty therein, that forthwith the Alderman commit such person to
Ward, there to remain, until he be discharged from thence by the Court of the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

That order be taken and treaty had with the College of Phisicions, that some
certain and convenient number of Phisisians.
Phisicions and Surgeons be appointed and notified to attend for the counsel
and cure of persons infected, and none to deal with the infected but those:
and the same to deal with no other patients but the infected, during the time
of infection. And for their counsel and travel to be recompensed by and for
the persons of hability at their own charge: and for the poor at the charge
of the Parish.

That whosoever shall by any subtilty or invention defraud the good intent of
any of these orders, shall receive double Defraud Order.
as much punishment as he that openly or plainly offends.

That the householders of houses infected, be charged to air the houses and
things therein within the said xxviii. Ayring houses, clothes.
days, and that no clothes or other things about the persons infected be given
or sold, but either destroyed, or well and sufficiently purified. On pain of
punishment by discretion of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

God save the King.
Printed at London by Isaac Iaggard, Printer to the Honorable City of London,
1625.


