Instructions for the Ministers, and Churchwardens, of the several Parishes,
of the City of LONDON.
1 THat his Majesty's Declaration published Ao Dni. 1628. before the Articles
of Religion, for settling all questions in difference, be strictly observed. 2
That special care be had concerning Lecturers in every Parish, for whom these
directions ensuing are to be followed. 1 First, that in all Parishes, the
afternoones Sermons, be turned into Catechizing by question and answer, where,
and whenever there is no great cause apparent, to break this ancient, and
profitable order. 2 That every Lecturer do read Divine Service, according to
the Liturgy, Printed by authority, in his surplice, and hood, before the
Lecture. 3 That where any Lecture is set up in a Market Town, the same be read
by a Company of grave, and Orthodoxe Divines, near adjoining, in the same
Diocese, and that they preach in Gowns, and not in Cloakes, as many use to
do. 4 That if a Corporation do maintain a single Lecturer, he be not
suffered to preach, till he profess his willingness to take upon him, a
living with cure of Souls, within that Incorporation; and that he do actually
take such Benefice, or Cure, so soon as it shall be fairly procured for him.
3 That the Minister, and Churchwardens, in every Parish, or one of them, do
by writing, under his, or their own hands, certify unto the Archdeacon of
London, or his Official, at or before the 28. of this present January, (and
afterward at, or before every Visitation) the Christian, and Sire-names of
every Lecturer, in their Parishes, and the place where he preaches (whether
exempt, or not exempt) together with his quality, and degree. 4 That they do
in like manner, certify the names of such Men, as being not qualified by Law,
do keep Chaplens in their Houses. 5 That they do further certify the names
of all such as absent themselves from, or are negligent in coming to Divine
Service, as well prayers, as Catechizings and Sermons. 6 That the Ministers and
Churchwardens of every Parish successively, do keep a several copy of these
Instructions, by them, whereby they may be the better informed of their duty,
and that the said coppies be showed at every Visitation, when they shall
present all such persons as have disobeyed these Instructions, that according
to his Majesty's pleasure, such as do conform, may be encouraged, and such as
are refractorie, may be punished.
Tho: Pask^ Archd: LONDON.


