THE LAWS OF THE MARKET.

Wolfe's device(?)

Imprinted by John Wolf, Printer to the honorable City of London. 1595.

woodcut illustrated border I W



The Laws of the Market.
FIrst, in all the Markets of this City, no victual shall be sold, but by
the price set by the Mayor of this City.

2 No man shall forestall any victual coming to the Market, as for to buy in
any Inn or other privy place, or yet coming to the Market, whether it be
found in the hands of the buyer or of the seller, under pain of forfaiture of
the same, and no Inholder, shall suffer nothing to be sold in his house, upon
pain of forfaiture of xl. s.

3 No man shall regrate any victual which is in the market, or buy any
victual to ingrate in the market, so that the commons can or may have any part
of such victual as in especial such as be known for huxters, or other
people, occupying their living by such victual as they would so ingrosse,
under pain of forfayture of such victual so regrated: Provided always that
any steward for any noble feast may buy or ingrate such victual as is
convenient for the same feast.

4 No butter shall be sold but according to the weight for the time of the year
allowed.

5 No Poulters shall deceiueably occupy the Market to sell any stale victual
or such as be Poulters of this City, for to stand in strange clothing so to
do, under pain of xl. s. and the forfayture of such victual. xl. s.

6 No Huxters shall stand or sit in the Market, but in the lower place and the
ends of the Market to the intent they may be perfectly known and the stranger
market people have the pre-eminence of the Market, under pain of iij. s. iiij.
d. if the Huxters disobey the same.

7 No unwholesome or stale victual shall be sold under pain of xl. s. and
forfayture of the same victual.

The Statutes of the Streets of this City, against Noysances.
FIrst, no man shall sweep the filth of the streate into the Canell of the
City in the time of any rain or at any other time under pain of vj. s.
viij. d.

2 No man shall cast, or lay in the Streets, dogs, cattes, or other carreine,
or any noisome thing contagious of air. Nor no Inholder shall lay out dunge
out of his house but if the cart be ready to carry the same away incontinently,
under pain of xl. s.

3 No Brewer shall cast wilfully, Dreggs, or dross of Ale or Beer into the
Canell, under pain of ij. s.

4 No man shall encomber the Streets with Timber, Stones, Carts, or such
like, under pain of forfayture of the same thing, that so encombreth the
streets which is twenty shillinges fine, if he amoue it not at the warninge
of the Sergeant of the Market.

5 Every buylder of houses ought to come to the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Chamberlayne, for a special license for hourde of, by him to be made in the
high Street, and no Builder to encomber the Streets with any manner of
thing, taking down for the preparinge of his new buildinge, under pain of
forty shillings, except he make a hourd of xl. s.

6 No man shall set any Carts in the streets by night time, under the pain
of xij. d. and recompense to such persons as shall be hurt thereby if any such
be, xij. d.

7 No Budge-man shall lead but two horses, and he shall not let them go
vnled, under pain of ij. s.

8 No man shall ride or drive his carre, or carte a trotte, in the street, but
patiently, under pain of ij. s.

9 No man shall gallope his horse in the street under pain of ij. s.

10 No man shall shoot in the street, for wager or otherwise, under like
pain of ij. s.

11 No man shall bowl, or cast any stone in the street for wager or gain or
such like, under pain of ij. s.

12 No man shall digg any hole in the street for any matter, except he stop it
up again, under pain of ij. s. and recompense to any person hurt thereby ij.
s.

13 No man shall bury any dunge, or goung, within the liberties of this City
under pain of xl. s.

14 No Goungfermour shall carry any Ordure till after ix. of the clock in the
night, under pain of thirtene shillings, four pence.

15 No Goungfermer shall spill any Ordure in the street, under pain of xiij.
s. iiij. d.

16 No man shall bait Bull, Bear, or Horse in the open street, under pain of
xx. s.

17 No man shall have any Kine, Goats, Hogs, Pigs, Hens, Cocks, Capons, or
Duckes, in the open street, under pain of forfayture of the same.

18 No man shall mainetayne any biting Curres, or mad Dogs, in the streets,
under pain of ij. s. and recompense to every party hurt therewith ij. s.

19 No Carts that shall be shodde with Spignayle, that shall come upon the
streets of this City, under pain of iij. s. iiij. d.

20 No Carts using daily carryage within the City, nor Car shall have
wheels shod with any Iron, but bare under pain of vj. s.

21 No man shall burn any straw, Rishes, or other thing, Linen, or woollen, in
the Streets, by night or by day, under pain of iij. s. iiij. d.

22 No man shall blow any horn in the night, within this City, or Whistle
after the hour of nine of the clock in the night, under pain of imprisonment.

23 No man shall use to go with visoures, or disguised by night, under like
pain of imprisonment.

24 Made that Night-walkers and Euisdroppers, like punishment.

25 No Hammar man, as a Smith a Pewterer, a Founder, and all Artificers, making
great sound, shall not work after the hour of nine in the night, nor before
the hour of four in the Morninge, under pain of iij. s. iiij. d.

26 No man shall cast into the Diches of this City, or the Sewers of this
City, without the walls, or into the Walls, Grates, or Gullyttes of this
City, any manner of carryn, stinking flesh, rotten fish, or any rubbyshe,
doung, sand, gravel, weeds, stones, or any other thing, to stop the
course of the same, under pain of cleansing of, at his own cost and charge,
under pain of imprisonment.

27 No man shall make any wided rawtes in any of the town Dyches, or the town
gullits, under pain of xx. s.

28 No man shall build nigh the Walls of this city, without license of the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Chamberlain, under pain of throwing down the same,
and no license may be granted except that the Chamberlain freely at al times
convenient and needeful for ingresse and entree, out-goynge, and clear
recourse.

29 No man shall go in the streets by night or by day, with bow bent, or
arrows under his girdle, nor with swoorde vnscabberd, under pain of
imprisonmente, or with hand-gunne, having therewith powder and match: except
it be in an usual May Game, or sight.

30 No man shall after the hour of nine at the Night, keep any rule whereby
any such sudden outcry be made in the still of the Night, as making any
affray, or beating his Wife, or Servant, or singing, or reuyling in his house,
to the disturbaunce of his neighbors, under pain of iij. s. iiij. d.

31 No man shall make any affray upon any Officer, which with good demeaner
does his message, by commandment of my L. Mayor, or any Alderman, or M.
Sheriffs, or M. Chamberlain, or misbehaue him self in any railing upon any
Judge of this City, or their Officers, which by commandment be sent to bring
any breaker of this law and custom to Ward, or to distress, or such like upon
pain of Imprisonment of forty days, and forfayture of the double penalty, for
the offenses asseasing railing upon any Alderman, or Mayor in his office, is
Judgment of the Pillory, railing upon Master Chamberlayne in his Office,
forty days imprisonment, beating, threatening, and railing of an officer is
imprisonment, after as the trespass is.

32 Memorandum that every offense found in this City, it is accustomed that
the Officer, a Freeman, findinge it, which is called primus Inuentor, has
half the penalty by the grace of the Court.

33 Also every Freeman may find any offense, but he has no power to bring the
Party before any Judge of this City, without an officer, except the party
will come to his aunsweare by freewill.

34 No man has power to arrest, attach, or make distres of any goods
forfitable, or offenses, except the constable or Sergeant of the Mase.

35 No Butcher or his servant shall not use to drive any Ox or Oxen, a trotte
in the streets, but peaceably and if an Ox happen to be let go, when he is
prepared to slaughter the Butcher shall forfayte ij. s. besides recompense, if
any person be hurt thereby.

36 No Butcher shall scauld Hogs but in the common scaulding house, upon pain
of vj. s. viij. d.

37 No Butcher shall sell any mesell Hog, or unwholesome flesh under pain of
x. li.

38 No Butcher shall sell any old stale victual: that is to say, above the
slaughter of three days in the Winter and two in the Summer, under pain of x.
li.

39 None unreasonable Victual for all manner of victuals.

40 No Victualer of this City, shall give any rude or vnsettinge language, or
make any clamor upon any man or woman in the open market, for cheapinge of
victual under pain of iij. s. iiij. d.

41 No Butcher shall cast the inwardes of beasts into the streets, cleaues of
beasts feet, bones, horns of Sheep or other such like, under pain of ij. s.

42 The Poding cart of the shambles shall not go before the hour of nine in
the night, or after the hour of five in the morninge, under the pain of vj.
s. viij. d.

43 No man shall cast any Urine boles, or ordure boles, into the streets, by
day or night, before the hour of nine in the night: And also he shall not cast
it out, but bring it down, and lay it in the Canell, under the pain of iij.
s. iiij. d. And if he do cast it upon any persons head, the party to have a
lawful recompense, if he have hurt thereby

44 No man shall hurt, cut, or destroy any Pipes, Sesperalles, or wind Ventes
pertayninge to the Condite, under pain of imprisonment and making
satisfaction, though he does it out of the City, if he may be taken within
the City.

45 No man within this City may make any Quill, and break any Pipe of the
Condite, coming through his house, or nigh his ground, under pain of the
Pillory, or take any water privily unto his house.

46 Casting any corrupt thing, appoysoning the water, is Lourgulary and felony.

47 Whosoever destroy or perrish any Cocks of the Condite, must have
imprisonment, and make satisfaction.

Old Laws and Customs of this City.
No man shall set up Shop, or occupy as a Freeman before he be sworn in the
Chamber of London, and admitted by the Chamberlain, under pain of.

48 No man shall set over his apprentise to any other person, but by license of
M. Chamberlayne, and there to be set over under pain.

49 No man which is a Foreign, shall not buy nor sell within the Liberties of
this City, with another Foreign, under pain of forfayture of the goods so
foreign bought and sold.

50 No Freeman shall be disobedient for to come at M. Chamberlaynes
commandment, to any summons to him given by any Officer of the Chamber,
under pain of imprisonment.

51 M. Chamberlain has power to send a Freeman to Ward, so that he
incontinently after send to the Lord Mayor, the cause why that he is punished,
so that the Lord Mayor release him not but by the Chamberlaines assent, and if
he be a great Commoner, and disobaying to the Chamberlayne, M. Chamberlayne may
refer it to a Court of Aldermen.

M. Chamberlayne has authority for to send or command any Apprentise to the
Counter for their offenses, and if their offenses be great as in defyling their
masters houses by vicious living, or offendinge his master by theft, or
disslaunder, or such like, then to command him to Newgate.

Apprentise enrolled, his master pays ij. s. vj. d.

Apprentice set over, he that receives ij. s.

Apprentice made free, he pays iiij. s.

Apprentise never enrolled, and made free, his master pays xiij. s. ij. d.

A man made free by his Fathers Copy, pays xviij. d.

A Proclamation made in the time of the Mayrolty of Sir Michell Dormer knight.

An Act of Common Council made in the Even of Saint Michaell, Anno Regis
Henrici Octaui, xxxi. that no person should lay any wares in the street, or
beyond the edge of their stall, upon pain of forfayture the first time vj. s.
viij. d. the second time xiij. s. iiij. d. and the third time the ware so laid.

FINIS.

