Wolstan Dixey Mayor.
The Abridgement of an Act of Common counsel passed at the Guildehal in London
the second day of July 1586. in the xxviij. year of the reign of our
sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God Queen of England France and
Ireland, defender of the faith etc. And there at the same time established for
a law, for the better service of her Majesty in her carriage belonging to her
highness household, and for the better government of Carts, Carters, Carres
and Carre men, and the government thereof by the authority of the same Act
committed to the Governors of Christ's Hospital.

The same Act is to take place from the xv. day of the said month of July.

THe government of Carts, Carters, Carres and Carremen, committed to the
Governors of Christ's hospital.

2 The Queens Majesty's Purueyors are to be associate with the said
Governors in all matters concerning the Queens service.

3 No man dwelling within the City of London or the liberties thereof, shall
have the use of a long Carte, Carre, or any manner of Carte, except he be
allowed and marked by the same Governors, upon pain of forfeyture of xv.
shillings for every time he shall occupy any such long Carte.

4 All Carts and Carres which shall be allowed and marked by the Governors,
shall be of the standarde or skantling hereafter following, viz. Every long
Carte shall contain in length between the Tugge hole and the Ear breadth
behind xiiij. foot of assise, and in breadth between the Raues in the body
of the Carte iiij. foot of assise, and every Carre shall contain in length
between the Tugge hole and the Ear breadth xij. foot and iiij. inches, and
in breadth between the Raues in the body of the Carre iij. foot and vij.
inches of assise.

5 No Carters shall take up carriage in London, but such as dwell within the
City and liberties, except it be at Sturbridge fair time, Midsommer fair
time, and S. James fair time, and except the Carters and Cariers of such
Cities, Towns and places, as do weekly bring carriage to London, the Cariers
of which Cities, Towns and places are by this Act lycensed to take up carriage
to lade themselves back again.

6 That none shall take more carriage than he is able to carry in his Carte at
one journey, upon pain of forfeiture of xx. shillinges for every such offense.

7 That none shall ingrosse carriage and send it out of London to meet with
other Cariers by the way to take it at their hands. And that no Carreman shall
bring carriage to such Cariers lodging, upon pain to forfeit for the first
offense xx. shillings, for the second xl. shillings, and for the third offense
to be secluded from using a Carte or Carre in or about London. It is provided
in this Artide that a Carren: an may carry to any Carters iodging, resorting
within a mile of London, as much carriage as the said Carter brought to London,
or as much as the said Carter or Carier can carry away in that Journey.

8 All Carts in London and all Carters resorting to London, shall serve the
Queen four turns in the year in her carriage being thereto appointed, upon
pain of forfeyture of xx. shillings for every time refusing or not serving
being appointed or warned.

9 That no Ox Waines shall be charged with carriage of her Majesty's stuff, or
other carriage whatsoever.

10 There shall be a book kept of all the names of them that dwell in London
and the Liberties that are charged with long Carts, by which book the said
Governors and the Yeoman Purueyor shall limit and apportion the turns and
courses of service of the long Carts in some certain order, which order
being known, every one may prepare himself for to go his turn against the
course shall come to him by the said order.

11 No man shall keep a great Woodwharfe, except he keep a Long Carte and
serviceable Horses and furniture thereto belonging* upon pain of forfeyture of
all the wood which shall be taken up upon his Wharfe, or xx. shillings for
every load, and that no Woodmonger shall hyre any other man's Carte or Carre
than his own for carriage of his wood.

12 Every two petty Wharfes to keep between them a long Carte.

13 Every Brickeman, Sandeman, Loameman, and every owner of the Placarde
Carts shall serve the Queen four times in the year with a Long Carte, upon
pain of forfeiture of xx. shillings for every default.

14 He that has two long Carts shall serve the Queen his double turn upon
the like penalty.

15 None shall lay down his long Cart, except he give three months warning in
writing to the Governors at a Court by them holden, upon pain of forfeyture
of xl* shillings.

16 The Governors and Purueyors shall elect the Officers called the Cart
takers.

17 The Carte takers shall from time to time report to the Governors who
served his turn last, that it may appear to the Governors where the course
of service lies, and how it is kept upon pain of forfeyture of vi.
shillinges viij. pence by the said Carte takers.

18 The Carters shall bring back their empty Caskes to the place where they
shall be appointed, and shall not keep the caske in their custody above one
night, upon pain of forfeyture of iiij. shilllings for every of the Caske.

19 That all Waynes, Carts and Carres shall pay quarteridge quarterly, viz.
every quarter xij. pence.

20 That all Carremen which have the use of a Carre or Carres shall serve one
turn with a long Carte, upon pain of forfeyture of xx. shillings.

21 That no Carremen shall put above one Horse in his Carte at one time, upon
pain to forfeite ij. shillings vj. pence for every offense.

22 That the Carremen in London shall supply all kind of carriage for her
Majesty's service, whilst she is resident at White Hall, S. James, or
Sommerset house, or elsewhere in the City or Suburbs.

23 The Country Carts to be warned to serve when the Carts of London and
such as resort to London to serve have served their four several turns.

24 Every long Cart shall have a Carre room.

25 He that keeps two long Carts shall have two Carre rooms.

26 The Raker of every Ward shall have a Carre room.

27 The Chamber of London shall have two Carre rooms.

28 That no Wharfe keeper shall deny or disturb any Carreman to come upon
their Wharfe, Hyue or Docke for carriage, paying such duty as is due to the
place, upon pain of forfeyture of vi. shillings viij. pence.

29 That no Carreman shall set over or lend his Carre without license of the
Governors, upon pain of forfeiture of vj. shillings viij. pence.

30 That the brazen rooms shall not be set over without license upon the like
penalty.

31 That no Carremans servant go with a Carre before he be allowed and
presented to the Governors, upon pain of forfeiture of ij. shillings vj.
pence for every day that he shall go with the Carre.

32 That no Carreman shall set over his servant without license, upon pain of
forfeiture of vj. shillings viij. pence for every such offense.

33 That all Forrainers to whom Carre rooms be admitted, shall go with their
Carres in their own persons, except they be lame, or do service to the Queen
with a long Cart, upon pain of forfeyture for the first offense v. shillinges,
for the second offense x. shillings, and for the third to be secluded from the
use of a Carre.

34 That no Cart or Carre shall stand in the street by night, upon pain of
forfeiture for every such offense xij. pence.

35 There shall not stand in the street above the number of Carres hereafter
mentioned, viz. At or near the little Conduite in Cheap at all times four
Carres. At or near Friday street end in Cheap when market is done three
Carres. At or near Bred street end when market is done three Carres. At or
near the great Conduite in Cheapeside when market is done ten Carres, and
in the market time at or near that place four Carres. At the Stocks near
Cheapeside at all times two Cars. On the west side the Conduit in Corn hill
next to Cheapeside when the Exchange is done three Carres. On the other side
the same Conduit toward Burchen Lane end when the exchange is done four
Carres. At Burchen Lane end three Carres. At or near Leaden Hall in the
market time six Carres, and when market is done twelve Carres. At Lymestreete
end at all times three Carres. At the pumpe at Aldegate at all times two
Carres. In Fanchurch street near Fanchurch at all times three Carres. At
Grace Church when market is done four Carres. Between the Conduit at Grace
Church and Eastcheape at all times two Carres. At the back gate at Leaden Hall
at all times three Carres. At or near the Cardinal Hat without Newgate three
Carres. In Newgate market when market is done three Carres, upon pain to
forfeit for the first offense xij. pence, and for every other offense
Imprisonment at the pleasure of the Lord Mayor for the time being.

36 That no Carreman shall run his Horse a trotte in the street, upon pain of
forfeyture of two shillings for every such offense.

37 That every Carreman shall lead his horse by the head, upon pain to
forfeite xij. pence or his Horse collor.

38 That no Carts or Carres that are occupied in this City, shall be shodde
with iron, upon pain of forfeiture of vj. shillings viij. pence by the Owner
for every day such a Cart is so occupied.

39 That no Cart or Carre shall pipe or creake in the street for want of
greasing, upon pain of forfeiture of ij. shillings for every day it is hard
so creaking.

40 That al Carmen resort to the Governors upon lawful summons, upon pain of
forfeyture for the first offense xij. pence, and for the second ij. shillings,
without a reasonable let or excuse.

41 A general survey of all Carts, Carters and Carremen, and a general seal
of all Carts and Carres shall be had once a year, at which time shall be
present one of her Majesty's purueyors.

42 As often as any contention or quarrel shall arise by reason of the meeting
and contrary course of Carts, Drayes or Cars, that such Carter, Carreman or
Drayman as shall be found wilful and will not do his endeavor to clear the
passage, shall be taken by the next Constable to the place next adjoining, and
shall be brought and committed to one of the Counters, and there shall remain
until the Lord Mayor for the time being shall see good to discharge him. And
if such offense be given and committed by any Carreman allowed by the said
Governors, that he shall not only receive imprisonment for such his disorder,
but shall have his Carre taken up, and not for to use it for the space of one
month then next following.

43 That the President, Treasurer, and any two Governors, or the Treasurer and
any three Governors may execute any ordinance in this book, except such
ordinances which do specially concern the Queens service, to which one of
the Purueyors is to be present.

44 That all fines, penalties and profits arising out of this government,
shall go to the use of the Children of Christ's Hospital.

45 Remedy by the way of distress for the leuying of the pains, forfeitures
and duties rising out of this government.

46 The distress to be redeemed within ten days, or else to be sold.

God save Queen Elizabeth.

