Reasons tendered by the Free Butchers of London, against the Bill in
Parliament, to restrain Butchers from Grazing of Cattle.
FIrst, the cause of this Bill put in against Butchers for grazing and selling
of Oxen and Sheep alive, is, because that those men that frame their Bill
against us, know that Butchers of London can afford a better penyworth then
they can: The reason thereof is, that there is no Butcher of London, but does
serve seven years Apprentice (at the least) before he is made Free, and in
that time he may learn to know what a lean Ox is worth, and what he may
be worth when he is fat: But on the other side, these men (for the most part)
were never Apprentice at all, to know how to buy and sell: and therefore,
although we pay as much for ground as they do, yet we will afford a better
peniworth then they either will or can: and in that we hope we are profitable
to the Commonwealth.

2. We say, that we are to provide and keep in store for the City: For, as
it is the care of the Lord Mayor and other the Magistrates of the City of
London, in the time of plenty to buy Corn in the Markets, and to lay it up in
store, for to supply the Markets when the Country does fail: So, it is our
care (being free Butchers of London) to buy Oxen and Sheep when they are
plentiful, and to keep them in our grounds near London, for the provision of
the City, till the Country cannot afford such Cattle sufficient to serve
such an honorable City as London is, because their drift is long, and the
ways very foul, which is the cause that though they are fat when they come
out of the Country, yet they are lean before they come to London: When on the
contrary, our Cattle are in our grounds nere London, and may be brought home in
half a day, so that in driving they are never the worse. This we will prove,
and therefore they cannot afford so good as we can.

3. It will be proved that in any Market of London, if Butchers do bring Cattle
to sell, they do sell them sooner, and as good cheap as any man whatsoever
that renteth his ground.

4. We crave to have the liberty that all the Kings subjects have, viz. All men
of what degree, estate or calling whatsoever, be they rich or poor, from the
highest to the lowest, they may graze Cattle if they will, and sell them alive:
Or any Tradesman in London, or in the Country, if he be able to hyre Land, or
if he have land of his own, it is lawful for him to graze, and afterward to
sell the Cattle he has grazed alive: therefore we trust, that which is allowed
every one of his Majesty's subjects, is not prohibited for us to do: so that
we hope we may have liberty to feed Oxen and Sheep, and all other Cattle, and
sell them alive if we need (keeping them so long as the Statute allows all
men) otherwise, we should seem Aliens and strangers (being barred of that
liberty which is limited to every one) and not his Majesty's subjects.

5. We crave (not on the behalf of all Butchers whatsoever, for there are many
that have not served half their time, and some that were never Apprentice, that
use the trade of a Butcher, these we omit: but on the behalf of the Free
Butchers of London, that are a Company of London, and bear the charge of a
Company of London) that the benefit of grazing may not be taken from us, which
anciently we have used, and without which, our trade is (as it were) no trade
at all, and not worthy seven years service.

6. Those that have put in their Bill against Butchers, have not done it for
the good of the Commonwealth, but for their own private gain. For, if they
can enact an Act of Parliament against Butchers for selling of Sheep and Oxen
alive, then the London Butchers must many Market days in a year, give them
that prosecute to have such an Act, twenty shillings in one Ox, and eighteen
pence or two shillings in one Sheep, more in one Market day, then they were
worth the Market day before. The cheifest cause that they would have this Act,
is, that thereby they might have their wills to inhaunce their prizes at their
own wills and pleasures (not caring for the hinderance of others:) For when the
Market is scanty of Cattle, then we have them in our grounds to serve our
turn, and to furnish the Markets for others of the poor Inhabitants of so
great a City: for then (unless we our selves would be loosers) we must be
forced to sell Beef at three pence or four dearer in a stone, and every joint
of Mutton three pence or four pence deerer in one market day then at other
times: but having in such times of scarsitie Cattle grazing in our own grounds
sufficient to serve the Market, we thereby hold down their excessive prizes,
which is the only cause they have preferred this Bill against us free Butchers
of London, for selling of Cattle alive.

7 When as there happen any deep snowes, foul weather, or high waters, that
the Grasiers cannot bring their Cattle to the City: as also in the time of the
visitation of the plague, the Butchers of London out of their own provision
and store, have used and do continually furnish the City of London, which
otherwise would not be supplied.

8. The Kings Majesty's Court at the entertainment of Ambassadors, and other
times, is often furnished with provision out of the Butchers store, which they
shall never be able to do, if they shall be restrained grazing, and so
consequently, his Majesty oftentimes unprovided.

9. Lastly, when it shall be considered by this high Court of Parliament, how
much it may concern the benefit of the Commonwealth, that we the free Butchers
of London should continue the use of grazing: and on the contrary, what
scarsity it will many times in a year bring in the City, if such an Act should
be inacted against us, we doubt not but it will be thought that those men who
have framed this Bill against us, have done it more for their own private
gain, then for the good of the Commonwealth.


