By the Mayor. An Act of Common Council, prohibiting all Strangers borne, and
Forrainers, to use any trades, or keep any manner of shops in any sort within
this City, Liberties and Freedom thereof.
At a common Council holden at the Guild Hall of this City, on the xv. day of
April, In the fourth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the
grace of God, King of England, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
and in the xxxix. year of his Reign of Scotland. It is ordained, and
established as follows.
WHere by the ancient Charters, Customs, Franchises, and Liberties of the
City of London, confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliament, no person not being
free of the said City, may or ought to sell, or put to sale any wares or
marchandises within the said City or the Liberties of the same by retaile, or
keep any open or inward shop, or other inward place or room for show sale, or
putting to sale, of any wares or marchandises, or for use of any Art, Trade,
Occupation, mystery or handicraft within the same. And whereas also Edward
sometime King of England of famous memory, the third of that name, by his
Charter made and granted to the said City in the fifteenth year of his
Reign, confirmed also by Parliament amongst other things granted, that if any
Customs in the said City before that time obtained and used, were in any part
hard or defective, or any things in the same newly arising, where remedy
before that time was not ordained, should need amendment, the Mayor and
Aldermen of the said City and their Successors, with the assent of the
Communalty of the same City, might put and ordain thereunto fit remedy, as
often as it should seem expedient unto them. So that such ordinance should be
profitable to the King for the profit of Citizens and other his people
repairing to the said City, and agreeable to reason. And whereas by force of
the said Customs, Franchises, and Liberties, and of the Charter last before
mentioned, confirmed as is before specified by Parliament, the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons of the said City, did the twelfth day of October in the
third year of the reign of Edward sometime King of England the fourth, as a
thing thought fit and convenient for that time, (amongst other things) agree
and ordain, that the Basketmakers, Gold-wyerdrawers, and other forraines,
contrary to the liberty of the said City, holding open shoppes, in diverse
places of the City, and using mysteries within the said City, should not
from thenceforth hold shoppes within the liberty of the City aforesaid. But
if they would hold any shop, or dwell in the same City, they should dwell
at Blanchapleton, and there hold shoppes, so as they might have sufficient
dwelling there. And where also the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the said
City, did afterward the sixeteenth day of May, in the seventeenth year of
the Reign of our late Soueraign Lord of famous memory King Henry the eight, as
a course thought fit and agreeable for that time, ordain, establish, and
enact, that no manner of person or persons being estrange from the Liberties of
the said City, from thenceforth should hold or keep any open shop or
shoppes within the said City or liberties of the same, neither with any
Lattesses before, nor yet without Lattesse, certain numbers of the poor men
occupying the feate of Botchers, Tailors and Cobblers, only except, upon pain
of imprisonment, and also to forfeite and to pay xl. s. to the use of the
Communaltie of this City, as oftentimes as he or they should do the
contrary. And where also the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the same
City, did afterward the xx. day of January, in the said xvij. year of King
Henry the eight, (reciting that where at a common Council holden the xvj. day
of May, in the seventeenth year of the reign of King Henry the eight. It was
ordained and enacted, that no manner of person or persons being estrange from
the Liberties of this City, from thenceforth should hold or keep any open
shop or shoppes within this City or Liberties of the same, neither with any
Lattesses before, nor yet without any Lattesse upon pain of imprisonment)
Further, ordain, and establish, that if any person or persons being foreign,
should hold and keep open any shop or shoppes as is aforesaid, he should
forfeite for every time so doing xl. s. to be levied by distress, to the use
of the Communaltie of the said City, by the Chamberlain for the time being,
or other Officer of this City, and also have imprisonment by the discretion of
the Mayor and Aldermen for the time being.

Now forasmuch as diverse and sundry strangers borne, and likewise Forreiners
from the liberties of the said City, nothing regarding the said ancient
Charters, Franchises, Customs, or liberties of the said City, and acts and
ordinances heretofore made according to the same, but wholly intending their
private profit, have of late years devised and practiced by all sinister and
subtle means, how to defraud and defeat the said Charters, Liberties, Customs,
good orders, and ordinances, and to that end, do now inwardly in privy and
secret places, usually and ordinarily, show, sell, and put to sale, their Wares,
and Marchandizes, and use Arts, Trades, Occupations, Mysteries, and
Handicraftes within the said City and Liberties of the same, to the great
detriment and hurt of the Freemen of the said City, who pay Lot and Scot,
bear Offices, and undergo other Charges which Strangers and others not Free
are not chargeable withal nor will perform. For reformation of which
disorders, and for avoiding of such prejudice and damage, as thereby grows to
the Freemen of the said City, and is more now of late used then was in any
time heretofore suffered, and to provide for the common profit and good of the
Freemen and Citizens of this City. It is therefore by the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen and Commons in this common Council assembled, ordained and
established: That no person whatsoever not being free of the City of London,
shall at any time after the feast of Saint Michael now next ensuing, by any
color, way or mean whatsoever, either directly or indirectly by himself, or
by any other, show, sell or put to sale any wares, or marchandises whatsoever by
retaile within the City of London, or the Liberties or Suburbs of the same,
upon pain to forfeit to the Chamberlain of the City, for the time being, to
the use of the Mayor and Communaltie and Citizens of the said City the sum of
five pounds of lawful money of England, for every time, wherein such person
shall show, sell or put to sale any wares or marchandizes by retaile, within
the said City, Liberties or Suburbs thereof, contrary to the true intent
and meaning hereof. And it is further ordained and established, That no person
whatsoever, not being free of this City, shall at any time after the said
Feast of Saint Michael, by any color, way or mean whatsoever, directly or
indirectly, by himself, or by any other, keep any shop, or other place
whatsoever, inward or outward, for show sale, or putting to sale of any wares,
or marchandises whatsoever, by way of retaile, or use any Art, Trade,
Occupation, Mystery or Handicraft whatsoever within the said City, or the
Liberties or Suburbs of the same, upon pain to forfeite the sum of five
pounds of lawful money of England for every time, wherein such person shall
keep any shop or other place whatsoever, inward or outward, for show, sale,
or putting to sale of any wares or marchandizes whatsoever, by way of retaile,
or use any Art, Trade, Occupation, Mystery or Handicraft whatsoever, within the
said City or Liberties or Suburbs of the same contrary to the true intent and
meaning hereof. All which pains, penalties, forfeytures and sums of money to
be forfeyted by virtue of this Act, or ordinance, shall be recovered by action
of debt, bill or plaint to be comensed and prosequuted in the name of the
Chamberlain of the City of London for the time being, in the Kings Majesty's
Court, to be holden in the Chamber of the Guild Hall of this City, before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same City, wherein no essoigne or wager of law
shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendant. And that the Chamberlain of
the said City for the time being, shall in all suits to be prosequuted by
virtue of this Act or Ordinance against any Offender, recover the ordinary
Costs of suit to be expended in and about the prosequution thereof. And further
that one equal third part of all forfeytures to be recovered by virtue hereof
(the costs of suite for recovery of the same, being deducted and allowed)
shall be after the recovery and receipt thereof paid and delivered to the
Treasurer of Christ's Hospital, to be employed toward the relief of the
poor children to be brought up and maintained in the said Hospital, and one
other equal third part to him, or them which shall first give information of
the offenses, for which such forfeitures shall grow and prosequute suit in the
name of the Chamberlain of the said City for the recovery of the same, any
thing in this Act to the Contrary notwithstanding. Provided always, that this
Act or ordinance, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any
person or persons, for bringing, or causing to be brought any victuals to be
sold within this City and the Liberties thereof, but that they and every of
them may sell victuals within the said City, and the Liberties thereof, as
they lawfully might have done before the making hereof, any thing herein to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

God save the King.
Imprinted at London by John Windet, Printer to the Honorable City of
London, 1606.


