A King and no King. Acted at the Globe, by his Majesty's Servants.

Written by Francis Beamount, and John Flecher.



AT LONDON Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Eagle and Child in Brittans-Bursse. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, AND VVORTHIE Knight, Sir HENRY NEVILL.
WORTHY SIR,
I Present, or rather return unto your view, that which formerly has been
received from you, hereby effecting what you did desire: To commend the work
in my unlearned method, were rather to detract from it, then to give it any
luster. It suffices it has your Worships approbation and patronage, to the
commendation of the Authors, and encouragement of their further labors: and
thus wholly committing my self and it to your Worships dispose I rest, ever
ready to do you service, not only in the like, but in what J may.

Thomas VValkley.

A King and NO KING.
Enter Mardonius and Bessus. Mar. BEssus, the KING has made a fair hand on it,
has ended the wars at a blow, would my sword had a close basket hilt to hold
wine, and the blade would make knives, for we shall have nothing but eating and
drinking.


Bes. We that are commanders shall do well enough.


M^r. Faith Bes. such co^manders as thou may, I had as live set thee Perdue for
a pudding yth dark, as Alexander the great.


Bes. I love these jests exceedingly.


Mar. I think thou love them better then quarrelling Bess^s, He say so much
ythy behalf, and yet thou art valiant enough upon a retreat, I think thou
would kill any man that stopped thee, and thou could.


Bes. But was not this a brave combat Mardonius?


Mar. Why, did thou see it?


Bes. You stood with me.


Mar. I did so, but me thought thou wi^kst every blow they struck.


Bes. Well, I believe there are better Soldiers then I, that never saw two
Princes fight in lists.


Mar. By my troth I think so too Bessus, many a thousand, but c^rtenly all
that are worse then thou ^aue ^eene as much.


Bes. T was brauel^ done of our King.


Mar. Yes, if he had not ended the wars, I am glad thou dare talk of such
dangerous businesses.


Bess. To take a Prince prisoner in the heart of his own Country in single
combat.


Mar. See how thy blood cruddles at this, I think thou would be contented to
be beaten in this passion.


Bes. Shall I tell you truly.


Mar. I.


Bes. I could willingly venture for it.


Mar. Vm, no venture neither good Bessus.


Bes. Let me not li^e, if I do not think it is a brauer piece of service,
then that ^me so famed for.


Mar. Why art thou famd for any valor?


Bes. I famed, I, I warrant you.


Mar. I am very heartily glad on it. I have been with thee ever since thou
came ath' wars, and this is the first word that ever I heard on it, prithee
who fames thee?


Bes The Christian world.


Mar. It Is heathenishly done of them, in my conscience thou deferu'st it not.


Bes Yes, I ha done good service.


Mar. I do not know how thou may wait of a man in's Chamber, or thy
agilitie in shifting a trencher, but otherwise no service good Bessus.


Bes. You saw me do the service your self.


Mar. Not so hasty sweet Bessus, where was it, is the place vanished.


Bes. At Bessus desperate redemption.


Mar. Bessus desperate redemption, where is that.


Bes. There where I redeemd the day, the place bears my name.


Mar. Prithee who christened it.


Bes. The Soldier:


Mar. If I were not a very merely disposed man, what would become of thee: one
that had but a grain of collar in the whole composition of his body would send
thee of an arrand to the worms, for putting thy name upon that field: did not
I beat thee there yth head, a'th troops with a trunchion, because thou would
needs run away with thy company, when we should charge the enemy.


Bes. True, but I did not run.


Mar. Right Bessus, I beat thee out on it.


Bes. But came not I up when the day was gone, and redeemed all?


Mar. Thou know, and so do I, thou mean to fly, and thy fear making
thee mistake, thou ranst upon the enemy, and a hot charge thou gave, as I Will
do thee right, thou art surious in running away, and I think we owe thy fear
for our victory. If I were the King, and were sure thou would mistake
always, and run away upon the enemy, thou should be General by this
light.


Bess. You Will never leave this till I fall foul.


Mar. No more such words dear Bessus: for though I have ever known thee a
coward, and therefore durst never strike thee; yet if thou proceedst, I will
allow thee valiant, and beat thee.


Bes. Come, come, our King's a brave fellow.


Mar. He is so Bessus, I wonder how thou come to know it: But if thou were a
man of understanding, I would tell thee he is vainglorious, and humble, and
angry, and patient, and merry, and dull, and joyful, and sorrowful, in
extreamities in an hour: Do not think me thy friend for this, for if I
cared who knew it, thou should not hear it Bessus: here he is with the prey
in his foot.


Enter Arbaces and Tigranes, with attendants. Arb. Thy sadness (brave
Tigranes) takes away
From my fall victory; am I become
Of so small fame, that any man should grieve
When I oreceme him: They that placed me here,
Intended it an honor large enough
For the most valiant living; but to dare
Oppose me single, though he lost the day,
What should afflict you, you are free as I,
To be my prisoner, is to be more free,
Then you were formerlie; and never think
The man I held worthy to combat me,
Shall be used seruilly: Thy ransom is
To take my only sister to thy wife;
A heavy one Tigranes: for she is
A Lady that the neighbor Princes send
Blanks to fetch home: I have been too unkind
To her Tigranes, she but nine year old,
I left her, and nere saw her since: your wars
Have held m^ long, and taught me, though a youth,
The way to victory: she was a pretty child
Then, I was little better; but now fame
Cries loudly on her, and my Messengers
Make me believe she is a miracle;
She Will make you shrink as I did, with a stroke
But of her eye Tigranes.
Is it the course of
Iberia, to use their prisoners thus?
Had Fortune thrown my name above Arbaces,
I should not thus have talked: for in Armenia
we hold it base; you should have kept your temper,
Till you saw home again; where it is the fashion
Perhaps to brag.

Arb. Be you my witness Earth:
Need I to brag, does not this captive Prince
Speak me sufficiently, and all the Acts
That I have wrought upon his suffering Land?
Should I then boast? Where lies that foot of ground
Within his whole Realm, that I have not past
Fighting, and Conquering? Far then from me
Be oftentation: I could tell the World
How I have laid his Kingdom desolate
With this sole arm, propt by Divinity,
Stripped him out of his glories, and have sent
The pride of all his youth to people graves,
And made his Virgins languish for their loves;
If I would brag, Should I that have the power
To teach the Neighbor world humility,
Mix with vain glory.

Mar. In deed this is none?


Arb. Tigranes, no; did I but take delight
To stretch my deeds as others do on words,
I could amaze my hearers*

Mar. So you do:


Arb. But he shall wrong his, and my modesty
That thinks me apt to boast: After an Act
Fit for a God to do upon his foe,
A little glory in a Soldiers mouth,
Is well becoming, be it far from vain.

Mar. Its pity that valor should be thus drunk.


Arba. I offer you my Sister, and you answer,
I do insult: A Lady that no suit
Nor treasure, nor thy Crown could purchase thee,
But that thou faughst with me.

Tigr. Though this be worse
Then that you spoke before, it strikes not me
But that you think to ouer-grace me with
The marriage of your Sister, troubles me,
I would give worlds for ransomes were they mine,
Rather then have her.

Arb. See if I insult
That am the Conqueror, and for a ransom
Offer rich treasure to the conquered,
Which he refuses, and I bea^e his scorn.
It cannot be self flattery to say,
The daughters of your Country set by her
Would see their shame; run home, and blush to death
At their own foulness, yet she is not fair,
Nor beautiful, those words express her not,
They say her looks are something excellent,
That wants a name yet: were she odious
Her birth deferues the Empire of the world.
Sister to such a Brother, that has taken
Victory prisoner, and throughout the Earth
Carries her bound; and should he let her loose,
She durst not leave him. Nature did her wrong
To print continual conquest on her cheeks,
And make no man worthy for her to take,
But me that am too near her; and as strangely
She did for me: But you will think I brag.

Mar. I do I Will be sworn. Thy Valor and thy passions seuerd, would have made
two excellent fellows in their kinds: I know not whether I should be sorry
thou art so valiant, or so passionate* would one of vm were away.

Tigr. Do I refuse her that I doubt her worth*
Were she as virtuous as she would be thought,
So perfect, that no own of her own sex
Would find a want, had she so tempting fair,
That she could wish it off her damning souls,
I would pay any Ransom, twentytimes,
Rather then meet her married in my bed:
Perhaps I have a Love, where I have fixed
Mine eyes, not to be moved, and she on me*
I am not fickle:

Arb. Is that all the cause?
Think you, you can so knit your self in love
To any other, that her searching sight
Cannot dissolve it? So before you tried
You th ught your self a match for me in fight:
Trust me Tigranes she can do as much
In peace, as I in War; she will conquer too
You shall see, if you have the power to stand
The force of her swift looks, if you dislike,
I Will send you home with love, and name your ransom
some other way: but if she be your choice
She frees you: to Ileria you must.

Tigr. Sir, I have learnt a Prisoners sufferance,
And will obey, but give me leave to talk
In private with some friends before I go.

Arb. Some two await him forth, and see him safe,
But let him freely send for whom he please,
And none dare to disturb his conference:
I will not have him know what bondage is Exe.
Till he be freefrom me. This Prince Mardonius
Is full of vvisdome, Valor, all the graces
Man can receive.

Mar. And yet you Conquered him?


Arb. And yet I conquered him, and could have don
Had thou joined with him, though thy name in Arms
Be great; Must all men that are virtuous
Think suddenly to match themselves with me:
I conquered him, and bravely; did I not?

Bes. And please your Majesty I was afraid at first.


Mar. When were thou other?


Arb. Of what?


Bes. That you would not have spide your best advantages, for your Majesty in
my opinion lay too high me thinks, under favor, you should have lain thus.


Mar. Like a Tailor at a wake.


Bes. And then, ift please your Majesty to remember, at one time, by my Troth,
I wished my self with you.


Mar. By my Troth thou would have sunk vm both out oath lifts.


Arb. what to do?


Bes. To put your Majesty in mind of an occasion; you lay thus, and Tigranes
falsified a blow at your leg, which you by doing thus avoided; but if you had
whipped up your leg thus, and reached him on the ear, you had made the blood run
abouts head.


Mar. what contry-fence-schoole did thou learn that at?


Arb. Puffed, did I not take him nobly?


Mar. Why you did, and you have talked enough on it.


Arb. Talk enough,
while you confine my words, by Heaven and Earth,
I weremuch better be a King of Beasts
Then such a people: If I had not patience
Above a god, I should be called a Tyrant
Throughout the World. They will offend to death
Each minute: Let me hear thee speak again
Andthou art earth again: why this is like
Tigranes speech* that needs would say, I bragged.
Bessus he said I bragged.

Bes. Ha ha ha.


Arb. Why do thou laugh?
By all the world I me grown ridiculous
To my own subjects: Tie me to a chair
And jest at me, but I shall make a start
And punish some, that other will take heed
How they are haughty; who will answer me?
He said I boasted, speak Mardonius,
Did I? He will not answer: O my Temper!
I give you thanks above, that taught my heart
Patience, I can endure his silence; what will none
Vouchsafe to give me audience, am I grown
To such a poor respect or do you mean
To break my wind, speak, speak soon one of you*
Or else by Heaven,

1 Gent. So please your,


Arb Monstrous,
I cannot be heard out, they cut me off
As if I were too saucy; I will live
In vvoods, and talk to Trees they will allow me
To end what I begin. The meanest Subject
Can find a freedom to dis harge his soul,
And not I, now it is a time to speak,
I harken.

1 Gent. May it please,


Arb. I mean not you,
Did not I stop you once? but I am grown
To balke, but I desire, let another speak.

2 Gent. I hope your Majesty,


Arb. Thou drawest thy words
That I must wait an hour, where other men
Can hear in instants; throw your words away
Quick, and to purpose, I have told you this.

Bes. An't please your Majesty:


Arb. Will thou devour me? this is such a rudenes
As yet you never showed me, and I want
Power to command me, else Mardonius
Would speak at my request; were you my King,
I would have answered at your word Mardonius,
I pray you speak, and true y, did I boast?

Mar. Truth will offend you.


Arb. You take all great care what will offend me,
When you dare to vttter such things as these.

Mar. You told Tigranes, you had won his Land
With that sole arm propt by Divinity:
Was not that bragging, and a wrong to us
That daily venturoe lives?

Arb. O that thy name
Were great as mine, would I had paid my wealth,
It were as great, that I might combat th^e;
I would through all the Regions habitable
Search thee, and having found thee, with my Sword
Drive thee about the world, till I had met
Some place that yet man's curiosity
Has mist of; there, there would I strike thee dead:
Forgotten of Man^ind, such Funeral Rites
As Beasts would give thee thou should have

Bes. The King
Rage* extre^mely, shall we flinke away;
Heel strike us:

2 Gent. Content.


Arb. There I would make you know it was this sole arm,
I grant you were my Instruments, and did
As I commanded you, but it was this Arm
Moved you like wheels, it moved you as it pleased:
vvhither slip you now? what are you too good
To wait on me? I had need have temper
That rule such people; I have nothing left
At my own choice, I would I might be private:
Mean men enjoy themselves, but it is our curse,
To have a tumult that out of their loves
will wait on us whether we will or no;
will you be gone? why here they stand like death,
My word mooues nothing.

2 Gent. Must we go?


Bes. I know not.


Arb I pray you leave me Sirs, I Am proud of this,
That they will be entreated from my sight:
why now they leave me all: Mardonius,

Mar. Sir.


Arb. will you leave me quite alone? me thinks
Ciuility should teach you more then this,
If I were but your friend: stay here, and wait.

Mar. Sir, shall I speak?


Arb. why you would now think much
To be deni^e, but I can scarce entreat
what I would have: do, speak.

Mar. But will you hear me out?


Arb. with me you article to talk thus: well
I will hear you out.

Mar. Sir, that I have ever loved you, my sword has spoken for me, that I do,
if it be doubted, I dare call an oath agreat one to my witness: and were you
not my King, from amongst men, I should have chose you out to love above the
rest:nor can this challenge thanks: for my own sake I should have doted,
because I would have loved the most deserving man, for so you are.


Arb. Alas Mardonius, rise, you shall not kneel;
we all are Soldiers, and all venture lives:
And where there is no difference in men's worths,
Titles are jests: who can out vallew thee?
Mardonius thou have loved me, and have wrong,
Thy love is not rewarded, but believe
It shall be better, more then friend in arms,
My Father, and my Tutor, good Mardonius.

Mar* Sir, you did promise you would hear me out.


Arb. And so I will, speak freely, for from thee
Nothing can come but worthy things and true.

Mar. Though you have all this worth, you hold some qualities that do eclipse
your virtues.


Arb. Eclipse my vertue^?


Mar. Yes your passions, which are so manifold, that they appear even in this:
when I commend you, you hug me for that truth: when I speak of your faults,
you make a start, and fly the hearing: but,


Arb. when you commend me? O that I should live
To need such commandations: If my deeds
Blew not my praise themselves above the earth,
I were most wretched: spare your idle praise:
If thou did mean to flatter, and should utter
words in my praise, that thou thoughtst impudence,
My deeds should make vm modest: when you praise,
I hug you; it is so false, that were thou worthy
Thou should receive a death, a glorious death
From me: but thou shall understand thy lies,
For should thou praise me into Heaven, and there
Leave me enthroned, I would despise thee though
As much as now, which is as much as dust,
Because I see thy envy.

Mar. How ever you will use me after, yet for your own promise sake hear me
the rest.


Arb. I will, and after call unto the winds,
For they shall lend as large an ear as I
To what you utter: speak.

Mar. would you but leave these hasty tempers, which I do not say take from
you all your worth, but darken vm, then you would shine indeed.


Arb. Well.


Mar. Yet I would have you keep some passions, least men should take you for a
god, your virtues are such.


Arb. Why now you flatter.


Mar. I never understood the word, were you no King, and free from these wild
moodes, should I choose a companion for wit and pleasure, it should be you, or
for honest* to enterchange my bos^me with, it would be you; or wisdom to to
give me counsel, I would pick out you: or valor to defend my reputation, still
I would find out you, for you are fit to fight for all the world, if it could
come in question: Now I have spoke, consider to your self, find out a use? if
so, then what shall fall to me is not material.


Arb. Is not material: more then ten such lives
As mine Mardonius: it was Nobly said,
Thou have spoake truth, and boldly, such a truth
As might offend another. I have bin
Too passionate, and idle, thou shall see
A swift amendment: But I want those parts
You praise me for: I fight for all the world:
Give thee a Sword, and thou will go as far
Beyond me, as thou art beyond in years,
I know thou dare, and wilt; It troubles me
That I should use so rough a phrase to thee,
Impute it to my folly, what thou will,
So thou will pardon me; that thou and I
Should differ thus.

Mar. why it is no matter Sir:


Arb. Faith but it is, but thou do ever take
All things I do thus patiently, for which
I never can requite thee but with love,
And that thou shall be sure of. ^hou and I
Have not bin merry lately: pray thee tell me
where had thou that same jewel in thine care?

Mar. why at the taking of a Town.


Arb. A vvench upon my life, a wench Mardonius
Gave thee that Iewe^l.

Mar. vvench, they res^ect not me, I Am old and rough, and every limb about
me, but that which should grows stiffer: lth those businesses I may swear I
am t^uely honest: for I pay justly for what I take, and would be glad to be at
a certainty.


Arb. why do the wenches incroch upon thee?


Mar. I by this light do they.


Arb. Did thou sit at an old rent with vm?


Mar. Ye^ faith.


Arb. And do they im^rooue themselves?


Mar. I, ten shillings to me, every new young fellow they come aequainted with.


Arb. How can live on it?


Mar. Why I think I must petition to you.


Arb. Thou shall take vm up at my price.


Mar. Your price?


Arb. I at the Kings price.


Mar. That may be more then I am worth.


1 Gent Is he not merry now?


2 Gent. I think not.


Bes. He is, he is, we will show our selves.


Arb. Bessus I thought you had been in Iberia by this, bad you^ ha^te* Gobrias
will want entertainment for me.


Bes. An't please your Maiest^e I have a suit.


Arb. Is It not lousy Bessus, what i^t?


Bes. I am to carry a Lady with me.


Arb. Then thou have two suits.


Bess. And if I can prefer her to the Lady Panthan your Majesty's sister, to
learn fashions as her friends term it, it will be worth something to me.


Arb. So many nights lodgings as it is thither, will not?


Bes. I know not that, but gold I shall be sure of.


Arb. Why thou shall bid her entertain her from me, so thou will resolve me
one thing.


Bess. Jf I can.


Arb. Faith it is a very disputable question, yet I think thou can decide it*


Bess. Your Majesty has a good opinion of my understanding.


Arb. I have so good an opinion of it: it is whether thou be valiant.


Bess. Some body has tradust me to you: do you see this sword Sir?


Arb* Yes.


Bes. If I do not make my back-biters eat it to a knife within this week,
say I am not valiant.

Enter Messenger.
Mess. Health to your Majesty.


Arb. From Gobrias?


Mess. Yes Sir.


Arb. How does he, is he well?


Mess. In perfect health.


Arb. Thank thee for thy good news,
A trustier servant to his Prince there lives not
Then is good Gobrias.

1 Gent. The King starts back.


Mar. His blood goes back as fast:


2 Gent. And now it comes again.


Mar. He alters strangely.


Arb. The hand of Heaven is on me, be it far
From me to struggle; if my secret sins
Have pulled this curse upon me, lend me tears.
Enough to wash me white, that I may feel
A childlike innocence within my breast;
Which once performed, O give me leave to stand
As fixed as constancy her self, my eyes
Set here unmoved, regardlesse of the World,
Though thousand miseries incompasse me.

Mar. This is strange, Sir, how do you?


Arb. Mardonius my mother:


Mar. Is she dead?


Arb. Alas, she is not so happy; thou do know
How she has labored since my Father died
To take by treason hence this loathed life,
That would but be to serve her, I have pardoned
And pardoned, and by that have made her fit
To practice new sins, not repent the old;
She now has hired a slave to come from thence
And strike me here, whom Gobrias sifting out,
Took, and condemned, and executed there
The carefulst servant: Heaven let me but live
To pay that man; Nature is poor to me,
That will not let me have as many deaths
As are the times that he has saved my life,
That I might die vm over all for him.

Mar. Sir let her bear her sins on her own head,
Vex not your self.

Arb. What will the world
Conceive of me? with what unnatural sins
Will they suppose me laden, when my life
Is sought by her that gave it to the world?
But yet he writes me comfort here, my sister
He says is grown in beauty, and in grace,
In all the innocent virtues that become
A tender spotless maid: she stains her cheeks
With mourning tears to purge her Mothers ill,
And among her sacred dew she mingles prayers,
Her pure oblations for my safe return:
If I have lost the duty of a son,
If any pomp or vanity of state
Made me forget my natural offices;
Nay farther, if I have not every night
Expostulated with my wandering thoughts,
If ought unto my Parent they have erred,
And called vm back: do you direct her arm
Unto this foul dissembling heart of mine:
But if I have been just to her, send out
Your power to compass me, and hold me safe
From searching treason; I will use no means
But prayers: for rather suffer me to see
From mine own veins issue a deadly flood,
Then wash my dangers off with Mothers blood:

Mar. I nere saw such sudden extremities.


Enter Tigranes, and Spaconia. Tigr. Why, will thou have me die Spaconia,
What should I do?

Spa. Nay, let me stay alone,
And when you see Armenia again,
You shall behold a Toombe more worth then I,
Some friend that either loves me, or my cause,
Will build me something to distinguish me
From other women: Many a weeping verse
He will lay on, and much lament those maids
That place their loves unfortunately (...) hight,
As I have done, where they can never reach:
But why should you go to Iberia?

Tigr. Alas, that thou will ask me; Ask the man
That rages in a fever, why he lies
Distempered there, when all the other youths
Are coursing ore the Meadows with their loves?
Can I resist it? am I not a slave
To him that conquered me?

Spa. That conquered thee, Tigranes he has won but half of
Thy body; but thy mind may be as free
As his, his will did never combat thine,
And take it prisoner:

Tigr. But if he by force
Convey my body hence, what helps it me
Or thee to be unwilling?

Spa. O Tigranes,
I know you are to see a Lady there,
To see, and like I fear: perhaps the hope
Of her makes you forget me ere we part,
Be happier then you know to wish: farewell.

Tigr. Spaconia stay, and hear me what I say:
In short destruction meet me, that I may
See it, and not avoid it when I leave
To be thy faithful Lover: part with me
Thou shall not, there are none that know our love;
And I have given gold to a Captain
That goes unto Iberia from the King,
That he would place a Lady of our Land
With the Kings sister that is offered me;
Thither shall you, and being once got in,
Persuade her by what subtle means you can
To be as backward in her love as I.

Spa. Can you imagine that a longing maid
When she beholds you, can be pulled away
With words from loving you?

Tigr. Dispraise my health,
My honesty, and tell her I am jealous:

Spa. Why, I had rather loose you: Can my heart
Consent to let my tongue throw out such words,
And I that ever yet spoke what I thought,
Shall find it such a thing at first to lie:

Tigr. Yet do thy best.

Ent. Bessus.
Bes. What is your Majesty ready?


Tigr. There is the Lady Captain.


Bes. Sweet Lady by your leave, I could wish my self more full of Courtship
for your fair sake.


Spa. Sir I shall find no want of that.


Bess. Lady, you must haste, I have received new letters from the King, that
requires more speed then I expected he will follow me suddenly himself, and
begins to call for your Majesty already.


Tigr. He shall not do so long.


Bes. Sweet Lady shall I call you my charge hereafter?


Spa. I will not take upon me to govern your tongue Sir, you shall call me
what you please:


Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus Scena Prima.
Enter Gobrias, Bacurius, Arane, Panthaea, and Mandane, waiting women, with
attendance. Gob. MY Lord Bacurius, you must have regard
Unto the Queen, she is your prisoner,
It Is at your peril if she make escape.

Bac. My Lord I know it, she is my prisoner
From you committed; yet she is a woman,
And so I keep her safe: you will not urge me
To keep her close, I shall not shame to say
I sorrow for her.

Gob. So do I my Lord.
I sorrow for her that so little grace
Does govern her, that she should stretch her arm
Against her King, so little womanhood
And natural goodness, as to think the death
Of her own Son.

Ara. Thou know the reason why,
Dissembling as thou art, and wilt not speak.

Gob. There is a Lady takes not after you,
Her Father is within her, that good man
Whose tears paid down his sins, mark how she weeps,
How well it does become her; and if you
Can find no disposition in your self
To sorrow, yet by gracefulness in her
Find out the way, and by your reason weep:
All this she does for you, and more she needs,
When for your self you will not lose a tear,
Think how this want of grief discredits you,
And you will weep, because you cannot weep:

Ara. You talk to me as having got a time
Fit for your purpose; but you know I know
You speak not what you think.

Pan. I would my heart
Were stone, before my softness should be urged
Against my Mother, a more troubled thought
No Virgin bears about her; should I excuse
My Mothers fault, I should let light a life,
In loosing which, a brother and a King
Were taken from me; If I seek to save
That life so loved, I loose another life
That gave me being, I shall loose a Mother,
A word of such a sound in a childs ear,
That it strikes reverence through it: May the will
Of Heaven be done, and if one needs must fall,
Take a poor Virgins life to answer all.

Ara. But Gobrias let us talk; you know this fault
Is not in me as in another woman*

Gob. I know it is not:


Ara. Yet you make it so.


Gob. Why, is not all that is past beyond your help?


Ara. I know it is.


Gob. Nay, should you publish it
Before the world, think you twill be belieu'd?

Ara. I know it would not.


Gob. Nay, should I join with you,
Should we not both be torn? and yet both die
Vncredited?

Ara. I think we should.


Gob. Why then
Take you such violent courses? as for me,
I do but right in saving of the King
From all your plots.

Ara. The King?


Gob. I bad you rest with patience, and a time
Would come for me
To reconcile all to your own content:
But by this way you take away my power,
And what was done unknown, was not by me,
But you, your urging, being done,
I must preserve mine own; but time may bring
All this to light, and happily for all.

Ara. Accursed be this ouercurious brain,
That gave that plot a birth; accursed this womb,
That after did conceive to my disgrace.

Bac. My Lo d Protector, they say there are diverse Letters come from Armenia
that Bessus has done good service, and brought again a day by his particular
valor: received you any to that effect?


Gob. Yes, it is most certain.


Bac. I Am sorry fort, not that the day was won, but that it was won by him;
we held him here a coward, he did me wrong once, at which I laughed, and so
did all the world: for, nor I, nor any other held time worth my Sword.


Enter Bessus, and Spaconia. Bes. Health to my Lord Protector, from the King
these Letters, and to your grace Madam these:


Go. How does his Majesty?


Bes. As well as conquest by his own means, and his valiant commanders can
make him* your letters will tell you all.


Pan. I will not open mine til^ do know
My brothers health; good Captain is he well?

Bes. As the rest of us that fought are:


Pan. But howes that, is he hurt?


Bes. He Is a strange Soldier that gets not a knock,


Pan. I do not ask how strange that Soldier is That gets no hurt; but
whether he have one?


Bes. He had diverse.


Pan. And is he well again?


Bes. Well again, ant please your grace; why I was run twice through the
body, and shot ith head with a cross arrow, and yet am well again.


Pan. I do not care how thou do, is he well?


Bes. Not care how I do, let a man out of the mightiness of his spirit
fructify foreign Countries with his blood for the good of his own, and thus
he shall be answered: why, I may live to relieve with spear and shield such a
Lady distressed.


Pan. Why, I will care, I am glad that thou art well; I prithee is he so?


Gob. The King is well, and will be here to morrow.


Pan. My prayers are heard; now I will open mine.


Gob. Bacurius, I must ease you of your charge:
Madam, the wonted mercy of the King
That ouertakes your faults, has met with this,
And struck it out; he has forgiven you freely,
Your own will is your Law, be where you please*

Ara. I thank him


Gob. You will be ready
To wait upon his Majesty to morrow?

Ara. I will.


Bac. Madam, be wise hereafter:
I am glad I have lost this Office.
Exit.
Gob. Good Captain Bessus, tell us the discourse
Between Tigranes and our King, and how
We got the victory.

Pan. I prithee do,
And if my brother were in any danger,
Let not thy tale make him abide there long,
Before thou bring him off; for all that while
My heart will beat.

Bes. Madam, let what will beat, I must tell truth, and thus it was: They
fought single in lists but one to one, as for my own part I was dangerously
hurt but three days before, else perhaps we had been two to two; I cannot
tell, some thought we had; and the occasion of my hurt was this, the enemy
had made trenches.


Gob. Captain, without the manner of your hurt be much material to this
business, we will hear it some other time.


Pan. I, I prithee leave it, and go on with my brother.

Bes. I will, but 'twould be worth your hearing: To the lists they came, and
single sword and gauntlet was their fight.


Pan. Alas.


Bes. Without the lists there stood some dozen Captains of either side
mingled, all which were sworn, and one of those was I: and it was my chance to
stand nee^e a Captain of the Enemies side, called Tiribasus; valiant they said
he was: whilst these two Kings were stretching themselves, this Tiribasus cast
something a scornful look on me, and asked me whom I thought would
overcome: I smilde, and told him, if he would fight with me, he should
perceive by the event of that whose King would win; something he answered,
and a scuffle was like to grow, when one Zipetus offered to help him: I --


Pan. All this is of thy self, I prithee Bessus
Tell something of my brother, did he nothing?

Bes. Why yes, I Will tell your Grace; they were not to fight till the word given,
which for my own part by my troth I was not to give.


Pan. See, for his own part.


Bac. I fear yet this fellowe's abusd with a good report.


Bes. I, but I:


Pan. Still of himself.


Bes. Cride, give the word, when as some of them said Tigranes was stooping,
but the word was not given then: when one Cosro^s of the enemi^s part held up
his finger to me, which is as much with us Marshallists, as I will fight with
you: I said not a word, nor made sign during the combat; but that once done.


Pan. He slips ore all the fight.


Bes. I called him to me, Cosros said I:


Pan. I will hear no more.


Bes. No, no, Ilie.


Bac. I dare be sworn thou do.


Bes. Captain said I, it was so.


Pan. I tell thee, I will hear no further.


Bes. No, your Grace will wish you had.


Pan. I will not wish it: what is this the Lady
My Brother writes to me to take?

Bes. An't please your Grace this is she: Charge will you come nearer the
Princes?


Pan. You Are welcome from your Country, and this Land
Shall show unto you all the kindnesses
That I can make it; what is your name?

Spa. Thalestris.


Pan. Y are very welcome, you have got a letter
To put you to me, that has power enough
To place mine Enemy here; then much more you,
That are so far from being so to me,
That you nere saw me.

Bes Madam, I dare pass my word for her truth.


Spa. My truth.


Pan Why Captain, do you think I am afraid she will steal?


Bes. I cannot tell, servants are slipperie; but I dare give my word for her,
and for her honesty: she came along with me, and many favors she did me by
the way; but by this light none but what she might do with modesty, to a man
of my rank.


Pan Why Captain, here is no body thinks otherwise.


Bes. Nay, if you should, your Grace may think your pleasure; but I am sure I
brought her from Armenia, and in all that way if ever I touched any bare on her
above her knee, I pray God I may sink where I stand.


Spa. Above my knee?


Bes. No* you know I did not, and if any man will say I did, this Sword shall
answer: Nay, I Will defend the reputation of my charge whilst I live; your Grace
shall understand I am secret in these businesses, and know how to defend a
Ladies honor.


Spa. I hope your Grace knows him so well already,
I shall not need to tell you he is vain and foolish:

Bes. I, you may call me what you please, but I Will defend your good name
against the World; and so I take my leave of your Grace, and of you my Lord
Protector, I am likewise glad to see your Lordship well.


Bac. O Captain Bessus, I thank you, I would speak with you anon.


Bes. When you please, I will attend your Lordship:

Exit.
Bac. Madam, I Will take my leave too:

Exit.
Pan. Good Bacurius:


Gob. Madam, what writes his Majesty to you?


Pan. O my Lord,
The kindest words, I Will keep vm whilst I live
Here in my bosom; there is no art in vm,
They lie disordred in this paper, Just
As hearty Nature speaks vm.

Gob. And to me
He writes, what tears of joy he shed to hear
How you were grown in every virtuous way,
And yields all thanks to me, for that dear care
Which I was bound to have in training you:
There is no Princes living that enioyes
A Brother of that worth.

Pan. My Lord, no Maid longs more for any thing, or feels more heat and cold
within her breast, then I do now, In hope to see him.


Gob. Yet I wonder much at this, he writes he brings along with him a husband
for you, that same Captive Prince;

And if he love you as he makes a show,
He will allow you freedom in your choice.

Pan. And so he will my Lord, I warrant you
He will but offer, and give me the power
To take* or leave.

Gob. Trust me, were I a Lady I could not like
That man were bargained with before I choose him.

Pan But I am not built on such wild humors,
If I find time worthy, he is not less,
Because hee*s offered.

Spa. It Is true, he is not, would he would seem less:


Gob. I think there is no Lady can affect
Another Prince, your Brother standing by;
He does eclipse men's virtues so with this.

Spa. I know a Lady may, and more I fear
Another Lady will.

Pan. Would I might see him:

Gob. Why so you shall: my businesses are great,
I will attend you when it is his pleasure
To see you Madam.

Pan. I thank you good my Lord.


Gob. You will be ready Madam:

Exit.
Pan. Yes.


Spa. I do beseech you Madam send away
Your other women, and receive from me
A few sad words, which set against your joys,
May make vm shine the more.

Pan. Sirs leave me all.

Spa. I kneel a stranger here to beg a thing
Unfit for me to ask, and you to grant,
It Is such another strange ill laid request,
As if a beggar should entreat a King
To leave his Scepter and his Throne to him,
And take his rags to wander ore the World
Hungry and cold.

Pan. That were a strange request.


Spa. As ill is mine.


Pan. Then do not utter it.


Spa. Alas, it is of that nature, that it must
Be vtterd, I, and granted, or I die:
I am ashamed to speak it; but where life
Lies at the stake, I cannot think her woman,
That will not take something unreasonably
To hazard saving of it: I shall seem
A strange petitioner, that wish all ill
To them I beg of, ere they give me ought,
Yet so I must: I would you were not fair,
Nor wise, for in your ill consists my good:
If you were foolish, you would hear my prayer;
If foul, you had not power to hinder me:
He would not love you.

Pan. What Is the meaning of it?


Spa. Nay, my request is more without the bounds
Of reason yet; for it is not in the power
Of you to do what I would have you grant.

Pan. Why then it is idle, prithee speak it out.


Spa. Your brother brings a Prince into this Land
Of such a noble shape, so sweet a grace,
So full of worth withal, that every maid
That looks upon him, gives away her self
To him for ever; and for you to have
He brings him: and so mad is my demand,
That I desire you not to have this man,
This excellent man, for whom you needs must die,
If you should miss him. I do now expect
You should laugh at me.

Pan. Trust me, I could weep
Rather, for I have found in all thy words
A strange disiointed sorrow.

Spa. It Is by me,
His own desire too, that you would not love him.

Pan. His own desire, why credit me Thalestris
I am no common wooer: If he shall woo me,
His worth may be such, that I dare not swear
I will not love him; but if he will stay
To have me woo him, I will promise thee
He may keep all his graces to himself,
And fear no rauishing from me.

Spa. It Is yet
His own desire, but when he sees your face,
I fear it will not be; therefore I charge you
As you have pity, stop those tender ears
From his enchanting voice, close up those eyes,
That you may neither catch a dart from him,
Nor he from you: I charge you as you hope
To live in quiet, for when I am dead
For certain I shall walk to visit him,
If he break promise with me: for as fast
As oaths without a formal ceremony
Can make me, I am to him:

Pan. Then be fearelesse,
For if he were a thing twixt God and man,
I could gaze on him; (if I knew it sin,
To love him) without passion: Dry your eyes,
I swear you shall enjoy him still for me,
I will not hinder you; but I perceive
You are not what you seem: Rise, rise, Thalestris.
If your right name be so.

Spa. Indeed it is not
Spaconia is name; but I desire
Not to be known to others:

Pan. Why, by me
You shall not, I will never do you wrong,
What good I can, I will; think not my birth,
Or education such, that I should iniure
A stranger Virgin: you are welcome hither.
In company you wish to be commanded,
But when we are alone, I shall be ready
To be your servant.
Exit.
Enter three men, and a woman. 1. Come, come, run, run, run:


2. We shall out-goe her.


3. One were better be hanged, then carry women out fidling to these shows.


Weo. Is the King hard by?


1. You heard he with the bottles say, he thought we should come too late,
what abundance of people here is.


Weo. But what had he in those bottles?


3. I know not.


3. Why, Ink good man fool:


3. Ink, what to do?


1. Why, the King look you, will many times call for those bottles, and break
his mind to his friends.


Weo. Lets take our places quickly, we shall have no room else.


2. The man told us he would walk a foot through the people.


3. I marry did he.


1. Our shops are well look to now:


2. S'life yonder is my Master I think.


1. No, it is not he.


Enter two Citizens wives, and Philip. 1 Cit. Lord, how fine the fields be,
what sweet living it is in the Country.


2 Cit. I, poor souls, God help vm; they live as contentedly as one of us.


1 Cit. My Husbands cosen would have had me gone into the Country last year,
were thou ever there?


2 Cit. I, poor souls, I was amongst vm once.


1 Cit. And what kind of creatures are they for love of God?


2 Cit. Very good people, God help vm:


1 Cit. Will thou go with me down this summer, when I am brought abed?


2 Cit. Alas, it is no place for us.


1 Cit. Why prithee?


2 Cit. Why, you can have nothing there; there is no body cries broomes.


1 Cit. No?


2 Cit. No truly, nor milk.


1 Cit. Nor milk, how do they?


2 Cit. They are feign to milk themselves ith Country.


1 Cit. Good Lord: but the people there I think will be very dutiful to one
of us?


2 Cit. I, God knows will they, and yet they do not greatly care for our
Husbands.


1 Cit. Do they not, alas? In good faith I cannot blame them: for we do not
greatly care for them our selves. Philip I pray choose us a place.


Phil. There Is the best forsooth.


1 Cit. By your leave good people a little:


1. What Is the matter?


Phi. I pray my friend do not thrust my Mistress so, she is with child.


2. Let her look to her self then, has she not had thrusting enough yet; if
she stay shouldring here, she may hap to go home with a Cake in her belly.


3. How now goodman squitterbreech, why do you lean so on me?


Phil. Because I will.


3. Will you sir sawce-box?


1 Cit. Look if one have not struck Philip, come hither Philip, why did he
strike thee?


Phil. For leaning on him.


1 Cit. Why did thou lean on him?


Phil. I did not think he would have struck me.


1 Cit. As God save me law, thou art as wild as a Bucke, there is no quarrel,
but thou art at one end or other of it.


3. Its at the first end then; for he will never stay the last.


1 Cit. Well stripling, I shall meet with you.


3. when you will.


1 Cit. I Will give a crown to meet with you*


3. At a bawdy house.


1 Cit. I, you are full of your rogery; but if I do meet you it shall cost me
a fall.


3. The King, the King, the King, the King:
Now, now, now, now.

Enter Arbaces, Tigranes, Mardonius, and others. All God preserve your Majesty.


Arb. I thank you all: Now are my joys at full,
when I behold you safe my loving Subjects;
By you I grow, it is your united love
That lifts me to this height:
All the account that I can render you
For all the love you have bestowed on me,
All your expenses to maintain my war,
Is but a little word: you will imagine
It Is slender payment; yet it is such a word
As is not to be bought without our bloods;
It Is peace.

All. God preserve your Majesty.


Arb. Now you may live securely in your Towns,
Your Children round about you; you may sit
Under your vines, and make the miseries
Of other Kingdoms a discourse for you,
And lend them sorrows: For your selves you may
Safely forget there are such things as tears;
And may you all whose good thoughts I have gained,
Hold me unworthy, when I think my life
A sacrifice too great to keep you thus
In such a calm estate:

All. God bless your Majesty.


Arb. See all good people, I have brought the man,
Whose very name you feared, a captive home:
Behold him, it is Tigranes; in your hearts
Sing songs of gladness, and deliverance.

1 Cit. Out upon him.


2 Cit. How he looks.


3 Weo. Hang him, hang him, hang him.


Mar These are sweet people.


Tigr. Sir, you do me wrong,
To render me a scorned spectacle
To common people.

Arb. It was far from me
To mean it so: if I have ought deserved,
My loving Subjects let me beg of you
Not to revile this Prince, in whom their dwells
All worth of which the nature of a man
Is capable; valor beyond compare,
The terror of his name has stretched it self
Where ever there is sun: and yet for you,
I fought with him single, and won him too;
I made his valor stoop, and made that name
Soared to so vnbelieu'd a height, to fall
Beneath mine: This inspired with all your loves,
I did perform, and will for your content
Be ever ready for a greater work.

All. The Lord bless your Majesty.


Tigr. So, he has made me amends now, with a speech in commendations of
himself: I would not be so vainglorious.


Arb. If there be any thing in which I may
Do good to any creature, here speak out;
For I must leave you: and it troubles me,
Thus my occasions for the good of you,
Are suchas ca lles me from you; else my joy
Would be to spend my days amongst you all.
You show your loves in these large multitudes
That come to meet me: I will pray for you,
Heaven prosper you, that you may know old years,
And live to see your Childrens Children
Fate at your boards with plenty: when there is
A want of any thing, let it be known
To me, and I will be a Father to you:
God keep you all.
Exeunt.
All. God bless your Majesty.


1. Come, shall we go, all is done.


Weo. I for Gods sake, I have not made a fire yet:


2. Away, away, all is done.


3. Content: Farewell Philip.


1 Cit. Away, you haltersack you:


1. Philip will not fight he is afraid on's face.


Phil. I marry am I afraid of my face.


3. Thou would be Philip, if thou saw it in a glass; it looks like a
visor.

Exeunt 1, 2, 3, and Women.
1 Cit. You Will be hanged sir: Come Philip, walk before us homeward; did not
his Majesty say, he had brought us home Peaes for our money?


2 Cit. Yes marry did he.


1 Cit. They are the first I heard on this year by my troth, I longed for some
of vm; did he not say we should have some?


2 Cit. Yes, and so we shall anon I warrant you, have every one a pecke brought
home to our houses.


Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus Tertij Scaena Prima.
Enter Arbaces, and Gobrius. Arb. MY Sister take it ill?


Gob. Not very ill,
Something unkindly she does take it Sir,
To have her Husband chosen to her hands.

Arb. Why Gobrius te^ her; I must have her know
My will, and not her own must govern her:
What, will she marry with some slave at home?

Gob. O she is far from any stubbornness,
You much mistake her, and no doubt will like
Where you will have her; but when you behold her,
You will be loath to part with such a Jewel.

Arb. To part with her, why Gobrius art thou mad? she is my sister*


Gob. Sir, I know she is:
But it were pity to make poor our Land
With such a beauty, to enrich another.

Arb. Pish, will she have him?


Gob. I think she will Sir.


Arb. Were she my Father, and my Mother too;
And all the names for which we think folks friends,
She should be forcst to have him, when I know
It Is fit: I will not hear her say she is loath.

Gob. Heaven bring my purpose luckily to pass,
You know it is just: Sir, she will not need constraint,
She loves you so.

Arb. How does she love me, speak?


Gob. She loves you more then people love their health
That live by labor; more then I could love
A man that died for me, if he could live again.

Arb. She is not like her Mother then?


Gob. O no, when you were in Armenia,
I durst not let her know when you were hurt:
For at the first on every little scratch,
She kept her chamber, wept, and would not eat,
Till you were well; and many times the news
was so long coming, that before we heard,
She was as near her death, as you your health.

Arb* Alas poor soul, but yet she must be ruled;
J know not how I shall requite her well,
I long to see her; have you sent for her,
To tell her I am ready?

Gob. Sir, I have.

Enter Tigranes.
Gent. Sir, here is the Armenian King.


Arb. He Is welcome.


Gent. And the Queen Mother, and the Princes wait without:


Arb. Good Gobrius bring them in,
Tigranes you will think you are arrived
In a strange Land, where Mothers cast to poison
Their only sons; think you you shall be safe?

Tigr. Too safe I am (...)*


Enter Gobrius, Aran^, Panth^a, Spaconia, Bacurius, Mardonius, and Bessus. Ara.
As low as this I bow to you, and would
As low as to my grave, to show a mind
Thankful for all your mercies.

Arb. O stand up,
And let me kneel, the light will be ashamed
To see observance done to me by you.

Ara. You are my King.


Arb. You are my Mother rise;
As far be all your faults from your own soul,
As from my memory; then you shall be
As white as innocence her self.

Ara. I came
Only to s^ew my duty, and acknowledge
My sorrow for my sins; longer to stay
We^e but to draw eyes more attentively
upon my shame: That power that kept you safe
From me preserve you still.
Exit.
Arb. Your own desires shall be your guard.


Pan Now let me die,
Since I have seen my Lord the King return
In safety, I have seen all good that life*
Can show me; I have nere another wish*
For Heaven to grant, nor were it fit I should:
For I am bound to spend my age to come
In giui^g than kes that this was granted me.

Gob. why does not your Majesty speak?


Arb. To whom?


Gob. To the Princess.


Pan. Alas Sir, I am fearful, you do look
On me, as if I were some loathed thing
That you were finding out a way to shun.

Gob. Sir, you should speak to her.


Arb. Ha?


Pan. I know I am unworthy, yet not ill,
Armed* with which innocence here I will kneel,
Till I am one with earth: but I will gain
Some words, and kindness from you.

Tigr. will you, speak Sir?


Arb. Speak, am I what I was?
what art thou that do creep into my breast,
And dare not see my face show forth thy self*
I feel a pair of fiery wings displaide
Hither, from thence; you shall not tarry there,
up, and be gone, if thou be love, be gone,
Or I will tear thee from my wounded flesh,
Pull thy loved down away, and with a quill
By this right arm drawn from thy wanton wing,
write to thy laughing Mother in thy blood,
That you are Powers belied, and all your darts
Are to be blown away by men resolved
Like dust; I know thou fear my words, away.

Tigr. O misery, why should he be so slow*
There can no falsehood come of loving her,
Though I have given my faith; she is a thing
Both to be loved and served beyond my faith:
I would he would present me to her quickly.

Pan. will you not speak at all, are you so far
From kind words? yet to save my modesty
That must talk till you answer: do not stand
As you were dumb, say something, though it be
Poisoned with anger that may strike me dead:

Mar. Have you no life at all? for manhood sake
Let her not kneel, and talk neglected thus;
A tree would find a tongue to answer her,
Did she but give it such a loved respect.

Arb. You mean this Lady, lift her from the earth;
Why do you let her kneel so long? alas,
Madam your beauty uses to command,
And not to beg; what is your suit to me?
It shall be granted, yet the time is short,
And my affairs are great: but where is my sister?
I bad she should be brought.

Mar. What is he mad?


Arb. Gobrius, where is she?


Gob. Sir.


Arb. Where is she man?


Gob. Who Sir?


Arb. Who, have thou forgot? my Sister.


Gob. Your Sister Sir?


Arb. Your Sister Sir?


Gob. Some one that has a wit, answer; where is she?


Arb. Do you not see her there?


Gob. Where?


Arb. There.


Gob. There, where?


Mar. S'light there, are you blind?


Arb. Which do you mean, that little one?


Gob. No Sir.


Arb. No Sir, why do you mock me? I can see.
No other here, but that petitioning Lady:

Gob. That's she.


Arb. Away.


Gob. Sir it is she:


Arb. It Is false.


Gob. Is it?


Arb. As hell, by Heaven as false as hell,
My sister: Is she dead? if it be so,
Speak boldly to me: for I am a man,
And dare not quarrel with divinity;
But do not think to cosen me with this:
I see you all are mute, and stand amas'd,
Fearful to answer me; it is too true
A decreed instant cuts off every life,
For which to mourn, is to repine; she died
A Virgin though, more innocent then sleeps,
As clear as her own eyes, and blessedness
Eternal waits upon her where she is:
I know she could not make a wish to change
Her state for new, and you shall see me bear
My crosses like a man; we all must die,
And she has taught us how.

Gob. Do not mistake,
And vex your self for nothing; for her death
Is a long life of (...) I hope: It Is she,
And if my speech deserve not faith, lay death
Upon me, and my latest words shall force
A credit from you.

Arb. Which good Gobrius,
That Lady do thou mean?

Gob. That Lady Sir.


Arb. It cannot be.


Tigr. Pish, this is tedious,
I cannot hold, I must present my self;
And yet the sight of my Spaconia,
Touches me, as a sudden thunderclap
Does one that is about to sin.

Arb. Away,
No more of this; here I pronounce him Traitor,
The direct plotter of my death that names,
Or thinks her for my Sister: It Is a lie,
The most malicious of the World, invented
To mad your King; he that will say so next,
Let him draw out his Sword, and sheath it here,
It is a sin fully as pardonable:
She is no kin to me, nor shall she be;
If she were any, I create her none,
And which of you can question this, my power
Is like the Sea, that is to be obeyed,
And not disputed with: I have decreed her
As far from having part of blood with me,
As the naked Indians: Come, and answer me,
He that is boldest now; Is that my Sister?

Mar. O this is fine.


Bes. No marry is she not an't please your Majesty:
I never thought she was, she is nothing like you.

Arb. No, it is true, she is not:


Mar. Thou should be hanged.


Pan. Sir, I will speak but once: By the same power
You make my blood a stranger unto yours;
You may command me dead, and so much love
A stranger may importune, pray you do;
If this request appear too much to grant,
Adopt me of some other Family
By your vnquestion'd word; else I shall live
Like sinful issues that are left in streets
By their regardlesse Mothers, and no name
Will be found for me.

Arb. I will hear no more;
Why should there be such music in a voice,
And sin for me to hear it: All the world
May take delight in this, and it is damnation
For me to do so; you are fair, and wise,
And virtuous I think, and he is blessed
That is so near you as your brother is:
But you are naught to me but a disease,
Continual torment without hope of ease;
Such an ungodly sickness I have got,
That he that undertakes my cure, must first
Orethrow Divinity, all moral Laws,
And leave mankind as vnconfinde as beasts,
Allowing them to do all actions
As freely as they drink, when they desire.
Let me not hear you speak again; yet so
I shall but languish for the want of that,
The having which would kill me: No man here
Offer to speak for her; for I consider
As much as you can say: I will not toil
My body, and my mind too, rest thou there,
Here Is one within will labor for you both.

Pan. I would I were past speaking.


Gob. Fear not Madam,
The King will alter, it is some sudden change,
And you shall see it end some other way.

Pan. Pray God it do.


Tigr. Though she to whom I swore be here, I cannot
Stifle my passion longer: If my Father
Should rise again disquieted with this,
And charge me to forbear, yet it would out:
Madam, a stranger, and a prisoner begs
To be bid welcome.

Pan. You are welcome Sir
I think, but if you be not, it is past me
To make you so: for I am here a stranger,
Greater then you: we know from whence you come,
But I appear a lost thing, and by whom
Is yet uncertain; found here in the Court,
And only sufferd to walk up and down,
As one not worth the owning.

Spa. O, I fear
Tigranes will be caught, he looks me thinks
As he would change his eyes with her; some help
There is above for me I hope.

Tigr. Why do you turn away, and weep so fast,
And utter things that misbecome your looks,
Can you want owning?

Spa O, it is certain so.


Tigr. Acknowledge your self mine.


Arb. How now?


Tigr. And then see if you want an owner,


Arb. They are talking.


Tigr. Nations shall own you for their Queen.


Arb. Tigranes, art not thou my prisoner?


Tigr. I am.


Arb. And who is this?


Tigr. She is your Sister.


Arb. She is so.


Mar. Is she so again, that's well:


Arb. And how dare you then offer to change words with her?


Tigr. Dare do it, why you brought me hither Sir
To that intent.

Arb. Perhaps I told you so,
If I had sworn it, had you so much folly
To credit it: The least word that she speaks
Is worth a life: rule your disorderd tongue,
Or I will temper it.

Spa. Blessed be that breath.


Tigr. Temper my tongue; such inciuilities
As these, no barbarous people ever knew:
You break the law of Nature, and of Nations;
You talk to me, as if I were a prisoner
For theft: my tongue be temperd? I must speak
If thunder check me* and I will.

Arb. You will.


Spa. Alas my Fortune.


Tigr. Do not fear his frown, dear Madam hear me.


Arb. Fear not my frown: but that 'twere base in me
To fight with one I know I can overcome,
Again thou should be conquered by me.

Mar. He has one ransom with him already, me thinks twere good to fight
double, or quit.


Arb. Away with him to prison; Now Sir see
If my frown be regardlesse: why delay you?
Seize him Bacurius, you shall know my word
Sweepes like a wind, and all it grapples with*
Are as the chafe before it.

Tigr. Touch me not.


Arb. Help there.


Tigr. Away.


1 Gent. It is in vain to struggle.


2 Gent. You must be forced.


Bac. Sir, you must pardon us, we must obey.


Arb. Why do you dally there? Drag him away
By any thing.

Bac. Come Sir.


Tigr. Justice, thou oughtst to give me strength enough
To shake all these off: This is tyran^ie
Arbaces, subtiller then the burning Bulls,
Or that famed Tyrants bed. Thou might as well
Search in the depth of winter through the Snow
For half starved people, to bring home with thee
To show vm fire, and send vm back again,
As use me thus.

Arb. Let him be close Bacurius.


Spa. I nere reioyc'd at any ill to him,
But this imprisonment: what shall become
Of me forsaken?

Gob. You will not let your sister
Depart thus discontented from you Sir?

Arb. By no means Gobrius, I have done her wrong,
And made my self believe much of my self,
That is not in me: you did kneel to me,
Whilst I stood stubborn and regardlesse by;
And like a god incensed, gave no ear
To all your prayers: behold, I kneel to you,
Show a contempt as large as was my own,
And I will suffer it; yet at the last forgive me.

Pan. O you wrong me more in this,
Then in your rage you did: you mock me now.

Arb. Never forgive me then, which is the worst
Can happen to me.

Pan. If you be in earnest,
Stand up, and give me but a gentle look,
And two kind words, and I shall be in Heaven.

Arb. Rise you then to; here I acknowledge thee
My hope, the only Jewel of my life,
The best of sisters, dearer then my breath,
A happiness as high as I could think;
And when my actions call thee otherwise,
Perdition light upon me.

Pan. This is better
Then if you had not frowned, it comes to me
Like mercy at the block; and when I leave
To serve you with my life, your curse be with me.

Arb. Then thus I do salute thee, and again
To make this knot the stronger; Paradise
Is there: It may be you are still in doubt,
This, this third kiss* blots it out. I wade in sin,
And foolishly entice my self along:
Take her away, see her a prisoner
In her own chamber* closely Gobrius.

Pan. Alas Sir, why?


Arb. I must not stay the answer, do it.


Pan. Good Sir.


Arb. No more, do it I say.


Mar. This is better and better.


Pan. Yet hear me speak.


Arb. I will not hear you speak;
Away with her, let no man think to speak
For such a creature: for she is a witch,
A poysoner, and a ^raytor.

Bac. Madam, this Office grieves me.


Gob. Nay, it is well the King is pleased with it.


Arb. Bessus, go you along too with her; I will prove
All this that I have said, if I may live
So long: but I am desperately sick,
For she has given me poison in a kiss;
She had it twixt her lips, and with her eyes
She witches people: go without a word. Exeunt omnes, pr^.
Why should you that have made me stand in war Ar. Mar.
Like fate it self, cutting what threads I pleased,
Decree such an unworthy end of me,
And all my glories? what am I alas,
That you oppose me? If my secret thoughts
Have ever harbored swellings against you,
They could not hurt you, and it is in you
To give me sorrow, that will render me
Apt to re^eiue your mercy; rather so,
Let it be rather so, then punish me
With such unmanly sins: Incest is in me
Dwelling already, and it must be holy
That pulles it thence; where art Mardonius?

Mar. Here Sir.


Arb. I prithee bear me, if thou can;
Am I not grown a strange weight?

Mar. As you were.


Arb. No heavier?


Mar No Sir.


Arb. Why, my legs
Refuse to bear mybodie; O Mardonius,
Thou have in field beheld me, when thou know
I could have gone, though I could never run.

Mar. And so I shall again.


Arb O no, it is past.


Mar. Pray ye go, rest your self.


Arb. VVilt thou hereafter when they talk of me,
As thou shall hear nothing but infamy;
Remember some of those things.

Mar. Yes, I will.


Arb. I prithee do: for thou shall never see me so again.


Mar. I warrant ye.

Exeunt.
Enter Bessus. Bes. They talk of fame, I have gotten it in the wars, and
will afford any man a reasonable pennyworth: some will say they could be
content to have it, but that it is to be achieved with danger; but my opinion
is otherwise: for if I might stand still in Canon proof, and have fame fall
upon me, I would refuse it: My reputation came principally by thinking to run
away, which no body knows but Mardonius* and I think he conceales it to anger
me. Before I went to the wars, I came to the Town a young fellow without
means, or parts, to dese^ue friends; and my empty guts persuaded me to lie,
and abuse people for my meat, which I did, and they beat me: then would I
fast two days, till my hunger cride out on me, rail still; then me thought I
had a monstrous stomach to abuse them again, and did it. In this state I
continued till they hung me up by th'heeles and beat me with hasle sticks, as
if they would have baked me, and have cosen'd some body with me for Venison:
After this I railed, and ^ate quietly: for the whole Kingdom took notice of
me for a baffel'd whipped fellow, and what I said, was remembered in mirth, but
never in anger; of which I was glad, I would it were at that pass again:
After this, God called an Ant of mine, that left two hundred pounds in a Cosens
hand for me, who taking me to be a gallant young spirit, raised a company for
me with the money, and sent me into Armenia with vm: Away I would have run
from them, but that I could get no company, and alone I durst not run. I was
never at battle but once, and there I was running, but Mardonius cudgel'd me;
yet I got loose at last, but was so afraid, that I saw no more then my
shoulders do, but fled with my whole company amongst my enemies, and overthrew
vm: Now the report of my valor is come over before me, and they say I was a
raw young fellow, but now I am improu'd. A plague of their eloquence, twill
cost me many a beating: And Mardonius might help this to if he would; for now
they think to get honor of me, and all the men I have abused, call me freshly
to account, worthily as they call it, by the way of challenge.

Enter Gent.
Gent. Good morrow Captain Bessus.


Bes. Good morrow Sir.


Gent. I come to speak with you.


Bes. You are very welcome.


Gent. From one that holds himself wronged by you some three years since: your
worth he says is famed, and he nothing doubts but you will do him right, as
beseemes a Soldier.


Bes. A pox on vm, so they cry all.


Gent. And a slight note I have about me for you, for the delivery of which,
you must excuse me; it is an office that friendship calls upon me to do, and
no way offensive to you, since I desire but right on both sides.


Bes. It Is a challenge Sir, is it not?


Gent. It Is an inuiting to the field.


Bess. An inuiting? O cry you mercy, what a complement he delivers it with?
he might as agreeablie to my nature present me poison with such a speech: vm
reputation, vm call you to an account, vm forced to this, vm with my sword, vm
like a gentleman, vm dear to me, vm satisfaction: It Is very well Sir, I do
accept it, but he must awaite an answer this thirteen weeks.


Gent. Why Sir, he would be glad to wipe off his stain as soon as he can,
Sir upon my credit I am already engaged to two hundred and twelve, all which
must have their stains wipt off, if that be the word before him.


Gent. Sir, if you be truly engaged but to one, he shall stay a competent time.


Bess. Upon my faith Sir to two hundred and twelve, and I have a spent body
too much bruised in battle, so that I cannot fight, I must be plain with you,
above three combats a day: All the kindness I can do him, is to set him
resolutely in my roll the two hundred and thirteenth man, which is something:
for I tell you, I think there will be more after him, then before him, I (...)
so pray ye commend me to him, and tell him this.


Gent. I will Sir, good morrow to you.

Exit:
Bess. Good morrow good Sir. Certainly my safest way were to print my self a
coward, with a discovery how I came by my credit, and clap it upon every post:
I have received above thirty challenges within this two hours, marry all but
the first ^ put off with engagement, and by good fortune the first is no madder
of fighting then I, so that that is referu'd. The place where it must be ended,
is four days journey of, and our arbytrators are there: He has chosen a
gentleman in travel, and I have a special friend, with a quarterne ague
likely to hold him this time here, for mine; and when his man comes home, we
are to expect my friends health: If they would send me challenges thus thick,
as long as I lived I would have no other living; I can make seven shillings a
day o th paper to the Grocers: yet I learn nothing by all these but a little
skill in comparing of styles. I do find evidently that there is some one
Scriuener in this Town, that has a great hand in writing of challenges, for
they are all of a cut, and six of vm in a hand; and they all end, my reputation
is dear to me, and I must require satisfaction: whose there? more paper I
hope; no, it is my Lord Bacurius, I fear all is not well betwixt us.

Enter Bacurius.
Bac. Now Captain Bessus, I come about a friuilous matter, caused by as idle a
report: you know you were a coward.


Bess. Very right.


Bac. And wronged me.


Bess. True my Lord.


Bac. But now people will call you valiant, desertlesly I think yet for their
satisfaction, I will have you fight with me.


Bess. O my good Lord, my deep engagements.


Bac. Tell not me of your engagements, Captain Bessus; it is not to be put off
with an excuse: for my own part, I am none of the multitude that believe your
conversion from coward.


Bess. My Lord, I seek not quarrels, and this belongs not to me, I am not to
maintain it.


Bac. Who then pray?


Bess. Bessus the coward wronged you.


Bac. Right.


Bess. And shall Bessus the valiant, maintain what Bessus the coward did?


Bac. I prithee leave these cheating tricks, I swear thou shall fight with
me, or thou shall be beat extremely, and kicked.


Bess. Since you provoke me thus far my Lord, I will fight with you; and by
my Sword it shall cost me twenty pounds, but I will have my leg a week
sooner purposely.


Bac. Your leg, why what ailes your leg? I Will do a cure on you, stand up.


Bess. My Lord, this is not noble in you:


Bac. What do thou with such a phrase in thy mouth?
I will kick thee out of all good words before I leave thee.

Bess. My Lord, I take this as a punishment for the offense
I did when I was a coward.

Bac. When thou were? confess thy self a coward still, or by this light, I Will
beat thee into sponge.


Bess. Why I am one:


Bac. Are you so Sir, and why do you wear a sword then? Come, unbuckle,
quick.


Bes. My Lord.


Bac. Unbuckle I say, and give it me, or as I live, thy head will ache
extremely.


Bess. It is a pretty hilt, and if your Lordship take an affection to it, with
all my heart, I present it to you for a new-yeers gift.


Bac. I thank you very heartily, sweet Captain farewell.


Bess. One word more, I beseech your Lordship to render me my knife again.


Bac. Marry by all means Captain, cherish your self with it, and eat hard
good Captain; we cannot tell whether we shall have any more such: A due dear
Captain.

Exit.
Bess. I will make better use of this, then of my sword: A base spirit has this
vantage of a brave one; it keeps always at a stay, nothing brings it down,
not beating. I remember I promised the King in a great audience, that I would
make my back-byters eat my sword to a knife, how to get another sword I know
not, nor know any means left for me to maintain my credit but impudence:
Therefore will I outsweare him and all his followers, that this is all is left
uneaten of my sword.

Exit. Enter Mardonius.
Mar. I Will moan the King, he is most strangely altered; I guess the cause I
fear too right, Heaven has some secret end in it, and it is a securge no question
justly laid upon him: He has followed me through twenty rooms, and ever when
I stay to await his command, he blushes like a girl, and looks upon me, as if
modesty kept in his business: so turns away from me, but if I go on, he
follows me again. See, here he is, I do not use this, yet I know not how, I
cannot choose but weep to see him: his very enemies I think, whose wounds have
bred his fame, if they should see him now, would find tears in their eyes.


Arb. I cannot utter it, why should I keep
A breast to harbor thoughts? I dare not speak:
Darkness is in my bosom, and there lies
A thousand thoughts that cannot brook the light;
How will thou vex me when this deed is done
Conscience? that art afraid to let me name it.

Mar. How do you Sir?


Arb. Why very well Mardonius; how do thou?


Mar. Better then you I fear.


Arb. I hope thou art; for to be plain^ with thee,
Thou art in hell else: secret scorching flam^s
That far transcend earthly material fires,
Art crept into me, and there is no cure;
Is not that strange Mardonius, there is no cure?

Mar. Sir, either I mistake, or there is something hid
That you would utter to me.

Arb. So there is, but yet I cannot do it.


Mar. Out with it Sir, i^ it be dangerous I shall not shrink to do you
service, I shall no^ est^e^ ^ my life a waightier matter then indeed it is, I
^n^w it is subi^ct to more chances then it has hou^es, and I were better loose
it in my King^ cause, then with an ^gue. or fall, or sleepin^ to a thi^^e; as
all these are ^ro^able eno^g^: let me ^ut know ^ ha^ I shall do foryou.


Arb. It will not out: were you with Gobrius,
And bad him give my sister all content
The place affoords, and give her leave to send
And speak to whom she please?

Mar. Yes Sir* I was.


Arb And did you to Bacurius say as much
About Tigranes?

Mar. Yes.


Arb. That's all my business.


Mar O say not so,
You had an answer of all this before,
Besides, I th n^e this business might be vtterd
More carelessly.

Arb. Come, thou shall have it out; I do beseech thee
By all the love thou have professed to me,
To see my Sister from me.

Mar. Well, and what?


Arb. That's all.


Mar That Is strange, shall I say nothing to her?


Arb Not a word;
But if thou love me, find some subtle way
To make her vnsterstand by signs.

Mar. But what* what s^ o^ld I make her understand?


Arb. O Mardonius, for that I must be pardoned.


Mar. You may, but I can only see her then.


Arb. It Is true;
Bear her this ring then, and on more advice
Thou shall speak to her: Tell her I do love
My kindred all; will thou?

Mar* Is there no more?


Arb. O yes, and her the best;
Better then any brother loves his sister: That Is all.

Mar. Me thinks this
Need not have been delivered with such caution;
I Will do it.

Arb: There is more yet,
VVilt thou be faithful to me?

Mar. Sir* if I take upon me to deliver it,
After I hear it, He pass through fire to do it*

Arb. I love her better then a brother ought;
Do thou conce^ue me?

Mar. I hope I do not Sir.


Arb. No, thou art dull, kneel down before her*
And nere rise again, till she will love me.

Mar. Why, I think she does.


Arb. But better then she does, another way;
As wives love Husbands.

Mar. Why, I think there are few wives that love their
Husbands better then she does you.

Arb. Thou will not understand me: is it fit
This should be vtterd plainl^e; take it then
Naked as it is: I would desire her love
Lasciuiouslie, leudlie, incestuouslie,
To do a sin that needs must damn us both;
And thee to* Do thou understand me now?

Mar. Yes, there is your Ring again; what have I done
Dishonestlie in my whole life, name it*
That you should put so base a business to me?

Arb Did thou not tell me thou would do it?


Mar. Yes* if I undertook it; but if all
My heirs were lives, I would not be engaged
In such a cause ^o save my last life.

Arb. O guilt, how poor, and weak a thing art thou?
This man that is my servant, whom my breath
Might blow about the world, might beat me here
Having his cause, whilst I pressed down with sin
Could not resist him, dear Mardonius
It was a motion misbeseeming man.
And I am sorry for it.

Mar. Pray God you may be so: you must understand, nothing that you can utter,
can remove my love and service from my Prince. But otherwise, I think I shall
not love you more. For you are sinful, and if you do this crime, you ought
to have no laws. For after this it will be great injustice in you to punish
any offender for any crime: For my self I find my heart too big, I feel I
have not patience to look on whilst you run these forbidden courses: Means
I have none but your Favor, and I am ^ather glad, that I shall loose vm both
together* then keep vm with such conditions, I shall find a dwelling amongst
some people, where though our garments perhaps be courser, we shall be richer
^arre within, and harbor no such vices in vm. God preserve you, and mend you.


Arb. Mardonius, stay Mardonius, For though
My present state require nothing but knau^s
To be about me, such as are prepared
For every wicked act* yet who does know
But that my loathed Fate may turn about,
And I have use of honest men again:
I hope I may, I prethy leave me not.
Enter Bessus to them*
Bess. Where is the King?


Mar. There.


Bes. An't please your Majesty, there is the knife.


Arb. What knife:


Bes. The Sword is eaten.


Mar. Away you Fool* the King is serious,
And cannot now admit your vanities.

Bes. Vanities, I am no honest man if my enemies have not brought it to this,
what, do you think I lie?


Arb. No, no, it is well Bessus, it is very well,


Mar. I am glad ont'.
If your enemies brought it to that, your enemies are cutlers,
Come, leave the King.

Arb No, let him stay Mardonius, let him stay,
I have occasions with him very weighty,
And I can spare you now.

Mar. Sir.


Arb. Why I can spare you now.


Bes. Mardonius give way to the state affairs


Mar. Indeed you are fitter for his present purpose.

exit.
Arb. Bessus I should employ thee; will thou do it


Bes. Do for you, by this air I will do any thing without exception, be it a
good, bad, or indifferent thing*


Arb. Do not swear.


Bes. By this light but I will,
Any thing whatsoever.

Arb. But I shall name a thing
Thy conscience will not suffer thee to do.

Bes* I would feign hear that thing.


Arb. Why I would have thee get my Sister for me:
Thou understands me in a wicked manner.

Bes. O you would have about with her?
I Will do it, I Will do it In Faith.

Arb. Will thou, do make no more ant?


Bes. More, no, why is there any thing else, if there be tell me, it shall be
done.


Arb. Have thou no greater sense of such a sin?
Thou art too wicked for my company
Though I have hell within me, and may yet
Corrupt me further: pray thee answer me
How do I show to thee after this motion?

Bes. Why your Majesty looks as well in my opinion as ever you did since you
were borne:


Arb. But thou appearest to me after thy grant
The vgliest, loathed, detestable thing
That I have ever met with. Thou have eyes
Like flames of Sulphur, which me thinks do dart
Infection on me, and thou have a mouth
Enough to take me in, where there do stand
Four rows of Iron teeth.

Bes. I feel no such thing, but it is no matter how I look, Jle do your
business as well as they that look better, and when this is dispatched, if you
have a mind to your Mother tell me, and you shall see I Will set it hard:


Arb. My Mother, Heaven forgive me to hear this,
I am inspired with horror: I hate thee
Worse then my sin, which if I could come by,
Should suffer death eternal, nere to rise
In any breast again. Know I will die
Languishing mad, as I resolve I shall,
Ere I will deal by such an Instrument:
Thou art too sinful to employ in this;
Out of the world, away.

Bess. What do you mean Sir?


Arb. Hung round with curses, take thy fearful flight into the deserts, where
among all the monsters,
If thou findst one fo beastly as thy self,
Thou shall be held as innocent.

Bess. Good Sir.


Arb. If there were no such Instruments as thou,
We Kings could never act such wicked deeds:
Seek out a man that mockes Divinity,
That breaks each precept both of Gods and Man's,
And Natures too, and does it without lust;
Me^rely because it is a law, and good,
And live with him: for him thou can not spoil.
Away I say; I will not do this sin.
Exit Bessus. I Will press it here till it do break my breast;
It heaues to get out: but thou art a sin
And spite of torture, I will keep thee in.

Finis Actus Tertij*
Actus Quarti Scaena Prima.
Enter Gobrius, Panthaea, Spaconi^. Gob. Have you written Madam?


Pan. Yes, good Gobrias.


Gob. And with a kindness, and such winning words
As may provoke him at one instant fee e
His double fault, your wrong, and his own rashness.

Pan. I have sent words enough, if words may win him
From his displeasure, and such words I hope
As shall gain much upon his goodness, Gobrius:
Yet fearing since they are many, and a woman's,
A poor belief may follow; I have wouen
As many truths within vm to speak for me,
That if he be but gracious, and receive vm.

Gob. Good Lady, be not fearful; if he should not
Gi^e vou your present end in this believe it
You sha l feel (if your virtue can induce you
To labor out this tem^est, which I know
Is but a poor proof against your patience*)
All those contents your spirit will arrive at
Newer and sweeter to you; your royal brother
(When he shall once collect himself, and see
How far ^e (...) been asunder from himself,
What a mere stranger to his golden temper)
M^st from those roots of virtue, (never dying
Though somewhat stopped with humor) shoot again
Into a thousand glories bearing his fa re branches
Hie as our hopes can look at straight as Justice,
Laden with ri e contents: he loves you dearly,
I know it, and I hope I need not further
Win you to understand it.

Pan. I believe it,
Howsoever I am sure I love him dearly,
So dearly, that if any thing I write
For my enlarging, should bege^ hi anger;
Heaven ^e a ^itnesse with me, and my faith
I had rather live in^omb'd here.

Gob. You shall not feel a vorse stroke then your grief, I am sorr^ it is so
sharp: I kiss your hand, and this night will deliver this true story with
this hand to your brother.

Exit.
Pan. Peace go with you,
You are a good man; my ^paconia
Why are you ever sad thus?

Spa. O dear Lady.
(...) Many, and strange ones,
I feel my old fire flame again, and burn
So strong and violent, that should I see her
Again, the grief, and that would kill me (...).

Enter Bac. and Spac. Bac. Your token I acknowledge, you may pass;
There is the King.

Spac. I thank your Lordship for it.

Ex. Bac.
Tigr. She comes, she comes, shame hide me ever from her; would I were
buried, or so far removed
Light might not find me out: I dare not see her.

Spac. Nay, never hide your self; for were you hid
where earth hides all her riches, nere her center;
My wrongs without more day would light me to you:
I must speak ere I die; were all your greatness
Doubled upon you, you are a perjured man,
And only mighty in the wickedness
Of wronging women. Thou art salfe, false Prince,
I live to see it: poor Spaconia lives
To tell thee thou art false; and then no more:
She lives to tell thee thou art more unconstant
Then all ill women ever were together;
Thy faith as firm as raging ouerflowes,
That no bank can command; and as lasting
As boys gay bubbles blown in the air, and broken:
The wind is fixed to thee, and sooner shall
The beaten Mariner with his shrill whistle,
Calm the loud murmurs of the troubled maine,
And strike it smooth again; then thy soul fall
To have peace in love with any: Thou art all
That all good men must hate, and if thy story
Shall tell succeeding ages what thou were,
O let it spare me in it, lest true Lovers
In pity of my wrongs burn thy black legend,
And with their curses shake thy sleeping ashes.

Tigr. Oh, oh:
The destinies I hope have pointed out
Our ends alike, that thou may die for love,
Though not for me: for this assure thy self,
The Princess hates thee deadly, and will sooner
Be won to marry with a Bull, and safer,
Then such a beast as thou art: I have struck
I fear too deep; beshrow me fort: Sir,
This sorrow works me like a cunning friendship,
Into the same piece with it; he is ashamed,
Alas* I have been too rugged: Dear my Lord,
I am sorry I have spoken any thing,
Indeed I am, that may add more restraint
To that too much you have: Good Sir be pleased
To think it was a fault of love, not malice;
And do as I will do: forgive it Prince,
I do, and can forgive the greatest sins
To me you can repent of; pray belieue*me.

Tigr. O my Spaconia! O thou virtuous woman!

Spa. No more, the King Sir.

Enter Arbaces, Bacurius, and Mardonius. Arb. Have you been careful of our
noble Prisoner
That he want nothing fitting for his greatness?

Bac* I hope his grace will quit me, for my care Sir.


Arb. It Is well, royal Tigranes health.


Tig. More then the stricktnesse of this place can give Sir I offer back
again to great Arbaces.


Arb. We thank you worthy Prince, and pray excuse us,
We have not seen you since your being here,
I hope your noble usage has been equal
With your own Person: your imprisonment
If it be any, I dare say is eafie,
And shall not outlast two days.

Tigr. I thank you:
My usage here has been the same it was
Worthy a royal Conqueror. For my restraint
It came unkindly, because much unlooked for;
But I must bear it:

Arb. What Lady is that Bacurius?


Bac. One of the Princess women Sir.


Arb. I feared it: why comes she hither!


Bac. To speak with the Prince Tigranes.


Arb. From whom Bacurius?


Bac. From the Princess Sir.


Arb. I know I had seen her.


Mardo. His fit begins to take him now again
It Is a strange Fever, and twill shake us all
Anon I fear; would he were well cured of this raging folly: Give me the
wars, where men are mad, and may talk what they list, and held the brauest
Fellows; This pelting prattling peace is good for nothing: drinking's a virtue
to it:


Arb. I see there is truth in no man, nor obedience,
But for his own ends, why did you let her in?

Bac. It was your own command to bar none from him,
Beside the Princess sent her Ring Sir
For my warrant.

Arb. A token to Tigranes, did she not:
Sir tell truth.

Bac. I do not use to lie Sir,
It Is no way I eat or live by, and I think
This is no token Sir.

Mar. This combat has undone him: If he had been well beaten, he had been
temperate: I shall never see him hansome again, till he have a Horse-mans
staff poak't through his shoulders, or an arm broke with a Bullet.


Arb. I am trifled with.


Bac. Sir.


Arb. I know it, as I know thee to be false.


Mar. Now the clap comes.


Bac. You never knew me so Sir, I dare speak it,
And durst a worse man tell me though my better.

Mar. It Is well said by my Soul.


Arb Sir you answer as you had no life.


Bac. That I fear Sir to loose nobly.


Arb I say Sir once again


Bac. You may say Sir what you please.


Mar. would I might do so.


Arb. I will Sir, and say openly this woman carries letters, by my life I know
she carries letters, this woman does it:


Mar. Would Bessus were here to take her aside and search her, he would
quickly tell you what she carried Sir.


Arb. I have found it out, this woman carries letters.


Mar If this hold twill be an ill world for Bauds, Chamber-maids, and
post-boyes, I thank God I have none but his letters pattents, things of his
own inditing.


Arb Prince this cunning cannot do it.


Tig. What Sir, I reach you not.


Arb. It shall not serve your turn Prince.


Tig. Serve my turn Sir.


Arb ^ Sir it shall not serve your turn.


Tig. Be plainer good Sir.


Arb. This woman shall carry no more letters back to your love Panthaea, by
heaven she shall not, I sa she shall not.


Mardo. This would make a Saint swear like a Soldier, and a Soldier like
termogant.


Tig. This beats me more King then the blows you gave me.


Arb. Take vm away both, and together let vm be prisoners, stricktly and
closely kept, or Sir your life shall answer it; and let no body speak with
vm hereafter.


Bac. Well I am subject to you, and must endure these passions.


Spa. This is the imprisonment I have looked for always, and the dear place I
would choose.

Ex. Bacu. with Tig. and Spa.
Mar. Sir, have you done well now?


Arb. Dare you reprove it?


Mar. No.


Arb. You must be crossing me.


Mar. I have no letters Sir to anger you,
But a dry sonnet of my Corporals
To an old Sadlers wife, and that I Will burn Sir:
It Is like to prove a fine age for the Ignorant.

Arb. How dare thou so often forfeit thy life,
Thou know it is in my power to take it.

Mar. Yes, and I know you wonnot, or if you do, you will miss it quickly.


Arb. Why?


Mar. Who shall then tell you of these childish follies
When I am dead? Who shall put to his power
To draw those virtues out of a flood of humors
Where they are drowned, and make vm shine again?
No cut my head off: do, kill me:
Then you may talk, and be beleeud, and grow,
And have your too selfe-glorious temper rot^^
Into a dead sleep, and the kingdom with you,
Like foreign swords be in your throats, and slaughter
Be every where about you like your flatterers.
Do, kill me.

Arb. Prithee be tamer good Mardonius,
Thou know I love thee, nay I honor thee:
Believe it good old Soldier I am all thine:
But I am rackt clean from my self, bear with me,
Woot thou bear with me good Mardonius.
Enter Gobrius.
Mar. There comes a good man, love him too, he is temperate,
You may live to have need of such a virtue,
Rage is not still in fashion.

Arb. VVelcome good Gobrius.


Gob. My service, and this letter to your grace.


Arb. From whom?


Go. From the rich mine of virtue, and all beauty,
Your mournful Sister.

Arb. She is in prison Gobrius, is she not?


Gob. She is Sir till your pleasure do enlarge her,
Which on my knees I beg; O it is not fit
That all the sweetness of the world in one;
The youth, and virtue, that would have wild Tigers
And wilder people, that have known no manners
Should live thus Cloysterd up, For your loves sake
(If there be any in that Noble heart)
To her a wretched Lady, and forlorn,
Or for her love to you, (which is as much
As Nature, and obedience ever gave)
Have pity on her beauties.

Arb. Prithee stand up, it is true she is too Fair,
And all these commendations but her own:
Would thou had never so commended her,
Or I nere lived to have heard it, Gobrius;
If thou but knew of the wrong her beauty does her,
Thou would in pity of her be a liar:
Thy ignorance has drawn me wretched man
Whether my self nor thou can well tell, O my Fate,
I think she loves me; but I fear another
Is deeper in her heart: how think thou Gobrius?

Gob. I do beseech your Grace believe it not,
For let me perish if it be not false:
Good Sir read her letter.

Mar. This love, or what a devil is it, I know not, begets more mischief then
a wake. I had rather be we I beaten starved, or lousy, then live within the
air ont. He that had seen this brave fellow charge through a grove of pykes
but the other day, and look upon him now, will nere believe his eyes again; If
he continue thus but two days more, a Tailor may beat him with one hand tied
behind him.


Arb. Alas she would be at liberty,
And there be thousand reasons Gobrius
That will deny it:
Which if she knew, she would contentedly
Be where she is and bless her virtue for it,
And me though she were closer, She would Gobrius,
Good man indeed she would.

Gob. Then good Sir for her satisfaction
Send for her, and with reason make her know
Why she must live thus from you.

Arb. I will go bring her to me.

Exeunt.
Enter Bessus, and two Swordmen, and a Boy. Bess. Y' are very welcome both,
some stools there boy,
And reach a Table; Gentlemen oth' Sword,
Pray sit without more complement: be gone child,
I have been curious in the searching of you,
Because I understood you wise, and valiant persons.

1. we understand our selves Sir.


Bess. Nay Gentlemen, and my dear friends oth' Sword,
No complement I pray; but to the cause
I hang upon, which in few, is my honor.

2. You cannot hang too much Sir for your honor,
But to your cause, be wise, and speak truth.

Bess. My first doubt is my beating by my Prince.


1 Stay there a little Sir, do you doubt a beating,
Or have you had a beating by your Prince.

Bes. Gentlemen ath'sword, my Prince has beaten me.


2 Brother what think you of this case


1 If he have beaten him, the case is clear.


2 If he have beaten him I grant the case;
But how? We cannot be too subtle in this business
I say, but how?

Bes. Even with his royal hand.


1 Was it a blow of love or indignation.


Bes. T was twenty blows of indignation gentlemen,
Besides two blows ath'face.

2 Those blows ath'face have made a new case ont',
The rest were but an honorable rud^nesse*

1. Two blows oth'face, and given by a worse man, I must confess as we
Swordmen say, had turned the business: Mark me brother, by a worse man; but
being by his Prince, had they been ten, and those ten drawn ten teeth, beside
the hazard of his nose for ever; all these had been but favors: This is my
flat opinion, which I Will die in.


2. The King may do much Captain beieeue it, for had he cracked your skull
through like a bottle, or broke a rib or two with crossing of you, yet you had
lost no honor: This is strange you may imagine; but this is truth now Captain.


Bes. I will be glad to embrace it gentleman;
But how far may he strike me?

1. There Is another,
A new cause rising from the time, and distance,
In which I will deliver my opinion:
He may strike, beat, or cause to be beaten; for these are natural to man:
your Prince I say may beat you so far forth as his dominion reaches; that is
for the distance, the time, ten mile a day* I take it.


2. Brother you err, it is fifteen mile a day,
His stage is ten, his beatings are fifteen.

Bes. It Is a the longest, but we subjects must
Be subject to it: you are wise, and virtuous.

1. Obedience ever makes that noble use ont,
To which I dedicate my beaten body;
I must trouble you a little further Gentlemen oth' Sword.

2. No trouble at all to us Sir, if we may
Profit your understanding; we are bound
By virtue of ou^ calling, to utter our opinions
Shortly, and dis^reetly.

Bes. My sorest business is, I have been kicked.


2. How far Sir?


Bess. Not to slatter my self in it all over, my sword forced, but not lost;
for dis^reetely I renderd it to save that imputation.


1. It showed discretion the best part of valor.


2. Brother, this is a pretty case, pray ponder on it,
Our friend here has been kicked.

1. He has so brother.


2. Sorely he says: Now had he sit down here
Upon the mere kick, it had been cowardly.

1. I think it had been cowardly indeed.


2. But our friend has r^d^^m'd it, in delivering
His sword without compulsion; and that man
That took it of him, I pronounce a weak one,
And his kicks nullities.
He should have kicked him after the delivery,
Which is the confirmation of a coward.

1. Brother, I take it you mistake the question:
For say that I were kicked.

2. I must not say so;
Nor I must not hear it spoke byth' tongue of man
You kicked dear brother; you are merry.

1. But put the case I were kicked?


2. Lot them put it that are things weary of their lives, and know not honor:
put case you were kicked?


1. I do not say I was kicked.


2. Nor no silly creature, that wears his head without a case, his soul in a
skin-coate: you kicked dear brother.


Bess* Nay Gentlemen, let us do what we shall do
Truly and honestly; good Sit toth' question.

1. Why then I say, suppose your boy kicked Captain?


2. The boy may be supposed, he is liable; but kick my brother?


1. A foolish forward zeal Sir in my friend;
But to the boy, suppose the boy were kicked?

Bess. I do suppose it.


1: Has your boy a sword?


Bess. Surely no: I pray suppose a sword too.


1. I do suppose it: you grant your boy was kicked then.


2. By no means Captain, let it be supposed still; this word grant, makes not
for us.


1. I say this must be granted.


2. This must be granted brother?


1. I, this must be granted.


2. Still the must:


1. I say this must be granted.


2. Give me the must again, ag^ine; brother you palter.


1. I will not hear you waspe.


2. Brother, I say you palter, the must three times together; I wear as sharp
steel as another man,

And my Fox bites as deep, must^^ my dear brother:
But to the cause again:

Bess. Nay, look you Gentlemen.


2. In a word I ha done.


1. A tall man, but intemperate; it is great pity:
Once more suppose the boy kicked.

2. Forward.


1. And being thoroughly kicked, laughes at the kicker*


2. So much for us; proceed.


1. And in this beaten scorn, as I may call it,
Delivers up his weapon: where lies the error?

Bess. It lies ith beating Sir,
I found it four days since.

2. The error, and a sore one, as I take it;
Lies in the thing kicking.

Bess. I understand that well, it is sore indeed Sir.


1. That is according to the man that did it.


2. There springs a new branch: whose was the foo^e?


Bess. Ah Lords.


1. The cause is mighty, but had it been two Lords,
And both had kicked you, if you laughed, it is clear.

Bess. I did laugh,
But how will that help me Gentlemen?

1. Yes, it shall help you, if you laughed alowd.


Bess. As loud as a kicked man could laugh, I laughed Sir:


1. My reason now; the valiant man is known
By suffering and contemning, you have
Enough of both, and you are valiant.

2. If he be sure he has been kicked enough:
For that brave sufferance you speak of brother,
Consists not in a beating, and away,
But in a cudgeld body, from eighteen
To eight and thirty: in a head rebuk't
With pots of all Size, daggers, stools, and bedstaues,
This shows a valiant man.

Bes. Then I am valiant, as valiant, as the proudest,
For these are all familiar things to me:
Familiar as my sleep, or want of money.
All my whole bodi's but one bruize with beating,
I think I have been cudgeld with all nations,
And almost all Religions.

2. Embrace him brother, this man is valiant,
I know it by my self he is valiant.

1. Captain thou art a valiant Gentleman
To abide upon it, a very valiant man.

Bes. My equal friends ath'sword, I must request your hands to this.


2. It Is fit it should be.


Bess. Boy get some wine, and pen and ink within:
Am I clear Gentlemen?

1. Sir when the world has taken notice what we have done,
Make much of your body, for I Will pawn my steel,
Men will be coyer of their legs hereafter.

Bes. I must request you go along, and testify to the Lord Bacurius, whose
foot has struck me, how you find my cause.


2 We will, and tell that Lord he must be ruled,
Or there be those abroad will rule his Lordship.
Exeunt:
Enter Arbaces at o^ne door, Gob* and Panth^ea at another* Gob. Sir here is the
Princess.


Arb. Leave us then alone.
For the maine cause of her imprisonment
Must not be heard by any but her self:
You are welcome Sister, and I would to God
I could so bid you by another name,
If you above love not such sins as these*
Circle my heart with thoughts as cold as snow
To quench these rising flames that harbor here.

Pan. Sir, does it please you, I should speak.


Arb. Please me,
I more then all the art of Music can;
Thy speech does please me, for it ever sounds
As thou broughts joyful unexpected news:
And yet it is not fit thou should^t be heard,
I prithee think so.

Pan. Be it so, I will.
I am the first that ever had a wrong
So far from being fit to have redress,
That it was unfit to hear it; I will back
To prison rather, then disquiet you,
And wait till it be fit.

Arb. No, do not go,
For I will hear thee with a serious thought:
I have collected all that's man about me
Together strongly, and I am resolud
To hear the^ largely, but I do beseech thee
Do not come nearer to me, for there is
Something in that that will vndo^ us both.

Pan. Alas Sir, am I venom?


Arb. Yes to me.
Though of thy self I think thee to be in
As equal a degree of heat, ^r cold
As Nature can make, yet as ^^sound men
Convert the sweetest, and the nourishingst meats
Into diseases, so shall I distemperd,
Do thee, I prethe^ draw no ^eerer to me.

Pan. Sir this is that I would, I am of late,
Shut from the world, and why it should be thus
Is all I wish to know.

Arb. Why credit me
Panthaea, credit me that am thy brother,
Thy loving brother, that there is a cause
Sufficient, vet unfit for thee to know,
That might undo thee eu^rlastingly
Only to hear^, will thou b^^ credit this;
By heaven ^is true, b^leeu^ it if thou can^t.

Pan. Children a^^ ^oo^^s are e^e^ credulous;
And I am both I think, for I b^l^eue:
If you dissemble be it on your head,
I Will back unto my^rison* yet me thinks
I might be kept in some place where you are:
For in my self ^ find, I know not what
To call it, but it is a great desire
To see you often.

Arb. Fie, you come in a step, what doc you mean
Dear Sister* do not so: Alas Pa^thaea,
Where I am, would you be, why that's the cause
You are imprisond, that you may not be
Where I am.

Pan. Then I must endure it Sir, God keep you.


Abr. Nay, you shall hear the cause in short Panthaea;
And when thou hearst it, thou will blush for me,
And hang thy head down like a Violet
Full of the mornings dew: There is a way
To gain thy freedom, but it is such a one
As puts thee in worse bondage, and I know,
Thou would encounter fire, and make a proof
Whether the Gods have care of innocents,
Rather then follow it; know I have lo^t
The only difference betwixt man, and beast,
My reason.

Pan. Heaven forbid.


Arb. Nay it is gone,
And I am left as far without a bound,
As the wild Ocean that obeyes the winds;
Each suddai^e pass^on throws me as it lifts,
And ouerwhelmes all that oppose my will:
I have beheld thee with a lustful eye:
My heart is set on wickedness, to act
Such sins with thee, as I have been afraid
To think off: If thou dare consent to this,
(Which I beseech thee do not) thou may gain
Thy liberty, and yield me a content:
If not thy dwelling must be dark, and close
Where I may never see thee; For God knows
That laid this punishment upon my pride,
Thy sight at some time will enforce my madness
To make a start eye to thy rauishing:
Now spit upon me, and call all reproaches
Thou can devise together; and at once
Hurl vm against me: for I am a sickness
As killing as the plague, ready to seize thee.

Pan. Far be it from me to r^uile the King:
But it is true, that I should rather choose
To search out death, that else would search out me,
And in a grave sleep with my innocence,
Then welcome such a sin: It is my fate,
To these cross accidents I was ordaind,
And must have patience; and but that my eyes
Have more of woman in vm then my heart,
I would not weep: peace enter you again.

Arb. Farewell, and good Panthaea pray for me;
Thy prayers are pure, that I may find a death,
How ever soon before my passions grow,
That they forget, what I desire, is sin;
For thither they are tending: If that happen,
Then I shall force thee, though thou were a Virgin
By vow to Heaven, and shall pull a heap
Of strange* yet vninuented sins upon me.

Pan. Sir, I will pray for you* yet you shall know
It is a sullen ^ate that gouernes us.
For I could wish as heartily as you
I were no sister to you* I should then
Embrace your lawful love sooner then health.

Arb. Could ^hou affect me then?


Pan. So perfectly
That as it is, I nere shall sway my heart
To like another.

Arb. Then I curse my birth,
Must this be added to my miseries
That thou art willing too, Is there no step
To our full happine^se, but these mere sounds
Brother and Sister.

Pan. There is nothing else
But these alas will separate us more
Then twenty worlds betwixt us.

Arb. I have lived
To conquer men, and now am overthrown
Only by words, Brother and Sister: where
Have those words dwelling? I will find vm out
And utterly destroy them, but they are
Not to be grasp't* let vm be men or beasts,
And I will cut vm from the earth, or towns,
And I will raze vm, and then blow vm up:
Let vm be Seas, and I will drink them off,
And yet have vnquencht fire left in my breast:
Let vm be any thing but merely voice*

Pan. But it is not in the power of any Force
Or policy to conquer them.

Arb. Panthaea,
What shall we do? shall we stand firmly here, and gaze our eyes out?

Pan. Would I could do so;
But I shall weep out mine.

Arb. Accursed man,
Thou boughtst thy reason at too dear a rate;
For thou haft all thy actions bounded in
With curious rules, when cuerie Beast is free:
What is there that acknowledges a kindred
But wretched Man? Who ever saw the Bull
Fearfully leave the Heifer that he likt,
Because they had one Dam?

Pan. Sir, I disturb you,
And my self too; twere better I were gone:
I will not be so foolish as I was.

Arb. Stay, we will love just as becomes our birthes,
No otherwise: Brothers and Sisters may
Walk hand in hand together; so will we
Come nearer: Is there any hurt in this?

Pan. I hope not.


Arb. Faith there is none at all:
And tell me truly now, is there not one
You love above me?

Pan. No by Heaven.


Arb. Yet you sent unto Tigranes Sister.


Pan. True, but for another: for the truth --


Arb No more,
I Will credit thee; I know thou can not lie,
Thou art all truth.

Pan. But is there nothing else
That we may do, but only walk; me thinks
Brothers and sisters lawfully may kiss.

Arb. And so they may Panthaea, so will we,
And kiss again too; we were scrupulous
And foolish, but we will be so no more.

Pan. If you have any mercy, let me go
To prison, to my death, to any thing:
I feel a sin growing upon my blood,
Worse then all these, hotter I fear then yours.

Arb. That is impossible, what should we do?


Pan. Fly ^it for Gods sake.


Arb. So we must, away;
Sin grows upon us more by this delay.

Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quinti Scaena Prima.
Enter Mardonius, and Ligones. Mar. SIR, the King has seen your Commission,
and ^eleeu^s it, and freely by this warrant gives you leave to visit Prince
Tigranes your noble Master.


Lig. I thank his Grace, and kiss his hanes.


Mar. But is the maine of all your business Ended in this?


Lig. I have another, but a worse; I am ashamed, it is a business. --


Mar. You serve a worthy person, and a stranger I am sure you are; you may
employ me if you please, without your purse, such Office should ever be their
own rewards.


Lig. I am bound to your nobleness.


Mar. I may have need of you, and then this courtesy,
If it be any, is not ill bestowed:
But may I ciuilly desire the rest?
I shall not be a hurter, if no helper.

Lig. Sir, you shall know I have lost a foolish daughter,
And with her all my patience; pilferd away,
By a mean Captain of your Kings.

Mar. Stay there Sir:
If he have reached the noble worth of Captain,
He may well claim a worthy gentlewoman,
Though she were yours, and noble.

Lig. I grant all that too: but this wretched fellow
Reaches no further then the empty name,
That serves to feed him; were he valiant,
Or had but in him any noble nature,
That might hereafter promise him a good man;
My carcs were something lighter, and my grave
A span yet from me.

Mar. I confess such fellows
Be in all royal Camps, and have, and must be
To make the (...) of coward more detested
In the mean Soldier, that with such a foil
Sets of much valor: By description
I should now guess him to you. It was Bessus,
I dare almost with confidence pronounce it.

Lig. It Is such a scuruy name as Bessus, and now I think it is he.


Mar. Captain, do you call him?
Believe me Sir, you have a misery
Too mighty for your age: A pox upon him,
(...) You a valiant fellow for all this.

Lig. My daughter is a Whore,
I feel it now too sencible; yet I will see her,
Discharge my self of being Father to her,
And then back to my Country, and there die;
Farewell Captain.
Exit.
Bes. Farewell Sir, farewell, commend me to the Gentlewoman I pr^ia.


1. How now Captain, bear up man.


Bes. Gentlemen ath'sword your hands once more, I have Been kicked again, but
the foolish fellow is penitent,
Has ask't me mercy, and my honor's safe.

2 We knew that, or the foolish fellow had better a kick't His Grandsire.
Confirm, confirm I pray.

1. There be our hands again.


2. Now let him come, and say he was not sorry,
And he sleeps for it.

Bes. Alas good ignorant old man, let him go,
Let him go, these courses will undo him.
Exeunt.
Enter Ligones, and Bacurius. Bac. My Lord your authority is good, and I am
glad it is so, for my confent would never hinder you from seeing your own
King. I am a Minister, but not a governor of this state; yonder is your King,
I Will leave you.

Exit.
Lig. There he is indeed,
Enter Tig. and Spaco. And with him my disloyal child.

Tig. I do perceive my fault so much, that yet
Me thinks thou should not have forgiven me.

Lig. Health to your Majesty.


Tig. What? good Ligones, welcome; what business brought thee hither?


Lig. Several Businesses.
My public business will appear by this:
I have a message to deliver, which
If it please you so to authorize, is
An embassage from the Armenian state;
Unto Arbaces for your liberty*
The offer's there set down, please you to read it.

Tig. There is no alteration happened
Since I came thence?

Lig. None Sir, all is as it was.


Tig. And all our friends are well.


Lig. All very well.


Spa. Though I have done nothing but what was good,
I dare not see my Father: It was fault
Enough not to acquaint him with that good.

Lig. Madam I should have seen you.


Spa. O good Sir forgive me.


Lig. Forgive you, why I am no kin to you, am I?


Spa. Should it be measured by my mean deserts,
Indeed you are not.

Lig. Thou could prate unhappily
Ere thou could go, would thou could do as well.
And how does your custom hold out here.

Spa. Sir.


Lig. Are you in private still, or how?


Spa. What do you mean?


Lig Do you take money? are you come to sell sin yet? perhaps I can help
you to liberal Clients: or has not the King cast you off yet? O thou vild
creature, whose best commendation is, that thou art a young Whore. I would thy
Mother had lived to see this: or rather would I had dyed ere I had seen it:
why did not make me acquainted when thou were first resolved to be a Who^e?
I would have seen thy hot lust satisfied more privately. I would have kept a
dancer, and a whole consort of Musitions in mine own house, only to fiddle
thee.


Spa. Sir I was never whore.


Lig. If thou could not say so much for thy self thou should be Carted.


Tig. Ligones I have read it, and like it,
You shall deliver it.

Lig. Well Sir I will: but I have private business with you.


Tig. Speak, what is it?


Lig. How has my age deserved so ill of you,
That you can pick no strumpets in the Land,
But out of my breed.

Tig. Strumpets good Ligones?


Lig. Yes, and I wish to have you know, I scorn
To get a Whore for any Prince alive,
And yet scorn will not help me thinks: My daughter
Might have been spared, there were enough beside.

Tig. May I not prosper, but She Is innocent
As morning light for me, and I dare swear
For all the world.

Lig. Why is she with you then?
Can she wait on you better then your men,
Has she a gift in plucking off your stockings,
Can she make Cawdles well, or cut your Corns,
Why do you keep her with you? For your Queen
I know you do contemn her, so should I
And every Subject else think much at it.

Tig. ^ et vm think much, but it is more firm then earth
Thou see thy Queen there.

Lig. Then have I made a fair hand, I called her Whore,
If I shall speak now as her Father, I cannot of use
But greatly rejoice that she shall be a Queen: but if
I should speak to you as a Statesman she were more fit
To be your Whore.

Tig. Get you about your business to Arbaces,
Now you talk idly.

Lig. Yes Sir, I will go.
And shall she be a Queeue, she had more wit
Then her old Father when she ran away:
Shall she be a Queen, now by my troth it is fine,
He dance out of all measure at her wedding:
Shall I not Sir?

Tigr. Yes marry shall thou.


Lig. I'e make these witherd Kexes bear my body
Two h^^rest gether above ground.

Tigr. Nay, go* my business requires haste.


Lig. Good God preserve you, you are an excellent King.


Spa. Farewell good Father.


Lig. Farewell sweet virtuous Daughter;
Ineuer was so Joyful in my life,
That I remember: shall she be a Queen?
Now I perceive a man may weep for joy,
I had thought they had lied that said so.
Exit.
Tig. Come my dear love.

Spa. But you may see another
May alter that again.

Tigr. Urge it no more;
I have made up a new strong constancy,
Not to be shook with eyes; I know I have
The passions of a man, but if I meet
With any subject that shall hold my eyes
More firmly then is fit; I Will think of thee,
And run away from it: let that suffice.
Exeunt.
Enter Bacurius, and a servant. Bac. Three gentlemen without to speak with me?


Ser. Yes Sir. Bac. Let them come in.


Ser. They are enterd Sir already.


Enter Bessus, and Swordmen. Bac. Now fellows, your business, are these the
Gentlemen.


Bess. My Lord I have made bold to bring these Gentlemen my Friends ath'sword
along with me.


Bac. I am afraid you will fight then.


Bes. My good Lord I will not, your Lordship is mistaken,
Fear not Lord.

Bac. Sir I am sorry fort.

Bes. I can ask no more in honor, Gentlemen you hear my Lord is sorry:


Bac. Not that I have beaten you, but beaten one that will be beaten: one whose
dull body will require launcing: As surfeits do the diet, spring and full.
Stock Fish? Now to your swordmen, what come they for good Captain


Bes. It seems your Lordship has forgot my name.


Bac. No nor your nature neither, though they are things fitter I confess for
any thing, then my remembrance, or any honest man's, what shall these billets
do, be pilde up in my VVood-yard?


Bes Your Lordship holds your mirth still, God continue it: but for these
Gentlemen they come.


Bac. To swear you are a Coward, spare your Book, I do believe it.


Bes. Your Lordship still draws wide, they come to vouch under their valiant
hands, I am no Coward.


Bac. That would be a show indeed worth seeing: sir be wise and take money
for this motion, travel with it, and where the name of Bessus has been known,
or a good Coward stirring, twill yield more then a tilting. This will prove
more beneficial to you, if you be thriftie, then your Captaineship, and more
natural; Men of most valiant hands is this true?


2. It is so most renowned,
It Is somewhat strange.

1. Lord, it is strange, yet true; we have examined from your Lordships foot
there to this man's head, the nature of the beatings; and we do find his honor
is come off clean, and sufficient: This as our swords shall help us.


Bac. You are much bound to your bilbow-men, I am glad you are straight again
Captain* twere good you would think some way to gratify them, they have
undergone a labor for you Bessus, would have puzzeld Hercules, with all his
valor.


2. Your Lordship must understand we are no men ath' Law, that take pay for our
opinions: it is sufficient we have cleared our friend.


Bac. Yet here is something due, which I as touched in conscience will discharge
Captain; I Will pay this rent for you.


Bess. Spare your self my good Lord; my brave friends aim at nothing but the
virtue.


Bac. That's but a cold discharge Sir for their pains.


2. O Lord* my good Lord.


Bac. Be not so modest, I will give you something.


Bes. They shall dine with your Lordship, that is sufficient.


Bac. Something in hand the while; ye rogues, ye applesquiers: do you come
hither with your botled valor, your windle frothe, to limit out my beatings.


1. I do beseech your Lordship.


2. O good Lord.


Bac: Sfoote, what a many of beaten slaves are here? get me a cudgel sir,
and a tough one.


2. More of your foot, I do beseech your Lordship.


Bac. You shall, you shall dog, and your fellow beagle.


1. A this side good my Lord.


Bac. Off with your swords, for if you hurt my foot, I Will have you fleade you
rascals.


1. Mines off my Lord.


2. I beseech your Lordship stay a little, my strap's tied to my codpiece
point: Now when you please.


Bac. Captain, these are your valiant friends, you long for a little too?


Bess. I am very well, I humbly thank your Lordship.


Bac. What Is that in your pocket slave, my key you mungrell? thy buttocks cannot
be so hard, out with it quickly.


2. Here it is Sir, a small piece of Artillery, that a gentleman a dear friend
of your Lordships sent me with to get it mended Sir; for if you mark, the nose
is somewhat loose.


Bac. A friend of mine you rascal, I was never wearier of doing nothing, then
kicking these two foote-bals.


Ser. Here Is a good cudgel Sir.


Bac. It comes too late; I am weary, prithee do thou beat vm.


2. My Lord this is foul play in faith, to put a fresh man upon us; Men are but
men.


Bac. That i^^t shall save your bones, up with your rotten regiment, and be
gone; I had rather thresh, then be bound to kick these raskals, till they
cride hold: Bessus you may put your hand to them now, and then you are quit.
Farewell, as you like this, pray visit me again, twill keep me in good
breath.


2. Has a devilish hard foot, I never felt the like.


1. Nor I, and yet I Am sure I ha felt a hundred.


2. If he kick thus ith dog-daies, he will be dry founderd: what cure now
Captain, besides oil of bays?


Bess. Why well enough I warrant you, you can go.


2. Yes, God be thanked; but I feel a shrewd ach, sure he has sprang my huckle
bone.


1. I ha loft a haunch.


Bess. A little butter friend, a little butter* butter and parselie is a
sovereign matter: probatum est.


2. Captain, we must request your hands now to our honors.


Bess. Yes marry shall ye, and then let all the world come, we are valiant to
our selves, and there is an end:


1. Nay, then we must be valiant; O my ribs.


2. O my small guts, a plague upon these sharp toe'd shoes, they are
murderers.

Exeunt.
Enter Arbaces with his Sword drawn. Arb. It is resolved, I bore it whilst I
could,
I can no more, Hell open all thy gates,
And I will thorough them; if they be shut,
I Will batter vm, but I will find the place
Where the most damned have dwelling; ere I end,
Amongst them all they shall not have a sin,
But I may call it mine: I must begin
With murder of my friend, and so go on
To an incestuous rauishing, and end
My life and sins with a forbidden blow
Upon my self.
Enter Mardonius.
Mardo. What Tragedy is nere?
That hand was never wont to draw a Sword,
But it cride dead to something:

Arb. Mar. have you bid Gobrius come?


Mar. How do you Sir?


Arb. well, is he coming?


Mar. why Sir are you thus?
why does your hand proclaim a lawless war
Against your self?

Arb. Thou answerest me one question with another,
Is Gobrius coming?

Mar. Sir he is.


Arb. It Is well.


(...). I can forbear your questions then, be gone Sir, I have marked.


Arb. Mark less, it troubles you and me.


Mar. You are more variable then you were.


Arb. It may be so.


Mar. To day no Hermit could be humblier
Then you were to us all.

Arb. And what of this?


Mar. And now you take new rage into your eyes,
As you would look us all out of the Land.

Arb. I do confess it, will that satisfy,
I prithee get thee gone.

Mar. Sir I will speak.


Arb. Will ye?


Mar. It is my duty,
I fear you will kill your self: I am a subject,
And you shall do me wrong in it: it is my cause,
And I may speak.

Arb. Thou art not traind in sin,
It seems Mardonius: kill my self, by heaven
I will not do it yet; and when I will,
I Will tell thee then: I shall be such a creature,
That thou will give me leave without a word.
There is a method in man's wickedness,
It grows up by degrees; I am not come
So high as killing of my self, there are
A hundred thousand sins twixt me and it,
Which I must do, I shall come toot at last;
But take my oath not now, be satisfied,
And get thee hence.

Mar. I am sorry it is so ill.


Arb. Be sorry then,
True sorrow is alone, grieve by thy self.

Mar. I pray you let me see your sword put up
Before I go; I Will leave you then.

Arb. Why so?
What folly is this in thee? is it not
As apt to mischief as it was before?
Can I not reach it think thou? these are toys
For children to be pleased with, and not men;
Now I am safe you think: I would the book
Of Fate were here, my sword is not so sure,
But I should get it out, and mangle that
That all the destinies should quite forget
Their fixed decrees, and have to make us new
Far other Fortunes, mine could not be worse,
Will thou now leave me?

Mar. God put into your bosom temperate thoughts,
I Will leave you though I fear.
Exit.
Arb. Go, thou art honest,
Why should the hasty errors of my youth
Be so unpardonable, to draw a sin
Helpelesse upon me?
Enter Gobrius.
Gob There is the King, now it is ripe.


Arb. Draw near thou guilty man,
That art the author of the loathedst crime
Five ages have brought forth, and hear me speak
Curses incurable, and all the evils
Man's b^die or his spirit can receive
Be with thee.

Gob. Why Sir do you curse me thus?


Arb. Why do I curse thee, if there be a man
Subtle in curses, that exceedes the rest,
His worst wish on thee. Thou have broke my heart.

Gob. How Sir? Have I preserved you from a child,
From all the arrows, malice or ambition
Could shoot at you, and have I this for pay?

Arb. It Is true thou did preserve me, and in that
Were crueiler then hardened murderers
Of Infants and their mothers; thou did save me
Only till thou had studdied out a way
How to destroy me cunningly thy self:
This was a curious way of torturing.

Gob. What do you mean?


Arb. Thou know the evils thou have done to me,
Do thou remember all those witching letters
Thou sentst unto me to Armenia,
Filled with the praise of my beloved Sister,
Where thou extolst her beauty; what had I
To do with that, what could her beauty be
To me, and thou did write how well she loved me,
Do thou remember this: so that I doated
Something before I saw her.

Gob. This is true.


Arb. Is it, and ^ when I was returned thou know
Thou did pursue it, till thou woundst me into
Such a strange, and vnbeleeu'd affection,
As good men cannot think on.

Gob. This I grant, I think I was the cause.


Arb. Were thou* Nay more, I think thou meantst it.


Gob. Sir I have a lie
As I love God and honesty, I did:
It was my meaning.

Arb. Be thine own sad Judge,
A further condemnation will not need:
Prepare thy self to die.

Gob. Why Sir to die?
Why would thou live, was ever yet offender
So impudent, that had a thought of mercy
After confession of a crime like this?
Get out I cannot, where thou hurlst me in,
But I can take revenge, that is all the sweetness
Left for me.

Gob. Now is the time, hear me but speak.


Arb. No, yet I will be far more merciful
Then thou were to me; thou did steal into me,
And never gave me warning: so much time
As I give thee now, had prevented thee
For ever. Notwithstanding all thy sins,
If thou have hope, that there is yet a prayer
To save thee, turn, and speak it to your self.

Gob. Sir, you shall know your sins before you do vm If you kill me.


Arb. I will not stay then.


Gob. Know you kill your Father.


Arb. How?


Gob. You kill your Father.


Arb. My Father? though I know it for a lie
Made out of fear to save thy stained life:
The very reverence of the word comes cross me,
And ties mine arm down.

Gob. I will tell you that shall heighten you again, I am thy
Father, I charge thee hear me.

Arb. If it should be so,
As it is most false, and that I should be sound
A bastard issue, the despised fruit
Of lawless lust, I should no more admire
All my wild passions: but another truth
Shall be wrung from thee: If I could come by
The spirit of pain, it should be powered on thee,
Till thou allowest thy self more full of lies
Then he that teaches thee.
Enter Arane.
Arane. Turn thee about,
I come to speak to thee thou wicked man,
Hear me thou Tyrant.

Arb. I will turn to thee,
Hear me thou Strumpet: I have blotted out
The name of mother, as thou have thy shame.

Ara. My shame, thou have less shame then any thing:
Why do thou keep my daughter in a prison?
Why do thou call her Sister, and do this?

Arb. Cease thou strange impudence, and answer quickly,
If thou contemn'st me, this will ask an answer,
And have it.

Ara. Help me gentle Gobrius.


Arb. Guilt dare not help guilt, though they grow together
In doing ill, yet at the punishment
They sever, and each flies the noise of other,
Think not of help, answer.

Ara. I will, to what?


Arb. To such a thing as if it be a truth,
Think what a creature thou have made thy self,
That did not shame to do, what I must blush
Only to ask thee: tell me who I am,
Whose son I am, without all circumstance;
Be thou as hasty, as my Sword will be
If thou refusest.

Ara. Why you are his son.


Arb. His son?
Swear, swear, thou worse then woman damned.

Ara. By all that's good you are.


Arb. Then art thou all that ever was known bad. Now is
The cause of all my strange misfortunes come to light:
What reverence expects thou from a child
To bring forth which thou have offended Heaven,
Thy husband and the Land: Adulterous witch
I know now why thou would have poisoned me,
I was thy lust which thou would have forgot:
Thou wicked mother of my sins, and me,
Show me the way to the inheritance
I have by thee: which is a spacious world
Of impious acts, that I may soon possess it:
Plagues rott thee, as thou live, and such diseases
As use to pay lust, recompense thy deed.

Gob. You do not know why you curse thus.


Arb. Too well:
You are a pair of Vipers, and behold
The Serpent you have got; there is no beast
But if he knew, it has a pedigree
As brave as mine, for they have more discents,
And I am every way as beastly got,
As far without the compass of a law,
As they.

Ara. You spend your rage, and words in vain,
And rail upon a guess: hear us a little.

Arb. No I will never hear, but talk away
My breath, and die.

Gob. Why but you are no Baftard.


Arb. Howe's that?


Ara. Nor child of mine.


Arb. Still you go on in wonders to me.


Gob. Pray be more patient, I may bring comfort to you.


Arb. I will kneel,
And hear with the obedience of a child;
Good Father speak, I do acknowledge you,
So you bring comfort.

Gob. First know our last King your supposed Father
Was old and feeble when he married her,
And almost all the Land as she past hope
Of issue from him.

Arb. Therefore she took leave
To play the whore, because the King was old:
Is this the comfort?

Arb. what will you find out
To give me satisfaction, when you find
How you have injured me: let fire consume me,
If ever I were whore.

Gob. Forbear these starts,
Or I will leave you wedded to despair,
As you are now: if you can find a temper,
My breath shall be a pleasant western wind,
That cooles, and blastes not.

Arb. Bring it out good Father,
I Will lie, and listen here as reverently
As to an Angel: If I breathe too loud,
Tell me; for I would be as still as night.

Gob. Our King I say was old, and this our Queen
Desired to bring an heir; but yet her husband
She thought was past it, and to be dishonest
I think she would not; if she would have been,
The truth is, she was watched so narrowly,
And had so slender opportunity,
She hardly could have been: But yet her cunning
Found out this way; she feigned her self with child,
And posts were sent in haste throughout the Land,
And God was humbly thankt in every Church,
That so had blessed the Queen, and prayers were made
For her safe going, and delivery:
She feigned now to grow bigger, and perceived
This hope of issue made her feared, and brought
A far more large respect from every man,
And saw her power increase, and was resolved,
Since she belieu'd she could not haue't indeed;
At least she would be thought to have a child.

Arb. Do I not hear it well; nay, I will make
No noise at all; but pray you to the point,
Quick as you can.

Gob Now when the time was full,
She should be brought abed; I had a son
Borne, which was you: This the Queen hearing of,
Moved me to let her have you, and such reasons
She showed me as she knew would tie
My secrecy: she swear you should be King;
And o be short, ^ did deliue^ you
Unto her, and pretended you we e dead;
And in mine own house kept a Funeral,
And had an emprie coffin put in earth:
That night the Queen feigned hastily to labor,
And by a pair of women of her own.
Which she had charmed, she made the world believe
She was delivered of you: you grew up
As the Kings son* till you were six year old;
Then did the King die, and did leave to me
Protection of the Realm; and contrary
To his own expectation, left this Queen
Truly with child indeed of the fair Princess
Panthaea: Then she could have torn her heir,
And did alone to me yet durst not speak
In publi^e; for she knew she should be found
A Traitor, and her talk would have been thought
Madness or any thing rather then truth:
This was the only cause why she did seek
To poison you, and I to keep you safe:
And this the reason why I sought to kindle
Some spark of love in you to fair Panthaea,
That she might get part of her right again.

Arb. And have you made an end now, is this all?
If not, I will be still till I am aged,
Till all my heirs are silver.

Gob This is all.


Arb. And is it true say you Maddam?


Ara. Yes God knows it is most true.


Arb. Panthaea then is not my Sister.


Gob No.


Arb. But can you prove this?
If you will give consent: else who dare go about it.

Arb. Give consent?
Why I will have them all that know it rackt
To get this from vm: All that waits without
Come in, what ere you be come in, and be
Partakers of my Joy: O you are welcome.
Ent. Mar: Bessus, and others. Mardonius the best news, nay, draw no nearer
They all shall hear it: I am found no King.

Mar. Is that so good news?


Arb. Yes, the happiest news that ere was heard.


Mar. Indeed twere well for you,
If you might be a little less obeyed.

Arb. On, call the Queen.


Mar. Why she is there.


Arb. The Queen Mardonius, Panthaea is the Queen,
And I am plain Arbaces, go some one,
She is in Gobrius house; since I saw you
There are a thousand things deliuerd to me
You little dream of.

Mar. So it should seem: My Lord,
What furi's this.

Gob. Believe me it is no fury,
All that he says is truth.

Mar It Is very strange.


Arb Why do you keep your hats off Gentlemen,
Is it to me? (...) good faith it must not be:
I cannot now command you, but I pray you
For the respect you bare me, when you took
Me for your King, each man clap on his hat at my desire.

Mar. We will: but you are not found
So mean a man, but that you may be covered
As well as we, may you not?

Arb. O not here,
You may but not I, for here is my Father in presence,

Mar. Where?


Arb. Why there O the whole story
Would be a wilderness to loose thy self
For ever; O pardon me dear Father,
For all the idle, and vnreuerent words
That I have spoke in idle moodes to you:
I am Arbaces, we all fellow subjects,
Nor is the Queen Panthaa now my Sister.

Bes. Why if you remember fellow subject Arbaces, I told you once she was not
your sister, I say she looked nothing like you.


Arb. I think you did good Captain Bessus.


Bes. Here will arise another question now amongst the Swordmen, whether I be
to call him to account for beating me, now he is proved no King.

Enter Ligones.
Ma. Sir, here is Ligones
The Agent for the Armenian King.

Arb. Where is he, I know your business good Ligones,


Lig. We must have our King again, and will.


Arb. I knew that was your business, you shall have
Your King again, and have him so again
As never King was had. Go one of you
And bid Bacurius bring Tigranes hither,
And bring the Lady with him, that Panthaea
The Queen Panthaa sent me word this morning
Was brave Tigranes mistress.

Lig. It Is Spaconia.


Arb. I, I, Spaconia.


Lig. She is my daughter.


Arb. She is so, I could now tell any thing
I never heard; your King shall go so home
As never man went.

Ma. Shall he go on's head?

Arb. He shall have Chariots easier then air
That I will have invented; and nere think
He shall pay any ransom; and thy self
That art the Messenger shall ride before him
On a Horse cut out of an entire Diamond,
That shall be made to go with golden wheels,
I know not how yet.

Lig. Why I shall be made
For ever, they belied this King with us
And savd he was unkind.

Arb And then thy daughter,
She shall have some strange think, well have the kingdom
Sold utterly, and put into a toy.
Which she shall wear about her carelessly
Some where or other.
See the virtuous Queen.
Enter Pan. Behold the humblest subject that you have
Kneel here before you.

Pan. Why kneel you
To me that am your vassal?

Arb. Grant me one request.


Pan. Alas, what can I grant you?
What I can I will.

Arb. That you will please to marry me,
If I can prove it lawful.

Pan. Is that all?
More willingly, then I would draw this air.

Arb. I Will kiss this hand in earnest.


Mar. Sir, Tigranes is coming though he made it strange
To see the Princess any more.

Arb. The Queen,
Enter Tig. and Spa. Thou meanest: O my Tigranes pardon me,
Tread on my neck I freely offer it,
And if thou be so given; take revenge,
For I have injured thee.

Tig. No, I forgive,
And rejoice more that you have found repentance,
Then I my liberty.

Arb. May thou be happy
In thy fair choice; for thou art temperate:
You owe no ransom to the state, know that;
I have a thousand joys to tell you of,
which yet I dare not v^ter, till I pay
My thanks to Heaven for vm: will you go
with me, and ^^l e me; pray you do.

Tig. I will.


Arb. Take then your fair one with you, and your Queen
Of goodness, and of us; O give me leave
To take your arm in mine: Come every one
That takes delight in goodness, help to sing
Loud thanks for me, that I am proved no King.

FINIS.

