blazon or coat of arms
An Act of common Council.
WHere at a court of common Council, holden at the Guild Hall of this City of
London, on the tenth day of November, in the xxix. year of the reign of our
sovereign Lady the Queens most excellent Majesty that now is. Before the
right honorable George Bond Lord Mayor of the said City, and the right
worshipful the Aldermen his brethren, and the commons in the same common
Council assembled. It was amongst other things enacted, established, and
ordered: that from after the viii. day of the same month of November, until
the feast of the birth of our Lord God, which shall be in Anno Domini, 1589. in
all and every case and causes, where the seller of any cloth or clothes
whatsoever, Linen or Woollen, Kersies, Fryses, Rugges, Bays, Cottons, or other
clothes or things whatsoever, shall be by virtue of any Acts, custom, usage
or ordinances heretofore established or used within the said City. By common
Council or otherwise for the payment of any quantity sum or sums of money
whatsoever usually paid, or to be paid by any seller in the City of London,
or the liberty, or the Suburbs thereof, for or by the name of Hallage: That
then the buyer of all and every such Cloth or Clothes, Linen or Woollen,
Kersyes, Fryses, Rugges, Bays, Cottons or other Clothes or things
whatsoever, shall by virtue of the said act be charged and chargeable to pay
like quantity sum or sums of money, as has been, is or shall be usually paid
or paiable by the seller. The same to be paid to the hand or hands of such
person or persons, as shall be appointed from time to time, by the Lord Mayor and
court of Aldermen for the time being, or by the governors of Christ's
Hospital or the more part of them, for the collection of the money which shall be
due and paiable by such sellers, to be employed toward the charges of the
buylding of Blackwel Hall. And it was likewise enacted yt if any person or
persons, which after ye said xiii. day of this present month, shall buy or
cause, or procure to be bought any such clothes, Lynnen, Kersyes, Fryses,
Rugges, Bays, Cottons or other things whatsoever before expressed, or in true
understanding or meaning intended by this act. And shall not upon demand to
him or them, to be made by such person or persons, as are or shall be appointed
for collection thereof as aforesaid, before the Saturday night next after such
demand, pay or cause to be paid to the same person or persons so appointed, or
to be appointed, such quantity sum or sums of money as is appointed,
meant and truly intended by this Act. That then every person which shall
deny or fail to pay such quantity sum or sums of money, shall for every
penny which he shall so deny, refuse, and fail to pay, forfeite and pay the
sum of iii. shillings iiii. pence, to be levied by distress of the goods and
Cattels of such person or persons, which shall so deny, refuse and fail,
whersoeuer they shall be found by such person or persons, as are or shall be
appointed as aforesaid. And it was then further enacted by the authority
aforesaid, yt if any clothes, either Linen or Woollen, Kersies or other things
before expressed or intended by this Act, which shall be brought to this City,
shall be harbored or received in any house, Shop, Chamber, or other place
within this City out of Blackwell hall, or the place where clothes shall be
appointed to be sold. That then if such person or persons in whose house,
Shop, Chamber, or place, the same clothes or other things as aforesaid,
shall be so harbored or received, shall not before Saturday night, next after
demand, pay to the Collectors appointed for yt purpose as aforesaid, or to
some one of them, all such sums of money to the use aforesaid, as should have
beeue due for Hallage of the same clothes or other things, if the same had
been brought to Blackwell hall and there bought and sold: then such person or
persons, shall forfeite the sum of iii. shillings iiii pence for every penny,
which so should have been due. The same penalty to be recovered by action of
debt, bill, playnt, or information, commensed or exhibited, and pursued in the
Queens Majesty's court holden in the utter chamber of ye Guild Hall of this
City, commonly called the Majors court, by and in the name of the
Chamberlain of this City, or else to be levied by way of distress by ye
person or persons, which are or shall be appointed as aforesaid, all which sums
of money so to be recovered either by distress or otherwise, over and above the
charges of the suit, shall be employed in and about the building of the said
Blackwell hall.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, Printer for the City of London.

printer's or publisher's device


