HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

I. G. M.

By the Major.
WHereas the infection of the Plague is daily dispersed more and more in diverse
parts of this City and the Liberties thereof, as well for that the houses
infected have not been, nor yet are kept shut up, according to the
Proclamation, and many Precepts and Orders in that behalf made and taken,
as well by the Kings most excellent Majesty, as by me and my Brethren the
Aldermen, as also for that the people infected, and whose houses are infected
(against all honesty, humane ciuility, and good conscience, seeking as it were
rather the desolation of the City, and of this Kingdom by dispersing of the
infection, then otherwise) do daily intrude themselves into all companies, both
private and public, as well at Sermons as elsewhere, and do flock and follow
the dead to the Grave in multitudes, one still infecting another, to the
displeasure of Almighty God, and great grief of his Majesty, to understand of
the destruction of his Subjects in such wilful and desperate manner. To the
end therefore that the cause of further infection, which may happen by any of
the aforesaid occasions (if God be so pleased) may be taken away, and the Kings
Subjects (whom in his Princely and gracious care had over them, he tendereth as
dearly as himself) may be preserved from that peril. These are in Gods Name
to exhort and persuade, and in his Majesty's Name straightly to charge and
command all persons whatsoever, inhabiting within this City and the Liberties
thereof, whose houses now are, or hereafter during this Visitation, shall be
infected with the Plague, upon their Allegiance, and due obedience, that they
do owe unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, to keep their said houses shut
up, for the space of xxviii. days next after the burial of any dying of the
Plague out of their said houses, And that the people infected, and of the said
infected houses, do continue in their said houses, during the said time of
xxviii. days, and none of them go abroad, but only for necessary food, and
with red wands in their hands, and do not come into, or frequent any public
assemblies, nor follow the dead infected bodies to the Grave, upon pain of his
Highness heavy displeasure and imprisonment of their bodies so offending by
the space of ten days, without bail or maynprize: Requiring also, and
charging all Churchwardens, Constables, Beadles of Wards, Clerks and Sextons
of Parishes, and all other Officers and Ministers within this City and the
Liberties thereof, every one of them in his place and office, carefully to
look unto the performance of the premises, and of all other orders formerly
set down by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City for the time being, or
by me and my Brethren the Aldermen, concerning the avoiding of the Plague, upon
like pain as aforesaid. Given at Guild Hall, the fifth day of April, 1625.

God save the King.
London Printed by Isaac Iaggard, Printer to the Honorable City of London.
1625.


