THE KINGS Medicines for the Plague, Prescribed for the year 1604. by the
whole College of Physicians, both Spiritual and Temporal. And now most
fitting for this dangerous time of Infection, to be used all England over.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold by F. Coules, at his Shop
in the upper end of the Old Bailey near Newgate 1636.

The Kings Medicine of the former year, against the Plague of the Body.
The first part.
TAke Sage of virtue, Rue, (otherwise called Herb-grace) Elder-leaves, red
Bramble leaves, and Wormwood, of each of them a good ^andfull, stamp them all
together, and then strain them through a fine linen cloth: and put to the
juice a quart of perfect good white Wine, and a good quantity of white wine
Vinegar: mingle them all together, and put thereto a quarter of an ounce of
white Ginger, beaten to small powder, use todrink this Medicine every morning
fasting (for the space of nine days together) the quantity of a spoonful at a
time, and this will (by Gods help) preserve you (...) the space of a whole
year.

The Kings Medicine for this present year against the Plague of the soul, and
the effect thereof.
TAke the herb of Virtue, (the doing of good, Psalm. 34. 14.) and the herb of
Patience (otherwise called a waiting upon the Lord, Psalm. 37. 7.) wherewith
possess your souls, Luke 21. 19. In steed of Herb-grace, take another, called
Christ's grace: and in the place of Elder-leaues, Elders Examples, following and
imitating the Elders of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21. prostrating your selves before the
Majesty of God. Let not two things be the ingredients of this Spiritual Kings
Medicine, which are in the corporal, the Bramble and the Wormwood. Leave out
the proud Bramble, and his leaves, for he would exalt himself above the other
trees, Judges 9. 15. Secondly leave out also the hitter wormwood of hate, anger
and envy: and according to the counsel of God (the best Physician) Deuteronomy. 29.
18. Let there not be among you any root of bitterness and Wormwood. In steed
of these two, take the humble Figgetree and his leaves, who would not exalt
himself above others, Judges 9. 11. Mingle herein the broad Figge-leaues of
lowliness, humbling your selves under the mighty hand of God, 1. Peter 5. 6.
Covering your good works (as the Figtree his sweet fruit) with the broad leaves
of humility. Take of each of those a good quantity, and be abundant in good
works, and in the Work of the Lord (as the Apostle speaks) being filled with
all fullness of God, Ephc. 3. 9. Strain these through the fine strainer of
uprightness and integrity, walking uprightly, Psalm. 15. Avoiding all
hypocrisy, and laying aside all guile and dissimulation, 1 Pet. 2. 1. In steed
of white Ginger, out thereunto the hot Ginger of love toward God and thy
neighbor: let it be white and pure, loving without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9.
Further, hot and fervent. Above all things, having fervent love among you, I
Pet. 4. 8. Break with the stamper of obedience and humility, the hardness of
thy heart: Let it smite thee as David's did, make as it were a small powder of
it through humility: and if to day thou hear the voice of the Lord, ^arden
not thy heart, Heb. 3. In steed of white Wine, put to the juice of these: The
perfect white and pure Wine, that is, the blood of Jesus Christ: and the sour
Vinegar of his death and passion: For, only by the virtue of this, the
Medicine must operate. Use to take in this Medicine every day fasting: sometime
outwardly and corporally (when in public calamity it is appointed by the
superior power, to reprove a present judgment) but always inwardly and
Spiritually, loosing the hands of wickedness, taking off the heavy burdens,
letting the oppressed go free: covering the naked, dealing thy bread to the
hungry, Esaias 5. 8. Use this (I say) not for the space of nine days together,
but the whole year, yea all the days of thy life. So continuing in the Lord,
Phil. 4. 1. and being not weary of well doing, 2 These. 3. 13. And this will (by
Gods help) preserve you from the Plague of the soul, and the infection of the
world. I say, not a whole year; but all thy life time, till against the future
resurrection, both with body and soul, thou may live eternally.

The Kings bodily Me dicine after Infection.
The second part.
IF it fortune, that one be stricken with the Plague before he have taken the
former Medicines: then take the things rehearsed and put thereto a spoonful of
Bettony water, and as much Scabious water, and a pretty quantity of fine
Treacle and temper them well together, and let the Patient use to drink it
often, and it will expel the venom or poison forthwith. But if the Botch do
happen to appear, then take a good quantity of Elder-leaves, red Bramble
leaves, and Mustard Seed: stamp them well together, and make a Plaster
thereof: apply it to the sore, and it will draw forth all the venom and
corruption.

The second part of the Spiritual Medicine.
IF it fortune, that thou art stricken with the Plague, before thou have taken
in the former Kings Medicine of repentance, then take the things before
rehearsed: and lest in thy affliction thou wax impatient, put thereunto, not
the Balm of Gilead, Jerem. 46. 11. But the Spiritual Treacle and Mithridate
of the consideration of Gods will and Providence, Psalm. 39. 9. opening not thy
Mouth because he does it: and holding that, nothing can happen unto thee
without his appointment. Further, that thou should not distrust or despair
of the remission of thy sins, of the health of thy soul, and of the
goodness and power of God the Physician; In steed of Betony water, put
thereunto a good quantity of that Aqua Benedicta, of that blessed water of Gods
mercy, praying with David, Take away, O Lord, the trespass of thy servant, 2.
Sam. 24. 10. and wash me that I may be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51. This will
cool the heat of thy conscience, and comfort thy weary bones. Add as much of
the water of life, Ioh. 4. 10. which is powered into our hearts by the holy
Ghost, unto everlasting life. Fetch it by prayer, of Christ the Physician and
Doctor of our souls: for he does give it to quench our thirst, John 4. 14.
Put hereunto thy Baptism water, representing the blood of Christ Jesus: It is
one of the three witnesses 1 John 5. Assuring thee of the remission of thy
sins. Leave out Scabious water: I mean that Scabby-holy-water, with the Bulls
and Indulgences of the Antichrist: for it will make thee to get scabs and
sores in thy soul, and be unto thee, not the water of Life, but the water of
Death. Add also a good quantity of that comfortable Treacle of hope, with the
consideration of the future glory, being sure that thy Redeemer lives, and
that thou shall see him with thine eyes, Job 19. 25. Mingle and temper thus
well together, this Patience, Faith, Confidence and Hope, and let the Patient
that is infected with either of them both, use to drink this Kings Medicine
often: let all his life (in health or in sickness) be a continual repentance
and Meditation of those things, and it will expel the venom of his sin, of
impatience, distrustfulnesse, and immoderate fear. But if the filthy botch of
impatience, distrustfulnesse, and immoderate fear do happen to appear: then
in steed of Elder-leaves, take a good quantity of Elders examples: the Faith of
Abraham, Patience of Job, the hope of David, and take (my brethren) the
Prophets for an example of patience in suffering adversity, Sam. 5. 10.
Further, take also the Mustardseed of Gods word, Math. 13. 31. with the
excellent commandments, admonitions, promises, and comforts contained therein:
mingle these together, consider upon them, make a Plaster of them, apply it to
thy sore, it will draw forth the venom and corruption of impatience,
distrustfulnesse, and immoderate fear. The Mustard seed, as Pliny does
witness, is both purgativum, and Curativum, it purges the body of ill
humors, and cures the venomous biting of a Serpent: Even so the Spiritual
Mustard seed of the Word, purges and avoydeth the evil humors of the soul,
and heals the venomous biting of that old Serpent the Devil.

Sundry Medicines for the Plague.
Those that fear the Plague, and are not Infected, let them take of this
drink hereafter following, which is twice in every week half a spoonful at
a time: it has been observed, that never any one dyed of the Sickness, that
did take it in time.

TAke three Pints of Malmesie, a handful of Rue, as much of Sage, boil these
to a quart: then strain out the herbs, and then take an ounce of Long Pepper,
Vinegar and Nutmegs, all beaten small in a Mortar, and put into the Wine, and
boil it a little, then take it off, and put into it one ounce of Mithridate,
two ounces of the best Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of Aqita-vitae, and put
all into the Wine and so keep it.

The use of it.
If any be infected, take one spoonefull of it as soon as the party does
presume himself infected, lukewarm, and so go to bed, and sweat two or
three hours, and then dry the body well, and keep warm, and drink no cold
drink, but warm drink and Cawdels, and Posset drink with Marigold leaves,
and flowers, when the party has sweat and is well dried with warm clothes,
and so long as the party is ill, take a spoonful morning and evening.

These things ought duly to be looked unto, viz.
IT is very convenient that you keep your houses, streets, yards, backsides,
sinks, and kennels sweet and clean, from all standing Puddels, Dunghils, and
corrupt moystures, which engender stinking savors that may be noisome, or
breed Infection: nor suffer no dogs to come running into your houses: neither
keep any (except it be backward in same place of open air, for they are very
dangerous, and not sufferable in time of sickness, by reason they run from
place to place, and from one house to another, feeding upon the vncleanest
things that are cast forth in the streets, and are a most apt cattle to take
infection of any sickness, and then to bring it into the house.

For ayring your Rooms.
Air your several Rooms with Charcole-fires, made in stone pans or
Chasingdishes, and not in Chimneyes: set your Pannes in the middle of the
Rooms: air every Room once a week (at the least) and put into your fire a
little quantity of Francincense, Juniper, dried Rosemary, or of Bay Leaves.

To smell to.
The root of Enula-Campana, steeped in Vinegar, and lapped in a Handkercher, is
a special thing to smell unto, if you come where the Sickness is.

To taste or chew in the mouth.
The root of Angelica, Setwall, Gencian, Valerian, or Sinamon, is a special
preseruasiue against the Plague, being chewed in the mouth.

To eat.
Eat Sorrel steeped in Vinegar, in the morning fasting, with a little bread
and butter: Sorrel sauce is also very wholesome against the same.

To drink.
Take Rue, Wormwood, and Scabius, sleep't in Ale a whole night, and drink it
fasting every morning.

Another.
The root of Enula-Campana, beaten to powder, is a special remedy against the
Plague, being drunk fasting.

Another.
If any feel themselves already infected, take Angelica water mixed with
Mithridatum, drink it off, then go to bed and sweat thereon.

Another special Preservative.
Take an Egg, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white and the yolke,
and fill the shell only with Saffron, roast the shell and Saffron together, in
embers of Charcoles until the shell war yellow: then beat shell and all
together in a Mortar, with half a spoonefull of Mustard Seed: Now so soon as
any suspicion is had of Infection dissolve the weight of a French Crown in ten
spoonfuls of Posset Ale, drink it lukewarm, and sweat upon it in your naked
bed.

Drink for ordinary Diet.
So near as you can, let the Patients ordinary drink be good small Ale of
eight days old.

For Vomiting.
Vomiting is better than bleeding in this ^ase, and therefore provoke to Vomit
so near ^s you can.

To provoke Vomit.
Take three leaves of Eastrabecca, stamp it, and drink it in Rhenish wine,
Ale, or Posset Ale.

For Purging.
If the party be full of gross humors, let him blood immediately upon the
right arm, on the Liver vein, or on the median vein, in the same arine: so
as no sore appear the first day.

A very wholesome water to be distilled.
Steep Sorrel in Vinegar four and twenty hours, then take it out, and dry
it with a linen cloth, then still it in a Limbeck, drink four spoonfuls with
a little Sugar, then milk upon it till you sweat, if you may: if not, keep
your bed, and sweat upon it. Use this before supper on any evening.

If the Patient happen to be troubled with any Swellings, Botches, Carbuncles,
let him sweat moderately now and then.

Outward Medicines to ripen the Sore.
Take the root of a white Lilly, roast it in a good handful of Sorrel, stamp
it, and apply it thereto very hot, let it lie four and twenty hours, and it
will break the sore.

Another.
Take a small quantity of Leaven, handful of Mallows, a little quantity of
Scabias, cut a white Onyon into pieces with half a dozen heads of Garlic,
boil these together in running water, make Poultus of it, and then lay it hot
to the sore

Another.
Take a hot Loaf, new taken forth of the Oven, apply it to the sore, and it
will doubtless break the same: but afterward bury the same Loaf deep enough
in the ground for fear of any Infection: for if either Dog or any other
thing do feed thereon, it will infect a great many.

For Ayring Apparel.
Let the Apparel of the diseased person be well and often washed, be it linen
or woollen: or let it be ayred in the Sun, or ^uer Pans of fire, or over a
Chasingdish of Coals, and fume the same with Frankin^ense, Juniper, or dried
Rosemary.

To preserve from the Infection of the Plague.
Take Garlic, and peele it, and mince it ^mall, put it into new milk, and eat
it ^asting.

To take the Infection from a house Infected.
Take large Onyons, peele them, and lay three of four of them upon the ground:
let them lie ten days, and those peeled Onyons will gather all the Infection
into them that is in one of those Rooms: but bury those Onyons afterward deep
in the ground.

Against the new burning Fever.
If the Patient be in great heat, as most commonly they will: take of fair
running water a pretty quantity: put it on a Chasingdish of Coals, then put
thereinto a good ^uantity of Sunders beaten to powder, and let it boil half
an hour between two dishes: that done, put a couple of soft linen clothes
into a dish, wet the clothes well in water and Sunders, and apply the same so
hot as you can suffer it to your belly.

To procure sleep to the sick Persons that are diseased, either with the
Plague or the hot Fever.
Take of woman's breast-milke a good quantity, put thereunto of the like
quantity of Aqua-vitae, stir them well together, and moysten therewith the
Temples of the Patient, and his Nosethrils, lay it on with some feather, or
some fine thin ragge.

Butter-milke in this contagious time is generally wholesome to be eaten, and is
a good Preservative against either the Plague or the pestilent Fever.

A Prayer for those that are not Visited.
OH most mighty and merciful Lord God, in whose hands are health and
sickness, who at thy pleasure can kill and comfort: I do confess that my
sins call louder for Justice, then I can cry for mercy, and I deserve all
Plagues and punishments in this life, and the Plague of Plagues in the life to
come, damnation both of body and soul: but Oh Lord, be thou more merciful,
then I can be sinful, and in Jesus Christ be reconciled unto me, and purge
me, and cleanse me from all my sins: and I beseech thee Oh heavenly Father,
at whose Commandment the Angels passed over the houses of the Israelites, when
it struck the Egyptians, (if it be thy blessed will) that this present
Sickness may pass ^uer me and my Family. We do confess, Oh Lord, that I and
others have deserved the Plagues of Egypt: but Oh Lord, howsoever keep us from
the greatest Plague, which is hardness of heart: and if it be thy pleasure,
withold thy heavy hand from us: Do not correct us in thine anger, nor yet
chastise us in thy heavy displeasure, but in thy mercy release us, and if it be
good unto thee, that I and others should taste of this bitter Cup, strengthen
our Faith, increase our Hope, augment our Patience, that so was may rest in thy
peace, rise in thy power, and remain in thy glory, and that for Christ Jesus
sake in whose name we further call upon thee, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

A Prayer for those that are Visited.
OH Lord God, thou best Physician, both of our souls and bodies, who can
bring to the Grave, and pull back again whom thou ^easest, which were moved at
the Prayers of Moses for others: of Ezekiah for himself: Oh Lord hear me for
others, others for me, and all of us for thy Son: and look with the ^ye of
mercy upon me whom it has pleased ^^ee at this time to visit with the Plague
and Sickness. O Lord, I am held in thy fetters: Oh thou which have bound me,
loose me, and if it tend unto thy glory and my good, restore my health unto
me. Oh Lord, I have ^eene an unprofitable servant all my life time: Oh the^
let me not then be bereft of the ^^fe of nature, when I begin the life of
grace: ^ut if thou have disposed of me otherwise, increase my Patience with my
pains: show ^^y strength in sustaining my weakness: and be my strong
fortress in this hour of my trial: give me grace to apprehend, and apply all
the merits and mercies of Christ unto my soul: and oh Lord, let thy Comforter
oppose the Tempter, in such a measure, that he may not prevail against me,
but as thou make me like Lazarus, full of sores, so also let thy Angels carry
me into Abraham's bosom Oh Lord, I entreat, let me obtain even for his sake,
for whom thou have promised and bound thy self, to hear and help the
afflicted, even thy Son, and my Savior, Christ Jesus: To whom with thee and
thy blessed Spirit, be all praise, etc.

FINIS.

