Orders conceived and agreed to be published, by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London, and the Justices of Peace of the Counties of Middlesex and
Surrey, by direction from the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable privy
COUNCIL.
WHereas in the first year of his Majesty's most happy reign over this Realm
of England, an Act was made, for the charitable relief, and ordering of
persons Infected with the Plague: whereby Authority is given to Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers, to appoint within their
several Limittes Examiners, Searchers, Watchmen, Keepers, and Buriers for the
persons and places infected, and to minister unto them Oaths for performance
of their Offices. And the same Statute also authorizeth the giving of other
Directions, as unto them for the present necessity, shall seem good in their
discretions. It is therefore upon special consideration thought very
expedient, for the preventing and avoiding of the infection of Sickness (if it
shall please Almighty God) which is now dangerously dispersed into many places
within the City and Suburbs of the same: that these Officers following be
appointed, and these Orders hereafter prescribed be duly observed.

FIrst it is thought requisite and so ordered, Examiners be appointed in every
Parish.
that in every Parish there be one, two or more persons of good sort and
credit, chosen and appointed by the Alderman his Deputy, and Common Counceil
of every Ward, and by the Justices of Peace in the Counties, by the name of
Examiners, to continue in that Office the space of two months at least: and if
any fit persons, so appointed as aforesaid, shall refuse to undertake the same,
the said parties so refusing, to be committed to Prison until they shall
conform themselves accordingly.

THat these Examiners be sworn by the Alderman, The Examiners Office.
or by one of the Justices of the County, to enquire and learn from time to
time what houses in every Parish be visited, and what persons be sick, and of
what diseases, as near as they can inform themselves and upon doubt in that
case, to command restraint of access, until it appear what the disease shall
prove: and if they find any persons sick of the infection, to give order to
the Constable, that the house be shut up: and if the Constable shall be found
remiss or negligent, to give present notice thereof to the Alderman, or the
Justice of Peace respectively.

THat to every infected house there be appointed two Watchmen, Watchmen.
one for the day and the other for the night: and that these Watchmen have a
special care that no person go in or out of such infected houses, whereof
they have the charge, upon pain of severe punishment. And the said Watchmen to
do such further Offices as the sick house shall need and require: and if the
Watchman be sent upon any business, to lock up the house and take the key with
him: and the Watchman by day to attend until ten of the clock at night: and
the watchman by night till six in the morning.

(...) company the Coarse to Church, or to enter the house Visited, upon pain
of having his house shut up or be imprisoned.

THat no Clothes, No infected stuff to be uttered.
Stuff, Bedding or Garments be suffered to be carried or conuayed out of any
infected houses, and that the Cryers and carriers abroad of Bedding or old
Apparel, to be Sold or Pawned, be utterly prohibited and restrained: and no
Brokers of Bedding, or old Apparel be permitted to make any outward Show, or
hang forth on their Stalles, Shop-boards or Windows, toward any Street,
Lane, common Way or Passage, any old Bedding or Apparel to be sold, upon
pain of Imprisonment: and if any Broker or other person shall buy any Bedding,
Apparel or other Stuff out of any infected house, within two months after
the infection has been there, his house shall be shut up as infected, and so
shall continue shut up twenty days at the least.

IF any person visited do fortuue, by negligent looking unto, or by any other
means, to come or be conuayed from a place infected, to any other place, the
Parish from whence such party has come, or been conuaied, upon notice
thereof given, shall at their charge cause the said party so visited and
escaped, to be carried and brought back again by night, and the parties in
this case offending, to be punished at the direction of the Alderman of the
Ward, and the Justices of the Peace respectively: and the house of the
receiver of such visited person, to be shut up for twenty days.

THat every house visited be marked with a red Cross of a foot long, Every
visited house to be marked.
in the middle of the Door, evident to be seen, and with these usual printed
words: that is to say, Lord have mercy upon us to be set close over the same
Cross, there to continue until lawful opening of the same house.

THat the Constables see every house shut up, and to be attended with
Watchmen, which may keep them in, Every visited house to be watched.
and minister necessaries unto them at their own charges (if they be able) or
at the common charge if they be unable: the shutting up to be for the space of
four Weeks after all be whole.

That precise order be taken that the Searchers, Chirurgions, Keepers and
Buriers are not to pass the Streets without holding a red Rod or Wand of
three foot in length, in their hands, open and evident to be seen, and are
not to go into any other house then into their own, or into that whereunto
they are directed or sent for, but to forbear and abstain from company,
especially when they have been lately used in any such business or attendance.

And to this end it is ordered, that a Weekly Tax be made in every Parish
visited, if in the City or Borough then under the hand of the Alderman of the
Ward, where the place is visited: if neither of the Counties, then under the
hands of some of the Justices next to the place visited, who, if there be
cause, may extend the Tax into other Parishes also, and may give warrant of
distress against them which shall refuse to pay: and for want of distress or
for assistance, to commit the offenders to Prison, according to the Statute in
that behalf.

Orders for clensing and keeping sweet of the Stteetes.
FIrst it is thought very necessary and so ordered, The streets to be kept
clean.
that every House-holder do cause the Street to be daily Pared before his
Door, and so to keep it clean Swept all the Week long.

THat the Sweeping and Filth of houses to be daily carried away by the Rakers,
That the Rakers take it from out the houses.
and that the Raker shall give notice of his coming by the blowing of a Horn,
as heretofore has been done.

THat the Laiestals be removed as far as may be out of the City, Laiestals
to be made far off from the City.
and common Passages, and that no Night-man or other be suffered to empty a
Vault into any Garden, near about the City.

THat especial care be taker, Care to be had of unwholesome Fish or Flesh, and
of musty Corn.
that no stinking Fish or unwholesome Flesh, or mustie Corn or other corrupt
fruits, of what sort soever be suffered to be sold about the City or any
part of the same.

That the Bruers and Tippling houses be looked unto, for musty and unwholesome
Caske.

That order be taken that no Hogs, Dogs or Cattes, or tame Pigeons, or
Conies be suffered to be kept within any part of the City, or any Swine to be
or stray in the Streets or Lanes, but that such Swine be Impounded by the
Beadle, or any other Officer, and the owner punished according to the Act of
common Council, and that the Dogs be killed by the Dog-killers, appointed
for that purpose.

Orders concerning loose Persons and idle Assemblies.
FOrasmuch as nothing is more complained on then the multitude of Roagues and
Wandering Beggars, Beggars.
that swarm in every place about the City, being a great cause of the
spreading of the infection, and will not be avoided, notwithstanding any order
that has been given to the Contrary: It is therefore now ordered, that such
Constables and others, whom this matter may any way concern, do take
special care, that no wandering Beggar be suffered in the Streets of this
City, in any fashion or manner whatsoever, upon pain of the penalty provided
by the law, to be duly and severely executed upon them.

THat all Plays, Plays.
Bearebaitings, Games, Singing of Ballads, Buckler-play, or such like causes of
Assemblies of people, be utterly prohibited, and the parties offending,
severely punished, by any Alderman or Justice of the Peace.

THat disorderly tippling in Tauernes, Tippling houses.
Alehouses and Sellers, be severely looked unto, as the common sin of this
time, and greatest occasion of dispersing the Plague: and where any shall be
found to offend, the penalty of the Statute to be laid upon them with all
severity.

And for the better execution of these orders, as also for such other
directions as shall be needful, It is agreed that the Justices of the City and
the Counties adjoining do meet together once in ten days, either at the
Sessions house without Newgate, or some other convenient place, to confer of
things as shall be needful in this behalf.

And every person neglecting the duty required, or willingly offending against
any Article or clause, contained in these Orders, he to be severely punished by
imprisonment, or otherwise, as by law he ought.

God save the King.
Imprinted at London by John VVindet, Printer to the honorable City of London.


