To the most Honorable assembly of the Commons House of Parliament.
The Binders of Books in London do most humbly show
THat in Anno Domino 1619. the Goldbeaters in London by the procurement of Sir
Henry Bretton Knight, and Docter Eglisham obtained a Charter of Incorporation:
for procurement whereof (besides other annual payments) Doctor Eglisham
receives of the said Goldbeaters at the least 200. lib per annu^. But what
recompense Sir Henry Bretton has; the Petitioners cannot declare.

That by color of that new Incorporation, and for satisfaction of the said
yearly payments the Goldbeaters have combined and confederated together, and
bound themselves, both by bond and oath to sell all Gold foliate only at one
place and at one rate, both good and bad: by which means they have inhaunced
the price thereof a full eight part viz. 1. d. ob. in every shiling, to the
great impouerishment of the Petitioners and other his Majesty's subjects.

That the said Company of Gold beaters exceed not 30. in number, of which
number six only reap the profit of the others labors, for the residue are
bound to sell all their Gold foliate to those six at the old rates: which six
sell the same to the Petitioners at the new inhaunced prices.

That the said Goldbeaters are free of other several Companies in London,
where they still bind their Apprentices. That they use all possible means to
diminish their number. So that in short time although the Goldbeaters in London
will be but few, yet they will sell their Gold foliate at what prices they list
for their private gain, but to the prejudice of the Common Wealth.

The petitioners further show, That of all the Gold foliate which is spent
they spend upon the binding and adorning of books not above the value of 300
lib. per annum. the residue being spent on Coaches and other unnecessary
things.

The Petitioners therefore most humbly pray that either the Goldbeaters may
be ordered to sell at their own houses their Gold foliate at the old Rates. Or
that the importation of Gold foliate from foreign parts may be tolerated. By
which means not only Gold foliate will be sold better cheap. But also a great
quantity of Gold will be brought to his Majesty's Mint yearly, which the
Goldbeaters now spend, by reason of the prohibition of the importation of Gold
foliate from beyond the Seas.
