Orders heretofore conceived and agreed to be published, by the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of the City of London, and the Justices of Peace of the Counties
of Middlesex and Surrey, by direction from the Lords of his Maisteies most
Honorable Privy Council, and now thought fit to be revived, and again
published.
WHereas in the first year of his Majesty's most happy reign over this
Realm of England, an Act was made for the charitable relief, and ordering of
persons infected with the Plague: whereby Authority is given to Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, and other head-Officers, to appoint within their
several limits Examiners, Searchers, Watchmen, keepers, and buryers for the
persons and places infected, and to minister unto them Oaths for performance
of their Offices. And the same Statute also authorizeth the giving of other
directions, as unto them for the present necessity, shall seem good in their
discretions. It is therefore upon special consideration thought very
expedient, for the preventing and avoiding of the infection of Sickness (if it
shall please Almighty God) which is now dangerously dispersed into many places
within the City and Suburbs of the same: that these Officers following be
appointed, and these Orders hereafter prescribed be duly observed.

Examiners be appointed in every Parish.
FIrst, it is thought requisite, and so ordered, that in every parish there be
one, two, or more persons of good sort and credit, chosen and appointed by the
Alderman his Deputy, and Common Council of every Ward, and by the Justices of
Peace in the Counties, by the name of Examiners, to continue in that Office the
space of two months at least: and if any fit persons so appointed as
aforesaid, shall refuse to undertake the same, the said parties so refusing, to
be committed to prison until they shall conform themselves accordingly.

The Examiners Office.
THat these Examiners be sworn by the Alderman, or by one of the Justices of
the County, to enquire and learn from time to time, what houses in every
parish be visited, and what persons be sick, and of what diseases, as near
as they can inform themselves, and upon doubt in that case, to command
restraint of access, until it appear what the disease shall prove: and if
they find any persons sick of the infection, to give order to the Constable,
that the house be shut up: and if the Constable shall be found remiss or
negligent, to give present notice thereof to the Alderman, or the Justice of
Peace respectively.

Watchmen.
THat to every infected house there be appointed two watchmen, one for the day,
and the other for the night: and that these Watchmen have a special care that
no person go in or out of such infected houses, whereof they have the charge,
upon pain of severe punishment. And the said Watchmen to do such further
Offices as the sick house shall need and require: and if the Watchman be sent
upon any business, to lock up the house, and take the key with him: and the
Watchman by day to attend until ten of the clock at night: and the Watchman
by night till six in the morning.

Chirurgions
THat there be a special care, to appoint women Searchers in every parish, such
as are of honest reputation, and of the best sort as can be got in this kind:
and these to be sworn to make due search and true report, to the utmost of
their knowledge, whether the persons, whose bodies they are appointed to
search, do dye of the Infection, or of what other diseases as near as they
can. And for their better assistance herein, forasmuch as there has been
heretofore great abuse in misreporting the disease, to the further spreading of
the Infection: It is therefore ordered, that there be chosen and appointed
three able and discreet Surgeons, besides those three that do already belong to
the Pesthouse: amongst whom, the City and Liberties to be quartered, as the
places lie most apt and convenient: and every of these six to have one quarter
for his limit: and the said Surgeons in every of their limits, to join with
the Serchers, for the view of the body, to the end there may be a true report
made of the disease.

And further, that the said Surgeons shall visit and search such sick
persons as shall either send for them, or be named and directed unto them by
the Examiners of every parish, and inform themselves of the disease of the
said parties.

And forasmuch as the said Surgeons are to be sequestered from all other
Cures, and kept only to this disease of the Infection: It is ordered, That
every of the said Surgeons, shall have twelve pence a body searched by
them, to be paid out of the goods of the party searched, if he be able, or
otherwise by the parish.

Orders concerning Infected Houses, and Persons sick of the Plague.
Notice to be given of the sickness.
THe Master of every house, as soon as any one in his house complayneth, either
of botch, of purple, or swelling in any part of his body, or falls otherwise
dangerously sick, without apparent cause of some other disease, shall give
knowledge thereof to the Examiner of health within two hours after the said
sign shall appear.

Sequestration of the sick.
AS soon as any man shall be found by this Examiner, Surgeon or Searcher, to
be sick of the plague, he shall the same night be sequestered in the same house.
And in case he be so sequestered, then though he afterward die not, the house
wherein he sickned, shall be shut up for a month, after the use of due
preservatives taken by the rest.

Ayring of the stuff.
FOr sequestration of the Goods and Stuff of the Infected, their Bedding, and
Apparel and hangings of Chambers, must be well ayred with fire, and such
perfumes as are requisite within the infected house before they be taken again
to use, this to be done by the appointment of the Examiner.

Shuting up of the house
IF any person shall have visited any man, known to be infected of the plague,
or entered willingly into any known infected house, being not allowed: the
house wherein he inhabiteth shall be shut up for certain days, by the
Examiners direction.

None to be removed out of infected houses, but
ITem, that none be removed out of the house where he falls sick of the
infection, into any other house in the City, Borough, or County (except it be
to the Pesthouse or a Tent, or unto some such house, which the owners of the
said visited house holds in his own hands, and occupies by his own
servants) and so as security be given to the parish, whether such remove is
made, that the attendance and charge about the said visited persons, shall be
observed and charged in all the particularities before expressed, without any
cost of that parish, to which any such remove shall happen to be made, and this
remove to be done by night. And it shall be lawful to any person that has two
houses, to remove either his sound or his infected people, to his spare house
at his choice, so as if he send away first his sound, he may not after send
thither his sick; nor again unto the sick the sound: and that the same which
he sends be for one week at the least shut up, and secluded from company for
fear of some infection, at the first not appearing.

Burial of the dead.
THat the Burial of the dead by this visitation be at most convenient hours,
always either before Sunrising, or after Sunne-setting, with the priuity of
the Churchwardens or Constables, and not otherwise; and that no Neighbors nor
Friends be suffered to accompany the Coarse to Church, or to enter the house
visited, upon pain of having his house shut up or be imprisoned.

No infected stuff to be uttered.
THat no Clothes, Stuff, Bedding or Garments be suffered to be carried or
conuayed out of any infected houses, and that the Cryers and carriers abroad of
Bedding or old Apparel, to be sold or pawned, be utterly prohibited and
restrained: and no Brokers of Bedding, or old Apparel be permitted to make
any outward show, or hang forth on their Stals, Shopboards, or Windows,
toward any Street, Lane, common Way or passage, any old Bedding or Apparel
to be sold, upon pain of imprisonment: and if any Broaker or other person
shall buy any Bedding, Apparel, or other Stuff out of any infected house,
within two months after the infection has been there, his house shall be
shut up as infected, and so shall continue shut up twenty days at the least.

IF any person visited do fortune, by negligent looking unto, or by any other
means, to come or be conveyed from a place infected, to any other place, the
parish from whence such party has come, or been conveyed, upon notice thereof
given, shall at their charge cause the said party so visited and escaped, to be
carried and brought back again by night, and the parties in this case
offending, to be punished at the direction of the Alderman of the Ward, and the
Justices of the Peace respectively: and the house of the receiver of such
visited person, to be shut up for twenty days.

Every visited house to be marked.
THat every house visited be marked with a red Cross of a foot long, in the
middle of the door, evident to be seen, and with these usual printed words:
that is to say, LORD have mercy upon us, to be let close over the same Cross,
there to continue until lawful opening of the same house.

Every visited house to be watched.
THat the Constables see every house shut up, and to be attended with Watchmen,
which may keep them in, and minister necessaries unto them at their own
charges (if they be able) or at the common charge if they be unable: the
shutting up to be for the space of four weeks after all be whole.

That precise order be taken that the Searchers, Chirurgions, Keepers, and
Buriers are not to pass the streets, without holding a red Rod or Wand of
three foot in length in their hands open or evident to be seen, and are not
to go into any other house then into their own, or into that whereunto they
are directed or sent for, but to forbear and abstain from company, especially
when they have been lately used in any such business or attendance.

And to this end it is ordered, that a weekly Tax be made in every parish
visited, if in the City or Borrough then under the hand of the Alderman of the
Ward, where the place is visited: if neither of the Counties, then under the
hands of some of the Justices next to the place visited, who (if there be
cause) may extend the Tax into other parishes also, and may give warrant of
distress against them which shall refuse to pay: and for want of distress or
for assistance, to commit the offenders to prison, according to the Statute in
that behalf.

Orders for clensing and keeping sweet of the Streets.
The streets to be kept clean.

That the rakers take it from out the houses. Laystals to be made far off from
the City.


FIrst it is thought very necessary, and so ordered, That every house-holder do
cause the street to be daily pared before his door, and so to keep it clean
swept all the Week long.

THat the sweeping and filth of houses to be daily carried away by the Rakers,
and that the Raker shall give notice of his coming by the blowing of a horn,
as heretofore has been done.

THat the Laystalles be removed as far as may be out of the City, and common
passages, and that no Night-man or other be suffered to empty a Vault into any
Garden, near about the City.


