By the Mayre.
FOr as much as in diverse good and ancient laws and statutes of this our
most drad soueraygne lord the kings realm of England, amongst diverse and
sundry other things, forstalynge and regratynge, as two capital and chief
evil myschefes and hynderaunces of the common and public wealth of our said
soueraygne lords realm have been prohibyted and restrained upon great and
strayte pains in the same estatutes mencyoned and declared. That is to say,
that every such offender for his first offense should be grievously amercyd and
to forfayt and loose their things so bought. For his second offense to be set
on the pyllery. For his third offense to be committed to ward, there to
remain until he have paid his fine and ransom. And for his fourth like
offense to abjure the city borough or town where he does dwell, (...)
statu^te made in the.xxv. year of the raygne of the right noble and famous
prince Edward the third plainly (...) (...)ed Syus which time also diverse
and many other pains and penaltyes have been ordained and prouy^^^ (...)aid
sovereign lord and his most noble progenitors by diverse and sundry other
godly and wholesome laws (...) made and set forth for the due punishment of the
said offenders as by the same estatures more plainly it does (...) which good
and reasonable laws and statutes, and the pains therein contained,
notwythstandynge diverse and (...) ^f our said souerygne lords subjects
neither regardyng or remembrynge their duty and conscience towar^^ (...) and
their neighbors, nor yet their bounden duty of obedience toward our said
soueraygne lord and his (...) of their ungodly covetous and gredy minds, have
now of late by such craft and means forstalled and regrated both all kinds of
vytayles, and namely wild foul, pultrie wares and vytaylles herafter written*
that the said wyldfoule, pultrie wares and vytaylles be not only brought to
excessyue and unreasonable pryses, as (...) days they have been, but also to
great lack and scarcity, to the great dyspleasure of our said soueraygne
lord and the hynderance of the common wealth of his graces loving subjects.

For reformation whereof the right honorable (...) lord Mayre of the city of
Londo and his worshypful brethren the Alderme^ of the same city straytly
charge and commau^de on our said soueraygne lord the kings behalf* That no
manner of person or persons of what so ever est^te condicyon or degree he or
they be of be so hardy or so bold at any time hereafter to forstall or regrate
any manner or kind of vytayles and namel^ wild fowls an^ (...)e wares, or
sell, or utter by retayle any manner of wyldefoule or pultrie wares neither
within the said city o^ the surburbes (...) ^ame nor without, brought or to be
brought, and conveyed to the same city or suburbs thereof to be sold either
by high ways, lanes, cha^bres, innes, or any other secret place, bu^ that
they and every of them permytte and suffer all the said wild foul and pultrie
wares and other vytailes to be brought into the open markettes holde^ within
the said city at the days and hours there accustomed for the same, there to
be put to sale and ordered in every point according to the tenoure of this
proclamacion. So that our said soueraygne lord the king, his nobles, and
others his loving subjects repayryng and resorting to the said city and
also the cytesyns and inhabytantes within the same, may be the more redelyer,
better, and at the more reasonable and competent pryses, served from
hensforwarde and spedde of the same. And that no manner of person or persounes
at any time from hence forth: neither fre man of the same city, nor foreyne,
pytch, or offer to sale any manner of wyld foul (...) ware, or other kind of
vytayle herafter mentioned and express in any other place or places in the
said city or suurbes of the same, but only in the open market places there.
That is to say Ledenhall, Chepsyde, and Newgate market, the same pultrie wares,
and other vytailes, there to stand seyl and remain v^^yll such time as our
said sourraygne, lord the kings majesty's provision for his most honorable
household shall be thereof by his graces pu^ueyours in that behalf assigned and
appointed, fully taken, furnished and served, according to their just
proportion thereof to the^ made and delivered, which proportion shall be showed to
the lord Mayre, or his deputy, when and as often as it shall be required:
which proportion and provision for our said soueraygne lords household so
furnished and served ^he hole resydue of all the said wyldfoule, pultry wares,
and vytayles to be sold in every of the said market places, during the time
of the said markets, and not else where within the said city, or the suburbs
of the same, and that at and for such rates and prises, as ben herafter rated,
taxed and assessed, by the said lord Mayre and Aid (...) ratifyed, allowed, and
confirmed by our said soueraygne lord the kings most honorable counsel.

That is to say, no citizen, or fre man of the said city, sell, or cause to
be sold the best Swanne above. v. s. The best Crane, bustard or Storke above
iiii. s. Herenshoes, Shouelardes and bytternes of the best the piece xviii. d
Pecockes old of the best, the piece ii. s. Pechyckens of the best, the piece
xiiii. d. Capons of greece the best the piece xx. d. Capons good the piece xiiii.
d Capons kent of the best the piece viii. d Hens of greece the piece of the best
vii d Brewes and Egrettes of the best, the piece x(...) Byttors of the best the
piece xii. d. (...) of the best the piece xi^^ (...)the piece vi. d. Grene Gese
fat from easter to mydsomer, the piece. vii. d Gese great from mydsomer till
shrouetyde of the best, the piece viii. d. Goodwyttes fat, the piece. xii. d
^ottrels of the best, the dosen iii and iiii. d. (...)ails of the best the
dosen iiii. ^. ^parowes the dosen iii. d. ^^geons or the best, the dosen viii.
d. Rabets souckets far the dosen xviii. d. Conyes from Easte^ to Hallontyde of
the best, ye dose^. ii. s that is for a piece ii. d. Winter ^onyes from
Hallontyde till shrouetyde, the dosen. ii. ^. vi. d that is for the piece. ii.
d. ob. The Coney of grese al covered, from Hallontyde till shrouety^^ iiii. d.
(...)des the dosen of the best. iiii. s. that is for one alone iiii. d Teales
of the best, the dosen. ii. s. that is for one alone. ii. d. Wegions fat the
dosen. iii. s. that is for the piece iii. d. ^odcockes of the best the piece
iiii. d. Plouers grene of the best, the dosen iii. s. Bastard Plouers fat
the dosen ii. s. vi. d Marlez of the best the dosen xviii. d Hennesnytes of the
best, the dosen xviii. d. Larkes of the best, the dosen vi. d. Buntynges of the
best, the dosen iii. d. Great birds of the best, the dosen vi. d. Eggs, v.
for a penny. Butter sweet from Easter to Hallontyde the pound. ii. d. Butter
sweet from Hallontyde to Easter the pound. iii. d.



