blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms
By the Major.
A Proclamation for the prices of Tallow and Candles.
THe Lord Mayor and Aldermen his Brethren, having taken knowledge of the
excessive prices of Tallow and Candles uttered and sold within the City of
London: and finding upon search and survey made of the store of Tallow and
Candles in the hand of the Tallow Chandlers, and Candlemakers, as well English
as Strangers, within this City and Liberties thereof, that diverse of them not
contented with reasonable profit, in uttering and selling of Candles and
Tallow, have engrossed unduly into their hands, great quantities both of Tallow
and Candles, thereby to enhance the prices thereof: Inasmuch as the principal
sale lies in the hands of few. For remedy whereof, the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, have conceived it very expedient and needful, to set prices
according to former presidents upon Tallow and Candles uttered within this
City. And therefore do by these presents, ordain, publish, and declare, that
no Butcher or other person whatsoever, shall from henceforth utter or sell, or
cause to be uttered or sold within this City or Liberties, any English Tallow
above the price of twenty six shillings eight pence the hundred weight. And
that no Tallow Chandler, Candlemaker, or other person whatsoever, that do, or
shall make, utter, or sell any Candles made of Tallow, within this City or
Liberties thereof, shall at any time hereafter, utter or sell, or cause to be
uttered or sold, any tallow Candles above the prices hereafter mentioned: that
is to say, good Cotton Candles for four pence farthing the pound, and good
Week Candles for three pence three farthings the pound, and not at any higher
price or prices. And the said Butchers, Tallow Chandlers, Candlemakers, and
such other persons before mentioned, are hereby straightly charged and
commanded, to obey and keep the said rates and prices set upon Tallow and
Candles as aforesaid, until further order to the contrary be taken by the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen his Brethren, upon pain and peril that will fall
thereon.

Given at the Guild Hall of the City of London, this 14. day of September, in
the eighteenth year of his Majesty's reign of England, France, and Ireland,
and of Scotland the four and fiftieth. God save the King.
Printed at London by William Iaggard, Printer to the Honorable City of
London, 1620.


