London LOOK BACK, AT THAT YEAR OF YEARS 1625. AND LOOK FORVVARD, UPON
THIS YEAR, 1630. Written, not to Terrify, But to Comfort.

LONDON Printed by A. M. and are to be sold by Ed. Blackmoore at the Angel in
Paul's Churchyard, 1630.

London Look Back.
TO look back at Ills, begets a Thankefuln^^^e t^ have esc^p^d them: So the
Children of Israel having d^y foot passed through the red Sea* looked back,
with a double Joy; To see themselves on Shore, and their enemies Drovvn'd

To Look Back, at our sins, begets a Repentance: R^pentance is the Mother
of Amendment: and Amendment leads us by the hand to Heaven: So that if we
look not Back, there is no going forward in that Journey to Jerusalem.

To look Back at an enemy, from whom we fly; Calls up Hope, and Fear;
Hope to out-runne him, Fear to be ou^r-taken: Hope to fight with him again,
Fear never to fight more. To look back, strengthens wisdom, to look
forward, arms Providence: and lendes eyes to Pr^uention.

What Mariner having gotten safely by a Rock, but with a liu^l^ spirit looks
back, and pra^s^th Heaven, for S^yl^ng by such a danger? What General, but at
the end of a Battle, looks back, on his slaughtered Soldiers with sorrow:
and on his living Regiments, with Gladness; What a Glory is it, to repeat the
story of the fight? How such a Captain cut a brave way to Victory with his
Sword? How another brake through the Battalia's, like the God of War.

Look back therefore (o LONDON) at Time, and bid him turn ore his
Chronicles, and show thee, that Year of Years 1625 For, The year ^625.
if ever there was in England, a year, great with Child of wonder, that very
year was then delivered of that Prodigious Birth.

It was a year Fatal to all our Kingdoms; For* the Courts of our Kings,
Fatal to our Kingdom.
were forced to fly from place to place for safety* and yet the pursuing
enemy, Death, tracde the^ and ouertooke the^ by the pri^ts of their feet.

It was ^atall (O thou Empress of Cittiees, fa^re Troynouant) to t^ce; For
(blood shed excepted) thou with Jerusalem, To the City.
did feel as g^ue^ us a Desolation: eating up, with Mariam, thine own
chil^r^n, with Samaria thou were beseiged, (...) go not (like Samaria) with
Benha^ad King of the Aramites, ^ Kings. 20 ^.
and ^2. Kings more with him: But with a far more cruel enemy, (the
Pestilence,) and an infinite Army of Sins, which to this very day, fight
against thee.

A more terrible Tyrant, then Benhadad (and that is Death) said then to thee,
as h^e di^ to Samaria; Thy Gold and thy Silver are mine, 1 Kings 20 5.
thy Women (...) and thy fair Children are mine. O how much of the one was
then buried in Earth, and what excellent Pieces of the other lay then defloured
in Graves*

Ioh. 6.20.
With Ierico, the wades of thy Glory (O London) were broken down* for thy
Princes took from th^e the Honor of their Chariots the Diuin^^ the harmony of
their Eloquence; London* general Misery.
Thy Magi^t^ates, the splend^r ^f their Authority; Thy Merchants the Renown of
Commerce: Thy Physi^ians gave thee over; Thy Soldiers (...) Cowards left t^ee
in the open field: Thy ol^ M^n went away, and thy young men fled before thee in
the (...) of their Marrow.

Reader, to Feast thee with more v^riety, cast (...) eye on these following
verses, in which is set down a (...) full, and more lively Description of that
Lamentable Time.

This was that year of wonder, when this Land,
Was Ploughed up into Graves, and graves did stand
From morn, till next morn, gaping still for more.
The Bells (like our loud sins) never giving ore.
Then, life looked pale, and sicklier then the Moon,
Whole Households, well ^'th morn, lying dead at Noone.
Then sickness was of her own face affrayle,
And frighting all yet was her self dismayde:
LONDON was great with child, and with a fright
She fell in labor -- But O pitious sight!
All in her Childbed Room did naught but mourn,
For, those who were deliuer^d were still-borne.
The City fled the (...), for those Bells
Which called the Church man, rung his neighbors knells:
The City fled the City, and in fear,
That enemy shu^^'d who me^ her every where.
The City so much of her Bo^y lost,
Th^^ she ap^e^r'd (...) Ghost:
Paul's Or^ans (th^n) (...), to call
This day a Qui (...)
Who yesterday sat (...) me
To morning (...), yet ^re they got home,
Had To^ens (...) them (...) they should no more
Hear A^th^^s there They we^e to go before
Him, to whose (...) Anthems were all sung,
To instruments, which wereby Angels strung.
By this little Picture you may guess, if that year of 1625. was not one of
the worlds Cli^a^tericall years: If it be not (to this day) more remarkable,
than any other year in the memory of man, look back but on such Calenders,
as your observations may set down, and then be your own judges.

First, (...) (in your looking back) remember those faint and pu^gatiue
Fl^xes, which then were the V^nt-currers, making way for other Diseases which
immediately brake in upon us: How many Families f^ll by that Consumption! How
many househol(...) carry away? (...) one (...) in a Thousand (...) it? Or if
happily they get out of his fingers, did not a spotte^^ Fever then presently
print her Nails upon their flesh?

How many Bo^yes were by this Purueyor of Death, marked for Funerals!

Our Doctors give that young Sickness then as they do this, now Reigning a
fine gentleman like name, the sp^tted Fever, as if it had been Er^^nd, the
s^o^t^d Fever, as if it h^d been a Beautiful fair ski^d Sickness, and
those Spotes, the fr^ckels in the face of it. But how many did this spotted
Leopard set upon, and tear in pieces! The spotted Fever.


The Physicians were modest, and gave it a pretty harmless Name, (the spotted
Fever) but woeful experience made us confess, A kin man to the Plague.
it was the direct Plague* or Couz^n-germane to it: The spotted Fever served
but as a By-name: The spots were the signs that hung at the Doors, but the
Pestilence dwelt within.

Again l^oke back upon that Moon, and that officious Star, The Moon and her
Wa^ting-ma^de..
waiting so close upon her, and read in both their faces, what followed after.

Again look bac^e, at the sudden, and vnexp^cted death of K James: The Death of
K. I.
He lead the way, and Millio^s of Subjects followed after him; He dyed of a
Burning Fever but that burning went cold to a great ^any Hearts in
Christendom, ^
and it ^^uck cold to us in England. (...) bre^th of (...) glittering of
Bonfire^, and (...) People hea^ed us again, with the happy N^w^s of a Glorious
Sun ris^n And that Sun was the Great Charlema^ne, our now present
Sovereign.

The Death (...)
Again look back upon (...) ^aths of our N^bility: Dukes, Earls, and Lords,
being at that time snatched from us.

The (...) grave.
Again look back, on the heaps of English, th^n swallowed in the sea, and
eaten up in the Low Countries. Rekcon our Losses of Men abroad, and at that
time, the ruin of Men, Women, and children at home.

All this Remembrances being thus added up together, point if you can (through
all the Reigns of our Kings) to any one year so full of wonderful mutati^n^!
Such Shifting of the Winds from fair to foul, and from foul to fair
weather. Such Eclipses, and such affrighting Changes* and then my Pen shall
be silenced,

But of all the changes happening that year, the greatest is not yet mentioned:
When our Sins were in a full Sea, God called in the waters of our punishment,
The great Change.
and on a sudden our miseries ebbed: When the P^stilence struck 5000. and odd
in a Week into the Grave; an Angel came, and held the Sword from striking: So
that the waves or Death fell in a short time, as fast as before they swelld up,
to our confusion: Mercy stood at the Church doors, and suffered but a few
Coffins to come in: And this was the most wonderful change of all the rest.

This was a Change, Crosses (...).
worthy to be set over every door in Letters of Gold, as before Red*painted
Crosses stood there, turning Citizens to runn-awayes. But a white ^lagge was
held out in sign of Truce; A pardon was promised, and it came to the great
Comfort of all our Nation. A (...)
When more than threescore thousand were ^owen down by the ^yeth of time:
Deaths harvest toward the end of that year was all most all in. Look back
(O LONDON) at these, and on thy knees, sing Hymns to heaven to thy th^n
d^liuerance.

It Is strange to observe, ^para
that if a Bell be heard to Ring out, and that it is voyc'd in such a Parish
within the walls of LONDON, a many is dead of the (...), O what talk it
breeds* If the next (...) two, then the Report sticks cold to the (...)
Cit^^. But if (as now) it rises to (...) the Head, and thousands fearfully
suspect, they (...) be undone. And is there not great ^eaven for ^t is, think
you? Yes there is.

For all other Infirmities, and maladies of the Bo^y, go simply in their own
Habit, and live wheresoever, they are (...), under their proper and known
Names (...) the (...) pass^th only by the name of the (...) an Ague, the Pox
Fistula, etc. (...) so (...) with (...) that they (...) and King out,
sometimes* night and d^y,) that sudden destroyer of Mankind: (...) Enemy.
that Nimble executioner of the Divine Justice: (The Plague or Pestilence) has
for the singularity of the Terrors waiting upon it, (...) title; THE SICKNESS.

It has a Pre-eminence about all others: And none being able to match it, for
Violence, Strength, Incertainty, Su^tlety, Catching, Universality, and
Desolation, it is called the Sickness. The (...) the (...).
As if it were, the only Sickness* or the Sickness of Sicknesses, as it is
indeed.

But, for all this Tyrants Raging and Rauing up and down this City; after
punishment: Mercy as you heard before, came down: when the deluge was p^st, a
Rainbow was seen: Martyrdom went before, and Glory with a Crown of Stars
immediately followed.

To Dye is held fearful: and the Grave has many formidable shapes.

Men alive in grave.
A Prisoner being dragged to a Iayle, out of which he can never be delivered,
may truly call his Chamber, his Living Grave, where his own sorrows and the
cruelty of creditors, bury him.

They, who with fearful labor, maintain life by digging underground, go
daily to their Grave; So do all Traitors that lay traynes to Blow up their K.
and Countre^: So do all those whose black consciences pr^ck them on to dige
Pitts for others, into which they fall then solues.

But to open a grave as it is indeed, the grave is our last Inn, A grave
Opened.
and a poor wooden Coffin our fairest Lodging Room. No: the Grave is not our
Inn, (where we may lie to Night and be gone to Morrow) but it is our standing
House, it is a perpetuity, our Inheritance for ever: A piece of ground (with a
little garden in it, five or six foot long, full of flowers and herbs,
purchased for v^ and our posterity, at the dearest Income in the world the
loss of Life.

The World is our common Inn, The World a fair Inn, but il Lodging in it.
in which we have no certain abiding: It stands in the Road-way for all
pass^ngers; And wither we be upon speed, or go slowly on foot, sure we are
that all our Iourneyes are to the land of death, and that is the Grave.

A sicke-mans bed is the gate or first yard to this Inn, A Chamberline for all
Trauelers.
where death at our first arrival stands like the Chamberlain to bid you
welcome, and is so bold, as to ask if you will alight, and he will show you a
Lodging.

In this great year of contagion, (I mean 1625.) when the Bell man of the
City (Sickness) beat at every door, there was one who whilst he lay in his
grave (his deathbed as he accounted it:) yet afterward he Recovered, reported
to his friends he beheld strange apparitions.

He saw a purchased Sessions; The Judge was terrible: In his hand, A man i^ his
Grave ^ees strange sights.
Lightning in his voice, Thunder: After thousands were cast, and condemned to
dye, (said this sick man) I saw my self a Prisoner, and called to the Bar:
The Judge looking sternly upon me, was angry: A sickmans Sessions.
my offenses (being read to me) were heavy, my accusers many; what could I do
but plead guilty! And falling on my knees, with hands held up, cry for mercy.

Tears, sighs, and Anguishes of soul, speaking hard for me, the Judge melted
in compassion, signed a repriue, saved me from death, The best, Judge in
England.
and set me free. O in what a pitiful state had I been else! for my
conscience araigned me, my own tongue accused me, my own guilt condemned
me: Yet the mercy of the Judge saved me.

In this grave I lay, my memory being dead, my Senses buried, my Spirits
covered with Earthly weaknesses, and all the faculties of my soul, When men is
weakest, God is strongest.
cold as the clay into which I was to be turned. Yet lo! I was called out of
this Grave; I quickened and revived: Seeing then that albeit death was about to
thrust me down with one hand, yet life gentley plucked me up by the other,
what did I but look back^ at the Horror which had beset me round! I did not
only look back but I looked forward at the Happiness coming toward me,
which with spread arms I embraced: neither did I only look forward, but I
looked upward to heaven. A due de^t must be paid.
Had I not reason to pay my heavenly Ph^sitian with an humble and hearty
Thanksgiving! I did so. Have I not reason to put al others, (that either t^
is year or in any year to come, shall be called to the same Iudgment-seat) in
mind of their deliverance!

We, being (at least we ought to be) Christ's followers, use as he did to give
thanks before we break our Bread: and when we are satisfied, he is not
satisfied, unless we pay him, thanks again, thanks! that is all: Poor is
that good turn which is not worth goda^ercy: That benefit withers, which is
not warmed by the breath of the Receiver. Here, leave we our ^icke-man, well
recovered, and singing holy Ditties for his restoring: Let us now again look
back, and stedf^stly fix our Eyes, upon the ^errible face of that former
wond^rfull year. How many in that swallowing Sea of contagion, were struck
with dreadful Calentures, and Madness of the Brains! Rauing, Raging and
Railing: yea cursing God to his face! And who had greater cause to Register up
his mercy, in fetching them out of such a hell, then they?

Job. 3.3
How many did then, with Job (through the anguish of their Soar^s) wish that the
day might perish in which they were borne! Yet some at the same time being
recovered did not only not send up prayers and prailes for their safety, but
having tasted of the f^ll Cup of Gods mercy, they again did te^pt, his Justice.
If Drunkards before their Sickness, they were ten times worse, after they
were well.

They were not good, for Joy they grevv unto strength, but being perfectly
hea^thfull, were madd in their hearts that their purses were too weak to
maintain the^ in their old Riots. Old s^r^s ill cured, break out again.
What would not such have ventured upon, but that poue^ty gave them Lame hands.
These People had a mind to Cheat God by thinking they owed him nothing: Many
men dea^, few amended.
But God stopped them in their Carrecre; for seeing no amendment in them, after
they had been smitten down once or twice, at the third blow he struck them
into Earth.

To close up this sad Feast, to which none but Worms were invited: let us
look only once more back, at this, all-Conquerin^ year, 1625. And remember
that Preaching in many Churches, was in the heat of the Battails, forced to
fly: Law, was at a Nonplus.

Traficke cast ouer-board, Trading in the City lay Bed-ridde, and in the
Country ^orely shaken with an Ague.

Remember O you Citizens, that our Schools then locked out Learning, (a wound
to your children;) that your Servants got little (a Bruze to your Family!) that
your selves spent much, and many of your Stocks were almost waste to
nothing: (a Mayme to the City) But then afterward on the sudden, to see all
this dis^oynted Buildings, put orderly into frame again! was there not great
reason to rejoice?

When that mighty number of 5000. and odd, The ^um^er that dyed in 1625.
in LONDON, and round about were carried on Men's shoulders to their last Home,
what Glory is due to the Divine mercy! That we (who now walk up and down
the Streets,) Live! Nay, not only live in Health but live! having been laid in
deaths Lap, full of Sores, of Feauers, of Frenzes, yet are now healed in body
and cured ^n mind.

Had every Man, and Woman, as many voices as Birds have notes: All of them
ought to be singing from Morn to Night, Praises, Hymns, and Honors to this
almighty Iohouah.

Are you not wearied, thus long with looking back, turn your Heads therefore
round, and now look forward*

Look not (as all this while you have done) through perspectiue-glasses, to
make objects afar off, appear as if they were near you, but look with
full eyes, at those presentations, which are directly now before you.

Look forvvard as the Men of Genazaret did, who bringing all the sick in the
Country to Christ, besought him, that they might touch the Hemme of his
Garment only.

Luke 7.30.
Look forvvard, as the Cananitish Woman did who cried alovvd to Christ, saying:
Have mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of David; My daughter is miserably vexed
with a Devil. Christ said nothing at first: He put her by once or twice, but
see how the Key of importunity, can open the very gates of Heaven! Her
incessant entreaties, won^e him at length to say,^ woman, great is thy faith,
be it to thee as thou desire, and her Daughter was made whole at that hour.

Math. 25.4.
Look forward as the five wise Virgins did, to fill your Lamps with Oil, and
expect the coming of the Bridegroom.

When open war is denounced against a Nation, they (albeit before they slept
in security, and lay drowned in sensual streams) yet then awaken, they start
up, and look forward for their armor, lest the enemy should come upon them
unprovided.

To look forward is to see where the fire is given to the Cannon, and so that
weak part, which lies subject to battry, is fortified for resistance.

Look forward therefore now; For now the Drum of Death is beating up: the
cannon of the Pestilence does not yet discharge, but the small shot plays
night and day, upon the suburbs: And has sent seaue^ bullets singing into the
City. The arrows fly over our heads and hit so^e, though they as yet miss
us; But none knows how soon the strong Archer, may draw his Bow, and clea^e
our very hearts* Look forward howsoever, and look up with open eyes, under
your sheildes to receive them as they come flying, lest they pierce you quit
through, and nail you to destruction.

This World is a School, we are Gods Scholars; Our Schoolmasters has taken
up (this year) as yet, but the twigge of a Rod, A wicked ^c^o le, but the
best Scholars.
in comparison of that bundle of Rods he used in that year 1625. He shakes
the twigg at us, and a few (of the lower forms in the School) feel the
smart, but the head Scholars that sit in the higher forms, do not as yet so
much as tremble. Many are preparing to break up School and steal into the
Country: But take heed, and look forward on the Book, which your
Schoolmasters sets you to read: To trewants.
For if he finds you not perfect in your Lessons; He is binding the Rod in
his hand, harder and harder, and be sure (when he strikes) to be paid
soundly.

The Bell tolles in a few places, but hearts ache in many. Is Sickness come to
thy door! Has it knocked there? And is it entered? There are many good Books
set forth, to drive back Infection, or if it cannot be driven away, Love thy
Physi^ian.
instructions are given how to welcome it. Make much of thy Physician: let not
an Emperick or Mounti-bancking Quacksaluer peep in at thy window, but set thy
Gates wide open to entertain thy learned Physician: Honor him, make much of
him Such a Physician is Gods second, and in a duel or single fight (of this
nature) will stand bravely to thee. A good Physician, comes to thee in the
shape of an Angel, and therefore let him boldly take thee by the hand, for he
has been in Gods garden, gathering herbs: and sovereign roots to cure thee; A
good Physician deals in simples, and will be simply honest with thee in thy
preservation. I never sat with Aesculapius at the Table; I scarce know what a
Salu^tory-box means: yet^ without asking leave of the learned College, to
hang out my bill or begging license at Surgeons hall, to seal aprobasum est
upon my Unguents and Plasters. I will adventure to Minister Physic, and
Salues to any one, that in this time, is troubled with the Sickness: and my
Patien^s in the end, shall confess: That Gallen Hyppocrates, Paracelsus, nor
all the great Masters, of those Arts, did never lay down sounder
prescriptions. And here come my Medicines martching in.

Art thou (in this visitation stricken with Carbu^cles, Blaynes, and Blisters,
Is thy body spotte^ all over? Art thou sure death bids: he come away, by some
Tokens which he has sent thee? Be ru^de by me, and take this receipt; Trust to
it, for it cui'd a King of Israel.

Cry out with David, O Lord! Chast^ze me not in thy wrath* King David's P^ysi^ke.
for thine Arrows have lighted upon me: There is nothing sound in my flesh
because of thine anger: neither is there rest in my bones because of my sins.
My wounds are putrified; my Reins full of burning: I am weakened and sore
broken. My heart pants: my strength fails me: And the light of mine eyes
(even they) are not mine own: my Lovers and my friends stand aside from my
Plague, and my Kinsemen stand afar off: Yet continue thou with the holy
singer, and conclude thus, O Lord, have to help me.

How like you, this Medicine? Is it of such virtue, that albeit, thou art
sick to thy Death: It will by degrees take away all thy Torments.

A Iulep.
This second is a lulep to sweeten the mouth of thy Stomach, after the
bitterness of thy sickness: ^or, when by an Armipotent hand, thou art lifted
out of thy deathbed; when the Bell has ceast rolling for thee, and thy
Womer-sle^pers leave gaping for thy Linen, thy goods, and thy money: And are
mad they are not likely to Rifle thy House: when thou have an appetite to
eat, and that thy feet are able to walk upon that Earth, which was hungry to
d^noure thy whole bdoy; Then fall thou upon that Earth, and Magnify God. Then
say, though thy sins in thy sickness made thy conscience shev a face to
thee as black as Hell, yet seake thou to it, and tell it, that this Recovery
with new repentance (continued) shall make it like the wings of a Dove,
covered with Silver: and whose Feathers are like the yellow Gold; David's Song
set to our tune.
Say to thy Soul, it shall be as white as the Snow in Zumon, and co^s^sse that
Gods Mercy is like the mountain of Bashan: Say to thy Health, that the
Chariots which God sent to guard it were twenty thousand Angels, Read 67.
amongst whom, the Lord was as in the Sanctuary of Sinay.

Nay, albeit Death should lay his Mouth to thine Ear, and bid thee put thy
House in order: For, thou shall Dye; Yet, an Isaiah (some good Man's prayer^) or
thine own, 2 Kings 20.1.
may be heard, and God may Ad^e to thy days fifteen years more, as he did
to Hezekiah, upon his Repentance.

Repentance is a Silver Bell, Good Men sick
and soundes sweetly in the Ear of Heaven. It is a Dyamond shyning and
sparkling in the dark, to inlighten all our miseries. It is a (...) for every
vvound: It is a golden ladder by whose st^pp^s we climb to immortality. It is
a Chain of Orient Pearl, tying up Gods hands that he shall not strike us:
Repentance smells sweeter then the Ointment which the Woman Anointed
Christ's feet* Luke 7 38.
when she wip^d them with her Hair. Repentance winnes the King of Heaven, to
smile upon us as if we were his ^auorites: and to say thus.

If thou still art ascending, Great (...).
and getting up this hill of Repentance, blessed shall thou be in the City,
and blessed in the field; Blessed be the fruit of thy Body, and the fruit of
thy Ground, and the fruit of thy Ca^tle, the increase of thy King, and the
(...) of thy sheep: Blessed shall be the Basket, and thy Dough: Deuteronomy. 25
Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed also when thou go
out.

Thy Land-soldiers (O England!) Shall not stand in fear ^or thy Royal Navy,
for thine enemies that rise against thee, shall fall before thy face: They
shall come out against thee one way, and fly before thee seven ways.

His word (that speaks this) may be taken better then any Kings in the world:
And therefore, hold out both thy hands under, this Tree of Blessings. and catch
the golden apples when so freely they are taken down into thy lap.

But, if thou trample these gifts under thy feet, and spur^est at Gods favor
bestowed upon thee, Bad service* bad wages.
in thy Health, in the midst of a hot sickness. If the Tolling of Bells cannot
awaken you, nor the opening of graves affright you* If Bill-men standing at
other men's doors, cannot put you in mind, that the same guard, may lock up
yours, and the same red Crosses be stuck in your Banners,: If to be shut up
close for a Month, seem but a short Saeue in a Tragedy, and not cared for,
when it is Acted; Then hear (O England and thou her eldest Daughter, so admired
amonst Nations for thy Beauty.) Hear what New Quiners of Punishments will be
opened; For, these are the Arrows which God himself says he will draw out
at rebellious Kingdoms: A Pestilence cleaving fast, Consumptions, feauers,
burning Agues; The Sword, Blasting new-Dewes, Heaven shall be turned to
brasle, and Earth to Iron: Or Houses to have others dwell in them, our
Vineyardes, to have others ^ast them, our Ox^n to be slain, yet we not eat
them, our Sheep to be slaughtered, and to feed our enemies. These, and
hideons squ^ldrons besides are threatened to be sent out against disobedient
people: What Physicians, Doctors, Surgeons, or Apothecaries, have we to defend
us in so dreadful a War? None, not any.

If therefore with Naaman, thou would be cleansed from Leprosy, 2 Kings.
5.14.
thou must obey Elisha, and wash thy self seven times in Jordan: Wee^e seven
times a day* Nay, seven times an hour for thy sins.

Whosoever with Ahaziah, (the King of Samaria) falls sick, and sends for
recovery of Baal-Zebub, (the god of Ekron) and not to the true God indeed, 2
Kings 7.^
he shall not come from his bed, but dye the Death.

For, 2 Kings ^.5.
we sincke to the Bottom of the watters, as the Carpenters Axe did: But,
though never so Iron-hearted, the voice of an Elisha, (the feruency of prayer
and praising God) can fetch us from the bottom of Hell: And by contrition make
us swim on the top of the waters of Life.

Now, albeit at the first crying to God, nay, the Second, God lou^^ an earned
Sui^e^.
Third, Fourth, or twentieth time, he will not hear thee; But that thy sighs
are neglected: Thy tears vnpittyed: Thy sores nor repented: Thy hunger not
satisfied; Thy poverty not relieved. Yet give thou not over: stand at the gate
of Gods mercy still; Beg still: 1 Samuel 1.^^
Knock still, and knock hard* For, (...) was barren, yet being an importunate
suitor, her petition was heard, and signed. She was fruitful, and had three
Sons, and two Daughters.

So, albeit we be barren in Repentance, in Thanksgiving, in Charity, in
Patience, in Goodness: Yet if unfeignedly we pray to Heaven, we shall be
fruitful: And these five shall be our Sons and Daughters.

By this means our Ma^^ shall change her Name again to Naomi, Ruth. ^.2^*
and our bitterness, be turned into sweetness.

Art thou sick! Thy best and only Doctor dwells above: Have thou been sick!
Art thou amended! Fill Heaven and Earth, full of Songs to thy Eternal
Physician, who takes nothing of thee, for any Eloctu^ri^s he gives thee, His
Pills are bitter, but whol^some, and of wondrous operation: And so much the
better, because what he gives, comes gratis?

Art thou recovered? Have thou plucked thy foot out of the grave, Syrack.
30^.14.
when it was stepping in?

Then with the Son of Syrach, acknowledge, that a Beggar in health is better
then a diseased Monarch, Health and Strength, are fairer then gold, and a sound
body is an infinite Treasure.

So that, if thou do not open thy Lips, to Magnify him, that has
snatched thee out of the laws of destruction, His blessings are to thee, as
messes of meat set upon the grave.

I must yet once more wish thee (O Troy nouans) to cast thine eyes about thee:
Look forward on thy sad Neighbor (distressed Cambriage,) Sickness shakes
her, her glorious Buildings are emptied, her Colleges shut up, her Lourned
Sons forsake her, her Tradesmen cry out for succor. Want walks up and down
her streets, a few Rich, a many Poor; But the hands of the one cannot feed,
not fill the mouths of the other.

To thee therefore (O thou Nourishing mother of all the Cities in England) to
thee (albeit thou art in some Sorrow thy self) does this afflicted Nource of
Scholars come; What tree has Branches broad enough to shelter her from
storms but thine? Where is a Sun to warm her frozen Limbs if it moves not
in thy Zodiac? Thou (O Queen of Cities) art Royal in thy gifts; Charity
sits in thy Gates, and compassion waits upon thee in thy Chamber; So that with
Dido, thou often says.

Non ignara mali, Miseris succurrere disco.
My miseries to my self being known,
Makes me count others wants, mine own.
FINIS.

