To the most Honorable Assembly of the Commons house of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Artizan Cloth-workers of the City of London.
Most humbly showing,
THat in the times of his Majesty's most noble Progenitors, Kings and Queens
of England, the State have from time to time had an especial care for the
employment and setting on work of the said Artizans, and thereupon have made
diverse good provisions for their relief. Notwithstanding which, the
Petitioners do not at this present enjoy or reap any or very small benefit by
those former provisions, but by reason of their multitude and their great
charge of children (being in London and the Liberties thereof 12000 persons and
upwards) some of them are enforced for want of work to betake themselves to
labor in the City as Porters, Waterbearers, and in other such like mean
callings; others to return home into their Countries, and there to be either
chargeable to their friends, or to follow husbandry and daily labor; others to
depart the Realm to diverse remote parts in the world, where the secrets of
their Art are disclosed, to the prejudice of those Artizans that remain at
home; and others for lack of employment are fallen to idleness and begging,
and betake themselves to other evil courses, to the great scandal of the
government of this Commonwealth. And if the Petitioners should not in some
measure get work from the Drapers of London, they might for the most part of
them perish for want of food.

That diverse complaints have bin made as well to his Majesty and to the Lords
of his Highness most honorable privy Council, as to the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of London, for some course to be taken for their relief and
employment, who have showed a great desire and willingness to relieve them,
and taken much pains to effect the same.

That the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council in London, taking into
consideration that one principal cause of the misery of the Petitioners, was
their retaining of excessive number of Apprentises, and the too speedy setting
up of Iourneymen: wherefore at a Common Council holden 24. Septembris, 16.
Iacobi Regis, an Act of Common Council was made, containing diverse wholesome
provisions for the remedy thereof, which does not produce that good effect
which was expected, by reason that diverse obstinate persons will not conform
themselves thereunto, unless the same be confirmed by authority of Parliament.

The Petitioners do further show, that of late time a great number of the
petitioners and their families were relieved by the rowing and shearing of
Fustians made within his Majesty's Dominions; but now by reason of the
transportation of great quantities of Fustians vnrowed and unshorn, the misery
of the Petitioners is increased, and they are thereby deprived of a great part
of their maintenance.

That the Petitioners have exhibited a Bill in this present Parliament, as well
for confirmation of the said Act of Common Council, as also for the redress
of sundry other inconveniences; The which Bill they do most humbly pray may be
enacted and established by this most honorable Assembly, to the relief of so
many thousands that depend upon the welfare of the Petitioners.


