To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Woollie.
Far fet, dear bought, does fit a Lady best;
Such you deserve, such would my will bestow:
Good things are rare, rare things esteemed you know;
Rare should yours be, as you rare of the rest:
Such hold this gift, fetched from a foreign land,
Which wisest King, as precious did provide,
Who viewing all the earth, has naught espide,
Whose worth (herewith co^par'd) may longer stand:
The price (I dare assure) is very dear,
As puchasd by your merit and my care,
Whose travel would a better gift prepare,
If any better worthy might appear:
Then this accept, as I the same intend,
Which duty to the dead would will me send.
ECCLESIASTES, OTHERWISE CALLED THE PREACHER. Containing Salomons Sermons or
Commentaries (as it may probably be collected) upon the 49. Psalm of David his
father. Compendiously abridged, and also paraphrastically dilated in English
poesy, according to the analogy of Scripture, and consent of the most
approved writer thereof.

Composed by H. L. Gentleman.

Whereunto are annexed sundry Sonets of CHRISTIAN PASSIONS heretofore printed,
and now corrected and augmented, with other affectionate Sonets of a feeling
conscience of the same Authors.

Psalm. 144. 3 Lord what is man, that thou regardest him: or the son of man,
that thou think upon him?

4 Man is like to vanity, his days like a shadow that vanishes.

LONDON. Printed by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blackefriers near Ludgate.
1597.

TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT AND NOBLE PRINCESS, LADY OF RAREST VERTVES, Queen
Elizabeth our most gracious Sovereign: her Highness faithful subject Henry
Lok, wishes perfect and perpetual felicity.
THE purest liquor drawn out of the heavenly fountain of SALOMONS inspired
wisdom I here (with all zeal of your Highness service) in most humble duty,
offer to your thrice sacred Majesty, under whose most glorious Empire, having
first received the breath of this life: and by whose shining beams of most
gracious government, that life having tasted part of the common comfort of
your many happy subjects, and peculiar favor of your most princely
countenance: I cannot but as I acknowledge all my powers of right to pertain to
your Highness disposition: so to force my weak endeavors, to testify the
sincerity of the same. This my present, which (in a rustie caske, in steed of
a golden cup) I have ventured to purchase for your Highness, is (I confess)
far unworthy your Majesty's tasting of (though in the benignity of David's
spirit, I doubt not your Highness will accept the same,) which, as it is
borrowed from the labors of so mighty and worthy a king as was Solomon the
true Author thereof, it seems most fit the dedication to your Majesty, who in
Empire being a peer unto him, in election a partner, in happiness a rival,
and in wisdom a Sabian obseruer of his soundest doctrines, can perfectliest
judge, and will kindliest (I assure my self) welcome this his child for his
fathers sake, which must be (and so I desire) his only grace. For with me it
is true that in the composition hereof, it fared as with more worthy Nehemias,
when he attempted the repair of the holy City: who being oftentimes disturbed
therein by the practice and malice of Sanballat, Tobia and Geshem, was
sometimes forced to desist from his attempt, and in the end to effect it with
sword in one hand and mattock in the other: so whilst common cares and
domestik duties (the direct enemies to all ingenious actions, and proper
poison) of pure invention, did many times confound my judgment, disturb my
leisure, and in a manner utterly disable my disposition for so weighty an
affair (removing so often my hand from my mind, and my mind almost from the
affection of my heart) I (with half my weak self) have been driven thus to
piece together, this often broken off, and now vnworkmanly perfected task.
Which yet (as a well favored person, even in mean attires, seems yet ever
comely) will I doubt not show some excellency of the co^posers spirit, though
it be not artificially clothed with borrowed bewties from my barren brain. And
your Highness, whose course of life so well conformeth with this his discourse
(teaching us your subjects by holy practice, what he by divine precepts
instructed his) may as justly challenge (me seems) the publication of the like
discourse: as we without defrauding God of his honor, and your Highness of
your due, may not conceal the perfect resemblance your Highness has of him in
name, disposition, and fortune: and we with his subjects in honor, prosperity
and peace: which albeit, we your inferior subjects (as the weak sighted eyes
which cannot behold perfectly the face of the sun, but looking down in the
water: nor see his first appearing in the East, but by looking for the shadow
in the West) knowing our disabilities iudicially to observe the clear
brightness of your shining virtues: referring to bordering Princes and attendant
Peers, the more fit recording of the same: we take palpable assura^ces of the
blessed Spirit of God working in you; by the like fruit of peace, prosperity
and plenty derived by your Majesty's most excellent government and wisdom,
unto us: whose first work of building up the Church of Christ, providing for
learning, restoring the decayed strength and munitions of the realm, enriching
the treasury of the land by refined coin, retaining with most princely
magnanimity, the ancient ample bounds of your Empire, the establishment of so
many profitable factories for unfrequented traffic, the chargeable
discoueries of so many unknown parts, the honorable repulsio^ of so many foes,
the bounteous purchase of so many neighbor friends, the charitable relief of so
many Christians oppressed, the equal distribution of justice unto all, (all
tending to the glory of God, and prosperity of your reign) do sensibly,
without any disparagement of the greatness of that mighty Prince, draw on a
certain lively comparison of both your properties and blessings: which
therefore might excuse me of flattery, if in a few words I should point
thereat. But I will leave the ampler relation hereof to future posterities, and
herein humbly craving pardon of your Majesty, for this my presumption (which
indeed has been founded on your Highness gracious acceptance of my former
Passionate present) and recommending them anew to your Majesty's favor
herewithall, augmented and reformed; I will with all feruencie of prayer,
commend your Highness to the protection of the Almighty: who as he has
confirmed your throne these (now nigh forty) years amongst us, to the
universal peace and comfort of his Israel the Church of Europe: so may he
redouble and continue even to the end (if so his Highness please) your
Majesty's most happy reign over us for ever.

Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subject, HENRY LOK.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is the most fit subject for the nobility of man's spirit to meditate of
felicity: and a true saying of Aristotle, that Omnia appetunt bonum. Yea the
common practice of our high minded age, is to strive for the same in the
superlatiue degree. But so foolish and newfangled are our desires, that
wishing we wot not what, and seeking it we know not how nor where: we come all
far short of the same, and some run headlong to the despised contrary
(looking for it on earth) and thereby groping for it to their graves, they are
there cut off of their hopes, and die discontented with their haps. Whereas if
they acknowledged it to be the tree of life, planted in the heavenly paradise,
they would less labor their bodies for attaining these transitory shadows of
pleasure, and more exercise the faculties of the soul for atchiuing the same,
so much the more despising these instable and imperfect happinesses of this
life, as they found their foolish affections of the flesh (doting on the^) to
work neglect of the nutriment of their soul: and slacknes in the constant
travel in religion and virtue (which is requisite for the long journey we have
to pass through life and death thereunto.) But this having bin the sickness of
all ages, and specially of the Jews in Salomons time, (which induced him, as
it should appear, to take so great pains in removing the^ from that error,) I
the less marvel, that our age flourishing in the pride of like long peace and
plenty, under her Majesty's most happy reign, be also sotted with the world
as they were, dreaming of that perfection and perpetuity here, which God by
nature has denied unto us, and but by her Highness reign we could hope for.
And since it is the duty of every part and member of the body, to join in the
assistance and cure of the whole, if any particular of it should suffer: I have
in a dutiful compassion of this common calamity endeavored to seek forth some
mithridate for this poison: by which so many perish, and have here brought thee
a Doses of the wisest Physicians composition, that ever had practice of that
cure: who did not (for the experime^t of his potions quality, first kill many
patients in trial thereof) but applying it to his own wound first, dares
confidently write probatum est, and by the seal of the holy spirit and consent
of the Church, does warrant thee to taste of the same. It is a receipt so oldly
composed perhaps, that thou respectest it the less, or of so small price, that
thou shamest to take it, or perhaps knowing the bitterness of the taste, thou
had as live continue sick, as to try it. But deceive not thy self, it is
of the nature of the perfectest drogs, which with age increase in strength: of
the kind of Sibillaes works, which refused, grow higher prized: and of the
herb called woodroofe. which only handled has an evil smell, but more
forcibly rubbed, yields a sweet savor. Receive it therefore as confidently
as he assures it, and as kindly as I intend it: who in respect that the
obscurity of many places, the contrariety (as at first would appear) of some
points, and strange dependancie of the whole together: have done my careful
and studious iudeuor (by consideration and imitation of the best interpreters
hereof) to explane the true sense, accord the different places: to join by
probable co^nexion the whole discourse together: which as well to distinguish the
several arguments, as to vary the verse, and pawse the reader) I have not
altogether unfitly distributed into three Sermons, each one containing four
Chapters a piece. The first especially showing the vain opinion of felicity,
which is not in earth to be found. The second pointing more directly (by the
lawful use of this life) the true way unto her. The last, teaching her
residence to be in heaven, and persuading the speedy pursuit of her favor. And
that you might truly consider of the carriage of the matter, according to the
scope of the Text, I have caused the same to be quoted in the margent, reducing
for memory sake into two abstract lines of verse set in the top of every
leaf: the substance of every pages content, which afterward as thou see, is
paraphrastically dilated page by page, in the plainest form I can devise. Who
in respect of the gravity of the argument did restrain my pen from the helps
of much profane learning, and in consideration of the antiquity of the work,
and majesty of the author, could not (without great indecencie) have used the
authorities of men, or of so late times (as since the learnings flourished,
whence we now receive our common light.) Like naked truth therefore I pray thee
receive it, for it own, if not for my sake: and if in any thing I seem to
swarne from thy conceit of many points, I pray thee confer farther therein, with
D. Gregorius, Neocerasiensis Epis. Olimpioderus, D. Salonius Epis. Vienne^sis,
Theod. Beza, Ioh. Serranus, Anth. Corranus, Tremelius, all interpreters and
paraphrasers in prose upon this work, and I. Lectius, To. Lemmannus, I.
Viuianus, reducers thereof into Latin poesy, or any other thou likest better
of, so shall my errors be covered or excused, whilst their different forms,
distributio^s of method, and interpretatio^s, will leave thee (I am persuaded)
in some points as little satisfied as this my labor shall do: who in some things
was forced to digress from them all, when either too much in one place, or too
little in an other, they followed the form of a Paraphrasis, which they
undertook: into which error also it is not unlike but I have sometimes fallen
my self, and I doubt not but many things more might have bin said, and perhaps
to more purpose then I have done, but non omnia possumus omnes. According to my
sufficiency I have discharged my self faithfully unto thee, and therefore I
trust (in these days wherein some pernicious, many uncivil, and a swarm of
superfluous and unprofitable books pass from the press) it shall not be
needful for me to use great insinuation for thy favor; since it lies not in
the bounds of a Preface, to prepare a perverse mind, or in the nature of such a
work, to go a begging for a grace. I will therefore cut off that labor, and
only signify unto thee the excellency of this work, compiled by the wisest
man, and mightiest king of Israel, even Solomon the king of peace: Ydida: the
beloved of God: Ecclesiastes the preacher: who in his Proverbs instructs thee
as a child, to a civil and honest life: in this work, instituteth thy manly
thoughts to the inquisition of the highest good. To the end, that by his last
song of heavenly love, thy ripened thoughts might be inflamed with that
glorious bride Christ Jesus: to whose holy direction I heartily commend thee.

H. L.

Certain poems to the Author of the work.
TErra ferax vatum est Brittannia, non tamen omnes,
Aut vno, aut sacro flamine Phoebus agit
Hic canit obscuri certaminis arma virosve,
Alter lasciui ludicra amoris alit.
Hos genio vt superas, sic carmine and argumento
AEquum and Reginae est cedere Regis opus.
A. H. S.

Ad Serenissimam Reginam Elizabetham.
REgia Virgineae soboles dicata parenti,
Virgo animo, patriaemater, Regina quid quid optas?
Chara domi, metuenda foris, Regina quid optas?
Pulchra, piaes, princeps, foelix, Regina quid optas?
Coelum est? Certo at sero sit Regina quod optas.
Ioh. Lily.

Ad Lockum eiusdem.
INgenio and genio locuples, dic Lock quid addam?
Addo, quod ingenium quondam preciosius auro.
Ad Authorem.
NOn vane vanos sapiens perstringit abusus:
Nec vano enarras regalem carmine mentem.
Nec qui suasit opus, fuerat vanusve malusve.
Nec vanum diuae sacrum dicare laborem.
Cuius quid vani? quid non memorabile dictu?
Non vanumest sceptro, populum rexisse potentem.
Non iusto regem bello, superasse superbum,
Non Antichristi vires fregisse furentis,
Non armis miseros, vicinaque regna fouere,
Si vanus repeto, ignosce o regia virgo*
Vano. Pergetamen. Sola haec and vera putato.
L. P.

To the work.
THee Princes pen, now present to a Prince,
And poem to a princely sprited Muse:
Ye full sound Ethics of the sweet essence
Of heavenly truth, which all ought to peruse
View all, reap good, leave ill without excuse.
H. A.

To the Author.
FOr me to praise this work, it were no praise,
Whilst thou do publish it: it prayseth thee;
Thing (once called perfect) further praise denayes,
Because all other words inferior be.
With happy sight thy muse appears to see,
That could select a subject of such choice,
Which has enforced many more then me,
With silence (for thy blist attempt) rejoice.
Thy former vain, no vain conceit bewrayes
By Passions (patterns of a Christian fight)
But for this work, yet highest honor stays,
And therefore henceforth fear no others flight
Thy Zeal, thy theme, thy gift, thy fame to stain,
Which imitate they may, but not attain.
M. C.

TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
TO you thrice sacred Princess of this I Will:
By God, By country, By true wisdoms praise,
Elect, Anointed, Sovereign, is the style,
Religous Empress, Beauty of our days,
His Church you cherish, that your state did raise,
Our peace you purchase, where your throne is plast,
Eternal glory on your actions stays;
Rare, Crowned, Virtue: Holy, Humble, Chaste,
Whom all heavens high perfections fully graced
Whom all earth honors, should, do, will adorn:
Whom all the Muses have with love embraced:
Who does pale Envy, and blind Fortune scorn;
To you wise kings discourse of bliss I bring,
Renowned Queen, true type of happiest King.
Chap. 1.


1.
The words of the Preacher the son of David king in Jerusalem. THe heavenly
words of holy David's son,
Who over Isreal's race sometimes did reign,
Wherewith to virtue he his subjects won,
Whilst in Jerusalem he did remain,
And to instruct them thus did not disdain.
Those words, no vain discourse it is I write,
Pend by a Prince, as God did them indite.
Strange doctrines, which some paradoxes call,
But yet the quintessence of holy creed,
Lives pure Elixer, which is sought of all,
T'asswage cares corasiues, in heart that breed,
Of happiness the generatiue seed,
Of moral speculation practice sound:
Of constant faith the quiet fruit he found.
2.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher: vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
The far fet happiness which some propound,
In minds, in bodies, and in fortunes gifts:
(Which all conjoined seeldome times are found)
But to a vain conceit the fancy lifts,
And their best Sectaries do lose their drifts;
The crown it is, of heavens most glorious state,
Earths fruits all vain: care, folly, and debate.
Yea vain, all vain (says he) man's soul well proves,
What ever on earths spacious Orb below
Has breath, life, being, sense, or what so moves
By vegetative kind: or which does ow
To nature a declyning state to grow.
Vain in the root, in bud, in flower all vain:
Vain fruit, whose of-springs vainly vades again.


3.
What remains unto man in all his travel, which he suffers under the Sun?
What if some one amids a multitude,
More happy in many points then others be?
Yet truly can you not thereby conclude,
That perfect happy, in all respects is he:
Nor long time can enjoy the same we see.
Upon a tickle point earths blessings stand,
And come and go in turning of a hand.
All must confess, that nothing long remains
To man, for all the travels of his mind,
Sustained in this life with bodies pains,
Since earth and earthly things all vade by kind,
As does a shadow or a puff of wynd.
No providence preuenteth destiny,
Earth and her fruits do live but for to die.
4.
One generation passes, and an other generation succeeds, but the earth
remains for ever. Man's life like to a burning lamp does wast,
And like the ship on sea all storms abide,
Flies swift as thought, which straight is come and past:
Whose memory as soon away does slide,
As trace which soaring foul through air did guide,
Whose intercourse of change so swift does go,
That sense can scarce discern that it was so.
And as on stage new actors issue still,
Until each part expired, the play be done:
So generations new the world do fill,
And ages new past ages overrun:
And shall till this worlds end have new begun
That other world, which never shall have end:
To which we posting thus, our hopes should bend.


5.
The sun rises, and the sun goes down, and draws to his place where he
rises. Yea all heavens elements full well we see,
Though far more durable then man by kind,
Yet for our use, in motion still to be,
And by their change of change put us in mind,
As in the lightsome sun we proof may find;
Whose time in measuring out our time is spent,
Whilst we to mark his motion only meant.
This glorious Bride, in love of earth his spouse
From his Starchambered palace of the sky,
Drawn on by mornings wings, betimes does rouse
Through either Hemi-sphere, and passing by
Th'Antipodes, from East to East does fly,
With every step Horizons making new,
Wherewith the earth new bewties does indew.
6.
The wind goes toward the South, and co^passeth toward the North: the wind
goes round about, and returns by his circuit. This pure sweet air wherein
things breathing live,
The All filling essence of vacuitie,
He unto life the very spright does give,
And never rests, his presence to apply
To our behoof: who languishing would lie,
If long he should retire his flagrant breath,
Whose use (from us restraind) does menace death.
He being speedy guide to motions all,
In tender care and neighbor love he owes
Unto those lower regions, forth does call
From hills and dales exhaled breaths, whence grows
As many winds as on earths compass blows,
Which cleansing clouds, and drying dampish soil,
Do whistling through earths hollow vaults recoile.


7.
(...) The liquid streams, of waters which arise,
Fro out the Cesterne of the Centors deep,
Whose winding channels in a wondrous wise,
Through hills and dales, in curbed wise do creep,
A constant progress do by nature keep,
Till they the Ocean (their dear mother) meet,
Whose brackish tears for the^, their drops make sweet.
Whose fruitful womb, in grateful wise repaies
The yielding earth, the tribute of her love,
By sending strayned springs through forced ways,
And Porus passages for man's behoue,
That so her self in bounds might mildly move:
Who yields likewise to bear earths heavy brood,
And breeds her self some store of human food.
8.
All things are full of labor: man can not utter it, the eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. And not these compound elements
alone
Are subject to this intercourse of change,
But even the four pure elements each one
Do from themselves, to the others natures range,
Though contrary by kind, with motion strange:
Earth into water turns, moist into air,
Pure air to fire, Condenst they back repair.
So all things labor evermore and tend
Unto their end, which when they once attain,
That form does change and to another bend,
Which likewise in his time has end again,
And nothing in one state does long remain;
Whose wondrous frame, in vain man seeks to find,
Whilst no man's study can suffice his mind.


9.
What is it that has been? that that shall be: and what is it that has been
done? that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the Sun. For
proof, let me demand but this of you,
Who most have searched natures secret power?
And you who are conuerst in stories true,
And you obseruers of each day and hour,
Have ye not found, that time does all devour?
And that new times the like things does produce,
As any former ages had in use.
We dream of secrets daily, newly found,
And of inventions passing former wits,
We think our world with wisdom does abound,
And fame (for knowledge) us much rather fits,
But ouer-weening thoughts this toy begits:
Their longer lives more temperately led
In holy study, sure more knowledge bred.
10.
Is there any thing whereof one may say, behold this, it is new: it has been
already in the old time that was before us. What one thing can we say is new
indeed,
Excepting time it self, which still renewes?
New sins perhaps this wicked age would breed,
Yet can not other then first age did use:
The name of new indeed we do abuse,
By calling new the thing we newly know,
Which rather ignorance of skill does show.
Those elder times (no doubt) in golden age,
When natures strength was in her youthful prime,
When Will on Wisdom tended as a Page,
And love of virtue, banished many a crime,
When humble thoughts did not for glory clime:
Then all things flourisht sure that now we see,
And actions all, that are, or that may be.


11.
There is no memory of the former, neither shall there be a remembrance of the
latter that shall be, with them that shall come after But they forgotten are, as
ours once shall,
Man's few and evil days with cares of mind,
Make many worthy things to dust to fall,
And us to predecessors grow unkind,
Whose fames with theirs shall vanish with the wind,
And as our stealing wits would clips their fame,
Devouring time, shall desolate our name.
For what more equal recompense is due,
To such as others merits do deprave,
Then that like base contempt, do them ensue,
And of successors they like guerdon have,
And so we see fame leaves us at the grave:
Build then his happiness on earth who will,
He but himself with care and scorn shall fill.
12.
I the Preacher have been king over Israel in Jerusalem. By proof I speak,
who once a mighty King
Did sway the Scepter of the holy seed,
Whose blessed name of peace, true peace did bring,
And public wealth, which happiness did breed,
And all delights whereon the world does feed:
From Dan to Bersaba there, bound before,
And from Euphrates unto Nylus shore.
My seat in Centor of earths Paradise,
In blessed Jerusalem Gods dwelling place,
Near to whereas mount Sion does arise,
The holy hill, which does the country grace,
Wherein I ruled not a little space:
For forty years, I reigned still in peace,
And in a ripened age I did decease.


13.
And I have given mine heart to search and find out wisdom by all things that
are done under the heaven, this sore travel has God give to the sons of men
to humble them thereby. And all this time I bent my power and will,
To find fair wisdoms palace, that I there
My homage due, might pay unto her still,
And trophes to her in my heart might rear,
Her love made me all other love forbear:
Wealth I and honor, health, and every thing
Disdaind, that did not me true wisdom bring.
I therefore first did God most humbly crave,
To guide my steps in such a holy care,
Who (thenceforth) thereof such a measure gave,
As none for wisdom might with me compare:
To prove all things I did my heart prepare,
Insatiat still as man by nature is,
Of skill (so doomd) for Adams first amiss.
14.
I have considered all the works that are done under the sun, and behold all
is vanity and vexation of the Spirit. What ever nature of her self brings
forth,
Or skillful Art by practice could produce,
What ever did to any seem of worth,
Or for necessity might seem of use,
Was still the object of my studious Muse,
Which out of all to gather did desire,
That happiness whereto we would aspire.
But for my pains on earth did naught attain,
But loss of time and agony of Spright,
A vain desire, replete with skill more vain,
A careful life, disguisd with vain delight,
A puffed up brain, with dreams of wisdoms sight,
But to my heart unfruitful of content,
To wearied life, a lode of time misspent.


15.
That which is crooked, can none make straight: and that which faile^^ can not
be numbered. For when I sought to practice what I knew,
My mind distracted diversely was led,
In looking to prevent things to insew:
Much care in vain I took, no fruit it bred,
To know the worlds amiss, serves to small sted;
When no man can make straight the crooked tree,
Or mend the chance that is ordaind to be.
To number forth man's miseries and woe
Is hard to do, and little would avail:
To stay the Oceans course, he should but go,
That would support, where nature means to fail:
It makes us but our weakness more bewail,
If any way our wisdom stood in sted,
It would suppress the vices in us bred.
16.
I thought in mine heart, and said, Behold I am become great, and excel in
wisdom all them that have been before me in lerusalem: and mine heart has
seen much wisdom and knowledge And though (alas) I might of all men best,
For wisdom be reputed among the great,
Whose knowledge far surpassed all the rest,
Before me ever were in Isreal's seat,
Or any others whom Records repeat:
Yea then was Chalcoll, Darda, or Ethan,
Heman, Maholl, or any living man.
Yet I for all my knowledge must confess,
That childish blindness reigns over all,
The more I knew, I thought I knew the less,
My knowledge, ignorance I seemed to call,
When to the skanning of it I did fall:
As far to weak true wisdom to behold,
As man unfit, Gods secrets to unfold.


17.
And I gave (...) heart to know wisdom and knowledge, madness and
foolishness: I knew also, that this is a vexatio^ of the spirit. And that I
might the better others judge,
I bent my self to every students vain,
To read each frivolous work I did not grudge,
As well as writers of more pregnant brain:
The rules of observations I did gain,
Which long experience makes many see,
And to the vulgar sort instructions be.
I put in practice what these arts did teach,
And tasted every toy for my delight.
Fond actions made in modest mind a breach:
For will with reason I did arm to fight;
Yet all in fine did but torment my spright.
In wisdoms grave restraint my bounds seem straight,
On folly, shame, and sorrow to awaight.
18.
For in the multitude of wisdom is much grief: and he that increases
knowledge, increases grief. So wisdom proves a style of small avail,
Which cannot yield a man one happy day,
His infant studies servile fears do quail,
His youthful years with wantonness decay,
His manly thoughts worlds combers wear away:
His years of judgment for true wisdom fit,
Deuoyd of power, through weakened limbs do sit.
And yet suppose some one in ripened time,
In body and in mind have some delight,
Yet he shall find, when he does seem in prime,
A world of woes to march before his sight,
Which past or presently shall with him fight:
Which if he escape, yet many thousands bear,
Whereof whilst yet he lives, he stands in fear.
Chap. 2.


1.
I said in mine heart, go to now, I will prove thee with joy: therefore take
thou pleasure in pleasant things: and behold this (...) vanity. THus tired
with these studies I repinde,
And in my heart, I said, no more of this:
Now will I try if pleasure I may find,
To cheer my fainting soul in worlds amiss:
Perhaps in mirth and joy is plast true blis,
Let me to counsel, my affections take,
And let them to their likings frolike make.
From reasons bonds, thus set at large awhile,
They each of them their appetites do fit,
Each several sense, himself seeks to beguile,
And all conspire the wished prise to git,
But (over gorged) full soon they all do surfit:
For lust complete sacietie does breed,
And vain the fruit, that grows from such a seed.
2.
I said of laughter, thou art mad: and of joy, what is this that thou (...)
Then did I first begin indeed to know,
The vanity of these unconstant joys,
For while the foggie mist of lust does grow,
As through a cloud, we see it so annoyes
Our purest judgment, even with childish toys:
But then (as safe on shore) the storm I saw,
Whose raging billows did souls peril draw.
Then called I laughter a deformed grace,
More fit for fools, then temperate men to try,
Grave majesty expelling from the face,
And antike wise disguizing men, whereby
As madness, I began it to defy:
As forced mirth, which no sweet fruit does bring,
But to relenting soul a poysned sting.


3.
I sought in mine heart to give my self to wine, and to lead mine heart in
wisdom, and to take hold of folly, till I might see when is that goodness of
the children of men, which they enjoy under the sun, the whole number of the
days of their life. The Antidote of hearts with care oppressed,
Earths blood, wits bane, wines best delighting taste,
I gave my self to prove in my unrest,
To quicken so my sprights, with care defast,
Not glutton like, with drunkenness disgrast,
But as in prickly bush men Roses take,
So in my plenty I not measure brake.
For why, the object of my actions were
So limited by wisdoms happy guide,
That I in them, did Gods offense forbear,
And in the bounds of temperance firm abide:
I only sought by all things to have tryde,
Where, and what is, that good man's offspring finds
In life on earth, which so inchaunts their minds.
4.
I have made my great works: I have built me houses: I have planted me
vineyardes. And for I held magnificence to be
A virtue fitting well a princely mind,
I built and dedicated (Lord) to thee
A Temple, where thy Arc a rest might find:
A worthless present for a God so kind:
Yet best that skillful Hyrams art could frame,
In seven years time, and cost upon the same.
I raised and reedified beside,
Full many cities to withstand the foes,
And Libanus, whose beauty far and wide,
In fame before all other cities goes:
Besides a Palace for my Queen, like those
Where mightiest Monarks courts have erst bin plast,
Which was with many vineyards greatly grast.


5.
I have made me gardens and orchards, and planted in the^ trees of all (...). I
made me spacious gardens therewithal,
Wherein to solace both my Queens and me,
In which all kind of herbs both great and small,
And all such flowers as either pleasing be
To sight or smell, you there might plenty see,
Or which for health of man had any praise,
Or for delight might serve him any ways.
My Orchards like to Paradise were held,
Wherein for shadie walks and sweet prospects,
Ingenious art had nature so excelled,
That things against kind produced most kind effects;
All fruitful trees of taste that man affects,
Were planted plenteously, from Cedar tall
To little shrubbe, that clymbeth by the wall.
6.
I have made me Cesterns of water, to water therewith the woods that grow with
trees. From top of farthest cliffes through hills and dales,
I set my fountain heads and crystal springs,
I forced rivers from the lower vales,
To mount their neighbor hills, whose backs them brings
Unto those Cesternes, which by spouts them flings,
Like April showers dispersedly to fall,
And so bedeaw those bordering trees withal.
Whence softly they distilling to the ground,
Might cool the pride of summers scorching rays,
And cause the happy soil with fruit abound,
Which spring time like, thus flourished always,
Whose overplus of streams in channel stays:
That every fish and foul might solace take,
Or men might bath on bank, and banquet make.


7.
I have gotten servants and maids, and had children borne in the house: also I
had great possession of Beeues and sheep, above all that were before me in
lerusalem. I was attended on in princely sort,
As well of Nobles as of servile kind,
Yea tributary kings did often resort,
To do the homage fealty did bynd,
Of Captives I had store, unto my mind,
And families of these and their offspring,
To populate a country for a king.
My flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle great,
Wherewith my royal Court I daily fed,
Who thirty Beeues, and fiuescore Sheep did eat,
Besides such dainties as the country bred,
I forty thousand horse to battle led,
And Charets more I had, I dare well say,
Then any king in Iewry till this day.
8.
I have gathered unto me also silver and gold, and the chief treasures of kings
and provinces: I have provided me men singers and women singers, and the
delights of the sons of men, as a woman taken captive, and women taken
captives, Of treasure I had store and revenue,
Six hundredth Talents, sixty six of gold,
Four hundredth fifty more, from Ophire due,
And custom for all merchandise was sold,
With tributes more then number well you could:
So that like stones or dross, I silver gave,
And in my reign for want few needed crave.
The choice of all the spoils of war I had,
Both men and women singers rare of skill,
Whose melody would cheer the mind most sad,
Whose beauties with delight the eye might fill,
And of these had variety at will,
And what so ever human kind can crave,
To seek delight therein, my self I gave.


9.
And I was great, and increased above all that were before me in Jerusalem: all
my wisdom remained with me. Thus grew I mighty, and of greater fame
Then any king Jerusalem had known:
From far and near, great Princes sent and came
To see my greatness, which abroad was blown:
Admired I was, and loved of my own,
Surpassing far, report that went of me,
As Saba Queen, confessed that came to see.
And (which few men, in prosperous state can do).
By wisdoms rule I guided so my life,
That holy Justice still I leand unto,
And shielded innocence from Tyrants strife:
And (had I not transgrest through heathnish wife,
Who made me wink at her Idolatry)
Few errors in my life you should espy.
10.
And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I withheld it not f^o^ them: I withdrew not
mine heart from any joy: for mine h^rt rejoiced in all my la^or: and this was my
portion of all my travel. Thus did I fill my eyes with their desire,
And fed my heart at full with all content,
No sooner did my thought a thing require,
But forward to effect it straight I went:
Thus I my days in joy and solace spent,
Peace gave me wealth and power, power fed my will,
My will sought happiness in all things still.
But happiness I had not as I thought,
For though in use of things I seemed glad,
Yet afterward they to me loathing brought,
And things begun in joy, were parting sad,
And yet that present joy was all I had,
In recompense of all my trau'll and pain,
And to have that, was more then many gain.


11.
Then I looked on all my works that my hands had wrought, and on the travel
that I had labored to do: and behold, all is vanity and vexation of the
Spirit: and there is no profit under the iunn^ In fine, now surfeiting indeed
with all
My dear bought pleasure, both begun and past,
Unto a reckoning I my judgment call,
And true account of gain, of them I cast,
And did suruay my works, which yet did last,
To see the benefit I reapt thereby,
Because I would the truth of all things try.
Which when I found for most part vanished quight,
And those remaining, subject to like fate;
I saw a world of vanity and spite,
Which made me world and all her works to hate,
As mass of misery, and unkind debate,
As they shall find, who thus forwarnd will prove,
Repentance being price of foolish love.
12.
And I turned to behold wisdom, madness, and folly: for who is the man that
will come after the king in things which men now have done. Then I a new
comparison did make,
Twixt sacred wisdom (heavens infused gift)
And human wisdom, which does pattern take
Of presidents, of moral actions drift,
The skill wherein does worldly minds up lift,
And this compard with foolish ignorance,
Which in the world does many sotts advance.
For if that knowledge on experience grow,
And that experience be the child of time,
If time her power do to the studious show,
And labor does to highest knowledge clime,
If judgment flourish where these are in prime,
Then who has me surpast, or shall succeed
In these, whose censure may more credit breed?


13.
Then I saw there is profit in wisdom, more then in folly: as the light is
more excellent then darkness. And what I could, impartial conceive
Of each of them, I will thee truly tell:
I found that folly did a man deceive,
And woe to them within her snares that fell,
But wisdom did all earthly things excel,
Immortalizing man with worthy fame,
And covering the defects of natures shame.
And look how much the sun in summers day,
When he in Zenith of our Hemis-pheres,
Most glorious beams of brightness does display,
Suprasseth darkest nights that winter wears,
In frozen Zone for light some face he bears:
So far and more, the wise do fools surpass,
Or more then precious stones do brickle glass.
14.
For the wise man's eyes are in h^s head, but the fool walks in darkness:
yet I know also that the same condition falls (...). For why, the wise call
passed things to mind,
Observe the present, future do foresee,
Compare effects, whereby they courses find,
And make their actions to best rules agree,
Like Eagle eyes, and Linxes sights theirs be,
Where fools as blindfold, groping miss the way,
And unto every danger are a pray.
Although in deed one end befalls all,
The wise and foolish, beggar and the king:
All made of earth, again to dust do fall,
And every state is crossed with some thing.
Wisdom breeds care, and folly want does bring:
Wealth lives in fear, and poverty in woe:
Honor enuide, base blood contemned does go.


15.
The^ I thought in mine heart, it befalls unto me, as it befalls to the
fool: why therefore do I then labor to be more wise? and I said in mine
heart, that this also is vanity. I therefore in my heart began to think,
If all estates some misery must have,
If wise and foolish both of one cup drink,
If all by death must draw unto the grave,
If wisdom may not man from danger save:
If sickness be the common guide to death,
If death the end of all that draws breath:
Why then do I contend for wisdoms praise?
With studious travel, why do I apply
My time, and spend away youths pleasant days*
With pain and toil? why serves severity,
And temperance of life, since all must die?
It is mere madness to be too precise,
Though fools be vain, vain also be the wise.
16.
For there shall be no remembrance of the wise, nor of the fool for ever: for
that that now is, in the days to come shall all be forgotten: and how dies
the wise man, as does the fool. Vain in the highest point of vanity,
If they suppose on earth true bliss to find,
As on a stage, each step they tred awrie
Is marked, and fame defamd by slanderous kind,
And their best name that they do leave behind
Is soon forgot, as fools facts also be,
As we by daily proof full well may see.
Alas! is there no difference at all,
In length of days betwixt the fond and wise?
Can naught protect from death, but must all fall?
As basest sort, so those in honor rise,
Can man no way to lengthen life devise?
Then vain is he in them reposeth trust,
Whose joys with them so soon determine must.


17.
Therefore I hated life: for the work that is wrought under the sun is
grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of the Spirit. The thought
whereof made me the world to hate,
And every circumstance of life to blame,
The day of birth, as day of cursed fate,
The length of life, as heap of woe and shame,
The daily look for death, as rotten frame
Of natures weakest building, earth does bear,
Bred up and nourished, with care and fear.
Conceived in sin, brought into world with pain,
With just laments bewayling future case,
Who impotent, does hopeless still remain,
(If pity in the parents had not place,
Or foster mothers did him not embrace)
Whose youth sharp tutors, age the laws restrain,
Whose vexed soul still carkes and cares in vain.
18.
I hated also all my labor, wherein I had traveled under the Sun, which I
shall leave to the man that shall be after me. Yea, though my self was free
from sundry things,
By reason of the greatness of my state,
With which the meaner sort full often wrings,
(As want, and suffering stroke of mighties hate)
Yet I my cares had in an other rate,
And far more forcible in me they were,
For prosperous states do worst afflictions bear.
As fear of change, care of the common good,
Desire to eternize my name on earth:
Yet nothing more (me thought) my joy withstood,
Then that I traueld for an others mirth,
For whom, my fruits were gathred ere his birth,
Which made me all my works of most desert
Hate and disdain, even from the very heart.


19.
And who knows whether he shall be wise or foolish, yet shall he have rule
ever all my labor, wherein I have traveled, and wherein I have showed my
self wise under the sun. This is also vanity. For what knew I, who should to
me succeed,
In use of all the wealth and pomp I left,
An infant of mine own, and proper breed,
Or else a stranger creeping in by theft;
I knew how easly crowns might be bereft,
If kings were Orphans lacking years or wit,
Ne knew I if my child for rule were fit.
The proof he yields, and sentence God did give,
Prognosticateth little good at all:
Yet (as unto mine heir in whom I live)
I give what wast he may, and fear he shall;
The fruit even of my wisest travels all,
So that the world which witnessed my pain,
May hap record my travels merely vain.
20.
Therefore I went about to make mine heart abhor all the labor, wherein I had
traveled under the Sun. This made me often, aid reason to contend
With my affections and my pleased sense,
And against my self, my self my wits to bend,
The love of all my works expulsing thence,
And taking on me truths sincere defense,
Said perturbations (which affections guide)
Should not give judgment where her cause is tryde.
I made my mind confess, the study vain
Which was imployd, on transitory thing
I made my body grant, too great the pain
Bestowd on any pleasure life does bring,
My senses to conclude, there was a sting
And bitter taste attended on delight,
And so resolved, worlds love to banish quight.


21.
For there is a man whose travel is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in
equity: yet to a man that has not traveled herein shall he give (...)
portion, this (...) vanity and a great (...). For could there be a greater
grief be^ide,
Or iuster cause to make a man repent
The pains and perils that he did abide,
In honest trade to purchase his intent,
Whereto his wits and diligence was bent:
Then for to think he does for others toil,
Manures the ground, where others reap the soil.
Who builds but in hope to dwell therein?
Who planteh, but in hope the fruit to taste?
Though birds and Bees their nests and combs begin,
Though sheep bear fleece, and Ox the land have trast,
In hope of profit, which their masters wast:
Yet wise men grieve to spend in vain their time,
For others sake the bush to beat or clime.
22.
For what has man of all his travel and grief of his heart, wherein he has
traveled under the sun? If man uncertain be, as sure he is
This night, if he the morrow day shall see,
If he do doubt his days cannot endure,
If he foresee his bed, his grave may be*
And yet of world have care, unhappy he,
I mean such care, as does his powers possess,
And suffers not his soul, some joy express.
For what he leaves him behind is lost,
What he enjoyed, that only was his own,
What has he gained, by wealth that comfort cost,
If he not taste his fruits of travel grown?
Possession best by use of things is known:
Who does not so, but lost his travels are,
A heavy burden bootlesse fetched far.


23.
For all his days are sorrows, and his travel grief, his heart also takes
not rest in the night, which also is vanity. He does thereby but massaker
himself,
And seem unkind to natures true intent,
Whose body feeds not on the view of pelf,
But on the food the hands to mouth do lend,
Which freely to each part does portion send:
He well may think his woeful days too long,
And travel grievous, thus requite with wrong.
If he the wished night ordained for rest,
Consume in careful thoughts of greedy mind,
If he for others hoord his comforts best,
And to himself (against kind) do prove unkind:
No blessedness on earth then shall he find,
But like a bubble vanish soon away,
And in his life his vanity bewray.
24.
There is no profit to man, but that he eat and drink, and delight his soul
with the profit of his labor: I saw also this, that it was of the hand of God.
For no true profit earth to earth can give,
But (whilst on earth man yet does make his stay)
The fruits of earth to use by which we live,
And each days care, defer unto that day.
These Creatures plenteously enjoy we may,
To needful sustenance of bodies strength,
And to delight the mind, waxt dull at length.
Man only must in plenty, plenty note
Of Gods abundant blessing showed therein;
And not forget him whilst they pass the throat,
And them abuse, as instruments of sin,
But for his gifts, with praise to him begin,
With alms proceed, the needy poor to feed,
And not repine, though often they stand in need.


25.
For who could eat, and who could have to outward things more then I. Of all
that I do say, I have made proof,
And therefore may the better thee advise,
Which as I now set down for thy behoof:
So thereof make thy profit, be thou wise,
He is a fool that counsel does despise:
And I who counsel thee, sure best could try,
Earths pleasures, and the fruits that come thereby.
As being King, I all things might command,
As being rich, I each thing might procure,
As being loved, to please me all men fawnd:
As being feared, I might my will make sure:
As being wise, I could make choice most pure,
If any earthly thing might breed content,
Then may I say, that God me part has sent.
26.
Surely to a man that is good in his sight, God gives wisdom, and knowledge,
and joy: but to the sinner he gives pain, togather and to heap, to give to
him that is good before God: this is also vanity, and vexation of the spirit.
And for a full report of my conceit,
I briefly say, as truth requires of me,
That wisdom as a blessing does awaight
Upon the godly, who true knowledge see,
And perfect joy alone in them can be:
For God the author of all goodness is,
And with his fear associats endless blis.
But to the wicked he alotteth grief,
In getting needful things great woe and care,
In their possession little sweet relief,
In laying up of wealth, a life still bare,
Which for the godly they do but prepare:
Rent gathrers for the good, the wicked be,
Vain vexers of their souls themselves may see.
Chap. 3.


1.
To all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under
the heaven. But for I see the wordly wise will say,
They have just cause, to study to attain
The hidden course, which nature does bewray
In interchange of times: which does remain
Inrold in writ of many a learned brain,
I will with them awhile confer, and show
To thee the depth of all the skill they know.
Most true it is (I grant) that hidden are,
In knowledge of Philosophy indeed,
Such rules profound, by learning fet so far,
As in the mind does admiration breed:
But yet that skill does serve to little steed,
For God has natures bounds prefixed so,
That from that course art cannot make them go.
2.
A time to be borne, and a time to die: a time to plant, and a time to pluck
up that which is planted. Begin we first where we begin and end,
With birth of man in mothers womb conceived,
Which (forty weeks expired) needs forth must send,
And age compels to yield the breath received,
In both of which, the wisest are deceived:
The birth and death of diverse, diuersely
Preventing time, of birth and time to die.
And as of men, so in increase of things
The which the earth brings forth in growing kind,
Although we know the Moon fit seasons brings,
To planted things to prosper, yet we find
They often miscarie, and we change our mind,
And (be their fruits once ripe) they gathered be,
And stock once rotten, we stub up the tree.


3.
A time to slay, and a time to heal: a time to break down, and a time to
build. And though it be a thing unnatural,
And most repugnant to society,
The life of man by hand of man to fall,
And to shed blood, wherein his life does lie,
Yet justice craves that male factors die,
As Well as that the sick, should physic have,
Or salues imployd, the wounded corpse to save.
Yea though that cities first well founded were,
For safety unto men of civil sort:
Yet never Monarkes seat such fame did bear,
Or city grow of much with great resort,
But time made cottages of small import
Survive their greatness, and surpass them far,
As Henok, Babell, Troy, true patterns are.
4.
A time to weep, and a time to laugh: a time to mourn and a time to dance.
Though nothing be more needful to our kind,
The rigors to alay of worldly care,
Though nothing better for the health we find,
Then mirth (at times we may well for it spare)
Yet in the use of it we must beware,
And use it so as if we ready were,
The brunt of greatest crosses straight to bear.
For times there are, when duty does require,
We should impart with neighbors woe and grief,
For (partners in distress) do all desire,
And men suppose thereby they find relief
For sin, so should we mourn, as cause most chief:
When Gods offended face, does threat his rod,
Thus mirth and woe, are both required by God.


5.
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones: a time to embrace,
and a time to be far from embracing. There is a time when we the quarries draw,
And from the bowels of the earth full deep,
Raise up her bones, the stones which never saw
The lightsome air, and them we carved keep,
To raise with them our towers, to heaven which peep,
Which afterward decay, and we are feign,
Their ruins to transport abroad again.
Even so in youthful years it seems fit,
As nature made it apt for loves embrace,
So for the worlds increase to yield to it,
With due respect of person time and place:
Yet nothing more unseemly in such case,
As when decrepit age creepes to the grave,
To dote in love, and seek a wife to have,
6.
A time to seek and a time to loose: a time to keep, and a time to cast away.
There is a time, when man with reason may
With diligence endeavor for to gain
A portion fit, his family to stay,
Although with sweat of brows, and daily pain;
But it were folly to torment his brain,
If losses hap, for there will losses fall,
Unto most wise, if they have ought at all.
Then he that is wise, knows when to spend and spare,
For who has most, before he die may need,
And he must spend sometimes that is most bare,
And he may thrive, that does the needy feed:
Bounty does love, and neighbor liking breed:
It is a virtue, placed in a mean,
Although it rather do to giving lean.


7.
A time to reap, and a time to sow: a time to keep silence, and a time to
(...). The rich attyres ordaynd by craft man's hand,
To cover shame, which sin made man to see,
Be not so comely held in any land,
But that in other lands, dislikt they be:
So what one sowes, the other reapes for thee:
Good works for Taylers that newfangled are,
None make more fast, then others mending mar.
What speak we of such common things as this?
Not speech it self (the Echo to the heart)
May be so free, but it restrained is
To civil rules, and laws of very art,
The tongues misuse, of^ breeds the body smart:
We therefore learn, both how and when to speak,
And when we modest silence may not break.
8.
A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war and a time of peace. Yea
though that kindled heat of beauties fire,
And sympathy of natures liking good,
(Chaste love) be founded on a just desire,
And bear such sway as hardly is withstood,
Infecting by the eye, both spirit and blood:
Yet such incounters grow in some respect,
That love finds hate, best merit, base neglect.
Yea bloody war the scourge of peace misusd,
The firebrand of ambition, hels own child,
The wrack of justice, value often abusd
From common wealth may not be well exyld,
Though peace breed wealth, wealth yet with pride defyld,
Produces war, which poverty does breed,
To which heavens blessed peace does yet succeed.


9.
What profit has he that works, of the thing wherein he trauelleth. Which if
so be, (as so it is indeed)
Then would I have the Gimnosophists wise,
The Magy, Druides, and Stoics breed,
The Sophis, and most wise of all Rabbis,
And all Philosophers of every guise,
Who moral rules, and natural skill did know,
Or judgments supernatural did show.
Them would I have to tell to me in brief,
What profit man, most properly may say*
He has, of all his days consumde in grief,
Which he assured is with him shall stay:
The goods of fortune subject to decay,
The strength of body, failing every hour,
the minds much more, which worldly cares devour.
10.
I have seen the travel that God has given to the sons of men to humble
them thereby. I see (me thinks) a laborinth of woes
Enuiron man about, from day of birth
Till hour of death, what so about he goes,
With sower sauce, seasoning still his fained mirth,
Cares him accompan'ing upon the earth,
For needful things for life, yet foolish he,
With needless studies still will meddling be.
And God has justly given this plague to all,
For our forefather Adams clyming mind,
That humbled so, we might before him fall,
Confessing that we are poor worms, most blind,
And fly to him where we may comfort find,
Upon his providence our selves to rest,
As thing whereby, we only may be blessed.
All beauteous and desird God made, though al things man not know.
This only good know I, with joy, good works in life to show.
11.
(...) made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has ^et the world in
their heart, (...) can not man (...) out the work that (...) has (...) from
the beginning, (...) to the end. Indeed God so his creatures beautified,
And marshald so their musters every one,
That in them his great wisdom is espied,
And in their season is their beauty shown,
Defect unto their kind, they suffer none:
No marvel then, if heart of man desire
To see and know their virtue, and admire,
And God has given to man a special will,
To search for knowledge ever while he lives,
Who therefore beats his brains about it still,
And uses all endeavor nature gives,
But he in vain about the matter strives:
He never can or shall, the depth attain
Of Gods decree, his labors are but vain.
12.
(...) that (...) is ^Sthing good in them, but to rejoice, and ^ do good in his
life. Let wise men therefore learn to be content,
With knowledge of such things as us befit,
Enjoy the blessing God to us has sent,
And with contented mind in quiet sit:
His pain and travel may not farther git,
Then God has limited, of that be sure,
With patience therefore do thy self endure.
For I no other good on earth can praise,
But present use of blessings I possess,
With cheerful heart to exercise my days,
To good of such, to whom I love profess,
And deeds which charity do best express,
And that is all this world to thee can lend,
And use, why God did them unto thee send.


13.
And also that every man eats and drinks, and sees the commodity of all
his labo^: this is the gift of God. And to speak truth, what man with all his
pain, And to speak truth, what man with all his pain,
Can promise to himself the use to have
Of what with greatest travel he does gain,
To yield the sustenance his life does crave?
What providence so wisely can it save,
But in a moment it may vade away,
Twixt cup and lip, fall many a slip we say?
Then let man learn that Gods good gifts they are,
And lent but for a time, whereof to yield
Account how they are used, and how far
Our confidence and trust on them we build:
For wealth cannot from heavenly judgment shield;
Let God therefore have part, the poor have his,
With temperance do thou spend, remain that is.
14.
I know that whatsoever God shall do, it shall be for ever: to it can no man
add, and from it can none diminish: for God has done it, that they should
fear before him. For well I know, God all things does foresee,
And seeing does foreknow their issues all,
Whose knowledge (when he will) makes things to be
In such estate, as unto us they fall:
Whose providence herein some fortune call,
Because effects of cause to us unknown,
By chance (as we suppose) has to us grown.
But they in his decree immutable,
From all beginnings were, and firm must stand,
Examples be, man's frustrate labors still,
If God assist not with his helping hand,
A hair from head, a bird falls not on land,
But with his heavenly will (which is a law)
And should us to his fear and reu'rence draw.


15.
What is that that has bin? that is now: and that that shall be, has now
been: for God requires that which is past. Hence nature has this interchange
of things,
This spring times clothing, of delightful green,
That scorched yellow color summer brings,
That tawney hew, in new spent harvest seen,
Those withered pale prospects in winter been,
When trees and plants to root lives sap retire,
And every change, that seasons do require.
This well divided kingdom of the light,
Twixt Sun and Moon, so needful to our life,
Of the one by day, the other by the night,
Wherein they lovingly, like man and wife,
With equal care do travel void of strife,
By Gods almighty hand were framed so,
Things past, and those to come in order go.
16.
And moreover I have seen under the Sun the place of judgment, where was
wickedness, and the place of Justice, where was iniquity. Yea though God be
not author of our ill,
(Whereto by nature only we are prone,)
Yet for our trial, or our scourge, he will
Permit sometimes, (as I full often have known)
That even his Magistrates, by whom alone
He leaves his laws of Justice to be tryde,
Into most foul enormities to slide.
So wicked Tyrants unto kingdoms rise,
And Judges sit in holy Justice seat,
Whose offices (ordained to beat down vice,)
It fosters, and the Just do worst entreat,
Which of all plagues to kingdoms is most great,
Yet God (who it permits) can it redress,
Whose wondrous works therein we must confess.


17.
I thought in mine heart, God will judge the just and the wicked: for time is
there for every purpose, and for every work. For God the great lawgiver, wise
and just,
Who sees the thoughts, and secrets of the raynes,
Though he a while, permit them in their lust
To range, in pride of their malicious brains,
Yet when he please, their progress he restraynes,
And makes them stand before his judgment seat,
Whose sway on earth does seem most powrful great.
He calls each creature in his time at will,
To wreke the wrongs that innocents abide:
Plague, famine, sword, attend upon him still,
And all mishaps the wicked do betyde,
Fro out the snares, the just he safe does guide
In his due time, and them with honor crown,
But their oppressors, headlong plucketh down.
18.
I considered in mine heart, the state of the children of me^ that God had
purged them: yet to see to, they are in themselves as beasts Thus may thou
see (as I do truly say)
By deep consideration of the thing,
To human state on earth, each hour and day
Some change, or alteration new to bring
To all estates, to subjects as to King:
And that albeit in creation, we
Were holy and pure, we now corrupted be.
Through which corruption, death did first creep in,
And death with it, all plagues and wants has brought,
The heavy recompense of parents sin,
By them infusd to us, by us still wrought:
Corrupt throughout, in word, in deed, in thought,
With more then brutish sins which in us reign,
And in our offspring always will remain.


19.
For the condition of the children of men, and the condition of beasts are even
as one condition unto the^: as the one dies, (...) dies the other: for they
have all one breath* and there is no excellency of man above the beast: for
all is vanity. And as with brutish kind our lives partake,
Or rather does out pass them far in ill:
(For Tigers, Wolves, Gotes, Swine, our sins us make,
When wrath, deceit, lust, glut'ny, rule our will,)
So to our end with them we hasten still,
Foreseeing nothing deaths approaching hour,
Which us (like them) is ready to devour.
In care and travel, we like them do live,
We live uncertain of the hour of death,
Uncertain thus, securely we do give
Our selves to pleasure, till it stop our breath:
When time is come, no art the hour prolongeth,
When we as they, again return to dust,
In earth (no more then they) may we have trust.
20.
All go to one place, and all was of the dust, and all shall return to the
dust. One common matter was our stuff and mould,
Even earth and slime, the Element most vylde,
Which though our maker for our honor would,
With his own hands vouchsafe to frame and bylde,
And with infused breath adopt as child,
Whilst by his word alone, the others all,
Take essence in the form they were and shall.
Yet we as they, one common end do find,
One dissolution of this earthly frame:
Whose matter does return unto the kind,
From whence at first creation forth it came;
The memory whereof, the mind should tame,
Of those ambitious brains unbounded will,
Which whilst they live, the world with comber fill.


21.
Who knows whether the Spirit of man ascend upward, and the Spirit of the
beast descend downward to the earth? And though indeed, the souls immortal
seed,
Which had his being from a cause more pure,
Upon a higher hope does justly feed,
And shall in all eternity endure,
Yet to the eye of man, who can assure
The same, if faith (the light unto the soul)
Did not distrustful fleshes thoughts control?
For even the self same instruments of life,
The same necessities of nutriment,
The same effects of sickness with us rife,
The same abhorred death, has nature lent
To every creature that on earth she sent:
And at, and after, parting of the spright,
The carcasses of both, seem like to sight.
22.
Therefore I see that there is nothing better then that a man should rejoice in
his affairs, because that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what
shall be after him? So that I see no use of earths increase,
Fit for our bodies, but (whilst here we live)
With them to cheer our sprights, and purchase peace,
And unto God for them, due praise to give,
Man's wit no further can his pleasure drive:
For he and they are subject as you see
To change, and to earths frail mortalitee.
As for the care the wise and goodly have,
Of their successors competent estate,
It is but due, and nature does it crave,
But for their love, our selves we ought not hate,
And toyling vex our souls with worlds debate,
What they will prove, or what in time may grow,
We know not, nor should curious be to know.
Chap. 4.


1.
So I turned, and con^idere^ all the oppressions that are wrought under the
sun, and behold, the tears of the oppressed, and none conforteth them: and
^o, the strength is of the hand of them that oppress them, and none comfort
him. But whither does this passion me transport?
My thoghts with thinking have forgot my thought,
Whilst (earthly I) with earthly worlds consort,
And to the bodies cares, have comfort brought,
My meditations have the heavens sought,
And those eternities which pass my skill,
But now descend to earth again I will.
And of more human actions will entreat,
Where we a tragedy of woes shall see,
Whilst weaker ones (oppressed by the great)
Are destitute of place, whereto to flee
For succor, since their foes their Judges be,
And far too powrefull, wherewith to contend,
And most men backward, poor men to defend.
2.
Wherefore I prayied the dead which now are dead, above the living, which are
yet alive. Which makes me think, (though nature it deny)
That much more happy is the dead man's state,
Then those that in this life such troubles try,
And life like death, my heart begins to hate,
Death unto endless life, is but the gate,
But life is unto death a longsome way,
Where tyresome troubles vex us day by day.
And death (that loathsome state which life does shun,)
By life itself, with care and toil is sought:
Through perils men to purchase death do run,
And with life's scorn, hold death but cheaply bought,
Which honor to them selves or country brought:
For life could not exempted be from woe,
Whilst dying they, all worldly cares forgo.


3.
And I count him better the^ them both, which has not yet bin: for he has not
seen the evil works which are wrought under the suune. But yet indeed, since
both by life and death,
The state of many men is wretched still:
They may most happy seem, which nere drew breath,
Or infants dyed, never knowing ill:
And reason good, for both produce I will:
The ones not being, making them to be
Incapable of vengeance wicked see.
The other clean exempt from humane care,
As being dead, now needing nothing more,
Whose actual crimes; hels doom could not prepare,
Original sins, by grace were cleansd before,
And mercy guiding them to high heavens door,
Whose want of reason (living) knew no woe,
But void of fear, to death did mildly go.
4.
Also I beheld all travel, and all perfection of works that this is the envy
of a man against his neighbor: this also is vanity and vexation of the
Spirit. This other plague besides, does follow man,
A vice (alas) too common in this age,
The more of virtue that he glory can,
The more the baser sort repine and rage,
And with reproachful slander malice swage,
Depriving, or deprauing best desert,
Or it Eclipsing with some guilefull art.
No foe to learning, like the ignorant,
Nor to the good, like to the bad we say:
Gods kingdom Beliall seeks to supplant,
And virtue failing his another way,
Even viciously they virtue would betray,
Who herein yet themselves do but disgrace,
For slander can not just deserts deface.


5.
The fool foldeth his hands, and eats up his own flesh. Themselves like
fools, and feeble helpless wights,
Unable or unwilling to attain
The travel which belongs to virtues rights,
Do poor disgraceful live, and so remain,
And caterpiller like, on others pain,
Do feed and live, to world improfitable,
Driven to depend on scraps, of others table.
Nay well it were with some, if so it were,
Who foodlesse are compeld to beg or starve,
Because their idle fingers do forbear
The honest trades, which might their living serve,
Whose folded hands, no better does deserve,
But as they to themselves do prove unkind,
So they of others, should no better find.
6.
Better is an handful with quietness, then two handfuls with I^bor and vexation
of the Spirit. Yet, which is lamentable to be told,
They senseless so in idleness delight,
That they their course of life to praise are bold,
And all virilitie excluding quight,
Their base borne humors gloss so well in sight,
As though an humble thought, and peace of mind,
From all industry did the honest bind.
As though that peace and plenty never met,
As if wealth were attained with bare desire,
As though they careless were that live in debt,
As if they grieselesse, who not wealth aspire,
As though God did not trauell'of us require,
As though an humble mind appeard not best,
In modest use of plenty and of rest.


7.
Again I returned, and law vanity under the Sun. Thus does one error forth
another bring,
Like Hydras heads, which each way us assail,
Man unto man, a Wolf with Scorpions sting
Of force by fraud still seeks to prevail,
If Satan's foreign practices do fail,
Our selves against our selves he straight does arm,
With ougly lusts of sin, which in us swarm.
So though we escape one snare, we soon may fall
Into some other snare, that he has set,
Into despair, if our estate be small,
Into presumption; if our power be great:
And every sin does thousands more beget,
And we with every wave of fortunes wind,
Do swell or sink, in glory of our mind.
8.
There is one alone, and there is not a second, which has neither son nor
brother, yet is there none end of all his travel, neither can his eye be
satisfied with riches: neither does he think, for whom do I travel and
defraud my soul of pleasure: this also is vanity, and this is an evil
travel. And yet of all vain humors that arise,
This seems to me the greatest plague indeed,
When one (of power) unto himself denies
The lawful pleasures might his comfort breed,
When he has no man but himself to feed,
Ne child, ne heir, ne any friend at all,
To whom his horded wealth he wished to fall.
And yet he cease not, to travel still
To gather wealth, he knows not how nor why,
Which though with plenty God into him fill:
He to himself does natures wants deny,
And of the world, is made a scorn thereby,
Not having grace once to his mind to call,
To whom the wealth he gets, is like to fall.


9.
Two are better then one: for they have better wages for their labor. Ne
knows he truly (as it should appear)
The blessings that his wealth depend upon,
For did he, he would hold no wealth too dear
To be bestowd in gain of such a one,
As might his comfort breed, with whom alone
He might recount the secrets of his state,
And partner make, of good and adverse fate.
For by the laws of friendship and of love,
Such mutual fruits does kindness counterchange,
That two as one, like taste of state do prove,
And eithers thoughts do in the other range,
With such a sympathy as seems strange,
Whilst gain of both, to each one does remain,
And eithers kindness, kindness pays again.
10.
For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe unto him that is
alone: for he falls, and there is not a second to lift him up. If one of them
an inconvenience have,
The other ready is to yield relief,
His peril shall the others peril save,
And with his yielding shoulders bear his grief,
And (which indeed of all is comfort chief)
His weal and woe, on the others shall depend,
And love in both, both ascend and descend.
Whilst that this wretched solitary wight,
Unknown and unregarded quite of all,
Shall live the object unto all despite,
And helpless perish, if he hap to fall,
No pity finding, or but very small:
For who by gratitude, is bound to moan
His case, who careless seeks to live alone?


11.
Also if two sleep together, then shall they have heat: but to one how should
there be heat? Such one (me thinks) may well compared be,
Unto a man that in long winters night,
(Through lack of light) can no earths comfort see,
And in his bed can find no great delight,
When (lacking list to sleep) he has no wight,
With whom in speech the time to pass away,
But (wallowing in his bed) does long for day.
Or rather to the withered aged man,
In whom the lives warmth blood is waxen cold,
Whom when as shiuerings seize, he seeks than,
In many furs and clothes himself t'infold,
Which not suffising, then he also would
A bedfellow wish, wherewith to have withstood
His cold, by others heat of native blood.
12.
And if one overcome him, two shall stand against him: and a threefold cord is
not easily broken. And that in all respects (I well may say)
The solitary man unhappy is,
Do but man's nature herein truly way,
Which is directly opposite to this,
He in society reposeth bliss:
Whose maker great, to whom he best was known,
Ordained a means he might not live alone.
The diverse wants (likewise) our lives sustain,
Compels the wise a neighbor help to crave,
A single man is soon oppressed by twain,
Whose valor (though right great) will scarce him save,
For great the strength small twigs in bundell have,
And closely plighted threeds, strong Cables make,
And force united, greater force does take.


13.
Better is a poor and wise child, (...) an (...) and foolish king, which will
(...) more be (...). The princely state of all most happy held,
And happiest sure (if worthy Prince have place)
Has not all common woes so well expeld,
But often times their crowns do cares embrace,
(Though God as his own deputies does them grace)
For where in virtue and wisdom is defect,
Full hardly can that honor them perfect.
For though best subjects bodies do obey,
The tyranny of most iniust behest,
Yet does their minds obedience often denay,
When they do find that power has right suppressed,
And then the poor wise child is held more blessed,
That yields to advice the sage does bring,
Then ill advised headstrong aged King.
14.
For out of the prison he comes f^rth to reign, when as he that is borne in
his kingdom, is made poor. Such one there has (not seldom times) been seen,
Of base descent by pedigree of kin,
Abandoned so of hope, that you would ween
He hardly should his living poorly win,
(Much less of captive ever free have been:)
Yet so by virtue he has raysd his state,
In the end he wore a crown that pynde of late.
Whereas contrariwise, you often behold,
The worthless child of many a worthy king,
On predecessors virtues grow so bold,
And to their state so little honor bring,
That from them, native right some others wring,
And they unto the common state of men,
Poor and rejected do return as then.


15.
I beheld all the living, which walk under the sun, with the second child
which shall stand up in his place. For so just God the Monarke maker great,
Disposes of these Emperies below,
That as they well or ill their flock entreat,
He moves so their subjects hearts to grow,
He makes fierce Adonebesock know
Himself, of mighty Prince most wretch alive,
And captived Joseph, by his bondage thrive.
Yea so unstable are men's minds withal,
That nothing can long time their minds content,
Unhappy are those men, who vnder-fall
The vulgar censure, which is lightly bent
Unto newfangled liking. And who rent
The right of rule from father, to bestow
On child ofttimes, before he merit show.
16.
There is none end of all the people, nor of all that were before them, and
they that come after, shall not rejoice in him, surely this is also vanity, and
vexation of the spirit. So does man gaze upon the rising sun,
So soon we surfeit feeding on the best,
So fast the multitude to mischief run,
So hardly can the fonder sort digest
Obedience, where their safest state should rest,
That (monster like) they many heads do rear,
And every head ten thousand fancies bear.
In which their choice, by chance if they attain
Unto a worthy guyder of their state,
He in their likings can not long remain,
Whilst (causeless) malcontents turn love to hate,
Which cares (with many more) their joys abate,
And makes their raised state more deeply way,
That woe, which nature does on all men lay.

Hear ere thou speak, of sacrifice, of babbling fool beware.
17.
Take heed to thy foot, when thou enterest into the house of God, and be more
near to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they know not that
they do evil. Now least my speech which tended to thy cure,
Should in thy mind worlds mere misliking breed,
Which yet perforce, a space thou must endure,
I will thee now with wholesome counsel feed,
With God and man, instructing thee the way
To live in peace, and worldly cares alay.
And first (as chiefest comfort of the rest)
I will direct they steps to God above,
Unto whose service when thou art addressed,
Let reverent fear thy whole affection move,
Come thou to learn, thy school his Temple make,
And fond prescriptious, of thy own forsake.
Chap. 5.


1.
Be not tas^^ with thy mouth not, let thine heart be hasty to utter a thing
before God, for God is in the heavens, and thou art on the earth, therefore let
thy words be few. Bethink thee well ere thou begin to pray,
And so prepare thy humble soul thereto,
That thou thy worthless state do duly way,
Gods power believe, and will, thee good to do,
And then thy needful wants crave and commend
To his best pleasure, to restrain or send.
For he inthronized in mercies seat,
All-seeing is, all-powerfull, always pressed,
To view our wants, to yield what we entreat,
If (as they ought) our prayers be addressed;
Few words (if fervent) will to heaven ascend,
He knows our thoughts ere heart to pray we bend.
2.
For as a dream comes by the multitude of business: so the voice of a fool
is in the multitude of words. The multitude of numbered words we hear
Some use in prayer, shows want of faith,
Like Balaams Priests their passions do appear,
Whose hope on their enchaunting fury stays,
And does not (as it should) on God depend,
Who kno^wes the fittest time thy cares to end.
For look how cares of passed day do cause,
A swarm of aparitions in the night,
Which on the sleeping senses terror draws,
And does the tired body often affright:
So folly moves the tongue, which vainly speaks,
And vain that is, which modest measure breaks.


3.
(...) And as in prayer, so advise thee well,
When unto God thou any thing wilt vow,
Earth is his footstool, heaven his throne to dwell,
What need has he then, of thy presents now?
Yet free will offerings he does kindly take,
If grateful heart a lawful promise make.
Be therefore sure, thou dally not therein,
But (if thou vow such things) perform the same,
Untruth with men, but foul defame does win,^
With God it can not then but purchase blame,
Ne ignorance, ne rashness may excuse
So foul a fault, refrain it then to use.
4.
It is better that thou should not vow, then that thou should v^w, and
not pay it. Thou had been better far, to have withheld
Thy promise, when thou first the same did make:
Thou wast not then by any law compeld
Thereto, but freely did it undertake,
Compulsiue promises, no promise be,
But vow premeditate, it binds thee.
It binds thee, even by the highest band,
That heaven and earth affords unto man,
Thy heart (as spokes-man) for thee long does stand,
And God the hearer, who conceive it can,
Thy self (faith breaker) unto God art found,
If thou perform not then, what vow has bound.


5.
Suffer not thy mouth to make thy flesh to sin: neither say before the Angel,
that this is ignorance: wherefore shall God be angry by thy voice, and destroy
the work of thine hand? Yet if thy promise were, to do the thing,
Which is contrary to his holy law,
I rather wish thee it forbear, then bring
The price of sin that should more judgments draw:
Of evils two, the least the wise do choose,
If vow were wicked, rather it refuse.
And first beware (as I before did say)
That thou no evil thing in vow pretend,
Then how thou can perform it, see thou way,
And freely then, with speed perform intend,
Least God and Angels witness thee untrue,
And thou and thine, with vengeance for it rue.
6.
For in the multitude of dreams and vanities, are also many words: but fear
thou God. Thus (in a word) I have informed thee,
How vain a rash and foolish prayer is,
How dangerous, a heap of words that be
Impertinent, and vows that are amiss:
Even fruitless vapors of corrupted brain,
Which like vain dreams, the rest of soul do stain.
Leave them therefore, and do thou wholly bend
Thy holy thoughts to please thy God aright,
In word and deed, and pray him grace to send,
That thy weak works be pleasing in his sight,
So (though the world, with wrong and woe abound)
Thy faith and peace of conscience, shall be sound.


7.
If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defrauding of
judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter, for he that is higher
the^ the highest, regards, and there be higher then they. What if the wicked
age wherein we live,
Or lawless place wherein thou hapst to dwell,
Do sacred Justice from her Scepter drive,
And make the poor man's life seem worse then hell,
As though there were no God, nor providence
To punish sin, or yield the just defense?
Yet be thou sure, God sees all full well,
And though he pacient be, yet (moved long)
He will dismount from heaven where he does dwell,
To do thee right, and wreke thee of their wrong,
With host of Angels, and earths means beside,
To power his wrath on them for lawless pride.
8.
And the abou^dance of the earth is over all, the king also consists by the
field that is tilled. When happy shall be held their blessed state,
Who humbly yielded unto Gods decree,
Who with the sweat of brows their living gate,
And with lives needful food contented be,
Whose travel on this earth of man's unrest,
With fruitful crop, from God above is blessed.
Thrice blessed (thou silly swain) that tilst the ground,
Void of the crafts and cares in Courts that be,
More honest profit, or content not found
In Princes palace, then in cot with thee,
Kings (without thee) ne live, ne can be kings,
Thy pain to Court and Country plently brings.


9.
He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves
riches, shall be without the fruit thereof: this also is vanity. What though
the world (through hateful lust of gold)
Be thus transported with a greedy mind,
To purchase wealth, which makes the coward bold,
To search land, sea, and hell, the same to find?
Yet (as it does increase) so does desire,
And soon consume as oil amidst the fire.
A just reward of so unworthy trade,
As does debase nobility of soul,
Which (made immortal) scorns those things that vade,
And in the wise should earthly'affects control:
But mouldwarp like, these blindfold grope in vain,
Vain their desires, more vain the fruit they gain.
10.
When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good comes
to the owners thereof, but the beholding thereof with their eyes? If honor,
wealth, and calling do excel
The common sort, so charge does grow with all:
Few with a little sure, may live as well,
As many may, though greater wealth befall:
It is not wealth, to have of goods great store,
But wealth to be suffisd and need no more.
Who has abundance, and it uses well,
Is but a steward to his family,
A purse-bearer for such as near him dwell,
An Amner to the poor (that helplessely)
He but his share does spend (though somewhat better)
And what he leaves, he is to world a detter.


11.
The sleep of him that trauelleth is sweet whether he eat little or much: but
the society of the rich will not suffer him (...) sleep. The laboring man,
that in his lawful trade,
Has past the toylesome day to gain to live,
No surfeit has his stomach to upbraid,
Nor fearful dreams, which into horror drive
His fraudlesse soul, whilst he the longsome night
Does rest, and rise (to work) as day does light.
When as the glutton after crammed gorge,
Whose surfets upon surfets buried be
In his insatiat maw of hellish forge,
In bed no rest can find, but slumbering see
A swarm of visions breed by vapors vain,
Which from a putride stomach rise to brain.
12.
There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the sun: to wit, riches
reserved to the ^wners thereof for their evil. And which I further see does
often ensew
The wealthier sort, and which I much lament,
Is that they often times themselves do rue
Their evil gotten wealth, with time misspent
As means (for so it proves) of greater care,
And which in end, does leave them poor and bare.
Like to a sponge, which store of sap has sucked,
Or to the Be, that honey has in hyue:
Their wealth is wrong, their honey comb is plucked
Out of their hord, by which they thought to thryue,
Their lives do for their goods, fare often the worse,
For envious eyes pursue the plenteous purse.


13.
And these riches perish by evil travel, and he begets a son, and in his
hand is nothing. Which though they hap to escape, yet many ways
There are besides, which does their joys bereave,
Ill gotten goods (we say) not long time stays,
And hasty wealth few heirs, to heirs do leave:
The getters faults or follies all may lose,
And chance or change of times it new dispose.
So that the offspring of these mighty men,
By due vicisitude do often descend
From their aspired greatness, hoped then
Unto the meanest rank from whence they wend,
Each Crow his feather has, and naked they,
Their parents sins by their mishaps bewray.
14.
As he came forth of his mothers belly* he shall return naked to go as he
came, and shall bear away nothing of his labor, which he has caused to pass
by his hand. The Father he, all naked went before
Unto the earth, whence first he naked came:
The son (as ready) stands at the door
To follow fathers steps, and with the same,
Poor, naked, helpless state, that borne he was
From all his pomp, unto his grave to pas.
Not any thing with him, from hence to bear,
Of earthly substance that he did possess,
The soul immortal is, and may not wear,
Nor any virtues that our way address
To heaven, they shall survive us after death,
When death shall live, by lives soon smothred breath.


15.
And this also is an evil sickness that in all points as he came, so (...) he
go, and what profit has he that he ^^th traveled (...) the wind^ If so it be
(alas what woe is this)
That not alone (as poorest man beside)
All naked unto grave he posting is,
But even the common pangs must him betide,
That to all flesh at hour of death is rife,
When soul and body (parting) finish life.
And that with him his travels fruits do end,
Who has no share in all his former gain,
But what soever bliss he did pretend,
His haps (as others chance) do void remain:
His hopes (like dust) dispersed with the wind,
Or sownd on sea, where they no root could find.
16.
Also all his days he eats in darkness with much grief, and in his sorrow
and anger. Which when he does fore-think with heavy cheer,
He pines away the remnant of his days,
How much the more he happy did appear,
The more unhappy he his state bewrayes,
For contraries, by contraries are shown,
As black from white, so good by ill is known.
As one that for some passed public crime
Is scandaled, and pointed at of all,
With shame retyres himself in future time,
Least into more disgrace he yet should fall:
And hanging down his head, does sigh (alas)
And rage with grief, so he his days does pas.


17.
Behold then, what I have seen good, that it is comely to eat, and to drink,
and to take pleasure in all his labor, wherein he trauelleth under the sun,
the whole number of the days of his life, which God gives him* for this is
his portion. Then this (for earthly good) I count the best,
(For other good, I scarcely any know)
That with those goods thou have, thou pleased rest,
And for thy own behoof thou them bestow,
Such part (I mean) as nature craves to use,
Even plenteously: so thou it not abuse.
And hold this all thou have, of that is thine,
For that is left, thou see may be lost:
God gave the plenty of both corn and wine,
To cheer man's troubled soul, with combers tossed:
This if thou have, and grace to use it right,
Thou have earths good, the most on thee may light.
18.
Also to every man to whom God has given riches and treasures, and gives him
power to eat thereof, and to take his part and to enjoy his labor: this is the
gift of God. And they are rightly used, when used they be
As he ordaines, that did them first bestow:
God was the author of all good to thee,
To him thy life all thankfulness does owe:
So using them, they to thee blessings are,
Else wealth breeds woe, peace proves as ill as war.
Thou see many starve, in plenteous place,
Thou see lusty youth suruyn'd by age,
Thou see honor stoop to foul disgrace,
And heavy cheer the greatest joys assuage,
And (for men do not yield the praise of all
To God) these mischiefs do upon them fall.

Since God does answer hearts desire, to him with joy and mirth.
19.
Surely he will not much remember the days of his life, because God answers
to the joy of his heart. O rare and happy they, that God does bless
With grace, to know and use his gifts aright,
Sure they more easly may support (I guess)
The common cares that do to all men light,
For present comforts, cancel passed care,
As pleasures past, do way to woe prepare.
Such season so the actions of their life,
That common cares, seem but the needful sauce,
To quicken taste, as peace ensuing strife,
More grateful is, and has the more applause,
They God in wealth and woe, a father find,
And unto him will not appear unkind.
Chap. 6.


1.
There is an evil, which I saw under the sun, and it is much among men. But
not one woe alone I must disclose,
For many woes do follow humane kind,
Great were these griefs, but not more great then those
That vnrecorded yet do rest behind:
One mischief seldom time alone does fall,
One care or other sure does follow all.
To speak of woes will less unpleasing be,
To such as hear (not feel) thereof the smart:
Thou (who so happy art) may better see,
(By others harm) thy happy peace of heart,
Then hear and learn more happiness to gain,
If thou (from others ill) thy self refrain.
2.
A man to who^ God has given riches and treasures and honor, and he wants
nothing for his soul of all that it desires: but God gives him not power to
eat thereof, but a strange man shall eat it up: this is vanity, and this is an
evil sickness. Thou may well see full often a man enjoy,
In show, all blessings nature can bestow;
Lands, honors, wealth, whose wants breeds thee annoy,
Whilst he (to world) does happy seem in show,
Not wanting any thing that thou would crave,
Yet some one want makes him small comfort have.
He has no wife, or else he has no child,
Or has them both, but both ungracious prove,
He wants his health, imprisond, or exild,
Or cares of common weal his joys remove:
His restless mind thus thirsting midst the stream,
He pines in care, and finds his bliss a dream.


3.
If a man beget a hundred children and live many years, and the days of his
years be multiplied, and his soul be not satisfied with good things, and he
be not buried, I say that an untimely fruit is better then he. Suppose a
hundredth children he begot,
And liu^d as long, as old Methusalem,
Yet if defame his family do spot,
And he do lack the common love of men,
And want the honor of his funeral,
How can you any ways him happy call?
True happiness on virtue has his ground,
And only measurd is by peace of mind:
What though all earthly blessings do abound?
If that the soul no inward comfort find,
Is not th'abortiue child more happy far,
Then those that living, thus perplexed are?
4.
For he comes into vanity and goes into darkness: and his name shall be
covered with darkness. In far more happy state, in very deed
Is he, whose timelesse birth his life denies,
Whose mothers womb unable him to feed,
Imperfect him reiects, and does despise
Unprofitable burden also long
To bear, that nature has compounded wrong.
For (being) he is not the same he seems,
The others seeming proves not so indeed,
This liuelesse humane shape, a man none deemes,
That deemed man with dreams our eyes does feed:
This never being known, none knows not,
Of all men this admyrd, of all forgot.


5.
(...) he has: not seen the sun nor known it: therefore this has more rest
then the other. How much it better is in true account,
To be a happy man, or so esteemd?
So far th'abortiue the other does surmount,
Though naught it seem, the other much is deemd:
For (having nothing good) it has no ill,
But his expected good, all woes do fill.
His closed eyes which never saw this light,
Those woes nere saw, which the other saw and felt,
His senseless brain which knows no delight,
(Incapable of cares with the other dwelt)
Makes his estate less ill, much better held,
Than his that thus, in wretchedness excelled.
6.
And if he had lived a thousand years twice told, and had seen no good, shall
not all go to one place. The multitude of years, but multiply
To the unhappy, multitude of cares,
Two thousand years, to him that dead does ly,
Are but one moment: all alike he fares,
But hours seem days, days years, years millions seem,
In care, grief, agony, that spent we deem.
Then how unhappy is that hated man,
Whose long and wealthy life, in boorlesse blis,
In life no peace or joy, enjoy he can:
In death not honor have, that proper is
To such, as by their lives do merit well,
Who dead, in sacred tomb do famous dwell.


7.
All the labor of man is for his mouth: yet the soul is not ^^lled. Alas,
what gains man by all his pain,
Which in his pilgrimage on earth he takes?
Sure nothing but a life he does maintain,
And as his state permits he diet makes,
For which (our backs and bellies nutriment)
Our times, our cares, our hopes and fears are spent.
And yet this food so carefully attaynd,
Cannot sustain our life one longer day,
Then God by providence has it ordaynd:
And when our time is come, we must away,
And though a little food will life sustain,
Yet long without supply we not remain.
8.
For what has the wise man more then the fool? what has the poor that
knows how to walk before the (...)* What has the wise, in all he does
possess
More then the fool, whereof he may rejoice?
The use of needful things, he has no less
That simple is, then who of wit has choice:
Both do but eat to live, and live to die,
Both like afflictions in their fortunes try.
What does the misers care increase his state,
More then free spenders honest thrift does his?
Yet the one by wretchedness does purchase hate,
The others bounty always praised is:
Both care to live, both can but live thereby,
And both of force, must yield (ere long) to die.


9.
The sight of of the eye is better then to walk in the lusts: this also is
vanity, and vexation of spirit. And therefore sure, whilst we are here to live,
It is the best to live with cheerful heart,
And cause of good report the world to give,
And not for us to breed our proper smart:
Our days consume unpleasing to our selves,
Offensiuely to such as with us dwells.
Yet both in end are vain, and soon have end,
No constancy or permanence in either,
The one or other can not life defend,
Both to the grave, are like to go together:
Vain and inconstant, is the fruit of all,
Wise, fond, sad, glad, into the earth must fall.
10.
What is that that has bin* the name thereof is now named: and it is known
that it is man, and he cannot strive with him that is stronger then he. What
can a man attain by any thing,
Which he on earth, atchieueth any way,
But even a name and fame, the which does bring
A swelling Echo of his praise a day,
But is as soon forgotten as is gaynd,
And with a thousand slanders may be staynd.
His praise cannot exceed, nor soon attain
The like that many worthies had before,
Their fame is gone, thine cannot long remain,
If thou be wise expect not any more:
For God thy maker has ordained so,
When he says yea, flesh may not answer no.
Chap. 7.


1.
Surely there be many things that increase vanity: and what avails it man.
SVre many things besides do yet remain,
Our vanity appears in every thing,
But they best knowledge of the fame attain,
To whom a prosperous state, did plenty bring:
For plenty best affoords to feed our will,
And will most soon, to folly runs still.
Which folly is the vanity I mean,
A fruitless travel of a careful heart,
When midst the choice of good, the ill we gleane,
And weaue unto our selves our proper smart,
When wit is captiuated unto fense,
Which does produce both Gods and man's offense.
2.
For who knows what is good for man in the life, and in the number of the
days of the life of his va^itie, seeing he makes the^ as a shadow? for who
can show unto man what shall be after him under the (...). And sure in this
sense, foolish are we all,
For who discernes aright twixt good and ill,
Whose knowledge truly can you perfect call,
Who (knowing good) effectuates goodness still:
Man's days are few, and like a shadow fly,
In which small good, he many woes does try.
The wisest men themselves do scarcely know,
Of others minds their knowledge is but blind,
Their present actions do them foolish show,
How should man then a solyde knowledge find,
Of future things which after him shall be,
Since he conceaues not what his eye does fee?


3.
A good name is better then a good oyntme^t, and the day of death, then the day
that one is borne. Then let man cease his wisdom to bestow,
In seeking forth on earth a happy state:
Let him endeavor rather good to grow,
The fruit and fame whereof cannot abate
Through age or death, but like a sweet perfume,
Will follow man unto his day of doom.
The trust wherein shall make him death desire,
As path to lead him unto bliss prepared,
And loath this life, whose cares him so do tire,
Where vanity and death is sole reward:
Yea he shall far prefer the day of death,
Before the hour he first drew living breath.
4.
It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting,
because this is the end of all men: and the living shall lay it to his heart.
For better preparation whereunto,
The wise will exercise their eyes and mind,
In contemplation of their states, who do
By death forerun their corse not far behind:
And (by the view thereof) resolved grow,
The worlds contempt in rest of life to show.
The feasts and sports which do his senses charm,
With deep forgetfulness of woes approach,
He will refrain, and rather think it harm,
That unprepared death should him incroch:
(For evils looked for, less evil seem,
And joys expected long, we doubled deem.)


5.
Anger is better then laughten for by a sad look the heart is made better. And
though awhile our minds therewith distract,
We feel a conflict twixt the flesh and spright,
Which lothly would dissolve the old compact,
Which flesh and world, contracted in delight:
Yet sweeter in the end we shall digest
Deaths bitter pill, which nature does detest.
Yea though we in a sort offended wax
With evils, which we see so much abound
Within our selves, and for the good that lacks
In us, and others which the good does wound:
Yet this a cheerful mendment will procure,
And raise our hearts in sin to fore secure.
6.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is
in the house of mirth. The wise they will (like heedfull watchmen keep)
A curious Sentinel in all their ways,
Least death and ruin should upon them creep,
And turn to mournful night their merry days,
They do observe the frailty of their state,
And rather fawn on death, then fear too late.
Whilst foolish worldlings surfeit with the joy,
Which they unfitly plast in earths vain sweet,
And are surprisd with every small annoy
So sore, that it to bear they are not meet,
And under every adverse cause do sink,
Whilst others hope and joy at perils brinke.


7.
Better it is to hear the rebuke of a wise man, then that a man should hear
the song of fools. And (for we hardly see our own amiss,
And each in others eyes a mote can spy)
My best advice (to do thee good) is this:
That to thy friends reproof thou do apply,
Yea such a friend, as knows good from ill,
And thy misdeeds in thee reprove that will.
For better are the blows that friends do give,
Then smoothed actions, flatt'rers do bestow,
Those to amendment do the wiser drive,
By the others, fools from ill to worse do grow,
There Sirens songs, do make thee sleep in sin,
These rougher words, thy soul from ruin win.
8.
For like the noise of the thorns under the pot, so is the laughter of the
fool: this also is vanity. And what delight (indeed) can wise men take,
In foolish tattle of the lewder sort?
Like crackling bushes in the fire, they make
A blast, and blase forth straight in their disport,
An outward show of mirth, which ends with smart,
And laugh with mouth, that have a heavy heart.
The wise in joy and mirth are temperate,
They ground their mirth on greater cause of joy.
They are not so raysd up with good estate,
Or beaten down with any'aduerse annoy,
But that they can bear either state as well,
As time or chance, can make them ebb or swell.


9.
Surely oppression makes a wise man mad, and the reward destroys the heart.
And yet it is (I grant) a heavy thing,
And hardly is digested of the best,
To see how some the laws to lust do wring,
And how thereby the weaker are oppressed,
How wrong for right sometimes does freely pas,
And no man will, or dare, say bad it was.
And to behold how bribes are busy still,
To blind the eyes that else would wisely see,
That Lay, and Clergy, great and small, most will
Give, take, buy, sell, things that most holy be,
Would make a man of sob'rest spright half mad,
And any good man be perplexed and sad.
10.
The end of a thing, is better then the beginning thereof, and the patient in
spirit is better then the proud in spirit. But men that note Gods judgments
for these things,
And can (as sure they ought) his pleasure stay,
Shall see the plagues that sin upon them brings,
And shall according to the proverb say,
That that is only good, and does excel,
Which does begin, and also ends well.
And therefore will with patience long expect,
The issue which God has decreed before,
And as he limits times, his will to effect,
So till that time be silent evermore:
The rather since their agony and grief,
Might woe increase, not yield one jot relief.


11.
Be not thou of an hasty spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of
fools. Then be not thou with worlds perverse event
Disquieted, or moved unto ire,
No though with malice men against thee bent,
With just offense might kindle cholers fire:
It is a passion that abundant is
In fools, and not reformes the thing amiss.
If thou with reason be (as be thou may)
Offended with the evils that abound,
Thou may reprove them sure (I say not nay)
And hate the place whereas such sins are found,
For fools they are, and dog-like bite the stone,
That blame offense, yet doer let alone.
12.
Say not thou, why is it that the former days were better then these? for thou
do not enquire wisely of this thing. But yet (withal) beware thou do not
blame
Thy God, in government of present age,
By calling him t'account, why not the same
Most hateful vices, which with us do rage,
Did not in former times so much excel,
And we with them compare in doing well.
For it were folly, and offensive much
To God and man, and sign of hateful pride,
In weal or woe we may at nothing grutch,
For through our sins those scourges us betide:
And God that sends the ill, can it amend,
Upon his will our liking must depend.


13.
Wisdom is good with an inheritance and excellent to them that see the sun.
Sure well is he that wisdom has, and grace
To use it always well, in weal and woe:
But who has wealth withal, in better case
By far (I do confess) though few are so:
Few though there be, yet some such may you find,
Though many more, with worldly wealth are blind.
Wealth gives means for exercise of good,
Wealth the temptations wants, to many a sin,
By wealth men's faults are hid, their foes withstood,
Wealth may perform such works as favor win:
Which wealth, if (by dissent, not care) we have
And wisdom both, what can we farther crave?
14.
For man shall rest in the shadow of wisdom, and in the shadow of silver: but
the excellency of the knowledge of wisdom, gives life to the possessors
thereof. This wisdom armed thus with worldly powers,
For pleasant shadow, may compared be
Unto an Arbor decked with fragrant flowers,
Which sweetly from sun beams protecteth thee,
From wind and rain, that can thee well defend,
And sweet repast unto thy body lend.
For wisdom teaches thee thy wealth to use,
Unto the needful ends they were ordaynd,
And (as unwise) you may them well accuse,
That will reject the goods may well be gaynd:
But wisdom wealth can get, and spends it well,
And wisdom therefore chiefly does excel.


15.
Behold the work of God: for who can make straight that which he has made
crooked? In wisdom therefore, set thy chief delight,
Come wealth, come woe, take all as God does send,
Against the Lords decree it is vain to fight,
He knows thy need, and gives what thou shall spend,
More then he has decreed, thou shall not have,
Toil while thou will, and moyle unto thy grave.
Can thou revoke the times the which are past?
Can thou recount, the days that are behind?
Can thou pursew the chafe that slyeth fast?
Can thou proportion out the weight of wind?
Can thou make straight the tree once crooked grown?
No nor thy state amend, but God alone.
16.
In the day of wealth be of good comfort, and in the day of affliction consider:
God also has made this contrary to that, to the intent that man should find
nothing after him. Then with thy state content thy quiet mind,
If wealth abound, with joy then use the same,
If less thy store, yet think not God unkind,
And to thy portion do thy compass frame:
In all estates a cheerful heart does well,
What God intends for thee thou can not tell.
God uses (like as wise Physicians do)
By want sometimes to purge our humors ill,
And after plenty gives to strengthen us to
The work whereto, employ our powers he will,
By proof of contraries, to teach us how
To use those gifts, as he does best allow.


17.
I have seen all things in the days of my vanity: there is a just man that
pe^^^heth in his justice, and there is a wicked man that continues long in his
malice. As for such new incounters as befall,
To thee in crossing of thy quiet life,
Assure thy self, they are not new at all,
But in my days (and long before) were rife,
Even full of vanities and care, I found
My life, as well as thy life to abound.
I saw both wise, and honest men full often,
Ensnared by the wicked, and destroyed,
Their counsels and their actions mocked and scoft,
Their innocencies, cause they were annoyd:
The force, the folly, rapine and the wrong,
The wicked vsd, protect their lives full long.
18.
^e not thou just overmuch, neither make thy self over wise: wherefore
should thou be desolate? What was the cause hereof thou may inquire,
Sure first the hate, the ill to good do show,
Then Gods decree, whose justice did require,
Their hidden sins, a public shame should know,
Some ouerweening wits, do foolish prove,
And cause of these mishaps do fondly move.
For excellence procures envy much,
And wise men's small offenses heinous seem,
And busy brains such tickle points may touch,
As indiscreet you may their judgment deem,
Be thou not too precise, nor over wise,
But with a modest mean thy gifts disguise.


19.
Be not thou wicked overmuch, neither be thou foolish: wherefore should thou
perish not in thy time. Yet do not thou extenuate so thy skill,
That thereby into scandal thou do fall,
The very wicked so contemn thee will,
And good and bad, will so condemn thee all,
None is so vile, that vice he will commend,
Although his deeds, to little better tend.
Ne do thou folly any whit affect,
For that does ruin all that it does use,
Who will the fool or vndescreet protect,
Or trust to him, or use him (may he choose?)
Well may men laugh at him and make disport,
But never trust, in cause that does import.
20.
It is good that thou lay hold on this: but yet withdraw not thy hand from
that: for lie that fears God shall come forth of them all. In measure is (we
say) a merry mean,
Twixt two extremes does sacred virtue dwell,
Who will unto true heavenly wisdom lean,
Must fly defect, and all excess expel,
With serpents wisdom must his judgment see,
With Turtles humble mind, yet clothed be.
The lofty thought, presumption does instruct,
The abject mind despair does soon persuade,
From wings of Lucifer, this quill is plucked,
To hateful serpents den, that leads the trade:
But he whom heavenly wisdom does inspire,
From both those snares in safety shall retire.


21.
Wisdom shall strengthen the ^ise man, more then ten mighty Princes that are
in the city. For wisdom is (indeed) a heavenly gift,
Insusde to guide us in earths pilgrimage;
Blessed is his choice who therewith not vplift,
Does peace procure, and worldly cares assuage,
Who trusts in the comfort of her aid,
In no affliction need to be affrayd.
She stronger is, and much of greater might,
Then any Princes power that ever was:
Yea Princes ten, combind against her to fight,
In force and prowess shall her no way pas,
The strongest bulwarks that they can erect,
Does art (by wisdom) soon to earth deiect.
22.
Surely there is no man (...) in the earth, that does good and ^^nneth not.
This wisdom makes thee have a secret peace,
Twixt God and thee, which if thou once attain,
To feed the same, his grace will never ceace,
And that content for ever will remain:
As for content the world afford thee can,
Its nothing worth, for vain is every man.
Let this therefore, be grounded in thy mind,
That man and all his works imperfect are,
That on the earth one man thou shall not find,
That from true righteousness not strayeth far,
Whose perverse deeds, do oftentimes bewray
The wicked thoughts that in his bosom stay.


23.
Give not thine heart also to all the words that men speak, least thou do
hear thy servant cursing thee. How much then less should thou be moved much
By words of any one that thee offend:
Yea though even very near thy fame they touch,
And to thy great disgrace they seem to tend:
Let pass like wind the blast of slanderous tongue,
And think the best, sometimes even so are wrong.
Yea though thou often might hear, yet do not hear,
Or if thou do, seem as thou did not,
Its better far both deaf and dumb t'appeare,
Then listening overmuch, it were thy lot
To hear thy servant, or some other speak
The thing, that being heard, thy heart would break.
24.
For oftentimes also thine heart knows that thou likewise have cursed others.
Thou may remember what thy self have done,
In like case unto others absent often:
And what dislike therefore thou might have won,
If that thy speech had not been uttered soft,
(Or not conceald by such as heard the same)
Which will thee make another less to blame.
For it were mere injustice, to condemn
Our underlings, for lavish speech of us,
When we our betters far, do more contemn,
Yet lothly would therefore be served thus:
The rule of Charity does will thee do,
As thou thy self would feign be done unto.


25.
All this have I proved by wisdom: I thought, I will be wise, but it went
far from me. All this have I found by experience true,
And so may thou, if that thou way it well,
Apply thy self the same then to ensue,
And let her laws within thy actions dwell,
And of thy wisdom do not ouerweene,
For many times the wise are ouerseene.
My self by nature was inclynd to skill,
By education was instructed much,
A heavenly gift did more my knowledge fill,
And all the world supposd my wisdom such,
As few attaynd, and I supposd no less,
But found my folly great, I must confess.
26.
It is far of, what may it be? and it is a profound deepnesse who can find
it? For of three things (all worthy to be known)
The past, the present, and the future things,
Whose first in writs record (in part) is shown,
Whose last with deep obscurenesse blindness brings,
In the one I had but even a very taste,
In seeking the other out, I time did wast.
That vulgar knowledge which by modern view,
I did observe, to make my profit by
Did somewhat me instruct, and much more true
Then passed things forgotten presently,
Or dreamd supposals of succeeding time,
Which for to fetch, to heaven my thoughts should clime.


27.
I have compassed about both I and mine heart, to know and to enquire and to
search wisdom and reason, and to know the wickedness of folly, and the
foolishness of madness. That knowledge which I had, I did bestow
With heart and mind in searching round about,
The true effect of every thing to know,
And of effects the causes out of doubt
(For happy they are held that can define
Of causes and effect, how they incline.)
And chiefly I observed, whence good and ill
Have their original and nutriment,
What bounds they have, and how the soul they kill,
And in the use of them sought man's intent:
And so of mirth, of folly, and delight,
And what so seemd, most pleasant unto sight.
28.
And I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and
snares, and her hands as bands: he that is good before God shall be delivered
from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her. And lo, I found all sin to
end with shame,
Yea even the sin which does most men allure,
The lawless love of women of defame,
Who bitterer plagues (then death) to us procure,
Insnaring in their bands of beauties gift
The wretched souls, which yield unto their drift.
A fatal fury of the flesh (alas)
In idle brain begot, with plenty fed,
Whose smallest sparckles to a flame do pass,
If by the eye the fancy will be led,
But such as God does love, shall lust refrain,
Whilst wicked ones intrapped do remain.


29.
Behold ^^^th the Preacher, this have I found seeking one by one to find the
count. Believe me well, I know it over well,
By many a one my self have found it true,
I teach thee this, who best the same could tell,
And for the same with all my heart do rue,
And wish thee by my harm the like beware,
And for their new assaults thy self prepare.
For few or none, but do assaults abide
At first or last, and over many fall,
Thou do not know thy strength, what may betide,
The wisest sort fall herein most of all:
In any case then trust not to thy strength,
Some dally with the fire, but burn at length.
30.
And yet my soul seeks but I find it not: I have found one man of a
thousand: but a woman among them all have I not found. I must confess, I would
not men acquit,
From equal blame in this so gross a sin,
Beseeming not (in truth) their stronger wit,
To yield to them whom they from ill should win,
And in this point, among thousands that I know,
One wise and perfect man, I scarce could show.
But of a world of women that this day,
Do prostrate their affections to their lust,
By my experience, sure I cannot say,
(Though others can perchance, and will I trust)
That one has so reclaymd her life to good,
As that a new assault would be withstood.

But men (for their original grace) their own inventions take.
31.
Only lo this have I found, that God has made man righteous, but they have
sought many inventions. So we and they, as woeful president
Of parents fall, to evil do incline,
He'is best at ease, that does his sins repent,
And not of others sins too much define,
Nor yet his own excuse: bad is the best,
This sin, is but one sin among the rest.
For though God made us holy, pure and just,
And gave us power in righteousness to dwell,
Yet did our wills, so to our senses trust,
That it the use of reason did expel:
Since which, a swarm of hateful sins increase,
On thought, word, deed, and all our actions prease.
Chap. 8.


1.
Who is as the wise man, and who knows the interpretation of a thing? the
wisdom of a man does make his face to shine: and the strength of his face
shall be changed. IT stands him then upon, who would withstand
This great calamity of humane kind,
Another course of life to take in hand,
Then in the practice of the most we find,
And armed with wisdom against the flesh to fight,
Not yielding cowardlike to lewd delight.
That is true wisdom worthy lasting fame,
That does adorn with honor and with praise,
Such as sincerely do embrace the same,
That will transform their life to better ways,
And give them grace with Prince and people still,
And in the end advance their state it will.
2.
I advertise thee to take heed (...) the mouth of the king, and to the word of
the oath of God It teaches man his duty unto God,
And how with civil men he should converse,
With neighbors how to have a kind abode,
Or with a people that are most perverse:
To know what does beseem in every case,
And how to walk, to win our sovereigns grace.
It will advise thee (as I also do)
To be attentive to thy Prince behest,
To be obsequious also thereunto,
So far as may accord with all the rest,
Of laws of God, of nature, and of state,
And to attend his pleasure rare and late.


3.
Have not to go forth of his sight: stand not in an evil thing: for he will do
whatsoever pleases him. If so his liking did of thee require
A thing unfit, not pleasing unto thee,
I would not wish thee there withal retire,
Or discontent in countenance ought to be,
But yield with patience rather to the same,
For to obedience, subjects ought to frame.
But if thy self by indiscretion have
Offended him, persist not in thy wrong:
Of him it is no shame thy pardon crave,
For unto Princes homage does belong,
They have the power of subjects to dispose,
Thy life and goods, to save or else to loose.
4.
Where the word of the king is, there is power, and who shall say unto him,
what do thou? The Princes wrath is messenger of death,
His will a law, his words are firm decrees,
Their instruments are ready at a breath,
To pull the proudest rebels on their knees,
Such Majesty and power in them is found,
With every frown a loyal heart they wound.
Who dare unto account his sovereign call,
Who to no power in earth inferior is?
Who will not at his feet all prostrate fall,
Who has the power to punish his amiss?
As deputies to God, on earth they reign,
And by his sword of Justice state maintain.


5.
He that keeps the commandments shall know none evil thing, and the heart of
the wise shall know the time and judgment. Whose laws (the godly wise) both
must and will
Endeavor most exactly to observe,
In every point and tittle to fulfill,
And wittingly in nothing much to swerve:
So shall he for himself, best safety find,
And leave the better name to world behind.
And (for they hardly can discharge aright
Their duty, that their native laws not know,
And that their ignorance cannot acquight,
Who may, and will not learn, more wise to grow)
The wise will therefore learn their duties furst:
The good, refrain the evil, they might and durst.
6.
For to every purpose there is a time and judgment, because the misery of man
is great upon him And as in public causes wise men use,
To guide their actions warily and well:
And proper times and seasons ever choose
For all they do, before therewith they mell:
(For proper times there are for every thing,
Which good or ill success with it does bring.)
So in their private life they do observe,
Expediencie of that they take in hand:
From care whereof, whilst some do rashly swerve,
(Because true wisdom they not understand)
They into many mischiefs headlong fall,
Which afterward too late they would recall.


7.
For he knows not that which shall be: for who can tell him when it shall be. For
it lies not (no doubt) in power of man,
To judge aright of sequels and events,
Though (by observance of things past) we can
Sometimes right near conjecture of intents,
As like to have success as we desire:
But none can judge the truth that they require.
It is but chance not judgment if they hit,
So many errors do encounter them:
Those future knowledges for God are fit,
And none but he, that priuileage can claim;
For as for Revelations few are now,
And devilish arts, Gods word will not allow.
8.
Man is not Lord over the spirit to retain the spirit: neither has he power
in the day of death, nor deliverance in battle, neither shall wickedness
deliver the possessors thereof. And how should he be able to foretell,
An others haps or actions, can you think,
That not foresaw, what to himself befell,
Nor knew his peril being at pits brinke?
Nor could defer his death or destiny,
With all the care he did thereto apply?
That could not tell the place, the dart should light,
That he in battle flong against his foe?
That cannot save himself amidst the fight,
But bears the brunt (perhaps) of ouerthroe?
No wicked slight or art can sinners save,
But that they sure (in fine) their merits have.


9.
All this have I seen^, and given mine heart to every work which is wrought
under the sun, and I saw a time that man rules over man to his own hurt.
How far (alas) does all our skill come short
Of that great knowledge we pretend to have?
My self have tried the same in every sort
Of study, to the which my self I gave,
And yet there is no knowledge so obscure
Or easy, but I did the same inure.
Nay of the things, most common in my sight,
Which enery man can say, and witness true,
I groped at, as in obscurest night,
And could not see the reason how it grew:
That men (even to themselves) most ruin bring,
And Magistrates their own dependants wring.
10.
And likewise I saw the wicked buried, and they returned, and they that came
from the holy place, were yet forgotten in the city where they had done right:
this also is vanity. For which the foolish world become so far
From just dislike of their iniust oppressions,
That live and dead, they feared and praised are,
And whose posterities get more possessions?
They flourish rather most by doing wrong,
As if the earth, did all to them belong.
But such as have led long a holy life,
Deserved well of world and country all,
Have been pursued in life with hate and strife,
And even at home forgot when death did call,
O vain affection of the vulgar sort,
That makes vice and virtue but a sport.


11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the children of men is fully set on them to do evil. These
worldlings whilst they see the day deferd,
Of plague and judgment of these wicked ones,
They do suppose their actions have not erd,
But wisely were decreed for the nonce,
And so grew bold in practice of the same,
Till all the world, therewith grew out of frame.
These wicked ones themselves grow insolent,
And pride their minds in their presumpteous trade,
They are so far from meaning to repent,
That wrong on wrong upon the just they lade,
Even whilst they able are no more to bear,
So void they are of any kind of fear.
12.
Though a sinner do evil an hundredth times, and God prolongeth his days, yet
I know that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, and do reue^ence
before him. But though they escape unpunished awhile,
(For hundred years are but a while with God)
Though flatteringly them selves they do beguile,
And feel no smart of Gods correcting rod:
But rather find their days prolongd with peace,
As though their happiness should never cease.
Yet sure I am, it one day shall be well
With such as in the fear of God do live,
As in his holy laws and Church do dwell,
And proof of their belief in life do give,
That they exempted far from tyrants rage,
Shall live and rest in peace an endless age.


13.
But it shall not be well to the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, he
shall be like a shadow, because he fears not before God. When as
contrariwise, the wicked one
Shall be dismounted from his seat of trust,
Dismayed and desolate, forlorn alone,
Pursued by heaven and earth, by judgment just:
Of God and man, forsaken and contemnd:
As he the innocent before condemnd.
The pomp and glory of his passed pride,
Like to a flower, shall vanish and decay,
His life like ruins, down shall headlong slide,
His fame like to a shadow vade away;
Because he feared not the God of might,
In justice shall these woes upon him light.
14.
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth* that there be righteous men to
whom it comes according to the work of the wicked: and there be wicked men
to whom it comes according to the work of the just: I thought also that this
is vanity. And yet in truth, it is a wondrous case,
To see the just so many woes sustain,
(Not that I think that pity can have place
With wicked ones, to make them wrong refrain:
But that the God of justice does permit
His servants, to be subject unto it.)
For you shall lightly see, the better man
The more afflicted in his worldly state,
The vilest person (worst that find you can)
Most wealthy'and loved most, though worthy hate,
But it is vain to search Gods mind herein,
Thereof to descant I will not begin.


15.
And I praised joy: for there is no goodness to man under the sun, save to
eat and to drink, and to rejoice: for this is adioined to his labor, the
days of his life, that God has given him under the sun But drawing this
discourse unto an end,
Concluding it as I the former did,
I say, that in this life who does intend,
Himself of many combers well to rid,
And to enjoy the bliss that earth can give,
Must cast off care, and seek in peace to live.
I mean those curious studies fore-reprou'd,
Which do but multiply a bootlesse care,
And joy himself, when joy may best be moved,
With use of every creature, and prepare
To take a plenteous part of them, as gain
Of all his travels to him shall remain.
16.
When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to behold the business that
is done on earth, that neither day nor night the eyes of man take sleep. For
though it be a thing some wisemen use,
And man by nature is thereto inclind,
And I my self the same did not refuse,
(Even studies travel to enrich my mind)
Who knew thereby what study might attain,
Or which a forward wit and will might gain.
Who searched had men's actions curiously,
And all the accident that world does yield:
Who in my self great part of them did try,
On others proof did likewise knowledge build,
Both day and night applying thereunto
My busy brains, as many others do.

Be'he nere so wise: toil nere so much, their depth cannot be found.
17.
Then I beheld the whole works of God, that man can not find out the work that
is wrought under the sun: for the which man labors to seek it, and cannot
find it: yea, and though the wise man think to know it, he cannot find it. Yet
(lo) I found that I much time had lost,
That all my study was imployd in vain,
That I in vain my books had turned and tossed,
That my experience did small knowledge gain,
That out the meanest creature God did make,
I might a new, full many a lesson take.
That all we know but mere supposall is,
That we know not the least of truth of them,
That in the principles of art we mis,
That we unjustly name of knowledge claim,
Who only truly know, we nothing know:
As wise men in the end, to see do grow.
Chap. 9.


1.
I have surely given mine heart to all this, and to declare all this, that the
just, and the wise, and their works are in the hand of God: and no man knows
either love or hatred of all that is before them. IT rests now my part to
perfect that,
I in my former speeches have begun,
That I may hit the mark I aimed at,
And so my course unto your comfort run,
That I may see that some, have profit won.
Which I will do by laying plain to thee,
The proofs which both by good and bad I make,
Their weal, nor woe, no perfect marks to be
Of love or hate of God, from whom we take
All power, and all success: and vain are they
That men's intentions by their issue way.
2.
Al things come a like to all: and the same condition is to the just, and to
the wicked, to the good and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that
sacri^iceth, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner,
he that swears, as he that fears an oath. For much a like, you all men's
states shall find,
And like events to good and bad befall,
To wisest men, as men most grossly blind,
To rich, as poor, and wretchedst man of all,
For in this life you none can happy call.
Observe the man that is of honest mind,
And mark the most deceitful man alive,
Look on the Athiest most profane by kind,
And holy man, and you shall see them thrive,
Both often a like, the foul blaspheming wight,
As he that prays, and serves God day and night.


3.
This is evil among all that is done under the sun, that there is one
condition to all, and also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and
madness is in their hearts whilst they live, and after that they go to the
dead. And sure of all the things that I do know,
It is the thing that seems most strange to me,
That makes wise men most amazed grow,
And best men most discouraged to be,
When they their states, as hard as others see.
And that like others is their death in show,
As subject unto pain as wicked men,
Forgotten, be they once in grave below,
Their virtues (as not done) unthought of then:
So that their cares, and fools unquiet days,
Both madness seem, both die deuoide of praise.
4.
Surely who so ever is joined to all the living, there is hope: for it is better
to a living dog, then to a dead Lion. Hence does proceed (no doubt) the
proverb old,
That living dog, dead Lion does excel,
With princely beast of noble courage bold,
Then, every barking curre dare ^ausly mell,
That living, durst not come within his smell.
The reason is right easy to be told,
Because he living could himself relieve:
Life does in time new hopes and haps unfold,
But death no hope or earthly hap does give;
Time works wonders (if our time we take)
Occasion (at our death) does us forsake.


5.
For the living know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing at all:
neither have they any more reward: for their remembrance is forgotten. And so
accordingly do wise men use,
Whilst yet they live (and living have the power
To work their wills) they proper times do choose,
To perfect their intent, least death deflowre
Their sweetest hopes, who all things does deuowre.
For well they see and may (it is no news)
The man that now triumphs, to morn to die,
That dead, the fool the wisest will abuse,
And that the wisest then do senseless lie,
And what unperfected they left behind,
Neglected, and themselves soon out of mind.
6.
Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished, and they
have no more portion for ever, in all that is done under the sun. Their love,
their solace, and their chief delights,
Even with their lives, expired and at end,
Their hate, their plots of high revenge and spights,
And every action that they did pretend,
Dead into grave with them each one descend.
Into that cabin of eternal nights,
Where they no more the gladsome beams shall see,
Of shining sun, the comfort of the wights
That in this mortal life yet lingering be,
Those perturbations ryfe with humane kind,
Their now exchanged state no more shall find.


7.
Go, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a cheereful heart: for
God now accepte^h thy works. Thy part of earthly things, that lawfully
Thou may enjoy, I therefore thee advise,
Use whilst thou may, for death comes speedily,
And crosses unsuspected often arise,
As every man's experience daily tries.
Use thou thy own with plentie'and cheerfully,
Hurt not, but help thou others to thy power,
And (if God gave thee means abundantly)
Do not thy self the same alone devour:
But as God gave, so freely do thou give,
Those alms best please, we use whilst yet we live.
8.
At all times let thy garments be white and let not oil be lacking upon thine
head. Thou needst not in thy diet be precise,
As some persuade, and only eat to live,
Where choice is set, to choose in thee it lies,
All things were made for man, God all does give,
By bounty us to thankfulness to drive.
Yea all the rich attyres thou can devise,
For different states of men ordained were:
For Princes purples, for to please the eyes,
And all the precious gems that earth does bear;
Yea sweet perfumes, for delicace ordaynd,
(If thou may have them) need not be refraynd.


9.
Rejoice with thy wise whom thou have loved all the days of the life of thy
vanity, which God has given thee under the sun, all the days of thy
vanity: for this is thy portion in the life, and in thy travel wherein thou
labourest under the sun. If that thy eyes behold a beauty rare,
Which does delight thy heart, and love inflame,
If that in lawful band she prove thy share,
And that unto thy love, her love she frame,
Thou may with comfort joy thee in the same.
A comfort sure, to mitigate the care,
Which worldly troubles may on thee inflict,
The sweetest, God or nature could prepare,
Or out of all earths beauties could be picked,
So great as none can judge that are unkind,
And on a single life do set their mind.
10.
All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power: for there is
neither work, nor intention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go. And (at a word for all) what else beside
In all the world, thou have a mind unto,
(So that in use thereof a measure guide)
Thou art no whit restraind the same to do,
But do it quickly, least death all undo.
For death diuerteth all, who can abide
The fury of his force, if once he smight?
To do (what thou woulst do) then take thy tide,
For in the darkesome grave of deadly night
No knowledge, wisdom, power, there does remain,
All is forgot, all purposes are vain.


11.
I returned and saw under the sun that the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor also riches to men of
understanding, neither yet favor to me^ of knowledge: but time and chance
comes to them all. By these obseruances I sought to win,
The happiness which I did in part attain,
But all gain not the goal, the running bin,
Nor have the spoil that fight the field to gain,
Nor to the wise does always wealth remain.
Nay many needy stern, and new begin
The world, whose wits and industries were good,
Their best endeavors stand on tickle pin,
And consterd are as they are understood,
By such on whom the common wealth does stay,
And time and chance in each thing bears a sway.
12.
For neither does man know his time, but as the fishes, which are taken in an
evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the children
of me^ snared in the evil time when it falls upon them suddenly. We must
acknowledge it in very deed,
The ordinance of God it should be so,
For well I know, that none can take such heed,
But headlong he into the snare may go,
(Say yea who will) if God alone say no.
Like harmless fish, that in the waters breed,
And fearelesse foul that in the air are free,
Whose innocencies serve to little steed,
When nets and snares by fraud extended be:
So man, by time and chance intrapped is,
(If wicked will) though nothing his amiss.


13.
I have also seen this wisdom under the sun, and it is great unto me.
Which being (as we see the Lords decree)
Improperly we attribute to chance,
His will in time, produces that to thee
Which thou supposest, fortune did advance,
So wide, man's wisdom from the truth does glance.
True wisdom rather, sure will let thee see
How to apply thy state, to each event,
With no adverse encounter quaild to be,
But all things take and use, as God them sent,
And seeing this ungrateful perverse age,
(By view of others wrongs) thy grief assuage:
14.
A little city and few men in it, and a great king came against it, and
campassed it about, and builded fortes against it. As I my self have done, who
sometimes saw,
A weak unfortified city sieg'd,
By powrefull Prince, who armies great did draw
T'ingirt their walls, and liberty abridge,
That none could escape, though wings were nere so flidge.
The town not populate to escape their iaw,
By any skirmishes of saly out,
His raised bulwarks kept them so in awe,
And forside trenches compast so about,
As if the Eagle houering over pray,
At pleasure ready were his talents lay.


15.
And there was found therein a poor and wise man, and he delivered the city
by his wisdom: but none remembered this poor man. When yet I saw (a worthy
thing to see)
A man of small account for wealth or state,
But yet (indeed) both bold and wise was he,
Who raysd the siege, and so did foes abate,
That town and people, thereby freedom gate.
But when they were miraculously free,
(Lo strange ingratitude but common sin)
This worthy man began neglect to be,
And deeds forgot, as they had never bin:
Though all did taste the fruit of his desert,
Not one laid up his virtues in his heart.
16.
Then said I, better is wisdom then strength: yet the wisdom of the poor
is despised, and his words are not heard. Yet this, his worthy prowess in my
sight
Was such, as I could never but admire,
And makes me think that they in vain do fight,
That have all wealth and power they can desire,
If policy they want, if cause require.
And them unwise (I hold) that judge a wight
By his appearance outwardly or pealth,
In poor men's words the rich have small delight,
For they account them fools that have not wealth,
Yet at their need, their help perforce they use,
Their own turn served, to help them they refuse.


17.
The words of the wise are more heard in quietness, then the cry of him that
rules among fools. But these my words I know that some will hold,
To be a partial speech of little wit,
For tales unto the foolish wisely told,
Can scarce have hearing, and small favor git,
Unless unto their humors it do fit.
Unto the wise I speak, of such I would
Have credit, even as they the truth do know,
I might grow hoarce with preaching if I should,
Seek some to win to bend unto my bow:
Few words among the wise, have greater place,
Then long orations, with unskillful race.
18.
Better is wisdom then weapons of war: but one sinner destroys much good
To such I say (as this example proves)
That wisdom is a thing of greater power,
And that a solid reason sooner moves,
If well applied, in convenient hour,
Then Cannons shot, that batters on a tower.
And that one action more then well behoues,
(Mistaking or neglecting of his due)
All former wisdom of a man reproues,
And makes many errors more ensue:
For as one bitter herb the broth does spill,
So one misdeed may work to many ill.
Chap. 10.


1.
Dead flies cause to stink and putrify the ointment of the Apothecarie: so
does a little folly him that is in estimation for wisdom and for glory. THou
therefore, who art once reputed wise,
Had need full warily thy self to guide,
For look how much more high thy fame does rise,
More sharper censure art thou like to bide,
If in a slender matter thou should slide.
For look how soon thou see the drowned flies,
In sweetest droogs Apothecaries make,
Corrupt them so, that men it straight despise,
Which they before, did for most precious take:
So be thou sure one vice shall stain thee more,
Then many virtuous deeds, thee praysd before.
2.
The heart of a wise man is as his right hand: but the heart of a fool is as
his left hand. Thou farther see, that wisdom is the thing
In all assayes, best worthy of esteem,
Who does her followers unto honor bring,
And makes their actions always gracious seem,
And men their words, like Oracles to deem.
From all extremes she shields them with her wing,
They find relief even ready at their hand,
When foolish folk (with every trifle) wring,
And like left handed helps amazed stand,
Not knowing how to othe^s help to breed,
Nor yet themselves to hel^e in time of need.


3.
And also when the fool goes by the way, his heart fails, and he tells
unto all, that he is a fool. If they in judgment, once do go astray,
They headlong fall, and never see the same,
If once they miss the usual common way,
Unto a better course they cannot frame,
But lie and perish to their lasting shame.
Their downefals they have not the wit to stay,
Nor to conceal their fault from any one,
Nay they will blase their shame (say who will nay)
To every one, though done a part alone,
Yea they will boast thereof, and it defend,
If that the standers by will hearing lend.
4.
If the spirit of him that rules rise up against thee, leave not thy place:
for gentleness pacifieth great sins. Which if they should, and that their
power permit,
Be not dismayed, but use thou wisdom then,
Give them the honor, for their place is fit,
And then remember that they are but men,
And use good words, as wisdom teaches when.
For words well used, works the grossest wits
Unto a plient patience, more to hear,
And patience, favor more in time begits;
And time forgetfulness, if thou forbear,
And mild forbearance, makes thy fault the less,
And him his fault (if grace he have) confess.


5.
There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, as an error that
proceeds from the face of him that rules. But yet this rule I find not
always true,
Nay rather often times it fails quight,
(A thing I cannot mend, though it I rue,
And is the thing I hold the greatest spite,
That ever may to common wealth alight.)
To see that those to whom all rule is due,
And should be guides to other men in good,
Should all the vices of the world ensue,
And may not be by any means withstood;
By whose examples, many others fall
To ruin; as do shrubs with Cedar tall.
6.
Folly is set in great excellency, and the rich set in the low place. How can
it be in any other wise,
If folly sit in seat of excellence,
Like will to like, and as the bad arise,
Down goes the good, and vertue'is banished thence,
(For wicked ones in wicked seek defense.)
Pure virtue naked in a beggars guise,
May wander for protection and for aid,
For every one her merits will despise,
Because like gifts, their natures have denayd,
Thus topsie turuie every thing will grow,
As cart, the horse: the stern, ships way should show.


7.
I have seen servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the
ground. For what obsurder thing can you suppose,
Then what is oftentimes before your eye?
When you on cockhorse see a prauncing those,
Whose birth and qualities you may despise,
Whilst wise and noble both contemned lies.
Nay lackie-like in trotting, time do loose,
In serving such as know not true desert,
A worser life there could be no way chose,
Or that could more torment an honest heart:
For where shall they expect their pains reward,
Which they to fool all ready see is shard.
8.
He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it, and he that breaks the hedge a
Serpent shall bite him. But for my part I can be well content,
To yield all honor where God honor gives,
But yet oppressors should in time repent,
For God in heaven a judge for ever lives,
And to confusion wicked worldlings drives.
He does prevent their fraudulent intent,
And makes them fall into the pit they cast,
Whilst they endeavor others to prevent,
The Serpents sting to martyr them as fast:
For fraud with fraud, is oftentimes repayd,
And wicked snard, in grin for others laid.


9.
He that remoueth stones, shall hurt himself thereby, and he that cutteth
wood, shall be in danger thereby. If laws of kingdoms chastisement procure,
For such as alter ancient bounds of land,
If that poor pilfring hedge-breakers be sure
To sit in stocks, if owners understand,
And every crime is punished out of hand.
Shall wrong, or shall oppression still assure
The mighty ones, to tread the weaker down,
Nay God the king of kings will not endure,
But in his wrath on them will fiercely frown,
For though his patient suffering does excel,
(Yet moved long) he strikes down to hell.
10.
If the iron be blunt, and one has not whet the edge, he must then put too
more strength: but the excellency to direct a thing is wisdom. Let no man
therefore so misuse his wit,
To hurt of neighbor, or to proper shame,
But let him do the thing he finds fit,
And let him wisely his intentions frame,
So shall less toil, more sweet ensue the same.
For as the dulled tool craves force with it,
Of doubled strength to make it pierce aright,
Yet will (with all thy pains) scarce cut awhit,
Unless thou join thy skill unto thy might:
So in all actions reason must be guide,
Else no good issue will the same betide.


11.
If the Serpent bite when he is not charmed, no better is a babbler. And as in
deeds, even so in words beware
How thou do guide thy tongue in any case,
Wherein to find a wise man, it is rare,
Licentious speech has now so common place,
And slanderous tongues, do find such special grace.
Yet not the Serpents which in Lybia are,
Whilst they vncharmed lie in wait for man,
More daungerously do sting: or do prepare
More present poison, then vile slander can,
If it have hearing once, and credit lent,
It will destroy the saint most innocent.
12.
The words of the mouth of a wise man have grace: but the lips of a fool
devour himself. The lavish tatling tongue on prating set,
Spares no man, nor regards what it says,
It cuts like to a razor which is whet,
And pricks himself which rashly with it playth,
And him that so it uses, fond bewrayth.
But wise men speak when matter good they get,
With modesty, and unto matter good,
Out of their lips no vain untruths they let,
They speak distinctly to be understood,
And words accompanied with matter grave,
For which of all they commendations have.


13.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the latter end of
his mouth is wickedness. Fools if they once begin, can never end,
And with their will they all the words will have,
They love to hear themselves, and will defend
Their follies, even before the wise and grave,
And think they (bravely) do themselves behave.
They do begin their speech (if ear you lend)
With vain and foolish talks, or lying toys,
But in the middle they to mischief bend,
In fine with madness ends he, and annoyes
The honest ear and soul, that hears him speak,
And them compel his senseless tale to break.
14.
For the fool multiplyeth words, saying* man knows not what shall be, and
who can tell him what shall be after him. From table talk and childish toys,
he grows
To highest points of learning and of skill,
In deep points of divinity he shows,
That with best learned clarke compare he will,
And all the world with paradoxes fill.
Gods secrets he by inspiration knows,
He prophecies of things yet long to come,
With super-naturall skill he ouerflowes,
And in each science seems to have some,
When silly wretch, his knowledge is but small,
For in those points, the best know naught at all.


15.
The labor of the foolish does weary him: for he knows not to go into the
city. Thus do the foolish vainly take in hand,
To vex their brains, with things for them to hie,
They know that future things none understand,
Yet they their faculties therein will try,
Such wise fools (fondly wise) the world has many.
It fares with them (if it be rightly scand)
As with the blind that would the seeing guide,
As if one wandering in an uncouth land,
Would those instruct, the way dwell hard beside:
They silly fools, know not their next way home,
And yet their wits would over all things rome.
16.
Woe to thee, o land, when the king is a child; and thy Princes eat in the
morning, Woe be to such, that by such ruled are,
But special woe be to thee land, where they
Do bear the Scepter, least they all do mar,
As ill as infants when they bear the sway,
Who not themselves, much less thy state can stay.
And doubled is thy woe and mischief far,
If that thy Magistrates (who should advise
Their Prince in highest points of peace or war)
To banqueting and surfets early rise,
Neglecting common good, which first of all
With temperate brain, they should to counsel call.


17.
^lessed art thou ^ land, when thy king is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in time, for strength and not for drunkenness. And thou thrice happy
soil, whose Prince descends
Of pedigree of Emp'rors and of Kings
Of ancient honor, which to virtue bends;
Whose rule both peace and plenty to thee brings,
Where through thy fame, mo^gst forre^ regions rings.
And happy Prince, whom God a Council sends
Of noble Peers and wise, whose watchful eyes
Thy subjects from all foreign foes defends,
And civil broils that might at home arise,
Such do in temperate wise their plenty use,
And feed for strength, and plenty not abuse.
18.
By slothfulnes the roof of the house goes to decay, and by the idleness of
the hand the house droppeth through. They cause the Pesant, in sweet peace
manure
The land, the treasury of wealths increase:
Unto the needy they do work procure,
And see the poor, with wealthy live in peace,
And all oppression in the land to cease.
Their waking eyes does Princes state assure,
Does to the people courage give to toil,
Gains to themselves a fame shall aye endure,
Gives to the foe the most disgraceful foil;
All this with pain and diligence is won,
Sloth ruins all, makes all to hauock run.


19.
They prepare bread for laughter, and wine comfort the living, but silver
answers to all. They give the safety, for to use thy own,
And peace, of plenty that thou may feed,
Thou feedst by them, of best on earth has grown,
Of fatlings, which thy flocks and herds do breed,
To recreate thy soul at time of need.
And for by gold and silver wealth is shown,
They do enrich the land with purest quine,
By which thy traffic far and near is known,
And Indian gems, and Arabian drugs are thine,
Gold gayneth all, and Ophire gold thou have,
Then happy thou, if hap in wealth be plast.
20.
Curse not the king, no not in thy thought, neither curse the rich in thy bed
chamber: for the heaven shall carry thy voice, and that which has wings, shall
declare the matter. Then slander not such Prince, that counsel grave,
By whom so many benefits we find,
Their many merits, many thanks do crave,
Each honest heart to reverent love they bind,
And base backbiters only are unkind.
The laws of God, and nature willed have,
The Magistrate should reverenced be,
The laws of man the bounds unto thee gave
Of words and deeds, but God the thought does see,
In deed then, word, and thought them honor aye,
Least flying fowls of air, thy guilt bewray.
Chap. 11.


1.
Cast thy bread upon the waters: for after many days thou shall find it. NOw
since no less discretion is required
In using wealth, then getting of the same,
And that the bounteous mind is most admired,
Does profit others most, and gains best name,
I therefore wish thereto thy heart to frame.
I would not have thy hand too quickly tyrde,
Nor too respective unto whom to give,
Some I have seen for shame have not desyrde
An alms, whom greatest need to crave might drive:
Though water powered in the sea seem vain,
Yet needless gift, a grateful heart may gain.
2.
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight: for thou know not what evil
shall be upon the earth. Some give in hope a gift to gain thereby,
Such gifts, I rather bribes, then gifts do call,
Some fear to give, least they themselves may try
Like want ere long: and so give naught at all,
Some sometimes give, but yet their gifts are small.
But I would have thy alms given cheerfully
Vnaskt, sometimes if craved, to none denide,
Let none lack (to thy power) in need that lie,
And to prevent their need, some goods divide,
For God all bounty is, and so should we
Dispose our goods, if like him we would be.


3.
If the clo^des be full, they will power forth rain upon the earth: and if the
tree do fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place that the tree
falls, there it shall be. Yea look how plenteously thou see the rain,
Fro out the deaw-fild clouds on earth distill,
So long as any drops in them remain,
Wherewith earths dried cesterns up to fill,
So in thy alms be thou as forward still.
And as each soil, some sap from heaven does gain,
And every tree and shrub of deaw has part,
So think thou not thy gift bestowd in vain,
To whom or when so ere thou giving art:
And if thy store be great, more may thou spend,
If less, yet some, unto more needy lend.
4.
He that observes the wind, shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds
shall not reap. Take all occasions to be doing well,
Let every season for it proper seem,
The husbandmen that most in skill excel,
Though sometimes they to sow more fit do deem,
Yet to be too precise, unfit esteem.
Who marketh always where the wind does dwell,
And fears every cloud that is in sky,
But little corn shall sow or reap to sell,
If always he do guide his works thereby:
So give thou when thou may, and think thy store
Increast thereby, no whit impaird the more.


5.
As thou know not which is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow
in the womb of her that is with child: so thou know not the work of God
that works all. Think this, that even that God which gave to thee
The present blessings that thou do possess,
Thy charitable works, from heaven does see.
And will thy labors in due season bless,
If thou thy faith, by neighbors love express.
And think that as the infants borne that be,
Conceived are, do grow, do live, do feed,
And be by birth in time from prison free,
By means unknown, to mothers them that breed,
Se be assured, that God which it has wrought,
Can wealth restore, by means to thee unthought.
6.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest: for
thou know not whether shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be
a like good. Both rath and late at every time and tide,
Then do unto thy power, some alms deed,
Without some others good, let no day slide,
So often as thou can find aman has need,
And who this can perform, is blessed indeed.
For man can not his work so wisely guide,
To know to whom, and when to give is best,
But who for pity gives, and not for pride,
Though needlessly some fall among the rest,
Yet some (no doubt) is blessedly bestowd,
And in thy will of good, good work is showd.


7.
Surely the light is a pleasant thing: and it is a good thing to the eyes to
see the sun. And since (but whilst thou live) thy goods are thine,
And what thou freely give deserves praise,
Give while thou may, so may thou find in fine,
Well saved, what well was spent in living days,
(For godly work, with God aye present stays.)
Long may thou live, but must in end decline
To death, the end of every living thing:
To yield to death, yet needst thou not repine,
If living thou to man, no good can bring:
And having left some good by life to men,
More welcome death may be unto thee then.
8.
Though a man live many years, and in them all he rejoice, yet he shall
remember the days of darkness, because they are many, all that comes is
vanity. For death thou know, unto life is due,
And life does but prepare a man to die,
Lives cares, a daily death in us renew,
To work in us consent to death thereby,
Which else no flesh (with patience) sure would try.
The many days or years which do ensue,
Of wariest government to happiest wight,
Cannot persuade him but that this is true,
That lightsome day will turn to darksome night,
That times most long have end and what does vade,
Is little better then a very shade.


9.
Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thine h^rt chere thee in the days
of thy youth: and wa^ke in the ways of thine h^rt, and in the sight of thine
eyes: but know that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment.
Delight he then in what so ere he please,
In youth, in beauty, strength, or wealthy store,
Let him delight himself, in use of these,
And cheer his heart (as cause he has) therefore
Yet let him think death knocks at his door.
And that they all, do vanish with their ways,
That God alone remains ever ^ure,
That only virtue with us longest stays,
And can eternal blessedness procure,
When to the judgment of a God severe,
Our works must come, who all in mind does bear.
10.
Therefore take away grief out of thine heart, and cause evil to depart from
thy flesh, for childhood and youth are vanity. Let him, and all the wise
whilst yet they may,
Prepare themselves to bear with cheerful mind,
The fierce assaults, in death that for us stay,
And but by faith can strong resistance find,
Since all our other works come short behind.
Let us abandon every wicked way,
And lay our treasure up in heaven above,
Youth is a flower that springs out in May,
But every frost or blast does soon remove,
But heaven and heavenly joys will still remain,
When youth and earthly works prove merely vain.
Chap. 12.

Ere crooked age all pleasure to thy lothed life denayes.
1.
Remember now thy creator in the days of thy youth, whilst the evil days
come not, ANd since thou can not shun deaths fatal day,
And as the tree does fall so shall it rise,
(Whilst yet thou may) prepare a quiet way
Unto thy soul, which in such danger lies,
If thou in time relief do not devise.
The earth and earthly things, do help denay,
Heaven is the harbor, where thy soul does dwell,
Let not thy hope on earth then longer stay,
But it and works thereof from heart expel,
Delay no time in hope long life to have,
Youth may, age must, ere long time go to grave.
Nor the years approach wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. To
heaven thy progress thou do wish to make,
Then cloth thy self accordingly therefore,
The clogs of worldly love and lust forsake,
And think them burdens to thee evermore,
And in thy life, have lights of virtue store.
Let thought of thy creator thee awake
From sins of youth, heart burdensome in age,
Remember God account of thee will take,
If thy repentance not his wrath assuage,
Yea leave thou sin, ere lust leave tempting thee,
Thy abstinence else, can not virtue be.


2.
Wh^les the sun is not dark, nor the light, nor the moon, nor the stars,
nor the clouds return after the rain. The feeble members which have lost
their might,
(Through which their senses did affection prove)
No marvel now, if they take less delight
In vain prospects which they tofore did love,
Since they the means do want does liking move.
The sun, moon, stars (heavens orname^t, earths light)
Can yield small comfort to the senseless corse,
When all thy joints begin by day and night,
Do tire thy life, and breed the souls remorse,
No marvel if thou then, prove continent,
But thou should temperance even in youth frequent.
3.
When the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong me^ shall ^ow
themselves. Before this glorious building do decay,
Wherein thy soul does soiourne as a guest,
Thy comely body which erecteth aye,
The thought and eyes to heaven as mansion blessed,
Grow feeble, and therein thou find no rest.
When trembling hand, his duty does denay,
And brainefalne thighs, and legs bend under thee,
When lamed limbs on others strength must stay,
And crouches (in their steed) of force must be,
What time thou twice a child, shall weary grow,
That thou the strength of youth did ever kuow.
Ere teeth wax few, and windows closd, deny thy eyes the light.

4.
And the grinders shall cease, because they are few, and they wax dark that
look out by the windows. Before the Cators of thy diet fail,
Those Iuorie teeth which do thy food prepare,
Which lost or loose, their labors not avail,
But broths and minst-meats must become thy share,
And sharpened knife, thy toothlesse gums must spare.
Before that darksome mists thy eyes assail,
Whose watchful sight thy Centinell should be,
When (crystal humor failing) they shall quayle,
And spectacles must teach them now to see,
Or closed windows force thee take thy leave
Of worlds vain shades, which did the soul deceive.
And the doors shall be shut out by the base sound of the grinding. Before thy
wanny cheeks sink hollowed in,
(In which well formed words should fashion have)
And corrall lips which have their portall bin,
And plyant tongue which elocution gave,
Now faltering signs, for interpretors do crave.
Whilst those white cliffes (the bounders which begin,
The repercussion causing sweet resound)
Stand firm on rock of their iaw joining chin,
Through which they gracious passage sometimes found,
And formed that powrefull gift of eloquence,
The root of sweet content and sharp offense.
Ere sleeplesse brain, at birds voice start, and singing pipes be base.

5.
And he shall rise up at the voice of the bird: and all the daughters of
singing shall be abased. Before thy dried brains do rest deny
Unto thy tired bones, and careful mind,
And comfortless the longsome night thou lie
In bed (thy grave) for ease tofore assignd,
And starts at each birds chirpe, or puff of wind.
Before thy organe pypes with horcenesse dry,
Restrain the passage of thy breathing voice,
Wherewith (resembling heavens true harmony)
Thy music notes used ears and hearts rejoice,
In liew whereof should hollow coffes succeed,
Which in corrupted loongs obstructions breed.
Also they shall be afraid of the hie thing, and fear shall be in the way,
and the Almond tree shall flourish. Before thou tired at every step must stay,
And clamber small assents on hand and knee,
And stumbling at each straw lies in the way,
A spectacle of feeble nature be,
To all that does thy fearful fashion see.
Before the harbengers of age (I say)
Even grie^ly hairs do blossom on thy chin,
(Which for most part declyning state bewray,
As Almond bud, shows summer to begin)
Prepare thy self, for death the harvest due,
Which after spring time, must of course ensue.
Ere weakness make the grasshopper, a burden seem, and lust
Consume, for sure concupiscence, with age does wear to dust.
5 (cont.).
And the Grasshopper shall be a burden* Before the childish toys of infants
lust,
Begin to want the wings of warmed blood,
And that thy body yield (as once it must)
To age, by which that humor is withstood,
To leave the use thereof I think it good.
For look how of May deaw, and summers dust,
The wanton Grasshopper does quickly grow,
And singes in harvest tide until he brust,
So does lusts pleasure vanish ere you know,
Like to Ephemeris, that Tanaish fly,
Morn bred, noone borne, that very night to die.
And concupiscence shall be driven away. Not those fair fruits which by
Gemorra grow,
Which touched once, straight unto dust do fall,
Are more deceitful then this sin in show,
Nor yet that fruit which first deceived us all,
Although regard thereof we have but small.
Lust like a Torrent soon does ouerflow,
If that access of nutriment abound,
But in a moment straight it waxes low,
As by experience has been ever found:
Not Ammons (of fair Thamor) foul desire
So fierce, but quenched, with loathing did retire.
Before in ages ^ed (thy grave) thou he, whilst thee they morn.

6.
For a man goes to the house of his age, and the mourners go about in the
street. Then leave that loathsome snare of humane kind,
The common cankor of the best concait,
Most powrefull passion that does reason blind,
And to more brutish sins, th'alluring bait,
And think on death which does on thee awaight.
Suppose each ringing knell puts thee in mind,
That thou art in the way unto thy grave,
Take heed that death thee vnprepar'd not find,
But so in all thy life, thy self behave,
As if thou were the man whose turn is next,
And would not with a sudden death be vexed.
Whiles the silver cord is not lengthened, nor the golden ewre broken, nor the
pitcher broken at the well, nor the whele broken at the cesterne. Before (I
say) the vital spirits fail,
Or that thy radick humors all be spent,
That cramps do silver cords of raynes assail,
And natures intercourse no more be sent
From liver heart and brain as erst it went.
Before warm blood with I sey fleame do quail,
And pulslesse leave thy over empty vain,
Before the (cesterne made for lives avail)
Thy stomach now no sustenance retain,
But all the wheles of nature lacking strength
To give them motion, they do fail at length.


7.
And dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that
gave it. For then (be sure) thy days are near an end,
And flesh dissolved turns unto dust,
Then yield thereto, before perforce thou bend,
And in thy strength of youth repose no trust,
Nor place thy joy in earth or earthly lust.
Thy nobler part (thy soul) it did descend
From God, first mouer of all life and grace,
Who therefore does chief interest pretend
In thee and it, and will thy soul embrace,
Amidst the heavens of his eternal rest,
If faith and love have once thy way adrest.
8.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, all is vanity. Thus have I (says
this Preacher) proved true,
The proposition that I first did make,
That earthly things are vain in use and view,
That in them we, can not sound comfort take,
And that in the end we must them all forsake.
That wisdom only, virtue should ensue,
And virtue is the way to happiness,
Which after death, does life again renew,
A life more happy then the world can guess,
When we shall live from lewd affections free,
And in that world no vain delights shall be.

His people knowledge, for their good, in all his words he sought.
9.
And the more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge,
Full many other learned works beside
He wrote, for more he knew the more he taught,
Whereby themselves the godly sort might guide,
Unto the wisdom which they wrongly sought,
And he with care and study dearly bought.
Three thousand moral rules in writ abide,
In proverbs and in adages for skill,
So sound that they worlds censure may abide,
And to a civil life reduce thee will,
Without offense of laws, and with content
Of such with whom thou daily shall frequent.
And caused them to hear. Of natures works with supernatural skill,
He many volumes did compose likewise,
Not curious works as some profanely will,
Of Alcumy, or judgments which arise
By heavenly motions, far above the skies.
But he his knowledge has contained still,
Within the lawful bounds of Gods decree,
And therefore many volumes he did fill
With medcinable use, of things which be
Abstracted out, of tree, shrub, metal, stone,
Of beast, fish, foul, and creatures every one.
He sought by parables to give, them precepts how to live.

10.
And searched forth, and prepared many parables. His heavenly Muse with wings
of zeal did fly
Above the common pitch of earthly men,
And so inflamed were his thoughts thereby,
With holy liking of his love as then,
That he could not contain his grateful pen.
In thousand songs and five his powers did try,
The praises of his sacred souls delight,
In whom sweet peace and love he did espy,
Which from him, love of world did banish quight;
Among the which that song of songs by name,
Describes her beauty, did him so inflame.
The preacher sought to find out pleasant words, and an upright writing, even
the words of truth. But this his large discourse was chiefly meant,
To teach the world to know how far they stray,
That do by earthly helps a mean invent
To lead their lives unto a happy day,
Since nature wholly does the same denay.
Which (for it crosses carnal men's content,
And hardly may amongst most wise have place)
By this most pleasant style, about he went
To give to naked truth a comely grace:
For hardly can corrupted man digest
Right wholesome food, unless it well be dressed.


11.
The words of the wise are like goades, and like nails fastened by the masters
of the assemblies, which are given by one Pastor. And wise men's sayings, spoken
to the wise,
Well fraught with matter couched well by art,
Adornd with words, and figures (whence arise
Content unto the ear, and move the heart)
Most soon do work impressions in each part.
And as they sooner pierce, so firmlier lies,
The mind resolved in such fownded ground,
Than any planke or post you can devise,
With nail (by hammers) forced nere to sound;
And such this princely Prophets words esteem,
Which are more weighty far, the^ thou woulst deem.
12.
And of other things besides these my son take thou heed: for there is none
end in making many books, and much reading is a weariness of the flesh. And
let this grave advice of father mild,
Which lovingly he wrote, I bring to thee,
Be never from thy heart so far exild,
That with the world again sedust thou be,
Wherein is naught but wretchedness you see.
And strive to practice as you knowledge build,
Else is your learning unto little end,
These many books wherewith this world is filled,
Do slender profit to the readers lend,
Which stuffed with words of superficial show,
But little fruit by them to world does grow.


13.
Let us hear the end of all: fear God and keep his commandments* for this
is the whole duty of a man. The end of all true wisdom is in this,
To know the will of God, and it observe;
To know his will, and yet to walk amiss,
A double chastisement must needs deserve,
Then fear henceforth therefro so often to swerve.
No servile fear which I persuade it is,
But such as grateful child to parent owes,
Who though he feel the smart, the rod will kiss,
Because the fruit of fathers love he knows;
And this does God require of man indeed,
That our obedience should from love proceed.
14.
For God will bring every work unto judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil. The breach whereof will heavy judgment call,
When God the searcher of the heart and raines,
Shall unto reckning with us for them fall,
And pay our passed joys with lasting pains;
For sinful work no other guerdon gains.
O happy then shall they be most of all,
Whose heedfull lives, in holy works were spent,
The gain of this their travel, is not small;
For blessed they the narrow path that went.
And though this narrow gate few enter in,
Yet who runs on this race, the prize shall win.
FINIS.
Adue to worlds vain delight.
YE worlds delights (blind guides to bliss) adue,
VVeake helps, which fit a carnal vain desire:
My soul can find but comfort small in you,
Though (as true bliss) profane sort you admire.
My soul does will my thoughts from ye retire,
In faith to place my hope of firmer stay;
To gain true bliss, less toil it does require,
Then worlds vain pleasure does, by far away.
Your false and fickle grounds do well bewray,
Your liking, base effect of fond desire:
The earth (your seat) does perfectness denay.
My souls true hope (inspired with heavenly fire)
There seeks to live, where bliss is firm and true,
And by reformed life, would heaven pursue.
Sundry Psalms of David translated into verse, as briefly and significantly as
the scope of the text will suffer; by the same Author.
Psalm. 27.
1 THe Lord he is my saving light, whom should I therefore fear?
2 He makes my foes to fall, whose teeth would me in sunder tear.
3 Though hosts of men besiege my soul, my heart shall never dread:
4 So that within his Court and sight, my life may still be lead.
5 For in his Church from trouble free, he shall me keep in hold:
6 In spite of foes his wondrous praise, my song shall still unfold.
7 Have mercy (Lord) therefore on me, and hear me when I cry;
8 Thou badst me look with hope on thee, for help to thee I fly.
9 In wrath therefore hide not thy face, but be thou still my aid;
10 Though parents fail, thou will assist, thy promise so has said.
11 Teach me thy truth, and thy right path, least that the enemy
12 Prevail against my life, whose tongues entrap me trecherously.
13 My heart would faint for fear, unless my faith did build on thee,
14 My hope, my God, and comforts strength, who will deliver me.
Psalm. 71.
1 IN thee (o Lord) I trust, therefore from shame deliver me;
2 Perform thy promise, save thou me, who call for help to thee.
3 Be thou my rock of strength and shield, whose power is great and might.
4 Deliver me from wicked men, and put my foes to flight.
5 For in thee only from my youth, have I my trust reposd;
6 Thou have had care of me, whilst yet in womb I was inclosd.
7 Thee will I praise, who art my help, when men at me do scorn;
8 My mouth thy mercies still records, who helpst the mind forlorn.
9 In time of age forsake me not, or when my strength does fail,
10 Least that the counsels of my foes, against my soul prevail.
11 Who say, my God has me forgot; they therefore me pursue:
12 But be thou Lord at hand to me, who can my strength renew.
13 Shame and reproach let be their share, which my destruction seek;
14 But on thee always will I wait, with humble heart and meek.
15 My mouth thy mercies shall rehearse, whose measure does excel*
16 And in thy trust my steps shall walk, and tongue thy truth shall tell.
17 Even from my youth thou have me taught, thy wonders well I know
18 And whilst I live, (if thou assist) I will thy judgments show.
19 Thy justice Lord I will exalt: whose works are like to thine?
20 Who threw'st me down, and raisd me up, who else in dust had leine.
21 Thou can man's honor soon increase, and show thy cheerful faces
22 Upon the Vyall will I sing thy praise, o God, of grace.
23 My lips shall joy to talk of thee, who have my safety wrought:
24 My freed soul, shall still confess, who has my safety bought.
Psalm. 119.
1 BLessed are those whose ways are right, and in Gods laws do walk,
2 Whose heart obeys to his will, and lips thereof do talk.
3 Such do not work iniquity, but so their ways direct,
4 That in their life, by straying steps thy laws they not neglect.
5 O would to God, my deeds therefore, so straightly I might frame,
6 That with regard of thy precepts, I might be free from blame;
7 Then should I praise with upright heart, thy righteous judgments known,
8 Which whilst I study to observe, Lord let thy help be shown.
PART. 2.
9 By looking to thy laws, most soon a man may perfect grow:
10 Since then my heart has sought the same, astray let me not go.
11 Thy promises in mind I bear, which me from sin withdraw:
12 Thou gracious God and blessed guide, teach me thy perfect law*
13 My tongue has testified thy praise, and justice thou do use:
14 To follow freely thy beheast, I Will worldly wealth refuse.
15 For of thee will I meditate, and study whilst I live;
16 And to obey thy just precepts, my mind will wholly give.
PART. 3.
17 Be gracious to thy servant Lord, give life and power to me;
18 Open my eyes, that of thy laws, I may the wonders see.
19 I am a stranger upon earth, hide not from me thy will:
20 My heart does swell with hot desire to know thy judgments still.
21 Thou have destroyed the proud, and cursed are they which go astray:
22 Shame and contempt yet take from me, who keep thy laws always.
23 Though Princes hate me for thy truth, yet will I thee obey:
24 Thy laws shall be my study still, and comfort night and day.
PART. 4.
25 My soul with sorrow is oppressed, give me thy promised aid:
26 Thou know my sins I do confess, thy wrath makes me afraid.
27 But teach thou me thy truth, that I thy wonders may admire:
28 For shame of sin so^daunts my hope, it dares not help desire.
29 If thou redress my blinded steps, and teach to me thy will,
30 Thy ordinances will I keep, and look upon them still.
31 Thou are the portion I do choose, o Lord confound me not;
32 But guide my steps to run that race, the which thy laws alot.
PART. 5.
33 Teach thou thy statutes unto me, that I may keep them all;
34 Give thou the knowledge of thy will, and turn my heart withal.
35 Direct me in thy path, o Lord, therein is my delight:
36 Incline my mind unto thy word, and sin put thou to flight.
37 Turn thou my eyes from vanities, and do thou quicken me:
38 Perform thy promise made to me, whose hope depends on thee.
39 Prevent the shame I fear, because thy judgments all are just:
40 Behold I would perform thy will, thy grace relieve me must.
PART. 6.
41 Then let the promise kindly made (O Lord) fulfilled be.
42 So shall I s^^se my just rebuke, and give the praise to thee.
43 Take not away from me thy truth, for on thee I attend;
44 But let my lips speak of thy praise, until my life do end.
45 My feet shall freely follow thee, until the truth I find.
46 I will not shame, to Kings thy truth to preach, with constant mind;
47 Yea all my solace shall be still, my love of thee to express:
48 My lifted hands unto the heavens, thy glory shall confess.
PART. 7.
49 Remember then thy promise made, wherein thy servant trusts;
50 In trouble i^ does comfort me, my soul thereafter lusts.
51 The wicked have derided me, thy laws yet have I kept:
52 I called to mind thy judgments past, whereby in peace I slept.
53 Sorrow and fear afflicted me, to see how wicked men
54 Thy laws transgress; in pilgrims life yet sing I to thee then:
55 In darkness and by night, thy name and laws I keep and fear;
56 Which blessing thou bestowe^^ on me, thy will in mind to bear,
PART. 8.
57 O Lord thou art my portion, I thy law will still observe;
58 My hearty prayers made to thee, and promise thine preserve.
59 I have reformed my ways, and will to thy behests obey:
60 With speed I will my life amend, and make no more delay.
61 The wicked have enticed me, but I will turn again:
62 At midnight will I rise to pray, till justice I attain.
63 My company shall such be still, as do thy precepts know;
64 Thy mercy fills the earth o Lord* to me thy pleasure show.
PART. 9.
65 According to thy word (o Lord) thou graciously have dealt;
66 Teach wisdom to thy servant Lord, who in thy law has dwelt:
67 Before I felt thy scourge, as then my ^eete did go astray,
68 But gracious God direct me now, that keep thy laws I may.
69 The proud against me work deceit, yet will I follow thee:
70 Their heart on folly feeds, thy laws yet shall my comfort be.
71 This fruit affliction brought to me, which made me learn thy law,
72 A greater treasure to my mind, then heretofore I saw.
PART. 10.
73 Thy hand has fashioned me, therefore teach me thy holy will:
74 So shall thy servants all rejoice; and I obey thee still.
75 Thy judgments Lord (I grant) are just, I did thy wrath deserve;
76 Have mercy yet and pardon me, thy promise cannot swerve.
77 Lord let me live I thee beseech, thy law is my delight:
78 Bring thou to shame my foes, and drive the wicked out of sight;
79 And let thy servants all behold, thy mercies showd to me,
80 Who walking in thy statutes just, shall not ashamed be.
PART. 11.
81 My soul is almost faint for fear, yet on thy word (...)*
82 My eyes are dim with looking sore, send me thy comfort just.
83 My bones are withered with despair, till thou thy promise pay:
84 My life is short, thy justice on the wicked Lord be^ray*
85 By fraud they seek to take my life, contrary unto right;
86 But thou art just, unjust are they, therefore put them to flight.
87 They had almost consumed me, my faith yet did not faint:
88 Revive thou me, and with thy truth, my mouth I will acquaint*
PART. 12.
89 O Lord thy word immutable in heaven does still endure:
90 Thy truth from ever was, thou laidst the earths foundation sure.
91 All things continue at a stay, and do thy people serve:
92 Unless thy word did comfort me, my faith with grief would sterue.
93 I never therefore will forget, thy laws which quicken me;
94 I am thy servant, save thou me, who unto thee do fly.
95 The wicked seek me to destroy, but in th^e will (...) rust,
96 Thy truth endures for aye, but else all things return to dust.
PART. 13.
97 So much I love thy law o Lord, I study on it still:
98 Thy grace beyond my enemies does me with true knowledge fill.
99 I better understand thy will, then they which do me teach;
100 I better know thy laws to keep, then they which should them preach.
101 That I thy word might keep; my feet refrain each e^ill way:
102 My judgment grees unto thy law, which taught me what to say.
103 Then honey comb unto my taste, thy word is far more sweet,
104 Thereby thy will I learn, and falsehood shun as most unmeet.
PART. 14.
105 Thy word is light unto my feet, and guides me in my way;
106 My heart has sworn, I will perform thy (...) ^ight and day*
107 My soul is sore oppressed o Lord* do thou me joy now send;
108 Teach me thy will, to my request a grateful ^earing (...)*
109 Though I in danger daily be, thy laws I not forget,
110 But keep them still, while me to snare, the proud a bay^ have se^.
111 They are the portion I have chose they are my hearts delight;
112 My heart is vowed thy laws to keep, with all my power and ^^ight.
PART. 15.
113 Thy word I love, but do detest the vanities of mind*
114 My shield thou art, my refuge safe, in whom I trust do find.
115 Away from me ye wicked men, my God alone I serve;
116 He will perform my hope, his word from truth does never swerue.
117 Support thou me, then am I safe, in thee is all my trust:
118 Thou have suppressed the proud, and such as follow worldly lust.
119 I love thee Lord, because thou do from earth the vain remove;
120 Yet do I fear thy judgments Lord, which shall my sins reprove.
PART. 16.
121 Let me not then oppressed be, I justice do observe:
122 Plead thou my cause against wicked men, which from thy will do swerue.
123 My eyes are dim with longing Lord to see thy promised aid;
124 Teach me my God, and let thy servant be with mercy paid.
125 I wait on thee, let me therefore of wisdom thine have part:
126 Help Lord in time, for all the world do from thy laws depart.
127 Yet do I thy precepts esteem more then the richest gold:
128 Most just are they, but such I hate as unto sin are sold.
PART. 17.
129 Thy testimonies I admire on them my soul does muse:
130 The ways thereto do shine so bright, the simple it may choose.
131 The zeal I bare unto thy law, did make my have to move*
132 Look on me then in mercy Lord, because thy law I love.
133 Direct my deeds, so that no sin may bear in me asway:
134 I keep thy will* to wicked men let me not be a pray.
135 Thy shining face unto me turn, thy statutes teach thou me:
136 With tears my eyes do daily flow, because they trespass thee.
PART. 18.
137 Thou righteous God, most just indeed thy judgments all are found;
138 To truth and equity alone, thy laws thy servants bound.
139 My zeal does burn, because my foes thy laws have clean forgot,
140 Thy word we find most pure, and I have chose it to my lot.
141 Though I be poor and in contempt, I do remember well,
142 Thy righteous precepts, which for aye, in glorious truth excel.
143 Anguish and ears upon me come, thy law yet do I love:
144 Teach me thy truth, that I may live eternally above.
PART. 19.
145 Hear me o Lord, to thee ^ cry, thy ^^atutes I will keep.
146 Save me, and grant that in thy house, I may in safety sleep.
147 Before the (...) to thee I call, and wait thy w^ll:
148 By night I watch, to meditate and study of thee still.
149 Hear me o gracious God in time, and quicken thou my spright*
150 They are at hand that hate thy law, and me pursue with spite.
151 Thy promises assure me Lord, that thou ar^ nigh at hand:
152 I knew (...) since thy high decree, should firm for ever stand.
PART. 20.
153 Behold my sorrows then and help: ^^y pleasure I obey;
154 Plead thou (...) me, upon thy word I stay*
155 The wicked they are far from help, which do not thee regard.
156 But for thy servants we do know, thy mercy is prepared.
157 Many they are tha^ me pursue, yet will I follow thee:
158 I see the wicked scorn thy lord, and much it grieueth me*
159 Consider Lord my (...) too thee; so quick (...)* my (...)*
160 For, from for aye, thy word of truth, and righteousness I find.
PART. 21.
161 Princes of might do me pursue, yet only thee I fear:
162 Thy word delights my heart, as if my richesse great it wear*
163 Thy law I love, but do abhorte all falsehood and deceit.
164 Seven times a day I praise thy name, and on thee always wait.
165 The keepers of thy law, shall stand from danger always free;
166 I keep thy heasts, because I hope thy saving health to see.
167 Yea for the love I bear to them, I will them not transgress.
168 Thou see (o Lord) in all my ways, thy name I do confess.
PART. 22.
169 Let then my plaint before thee come, and be thou still my guide:
170 Give ^are unto my suit, and let thy promise firm abide.
171 When thou have me thy statutes taught, my lips shall speak thy praise;
172 My tongue shall tell thy word of truth, and walk thy righteo^s ways.
173 Help with thy hand, for I entend, thy precepts to pursue:
174 Thy saving help and law I seek, Lord do my faith renew.
175 Let live my soul, to praise thy name, thy mercy me uphold.
176 I fear thy law, then cleanse my sins, and bring me to thy fold.
Psalm. 121.
1 Unto the hills I lift my eye, from whence my help shall grow;
2 Eue^ to the Lord which framed the heavens, and made the deeps below.
3 He will not let my feet to slip, my watchman neither sleeps.
4 Behold the Lord of Israel still his flock in safety keeps.
5 The Lord is my defense he does about me shadow cast;
6 By day nor night, the Sun nor Moon, my limbs shall burn or blast.
7 He shall preserve me from all ill, and me from sin protect;
8 My going in and coming forth, he ever shall direct.
Psalm. 130.
1 FRom pit of deep perplexities to thee for help I cry,
2 O Lord give ^are unto my pla^^t, and (...) me speedily.
3 If strictly thou my sins behold, o Lord, what ^^esh is just?
4 But mercy proper is to thee, and thereto d^ we trust.
5 Upon thy promise I attend, thy word is always true,
6 With morning and with evening watch, I will my suit renew.
7 Thy servant must depend on thee, in thee i^ mercy found,
8 Thou will redeem their ^oules from death, thy grace does so abound.
Lords Prayer.
Our Father which in heaven art, Lord hallowed be thy name.
Thy knigdome come thy will be done, in heaven and earth the same:
Give us this day our daily bread: our trespasses forgive,
As we for other men's offense, do freely pardon give:
Into temptation lead us not, but liver us from ill.
For thine all kingdom, glory, power, is now and ever will.
SUNDRY CHRISTIAN PASSIONS, CONTAINED in two hundred Sonnets. Divided into two
equal parts: The first consisting chiefly of Meditations, Humiliations, and
Prayers. The second of Comfort, Joy, and Thanksgiving.

By H. L.

Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field. 1597.

To the rIght Renowned Virtuous VIrgin ELIzabeth, Worthy QVeene of Happy
EngLanD, her Highness falthfVL subleC^, Henry Lok, Wishes Long Life, With
eternaL Bliss. June VII.
MY worthless pen
To eternize
In holy flame
Which does despise
Thee sacred dame
That should protect
Whose Phoenix quil
And those has dect
Heavens do distill
As come from thence,
Jove long you save,
For whose defense,
Venus would crave,
Which Pallas wills
Presumes to devise,
Your peerles virtuous fame:
Of zeal my heart does rise,
A theme of vulgar frame,
The graces have select,
The holy Muses hill;
Does heavenly Crown affect,
Which Roman Trophies fill:
Their happy influence,
You there your portion have;
Whose Scepters you dispense,
True English hearts he gave:
And Dain does that due,
Me yield alone to you.
The observations of the square following.
1 A Saint Georges cross of two collumbs, in description of her Majesty,
beginning at A. and B. in the middle to be read downward, and crossing at C.
and D. to be read either single or double.

2 A S. Andrews cross, beginning at E. and read thwartwaies, and ending with
F. containing the description of our happy age, by her highness.

3 Two Pillars in the right and left side of the square, in verse, reaching
from E. and F. perpendicularly, containing the sum of the whole, the latter
columbe having the words placed counterchangeably to rhyme to the whole square.

4 The first and last two verses, or the third and fourth, with seventh and
eighth are sense in them selves, containing also sense of the whole.

5 The whole square of 100. containing in it self five squares, the angles of
each of them are sense particularly, and united depend each on other, beginning
at the center.

6 The out-angles are to be read 8. several ways in sense and verse.

7 The eight words placed also in the ends of the S. Georges cross, are sense
and verse, alluding to the whole cross.

8 The two third words in the bend deaeter of the S. Andrews cross, being the
middle from the angles to the center, have in their first letters T. and A. for
the Author. and H. L. in their second* for his name, which to be true, the
words of the angles in that square confirm.

9 The direction to her Majesty in prose above, contains only of numerall
letters, the year and day of the composition, as thus, DD. C LL LL LL LL. VV
VV VV VV VV VV VV VV. IIIIIIIIIIIII. For, 1593. June V.

A Square in verse of a hundred monasillables only: Describing the cause of
Englands happiness*
Haec ^ A B F In ^oc God 5 has pourd forth Rare Grace On this I^^e And Makes
Cround 4 your rule Queen In the same so 4 still Kings lawd THis 3 saint Fair
that with truth 3 does stand Rule so long time 2 mild Prince joy 2 land it
will C For proof you shows 1 wise 1 of earths race whom There Quadrata
Heavens have up held Just 1 choice 1 whom God thus sheilds Your stock of
Kings 2 worlds rich of 2 spring and fear States fame Known 3 far Praise Isle
which ALl 3 bliss yields Hold God 4 there fore sure stay of all the 4 B^st
Vinces Bl^st 5 is your reign Here Builds sweet Peace true Rest 5 Sign^^ Fi^^^

The Square plainly set down.
GOd has powered forth rare grace on this I Will, and
Makes crowned your rule, Queen in the same so still,
Kings laud this Saint fair, that with truth does stand,
Rule so long time mild Prince, joy land it will.
For proof you shows, wise of earths race whom there
Heavens have vpheld* lust choice whom God thus shields,
Your stock of kings (worlds rich offspring and fear,
States fame known far) praise I Will which all bliss yields.
Hold God therefore sure stay, and port the best;
Blessed is your reign, here builds sweet peace, true rest.
To the Christian Reader.
WHo so shall duly consider the whole progress of man's estate from life to
death, shall find it (gentle Reader) to be nothing else but a very pilgrimage
through this earth to another world; for whether we observe the common course
of all flesh, which from the mothers womb to the grave, is still traveling
with change of bodily constitution, from youth to age, from health to
sickness, and so from one estate to another. Or if we behold the particular
incounters which each man finds in himself, in the variable change of hopes
and crossing of his purposes: in both it shall by a general experience of all
men's calamities be assuredly confirmed to be too true. But how much more may we
find in the direction of our s^ules to the proper haven of their habitation
(even to heaven) a multitude of adversaries lying in the way to hinder out
t^auell to that Promised land; how many afflictions of the mind, frailties of
the flesh, bayts of the world, and snares of Satan, are bent against us, to
slacken (if not clean to divert) our due course thitherwardes, in such sort as
if God of his infinite mercy and providence did not oftentimes prevent and
stop our wills and powers, and bridle the malice of these adversaries, we
should all assuredly perish by the way. But now (such is his fatherly care and
love to us in Christ) that he has left us a direction and ready way of safety
in the midst of all assaults or afflictions how perilous soever, even prayer;
which being formed according to the rules prescribed unto us by his Son, and
with feruencie of faith offered up unto him, are of power to penetrate the
heavens, purchase our safety, pay our debts, and procure us peace of heart in
the midst of all earthly perils: yea (knowing our coldness herein, and fear
of our own guilt, deterring us from his presence) he does not only license us
to this boldness, but allur^th us by many sensible blessings felt in our own
consciences; and calls us by a supernatural courage, sometimes with
confidence to come unto him, and even to hope against hope in our most
desperate necessities. He does direct our tongues oftentimes here in before our
minds, and our minds before our hearts; being himself readier to give then
we to ask, and giving with more regard of our good, then we can crave or
conceive: for all which he expects nothing else at our hands, but continually
to fly unto him, and to yield him due praise: to rely on him only in the day
of trial, and to encourage others thereto; for in this sort alone he will be
honored of us. This our earthly pilgrimage being then so dangerous to all
flesh, and so ready a way prescribed unto us for our safer passage therein, ^e
were very unwise that would not furnish himself with such provision (which
costs so little as our wills to have it) and more uncharitable that would nor do
his best to assist his companion in his journey, with both counsel and comfort
of the same. For this cause (gentle Readers) I having (through gods great
goodness) felt in the direction and protection of my unstable youth, a
plentiful portion of the wonderful care he has over us, and of the
unspeakable force of prayer and thanksgiving in all extremities: the more to
stir up my self to a memory thereof, have thought good to set down these
abrupt passions of my passed afflictions, as witnesses of the impedime^ts most
stopping me in my Christian pilgrimage, and testimonies of the means of my
evasion hitherto, which may serve for presidents for my self in the like
future occasions: and not be altogether unprofitable for others to imitate. In
which (as in a glass) may be seen, the state of a renegerate soul, sick
with sin, sometimes (Ague-like) shiuering with cold despair, straight ways
inflamed with feruencie of faith and hope. One while yielding under the burden
of sin to eternal death, and presently encouraged to run chearefully
forward the appointed course of this his pilprimage; and like a practiced
traveler, used to the change of company, diet, heat, cold, pain, pleasure,
plenty, and want, not to amaze himself long with any change: but by a
consideration of pleasures passed, or rest expected, patiently to pass over
this world full of incombrances; from a sense and feeling whereof in some
measure, no true child of God is any long time (as I suppose) expempt. Now,
although I doubt not but even these reasons will carry the judgment of the
godly Christian Reader to a favorable interpretation of my purpose herein, and
to some delight in the taste thereof, to whom no person or occasion, style or
phrase, will seem unseasonable, being employed to the glorifying of God, and
profit of the Church, or proceeding from a zeal of that effect; yet the
consideration that the greater number to whose hands this Treatise may happen
to come, are either not so well affected, or so discreet and temperate as were
to be wished, makes me think it needful to say something in declaration of
my purpose herein: not in excuse of my exercising my self in such theames,
which in deed ought to be the common action in some measure of all men, as often
as necessary affairs of this life will permit them, neither in that I make
common with others this my exercise, which seems in secret only to be
practiced by my self* for that I take it not to be always a token of pride or
vainglory, to make known for a common good to others, that which may breed a
suspect of ambition in the Author among the profane or cauelling multitude;
though how herein I am carried my self, I leave to God the searcher of hearts
to judge: only I would satisfy them first in the cause of my writing them in
verse, then of the confused placing of them without special titles. To the
first I was induced, for that I find many oftentimes (specially such as had
most need to pray and meditate) to read books rather for the affection of
words then liking of matter, and perhaps more to control the compiling, then
commend the contents, Such yet (so as they read) shall give me all that I crave,
and find I hope that good they looked not for, if not in all, yet in some among
many of these Sonnets. As for the apt nature of Poetry, to delight, to
contriue significatiuely in few words much matter, to pearce and penetrate
affections of men, with the aptness thereof, for help of memory, I will not
say much: but for my deducing these passions and affections into Sonnets, it
answers best for the shortness, to the nature, and common humor of men, who
are either not long touched with so good motions, or by their worldly affairs
not permitted to continue much reading. To the cause of my so preposterous
placing of them, and division only into three sorts, I confess indeed I am
persuaded their disorder does best fit the nature of mankind, who commonly is
delighted with contraries, and excercised with extremes; and also as they were
by God ministered unto my mind to set down by sundry Accidents: so I suppose
my providence could not (by a formal placing of them) so soon hit the
affection of every reader, as Gods direction (by that which me^ call chance)
might often do. As they are therefore, I recommend them to thy courtesy in
reading, and thee to Gods holy spirit in the perusing of them. If they may have
the same working in thee, that I praise God some of them had in me, they shall
not be utterly unprofitable. If in matter they iumpe not to thy passions in all
points, think that in the great Arsenall of Satan's Armor he has choice of
weapons for sundry assaults, and disposes of them diversely, according to the
strength or weakness of the party he besieges: which (being as different in
particular persons as Gods gifts are to them) thou shall do well (to thy
ability) to reform or supply my defect therein If in manner of the verse or
style, they be (as I doubt not but they are) to be amended much, I do not
greatly seek the praise of a curious Architector, neither (without neglect of
more necessary duties) could I attain to the required obseruances that way.
And therefore crave that thy discretion may excuse my intention and ability
And thus I heartily recommend thee to the Almighty.

THE FIRST PART OF CHRISTIAN PASSIONS, containing a hundredth Sonets of
meditation, humiliation, and prayer.
PREFACE.
IT is not Lord the sound of many words,
The bowed knee or abstinence of man,
The filed phrase that eloquence affords,
Or Poets pen that heavens do pearce, or can:
By heavy cheer, of color pale and wan,
By pined body of the Pharisay,
A mortal eye repentance often does scan,
Whose judgment does on outward shadows stay,
But thou (o God) do hearts intent bewray,
For from thy sight Lord nothing is conceald,
Thou formdst the frame fro out the very clay,
To thee the thoughts of hearts are all reueald,
To thee therefore with heart and mind prostrate,
With tears I thus deplore my sinful state.
SONET. I.
HOw should my soul Lord clad in earthly mold,
(The prison where it ready is to pine
Where vile affections captive it do hold,
And threaten naught, but ruin in the fine)
Unto one thought of hope or help incline,
Or raise my eyes unto the heavens bright?
How may it Lord take hold on mercies thine,
Or press it self in presence of thy sight?
Or how can thou therein at all delight,
If mercy be not spokesman in this case,
If merit of thy Son should not acquit
The common guilt of Adams sinful raze?
Which since by faith alone man may attain,
Grant me first grace not faithless to ramaine.
SON. II.
FRo out the darkness of this sea of fear,
Where I in whale remain deuourd of sin,
With true remorse of former life I rear
My heart to heaven, in hope some help to win:
I do confess my fault, who did begin
To fly from thee, o Lord, and leave undone
Thy service, which of right should first have bin
Performd, by which so many should be won
To praise thy name: but fear alas begun,
To represent to me my iourny long,
The dangers of the world my life should run,
Which made me to my soul to offer wrong.
But since by show of death thou caldst me back,
Thy gracious help at need let me not lack.
SON. III.
WIthin this arc where in my soul does dwell,
My body floting on worlds troubled wave,
Which winds of fierce affections cause to swell,
And hardly can my power from sinking save,
I cry to thee o Lord, and comfort crave:
Close up this fountain of still flowing sin,
Let me by faith again once footing have
On fruitful earth, and holy life begin;
Lighten the burden so unclean within,
Of brutish vices raging in my mind,
Let clean affects the greater party win,
And so increase, that plenty I may find
Of sacrifices pleasing in thy sight,
Of faith and love, which are thy souls delight.
SON. IIII.
IN humble wise as fitteth best my state,
An abject wretch deuoyd of all desert,
I here approach before thy mercy gate,
O Lord of life with broke and contrite heart:
I need not to reveal to thee my smart,
A lump of sin and shame I am I know,
Wounded so deep with deadly poysned dart
Of serpents sting, which did from parents grow,
That now my humors so do ouerflow
With foul affections of my feeble mind,
As presses down my eyes on earth so low,
As dares not search the heavens, true help to find.
Yet since thou have made known to me my grief,
Guide me by grace to fountain of relief.
SONET. V.
Unto thy princely wedding Lord are bed,
Of every sort some guests to feast with thee,
One that a spouse but late before had wed,
One oxen bought, one taken land to fee:
They from the banquet therefore absent be,
Regarding not thy messengers of grace,
In number of the like, Lord hold not me,
But let me have I crave the offered place:
Yet ere that I appear before thy face,
A wedding garment first I must put on,
My own unrighteous clothing is too base,
And merchandise of merits now are gone,
Then since thou cal'st, with faith do thou me cloth,
A lame blind beggar Lord, do thou not loath.
SON. VI.
IN pride of youth when as unbridled lust
Did force me forth, my follies to bewray,
I challenged as patrimony just,
Each vain affection, leading to decay:
And trusting to that treasure, post away
I wandered in the worlds alluring sight:
Not reason, virtue, shame, or fear could stay,
My appetite from tasting each delight,
Till want and weariness began me bite,
And so perforce to father I retire,
To whom I prostrate kneel (unworthy wight)
To name of son not daring to aspire;
Receive me yet, sweet savior, of thy grace,
Poor penitent, into a servants place.
SON. VII.
Lame of my limbs, and senseless of my state,
Near forty years Lord have I groueling line,
Before Bethesda poole, yet still too late,
To wash me in the fountain I incline,
Whence health would come, when Angel gives the sine:
If any one to aid me ready were,
But helpless thus, I ready am to pine,
My self unable duly up to rear.
Vouchsafe thou then me to this bath to bear,
By the assistance of thy heavenly grace,
Let not the force of foul affects me fear,
To prease forth first when Christ appears in place,
Who is the fountain, Angel, and the man,
That bath, that bliss, that cure my senses can.
SON. VIII.
THy thundering voice and Angel Lord of long,
Has called my soul from slumber where it lay,
The harmony of heavenly musickes song,
Has made my wandering feet at last to stay:
Direct thou me also the ready way
Unto thy church, that in thy holy place
Thy word and law I may in heart obey,
And worship thee before thy peoples face.
Grant me I say, such measure of thy grace,
That greedily by faith I swallow up
Thy book of truth, and so thy word embrace,
That frutefully I taste saluations cup.
Thou who do rule the earth, the sea and land:
In my defense, with power and glory stand.
SON. IX.
AMong thy sheep o Lord I seemd to feed,
By Sacraments received into thy stock,
By preached word I watered was indeed,
And works with fleece did seem inritch my stock:
But at my door true faith did never knock,
(Which should be shepherd of my souls defense)
But (thief like) fond affections reason mock,
And by the window of my wilful sense
Do enter to my heart, and steal from thence
Each motion of amendment which does rise,
And shepheardlesse of grace, transported hence
By Satan (rau'ning woolfe) in fearful wise,
I call to thee (sweet Savior) shepherd true,
Teach me to know thy voice and thee ensue.
SONET. X.
BEhold o Lord the City thou have built,
Jerusalem this fleshly frame of mine,
By sin (Assyrians sword) is almost spilt,
And like to yield to Rabsake in fine:
Yet lo (alas) my soul does much repine,
To see proud Satan so blaspheme thy name,
To threaten ruin to this temple thine,
Since thou art praysd and honored in the same:
Thou able art the rage of lust to tame,
The force of pride and fury to subdue;
Against Senacherib thy Angel came,
And all his host in one night overthrew:
So let thy holy spirit me defend,
And to my plaints and prayers comfort send.
SON. XI.
SInce with Goliath I am now to fight,
And lack the slight of holy David's sling,
Arm thou me Lord with heavenly armor bright,
Which power of flesh and world to foil may bring:
Thy righteous breast plate gird on me with truth,
Prepare my feet with Gospel of thy peace,
The shield of faith (which fiery darts bear forth,
Of wicked Satan, whose assaults not sease)
The helmet of salvation, and the sword
Of spirit, which is founded on thy law;
All these my prayers are, that thou afford,
To make me steadfast, spite of lions claw,
Who roaring, daily seeks as wished pray,
My silly soul from thee to take away.
SON. XII.
NOw that thou have prepared me to confess,
Thy service Lord the which I undertake,
I thee beseech, my purpose so to bless,
That I a good account to thee may make:
A Nazarit I am, who do forsake
The delicacies of the worlds delight,
Whose thirst thy purest fountain still shall slake,
With faith and truth, the which with sin shall fight:
I will not taste the wine of Satan's slight,
Which does confound all reason and all sense,
My vow shall be to serve thee day and night,
And trust in thee shall be my true defense,
Till death dissolve this promise made to thee,
Whose strength herein thy heavenly graces be,
SON. XIII.
I Seeeke o Lord to show thy powrefull hand,
Which has converted this my sinful heart,
Into a rod of strength, which still might stand
Strong in thy truth, who powrefull only art:
But Iannes pride, and Iambres lustful heart,
By ^light imposture of sly Satan's might,
Two Serpents frame, which will not thence d^paert,
But seek against thy powrefull hand to fight.
But let my faith their fury put to flight,
And virtue thine, devour these imps of sin,
Let not these fleshly fruits appear in sight
Of truth, which only can the conquest win.
Let faith show forth the finger of thy hand,
And clean consume, each power does it withstand.
SON. XIIII.
BEhold o Lord a tree by high way side,
Unfruitful yet of any food for thee,
In high way side as yet I do abide,
Where passers to Jerusalem I see:
Though summer grow, I cannot fruitful be,
Unplanted by thy grace in garden thine:
I do confess I am a wild fig tree,
For want of moisture which am like to pine,
Unto my prayers Lord do thou incline,
Remove me home into thy garden fair,
Let me behold the face of thy sun shine,
Which may my withered leaves with life repair:
So may thou taste a fruit of wholesome kind,
And leave a mark of mercy great behind.
SON. XV.
Within thy garden Lord I planted was,
And watered well with thy most careful hand,
But yet v^frutefull I remaind (alas)
And these thy blessings did not understand.
In vain I did employ possessed land,
Ten times three years thy servants did replant
My stock, and sought to bend my crooked wand,
And did supply each aid I seemed to want.
At length my fruits which daily grew more scant,
Wild thee resolve to have me weeded out,
My foul affections were with folly brant,
My root of faith was shakt with fear and doubt,
And lo I pine, sweet Savior water me,
Paul and Apollos work, else lost will be.
SON. XVI.
A Wicked Pharisie I long have been,
Whom sight of mercies thine allure to thee,
A shamed Lord of my fair clothed sin,
In secret night I seek thy face to see:
That thou art God, thy wo^kes reveal to me,
That thou art mine, thy son does me assure,
Vouchsafe, that I regenerate may be,
And that my prayers pardon may procure.
Purge by thy sprite and faith, fair fountain pure,
The senses dull that cannot understand,
The heavenly birth which shall in bliss endure,
Not subject unto Satan's sinful band.
And with thy son let worlds affections die,
My soul from hell, with him ascend on hie.
SON. XVII.
Five foolish virgins in my senses dwell,
And seek to make me slumber over long,
They dream, that all my deeds do fall out well,
Whereas indeed I headlong run to wrong:
To vanities their humors do belong,
And sin, who does their fancy chiefly feed:
They cheined are to linkes of lust so strong,
That their best foil, brings forth but bitter weed;
They lack the oil which should be used indeed,
To lead them to the everlasting light:
It grows not Lord in fruit of humane seed,
Man sleeps all day and gropes his way at night,
Unless thou lend thy hand and fill our lamps,
Our light goes forth with smothering sinful da^ps*
SON. XVIII.
OVt of the fountain of eternal life,
I poor Samaritan here ready stand,
(To sinful lustan old betrothed wife)
With pitcher ready in my trembling hand,
To wraw a draught of liquor most divine,
To quench the thirst of my inflamed heart
With heavenly deaw: ere that my soul do pine,
And quali^ie the rigor of my smart.
A Prophet true thou art I understand,
Or rather father of all truth thou art,
A stranger I from fair Iudaea land,
With these thy blessings crave for to impart:
Then guide my hand, and teach my soul to taste
True faith, the fountain where all bliss is plast.
SON. XIX.
A Wicked soul sold to all fleshly sin,
Lord here I prostrate at thy feet do lie,
To gather crummes of grace, souls health to win,
Which Lord to give me do thou not deny:
The precious oil of penitence will I
Power forth with tears, fro out my melting eyes,
To bath thy feet, and after will I dry
Them with my hairs (which balms no treasure bies)
Though worldly love (when he my fact espies)
Repine to see my soul so well inclind:
To my defense o Lord vouchsafe to rise,
And fructify this first fruit of my mind;
Vouchsafe to sup with humble servant thine,
And that of service, better choice be mine.
SON. XX.
A Poor Arabian whom base Agar bare,
First borne of flesh, but last of promised grace,
Of bastard kind, bred up with mothers care,
In wilderness of world for a long space:
And famishing before my parents face,
Whose works unable were to lend me aid,
A bond man unto sin as fleshly race,
To whom heavens heritage thy laws denaide:
Amidst my wandering course by thee am staide,
And have a promise, not to die but live;
Thy covenant Lord abundantly is paid,
If grace (to feed by faith) thou do me give:
My bondage thus release, make thou me free,
My barren branch shall so bring fruit for thee.
SON. XXI.
A Merchant I, full long abroad have straide,
By sea and land true happiness to gain,
The riches of the earth my eyes have waide,
And see their profit to be light and vain:
Such trifling trash my soul does now disdain,
And Jewels of more value I espy,
Among the rest, one does all other stain,
Which with my wealth I wish that I might buy.
But this rare pearl is of a price so hie,
As all the earth cannot esteem the same,
Much less to purchase it, can it come nie,
Yet does the love thereof my heart inflame:
Be thou the pledge (sweet Savior) then for me,
That heavenly bliss shall so my riches be.
SON. XXII.
AMong the prease of many that draw near,
Unto the feast of grace in Temple thine,
I silly widow also do appear,
With humble heart o Lord, who here incline,
And unto thee a mite for offering mine,
Present as precious, to my poor estate,
For herds or flocks for store of corn and wine,
Without obedience Lord thou aye did hate,
But broken hearts and souls which lie prostrate
Before thy throne of grace, and mercy crave,
Do mercy find, though it be nere so late,
Thy promise hereof us assurance gave,
In trust whereof, obaying thy behest,
My prayers to thy praise, o Lord are pressed,
SON. XXIII.
INto thy vineyard Lord (unworthy) I
Desire to come, to travel out the day,
Thou calledst me thereto, and did epsy
Me loytring idle, by the worlds high way:
At first to come my follies did me stay,
Whom cold and hunger now to work compel,
Though half my days be spent, say me not nay,
The other half to try, employed well.
I do not hope my pains so dear to sell,
As they that bear the brunt of heat of day,
They merit most whose travels most excel,
My slender service craves but single pay.
But (if thy bounty give,) behold me pressed,
With thanks thy grace to taste, amongst the rest.
SON. XXIIII.
AS thou art pure and just in all thy ways,
(O Lord) so should thy offerings also be:
The tongue unclean, cannot set forth thy praise,
The wanton eye may not thy secrets see:
The lame of faith, the blind of skill not he,
That thou alotst thy sacrifice to slay;
The heart that is found clean in each degree,
Is fittest for thy church, wherein to stay,
Such is no flesh, o Lord, the truth to say,
But as thou please them to purify,
By faith and by repentance every day,
Who then with Christ, may boldly thee come nie,
Behold me then, thus thy adopted child,
Let me not from thy temple be exyld.
SON. XXV.
I Follow thee o Lord but far behind,
As Peter did, when he did see thee led
To prison, where the traitors did thee bind,
Amazed much with worldly fear and dred:
When as I saw the world all over spread
With hatred and disdain unto the just,
My courage it was quayld, and quickly fled,
And had no liking to thy help to trust.
But Lord I know perforce I forward must,
If I intend to gain the crown I crave,
I must abandon flesh and fleshly lust,
And in thy promise all my hope must have.
Grant thou me boldness then and constant will,
To persevere in thy obedience still.
SON. XXVI.
OF parents first, two brothers borne that were,
The body and the soul did represent,
The elder Cain, who Henocks walls did rear,
The younger Abell dwelt in silly tent:
First man with plough the virgins soil he rent,
The other served and shore the silly sheep:
To worldly lusts of flesh the one was bent,
Thy heavenly laws the other sought to keep.
A deadly discord twixt them so did creep,
The elder did the guiltless younger slay;
That ancient hatred grounded is so deep,
It strives in me (alas) unto this day.
Accept my sacrifice, Lord me defend,
My powers unto thy holy pleasure bend.
SON. XXVII.
LIke pined child o Lord from nurses breast,
Whom churlish stepdame over soon does waine,
By wicked will alas I am oppressed,
And cry to cruel flesh behold in vain:
Who lets me languishing in sin remain,
And sends no comfort to support my need,
My faults I know, I do confess them plain,
That folly does my weak affections feed:
I see my ruin near at hand in deed,
And cannot call for aid whose tongue is dum,
My feet so feeble cannot help at need,
Although I see at hand thy vengeance come,
Unless thou give me grace to see and fear,
To pray in faith, and thou thy hand forbear.
SON. XXVIII.
POlluted with the curelesse leprosy
Of sin, which is heriditarie now,
So loathsome grown, that I dare not come nie
Thy holy temple, where my heart does bow:
I crave o Lord, it please thee to allow
The high Priest Christ thy son to view my sore,
Whose holyhand may guide and teach me how
To cure this grief it may return no more.
I know o Lord, thou have of mercy store,
And only thou do pity man's estate,
Which though my stubburne heart refusde before,
Repentance yet and faith coms not too late,
Whose sparrowes of repentance I present
An offering here through worldly desert sent.
SON. XXIX.
A Virgin pure o Lord by birth I was,
The daughter of thy church adopt by grace:
But loathsome lust (foul fiend) did me alas
Pursue, and sought with me his dwelling place.
As many virtues as did seek my grace,
By weddings band to me to be vnight,
So many did this fiend, first night deface,
So often I was deprived of my delight.
Seven times a widow I with shame and spite
Am left, and live now hopeless of redress:
Till thou with Raphaell send that medicine bright,
Of God to give me grace, to sin suppress.
Thy son thus made, my spouse shall soon restore
Tobias sight, wealth comfort, lost before.
SON. XXX.
OF sinful race of man's licentious seed,
Whilst heavenly offspring with fair humane kind,
Do join affects, where wicked lusts do breed,
And so pollute the fruits of virtuous mind,
A bastard brood my self alas I find,
Whose nature does in tryannie consist,
Of grace and reason grown so dull and blind,
That I in wrong with stubburnesse persist:
Who seeing father Nature ere he wist,
A sleep with so^tish wine of worldly love,
To hide his shame by wisdom had no list,
Which justly curse of God on me did move.
A slave to sin, therefore I did pursue
(Like Nymrod) grace of God, which now Irue.
SON. XXXI.
AS often as thou by grace would draw me back
From sin, whereto I am by nature thrall,
So often alas I find my will to lack,
And power to follow thee when thou do call,
From sin to sin, I headlong thus do fall,
And quench repentance by a perverse will,
I see my fall, but have no fear at all,
And to my vomit dog-like turn I still.
My frailty does thy wrathful cup fulfill,
With flowing measure of revenge and woe:
When I return a little back from ill,
To wallow in the mire again I go.
No power is in me Lord my life to mend,
Unless thy hand from heaven me comfort send.
SON. XXXII.
Feign would I fence this feeble flesh of mine,
From Satan's fury, who me thus assailes,
Which does besiege my soul, and means to pine
My conscience, which my sin so sore bewailes,
His busy brain to win me never fails,
And leaves no stratagem at all untried:
My fainting hope I know not what it ailes,
But it does fear the batt'ry to abide.
The safest way must be (what ere betide)
To set a watch to look unto my ways:
Lest pride, or lust, or wrath do let him slide
Into my heart, which yet vnyeelded stays:
But like a thief he steals me upon,
Watch thou me (Lord) each hour: else I am gone.
SON. XXXIII.
MY sins behold (o Lord) are manifold,
Which do incamp my soul each hour about,
Still me entrenched with distrust they hold,
So that no fruits of faith can issue out:
Their fleshly champion is a soldiar stout,
Who is assist by world and Satan's aid,
And foul affections ready are in rout,
To further force to lust, but hardly staide.
The earthly treasures have with pleasure paid,
The hateful Army which does have to hell:
My native power their passage not denaide
Which makes their pride and perverse will to swel.
I see no way to help to shun decaie,
But on thy graces rescue Lord to stay.
SON. XXXIIII.
THe greediness of this my corrupt mind,
Which tastes not but of the earthly gain,
And in thy glory can no profit find,
But seeks with symonie my soul to stain:
Makes me (alas) for carnal treasor vain,
Like Elizeus servant to desire,
A present of worlds pleasure mixed with pain,
As recompense of heavenly comforts hire.
I sorcerer like do also often require,
(Like merchandise) thy graces for to buy,
Supposing moral virtues may aspire,
To save my soul, and sin to mortify.
But lo I see souls leprosy herein,
And crave that prayers may my pardon win.
SON. XXXV.
Void of true life, and buried in the grave
Of wicked flesh (alas) I long have bin,
No earthly comfort can my conscience have,
Which was corrupted with all loathsome sin.
My sister (virtues) to despair begin,
Of ever seeing once my life's restore,
Ne is there any other way to win
True life indeed, which shall decay no more,
But prostrate Lord thy help for to implore,
And crave thy gracious presence at the last,
To aid the soul thy son has loved before,
For time of grace with thee is never past.
Roll back hard stone from heart, bid him arise,
Who slave to sin, in earthly coffin lies.
SON XXXVI.
MY body (Lord) the house which has been long
Possessed with spirits, to ruin of the same,
Which forced me forward, unto open wrong
Of conscience, by defacing of thy name,
Has found some comfort, since thy message came
Unto my soul, which in thy word was sent,
Whose powerful truth has bound, and seeks to tame
The furious lust which to my ruin bent.
Grant Lord from heart I may indeed repent,
And therewith chase these fiends fro out of me,
Sweep clean my house, fro out of which they went,
And garnished with graces let it be:
Let puissant faith henceforth possess the place,
Lest sin return with legions of disgrace.
SON. XXXVII.
AMidst this famine of Sarepta soil,
Where I a widow dwell, poor and abject,
Compeld by sin, with sweat of brows to toil,
To gather sticks, from cold me to protect:
Behold me Lord, a caitiue thus neglect,
Whom sin has banished thy blessed land:
Who yet in heart thy Prophers do affect,
And with thy church to life and death would stand.
I offer all my treasures here in hand,
That little spark of grace yet left behind,
Increase it Lord, unto a great firebrand
Of faith which may a fruitful harvest find.
My meal and Oil, o Lord do thou increase,
My self and son, shall praise thee so in pease.
SON. XXXVIII.
BOrne blind I was, through sinful Adams fall,
And never since could see with carnal eyes:
Ne know I where or how for help to call,
From out of sin to holy life to rise.
It pleased thee (o Lord) that in this wise,
Thy power and glory might to man appear,
Who graceless groueling in earths darkness lies,
And wants the eyes of faith his soul to cheer:
But since thou sentst thy son my Savior dear,
To shine in light to those in darkness wear:
To dym the worldly wisdom seeming clear,
And sinful souls from hell to heaven to rear.
Touch thou my eyes with faith, wash me with grace,
In Sylo poole (thy word) which I embrace.
SON. XXXIX.
HOw drunken are my humors all alas,
With wine of vanity and sensual lust,
Which from one sin do to an other pass,
And after evil daily more do thrust.
Of force my faults (for shame) confess I must;
My lavish usage of thy graces sent,
My souls consent to action so unjust,
As death of Prophets teaching to repent:
Like Herod I about the matter went,
To please the follies of my flesh delight:
Incest'ous I, to sin so much was bent,
That offered mercy, pleased not my sight:
But Lord prepare my heart to see my sin,
That sorrow may, a way to mends bigin.
SON. XL.
THough with thy Saints o Lord I choice have made,
To spend my days in praising of thy name,
And in the study of thy word to wade,
To feed my faith with portion of the same:
Yet can I not my choice so rightly frame,
A^midst the spacious fields where truth does grow,
But whilst to gather healthful herb I came,
A bitter bud I found of fearful show
Which threatens me with death and overthrow,
Unto my soul, which feeds greedely
On sin, the weed which Satan did bestow:
By poisoned taste thereof I pined lie,
But Christ thy son by faith me health shall bring,
Discharge the law, and bruise this deadly sting.
SON. XLI.
ACcording to the promise of thy word,
To give the victory (o Lord) to those
That fight thy battles with a faithful sword,
Against the world, flesh, devil and thy foes:
I seek o Lord proud Jericho t'inclose,
Incouragde by thy graces from above,
My shoes of foul affects I pray thee lose,
Before on holy earth my path I move;
Thy powerful hand by prayers let me prove,
Which daily seven times I to thee direct:
Shake thou the walls of sin for my behoue,
And in this skirmish do thou me protect:
The fruits of flesh, pride, lust, and error all
So shall be wract, and sin not raise a wall.
SON. XLII.
AMidst the graves of death this many a year,
My soul (possessed with all sorts of sin)
Has lived, and held that fruitful place so dear,
That from the same no counsel could me win:
To beat my self my follies never lin,
No reason can with chains bind so my will,
But to unloose my lust I do begin,
With help of furious fiend, who aides me still,
But since thy son appears me until,
I crave I may no more tormented be,
Lest that my soul eternally he kill,
But from the force of Satan make me free;
These brutish sins in swine more fit to dwell,
Drown in repentant seas, of tears which swell.
SON. XLIII.
IN deadly sleep o Lord sin has me cast,
Wherein secure I lie, and so remain,
Raise me o Lord out of this dream at last,
And let me sight and light of heaven attain:
The heavy humors which my judgment stain,
And dazell so the reason of my mind,
Grant that they may their proper use attain,
And comfort in thy grace and promise find.
All fleshly wisdom of it self is blind,
Till thou by knowledge clear their wandering sight:
Out of the snare of sin flesh cannot wind,
Unless by faith they see thy Son so bright,
Him let me still, both see and eke admire,
And thee in him, o Lord I thee desire.
SON XLIIII.
MY wicked flesh, o Lord with sin full freight,
Whose eye does lust for every earthly thing,
By couetise allurde has bit the baight,
That me to Satan's servitude will bring.
By violence I virtues right would wring,
Out of possession of the soul so weak,
Like vineyard which the wicked Achab king
Possessed by tyrants power, which laws do break:
Let Prophets thine (Lord) to my soul so speak,
That in repentant sackcloth I may moan,
The murder of thy grace, which I did wreake,
Whilst to my native strength I trust alone;
And let my Savior so prolong my days,
That henceforth I may turn from sinful ways.
SON. XLV.
IF thou vouchsafdst Lord of thy goodness rare,
To sanctify with holy presence thine,
The Cana marriage, where thou did not spare,
First miracle of water turned to wine,
Then be thou present at this wedding mine,
Which twixt thy Church and me by faith is meant:
To see the want in me thy eyes incline,
(Whose wine of grace by wanton youth is spent)
But (being touched with view thereof) repent,
And crave that water of earthes healthles well,
May issue forth from heart with sorrow rent,
And turned to wine, may so with grace excel,
That all that see and taste this change in me,
May grant this work, of thee alone to be.
SON. XLVI.
SInce it has pleased thee (o Lord) to send,
Now in my barren age of hope and grace,
Repentant child from ruin to defend,
My name and soul to live before thy face,
Thy blessings I do thankfully embrace,
And in thy fear will frame his tender year,
The worlds regard in me shall have no place,
If once thy word and will my heart do hear.
And when thou calst, we both will then appear,
Before thy Altar in Moriath land,
To offer up thy gift my son so dear,
Obedient child to faithful fathers hand:
Which sacrifice (not worthy gift for thee,)
With Christ my Sauiors sufferings quit let be.
SON. XLVII.
OF every creature unclean to fore,
Whereof thy holy people might not taste,
Thou did present ^ Lord to Peter store,
Which were from heaven in sheet before him plast.
Which he at first refusde with mind most chaste,
Not touching things polluted or defilde:
But afterward thy counsel he embrast,
And saw himself had been before beguilde,
To think all sinners were for aye exilde
From presence of thy mercies, which abound,
Whom often thou do receive as father mild,
If faith in Christ thy son in them be found.
By prayers faith, by faith, thy grace does grow,
Cornelius blessing (Lord) on me bestow.
SON. XLVIII.
HOw hard it is (o Lord) for man to frame
His mind (corrupt) to be preparde for thee,
With tongue unclean to praise thy holy name,
With fleshly eyes thy glory for to see:
Homeward I bring thy blessings unto me,
And make my soul their dwelling place to rest:
But so forgetful of thy laws we be,
That this my action Lord I see not blessed,
Pride and contempt the ways have so oppressed,
That danger is the carriage overthrow:
Grant that thy grace, to stay it may be pressed,
That so my soul thy saving health may know,
For to my flesh unsanctified to trust,
Were aie to hasten death by judgment just.
SON. XLIX.
MY traitrous heart which long time has rebeld,
Against thy spirit, which should feed me still,
A secret counsel in it self has held,
To contrary thy known revealed will:
Whose mutiny my senses so do fill
With deeds repining to thy holy law,
That raging pride and lust lead me to ill,
Forgetting tokens of thy wrath they saw;
As Dathan and Abyram had no awe
Of Moses and of Aron thine elect,
But sought a way thy people how to draw,
And Prophets thine by pride for to reject:
So does my soul alas thy grace resist,
And in the follies of the flesh persist.
SON. L.
A Tenant most untrue o Lord to thee,
In vineyard of my body have I bin:
To crave thy rent thy servants came to me,
But nothing but entreaty bad they win:
My travel therein was to nourish sin,
And wast the wine of thy abounding plant;
The more to call me back thou did begin,
The more to thee my gratitude did want.
Ne would my lack of grace let me recant,
When thou thy only Son to me did send,
For sin and Satan did me so supplant,
That to his ruin I did also bend:
But Lord me lend In time repentant heart,
That from this vineyard I may not depart.
SON. LI.
WHilst in the garden of this earthly soil,
My self to solace and to bath I bend,
And fain would quench sins heat, which seems to boil
Amidst my secret thoughts, which shadow lend:
My sense and reason which should me defend,
As judges chosen to the common weal,
Allured by lust, my ruin do pretend,
By force of sin, which shameless they reveal.
They secretly on my affections steal,
When modesty (my maids) I sent away,
To whom for help I thought I might appeal,
But grace yet strengthens me to say them nay;
Yet they accuse me Lord, and die I shall,
If Christ my Daniell be not judge of all.
SON. LII.
I Justly am accusde, and now am brought
By law and gilt of conscience (I confess)
Before thy throne, convict by deed and thought,
Of sinful lust which did me so possess,
That quickening graces thine I did suppress
By fading love of world procliue to ill,
Whose dome eternal death and nothing less,
My soul does see, to threaten to me still.
But since that frailty so the world does fill,
That no one fleshly wight thereof is free,
For mercy Lord to thee repair I will,
Who see the heart, and can best comfort me:
Quit me from death, grant I may fall no more,
But remnant of my days thy grace implore.
SON. LIII.
A Husbandman within thy Church by grace
I am o Lord, and labor at the plough,
My hand holds fast, ne will I turn my face
From following thee, although the soil be rough:
The love of world does make it seem more tough,
And burning lust does scorch in heat of day:
Till fainting faith would seek delightful bough,
To shade my soul from danger of decay.
But yet (in hope of grace from thee) I stay,
And do not yield, although my courage quail;
To rescue me be'prest, I do thee pray,
If sinful death do seek me to assail.
Let me run forth my race unto the end,
Which (by thy help o Lord) I do intend.
SON. LIIII.
ABase borne son to sin by kind I am,
From native soil by want of grace exilde,
Of idle fances captain I became:
Whilst I in Tob, my resting place did bilde,
With worldly vanities I was defilde,
Till home thou caldst me by thy heavenly word:
Who (trusting to my self) was soon beguilde,
When I sought works to be a conquering sword,
Whose vows did seem a present to afford,
Of fruit of victory at my return:
Which rashness has a mischief great incurd,
Compelling me my own deserts to burn.
And now I mourn, and better fruit do crave,
The blessing of thy son Lord let me have.
SON. LV.
WHen thou vouchsafedst (Lord) to raise my state,
From base degree of common humane kind,
And gave me knowledge, and a will to hate
Each wickedness contrary to thy mind,
By promise thou did me most strictly bind,
To slaye each wicked seed which does possess,
My sinful flesh (Amalekite most blind)
Which virtue and thy grace seeks to suppress,
But wretched I alas I do confess,
Have kept a part of that accursed spoil
Undaunted, which thou see nere the less,
And therefore wilt accurse my sinful soil,
And take from me the kingdom thou did give,
Except thy mercy do my soul relieve.
SON. LVI.
THe only daughter Lord of my delight,
(Dina the virtue of my judgment best,)
Is ravished alas by Satan's might,
Whilst I secure in Hiuits country rest,
In worldly vanities a wandering guest,
Amongst the wicked I remainde a while,
Where (silly) she, by foolish will addressed,
Gazde on those godless youths which her beguile:
For lustful Sichem son to sin most vile,
Did lay a train of love, which led to shame:
Whose flattering speech did modesty exile,
And left a spot of guilt and foul defame.
But faith and zeal (the first fruits of my strength)
By grace shall venge my honor just at length.
SON. LVII.
THe silly babes (the motions of the mind,)
Which native virtue seeks forth to bring,
Concupiscence (the midwife most unkind)
To deadly sin and Satan straight does fling:
The mothers power suffiseth not to wring,
Out of this tyrants hands her dying child,
Her moan to see, it is a piteous thing,
When reasons laws so lewdly are defilde.
But if thy favor Lord be reconcilde,
By love unto thy son, by him to me:
Then though my hope of grace be near exilde,
Yet thou a child Of faith wilt let me see.
A coffin Lord of comfort for me make,
Where safe I may swim in the words wild lake.
SON. LVIII.
Where shall I build o Lord a quiet rest,
To bring forth birds of turtle Pigeons kind?
My wearied wings do wander without rest,
And cannot gain a harbor to my mind.
The Swallow Lord a settling place does find,
Within thy temple, free from Eagles claw,
Not moved with tempestuous storms of wind,
Or dangers, which their kind does stand in awe:
A place as fit for me, my faith once saw,
VVheras my soul might safely be inclosd,
Thy Church invisible, to which I draw,
My life retirde, therein to be reposd.
Make fruitful Lord my barren heart therein,
Shield me from storm of still assailing sin.
SON. LIX.
Whilst in the vale of carnal sense I dwell,
(Foul Sodom sink of sin and badge of shame)
Of whose polluted nature I do smell,
And aptly bend my self to them to frame:
Sent by thy mercy Lord, thy Angels came,
And did vouchsafe, a harbor to accept
Within my soul, which did profess thy name;
But Satan who a watch on me had kept,
When as these guests within my conscience slept,
Environed with lust my harbor weak,
For sorrow of this sin my soul it wept,
Whilst violently my bodies bands they break.
But strike thou blind their fury, them expel,
Take me Lord from the flame of burning hell.
SON. LX.
MY body Lord infected long with sin,
Whose running issue is almost past cure,
Which help my humane physic cannot win,
And without comfort cannot long endure,
By viewing mercies thine becomes sure,
If but thy gracious hem, my hand may reach,
That love in Christ my pardon shall procure,
And reunite in strength healths former breach.
Through press of worldly lets, faith shall me teach,
To seek my safety in thy promise true,
Vouchsafe thou eke repentance so to preach,
That (I no more offending) health ensue
Thy virtue Lord, (which bidding me be clean)
To yield me health of soul is ready mean.
SON. LXI.
NOw that I see o Lord my open shame,
Convict of sin and void of clothing pure,
Which cover might my soul which naked came
Of grace, and me from storm of world assure:
I do mistrust my self long to endure,
The heat and cold, which fear and frailty bring,
And clothing of my own works to procure,
I find in deed to be a frutelesse thing;
To hide my self under thy mercies wing,
I therefore hasten now, in hope of grace:
Grant I beseech, the world no more me wring,
Out of thy hands, but let me see thy face,
With faith and comfort, clothed by thy hand,
And Christ thy Son in my defense to stand.
SON. LXII.
Whilst that the chosen chieftaines of thy word,
Do bend their power, by preaching to subdue
The fleshly Canaan, and put sin to sword,
And give the soul to be possessed a new
With righteous Israel, unto whom of due,
Those earthly blessings rather do pertain:
They send two spies my secret thoughts to view,
The law and Gospel, which discover plain,
My fainting force, in fear for to remain
Where yet repentant Rahab ready is
To lodge them safe, whilst Satan seeks in vain,
To slaie these messengers of heavenly blis:
I crave therefore sweet Savior for a sine,
Faith bearing fruits, as pledge of safety mine.
SON. LXIII.
HOw often o Lord with more then tender care,
Have thou by Prophets called me to repent?
How great thy love by son, which did not spare,
To stay me back from hell, whereto I went?
Who to that end from heaven to earth was sent,
Whose graces daily preached offered peace,
And sought to stop my course to ruin bent,
And me from guilt of death for to release:
Like as the hen, whose voice does never cease,
To clock her tender chickens under wings,
When furious fowls on silly pray do prease,
And would devour (alas) the helpless things.
Such Lord thy care I feel, and love of me,
That thrall to Satan would not have me be.
SON. LXIIII.
Whilst with the wholesome food of heavenly truth,
(The Manna which thy written word does give)
Thou soughtst o Lord to feed my wandering youth,
That it in plenteous peace by grace might live,
By lust lo Satan sought my soul to drive,
To break obedient bands unto thy law,
Which my offenses (I protest) do griue
My helpless heart, the which delight did draw:
The memory of Egypts store I saw,
Of vanities (which carnal senses feed,)
Made me to wish, to fill again my maw
With dishes such as to destruction lead:
Wherefore inwrath with quails thou cloidst me so,
That plagued with sin, my error now I know.
SON. LXV.
SInce thou have raysd my poor abiected spright,
From threshing floor, where captive I did stand,
And call me thy battles for to fight,
Against sin (the Madianite which wastes thy land)
Give me a token by thy mighty hand,
(O Lord) whereby my faith may be assurde,
And be to me a pledge of former band,
That victory by me shall be procurde:
Let heavenly deaw by prayer be allurde,
To moysten this my freewill fleece of wool,
Then dry the d^regs thereof to sin inurde,
Whose heavy weight makes grace and virtue dull;
And offering mine (of prayers to thy name)
Accept, and with a holy zeal inflame.
SON. LXVI.
WHilst that in wealth and ease I did possess
The Empire of thy many blessings sent,
I took in hand pure virtue to suppress,
And pride with lust my powers they wholly bent,
To conquer reason, which thy grace had lent,
And quite forgetting worlds late flood for sin
To build a tower of trust, wherein I spent
The strength of flesh and blood, high heaven to win:
As though in natures strength the force had bin,
To shield themselves from flood or heavenly fire;
But now confusion just my soul is in,
Makes laboring flesh from folly such retire,
And craves alone within thy Church to dwell,
Whose walls of faith and truth may death expel.
SON. LXVII.
THe Temple Lord of this my body base,
Where thou vouchsafdst to place my soul to dwell;
And promisedst to make thy chosen place,
Whence sacrifice of praises thou would smell,
Behold against thy laws does now rebel,
By worldly vanities thereto allurde,
Where couetise and pride their pack does sell
At such a price, as flesh and sin afford:
But since o Lord thy promise has assurde
My soul, that thou art always pressed to hear
The plaints of penitents, which has procurde
Thy Son himself in temple this t'appeare,
Whip forth, fling down, this worldly wicked pack,
Fro out my soul, repel thou Satan back.
SON. LXVIII.
WIthin thy house this body base of mine,
It pleased thee o Lord my soul to plant,
A steward of the gifts the which were thine,
And nature filled with measure nothing scant,
Of body or of mind, no blessings want,
And fortunes favors sharde with me no less,
In such proportion Lord I needs must grant,
As thou do give, when thou do use to bless:
But wantonly I wested, I confess,
Thy treasure put into my hands of trust,
And now alas (though late) I seek redress,
Wise steward-like to live, when dye I must:
I cast my count, by Christ, my debt to pay,
And fruits of faith from hell my soul shall stay.
SON. LXIX.
NOw that it pleases thee Lord of thy grace,
To pluck me forth of sinful Sodoms lake,
Where I have dwelt alas this life long space,
Since I of holy Abram leave did take;
Vouchsafe I pray thee for thy mercies sake,
To grant thy Church be refuge for my life,
The Zoar where I may my dwelling make,
Safe from revenging Angels bloody knife;
And though the frailty of Lots lingering wife
Look back, with love, on sinful worlds delight,
(Which common weakness to all flesh is rife)
Yet keep me constant by thy heavenly might,
And let me not grow drunk with blessings thine,
To procreate sin on lustful daughters mine.
SON. LXX.
WHilst in this worldly wilderness about,
For want of faith I back am forced to go,
(Afraid of sins which Giant-like are stout,
And foul affections, which like cruel foe
Of Esawes race, their might and power bestow,
To stop my passage to the promised land)
I gin to faint, and to repine also,
Against the power of thy most mighty hand,
For which the Serpent Satan now does stand
In readiness, my silly soul to sting,
And close me up in deaths eternal band,
Unless to me thy mercy succor bring.
That brazen Serpent Christ nayld on the tree,
Whose sight by faith alone is cure to me.
SON. LXXI.
WHat am I else Lord but a sinful wretch,
In sin and in iniquity begot,
In conscience guilty of the common breach,
Of every law, that may my honor spot.
Thy blessings given me, I regarded not:
Thy threatened judgments I did not esteem,
My vows to thee I almost had forgot,
My sins no sins to hardened heart do seem;
Like to my self I did thy power deem,
Because thou did forbear thy rod a while,
I sought by Idols aid to heaven to clime,
Whilst worlds delight my senses did beguile:
But helpless now, alas I turn to thee,
To stay my race, let grace Lord succor me.
SON. LXXII.
THou formedst me at first out of the clay,
Unto the image of thy glorious frame,
(O Lord of might) thou shewdst to me the way,
To magnify thy pure and holy name:
Like Potters vessel first my model came,
Out of a rude unformed lump of earth,
To holy use it pleased thee me reclaim,
Before my life took use of carnal breath;
Thou fedst me in the common humane dearth
Of knowledge of thy will, with such a taste
Of pleasing fruit, as filled my soul with mirth,
And ready makes me now, no more to wast
Thy offered mercies, which so bless in me,
Of glory that I may a vessel be.
SON. LXXIII.
A Servant Lord even from my day of birth,
I vowed was by parents unto thee,
A Nazarit I lived on the earth,
And kept thy vows as grace did strengthen me,
Till Satan made me worlds deceit to see,
And trapt my senses with forbiden lust,
As Eve did taste of the restrained tree,
So fond affections did me forward thrust,
A sinful Philistine (of faith unjust)
To like, to love, to crave, to wed, to wife,
Thy grace my strength to her reveal I must,
Till she to Satan sell my slumbring life:
A prisoner I, thus scornd and void of sight,
Sins house to overthrow, crave heavenly might.
SON. LXXIIII.
WHilst in the plenty of thy blessings sent,
I sought to solace Lord my self secure,
And gazing on worlds beauty long I went,
(In pridefull tower which did prospect procure)
I saw the baytes of sin, which did allure
My idle thoughts to follow wicked lust,
My kindled passions could not long endure,
But unto furious flames break forth they must,
I did pollute my soul, by fraud unjust,
And reft thy grace from his true wedded wife,
And that I might away all mendment thrust,
I did bereave my knowledge of this life:
Whose bastard fruits slaie Lord, but let her live,
That penitent we may thee praises give.
SON. LXXV.
A Servant sold to sin o Lord I am,
Whom Satan (Syrian proud) does sore assail,
Nine hundted Chariors of desire there came,
Armed with lust, which sought for to prevail
And to subdue by strength they cannot fail,
Unless thou raise my fainting strength by grace,
Let constant faith the flying fury nail
To ground, where groueling is his resting place:
Then shall my soul with Debora embrace,
In thankful wise thy mercies I receive,
And so pursue the fleshly Canaans race,
Till I the fury of the same bereave.
And with my song thy servants shall accord,
To yield due praise to thee the living Lord.
SON. LXXVI.
MY soul like silly Joseph Lord was sold,
By fleshly brethren his, (unkind alas,)
To vanities (the merchants) which behold
From far they saw to Egypt, which do pass.
A servant unto Ismaels seed it was,
And sold from sin to death, and so to hell,
Of humane frailty Lord a looking glass,
In which all foul affections long did dwell,
Yet lo alas when sin seeks most to excel,
And have my mind consent to traitrous lust,
With grace o Lord, that enemy repel,
And hear my prayers, who in thee do trust;
Who though a space in bodies prison stays,
Yet Lord at length vouchsafe to heaven to raise.
SON. XXVII.
SO blind o Lord have my affections bin,
And so deceitful has bin Satan's slight,
That to give credit I did first begin,
To pride, and lust, as heavenly powers of might:
I offered all my senses with delight,
A sacrifice to feed those Idols vain,
Of all the presents proffred day and night,
Naught vnconsumde I saw there did remain;
Till that thy Prophets by thy word made plain
The falsehood, by the which I was deceived,
How Satan's kingdom made here of a gain,
And wickedness my hope and faith bereaved;
But now the sifted ashes of thy word,
Bewraies Bells Prists: slaies dragon without sword.
SON. LXXVIII.
A Wicked thief that often have robbed and slain,
Thy graces of their fruit, my self of bliss,
Now on the cross of conscience I remain,
To die the death the which eternal is:
I see no way to quit my self of this,
Unless thou Lord whose kingdom is above,
Remember me, and cansell life amiss
Out of thy memory, through Christ thy love:
Who in my flesh with me like death did prove,
That guiltless he, might guilties ransom be,
Love to my soul it was, that did him move,
The bands of death to bide to make us free:
Bless thou my tongue, increase thou faith in me,
This night to be in paradise with thee.
SON. LXXIX.
IN bondage long to Satan have I bin,
A maker of the brick of Babell tower,
By birth, a thrall to gross and filthy sin,
Whom lusts taskmasters does attend each hour,
Affection to the flesh does clean defloure
The memory and love of promised lands:
The fiend (even Pharo) seeks to devour
My soul, and chain me to his dreadfulll bands:
But Lord receive me safe into thy hands,
Protect me from the rigor of his might,
Quench thou the force of lusts inflamed brands,
In my defense give me true faith to fight:
Send Moses Lord, with power of heavenly sword,
And Aaron to direct me by thy word.
SON. LXXX.
A Moabit I was of cursed kind,
Unkind unto thy Church Lord, and to thee,
Who sought by aid of foolish Balaam blind,
To captiuate the soul that should be free,
Incestuous fruits of that high climing tree,
Which does subdue all reason and all grace,
A carnal kinsman by a near degree
Unto the soul, the which I have in chase.
Whom I with loathsome sin sought to deface,
And bastardise with carnal fond affect,
Whose offspring thou unto the tenth man's race,
Did once out of thy sanctuary reject.
Yet now by faith made free of Jury land,
A suter here before thy throne do stand.
SON. LXXXI.
LO how I groueling under burden lie,
Of sin, of shame, of fear Lord of thy sight,
My guilt so manifold dare not come nie
Thy throne of mercy, mirror of thy might:
With hidden and with ignorant sins I fight,
Dispairing and presumptuous faults also,
All fleshly frailty on my back does light,
Original and actual with me go.
Against a stream of lusts my will would roe
To gain the shore of grace, the port of peace,
But floods of foul affections ouerfloe,
And sink I must, I see now no release:
Unless my Savior dear this burden take,
And faith a ship of safety for me make.
SON. LXXXII.
FRom Judah wandering Lord to Jericho,
From holy law of thine to carnal lust,
Whilst midst the prease of lewd affects I go,
I robbed am, of raiment pure and just
And wounded lie Lord groueling in the dust,
Not any passer by can give me aid,
In fleshly strength, or friendship is no trust,
By highway seen, to help me few have staide:
But since my Savior Christ on cross has paid
A ransom rich to cure my bleeding sore,
By faith to crave the fruits I Am not affraide,
In hope my health thereby for to restore:
Bind up my wounds with balm, lead me to rest,
Give me such gifts of grace as like thee best.
SON. LXXXIII.
THis slender City (Lord) of strength behold,
Wherein I dwell, Bethulia my bower
Of flesh, whereto sin lays a battry bold,
And seeks with sword and dearth my souls deuower:
Suppress thou hellish Holofernes power,
Who prides himself in pray, of children thine,
I have no trust in mountains, walls, nor tower,
For want of faithes (true fountain) we shall pine,
Raise up this female couragde heart of mine,
Strengthen my hand to reave this monsters head,
Let me not taste deceiptfull follies wine,
Nor be polluted with worlds sinful bed:
But constantly by faith fight in defense,
Of feeble flesh, and drive thy enemies thence.
SON. LXXXIIII.
NOt that my faith does faint a whit is cause,
That I so instant am on thee to call,
O God of life, but yielding to thy laws,
Before thy sight, my soul these tears lets fall:
Which in thy bottle kept I know are all,
And quench the fury of thy burning ire,
Which sin enflamde, and qualify it shall
The quarrel which has set thy wrath on fire,
If fervently the child due food desire
Of father, he will not give him a stone,
If of the wicked, justice man require
Importunely, some justice will be shown:
More righteous judge and father thou to me,
Art Lord indeed, and far more kind wilt be.
SON. LXXXV.
THe many trials Lord that I have found,
Since out of Egypt darkness I am brought,
Might witness well how in thee still abound,
Power, mercy, truth, whereby thy works are wrought.
But foul despair against my faith has fought,
Amidst the wilderness wherein I stay,
And daintier food my fond affections sought,
Then Manna, which thou sentst me every day,
The desert Zyn, does fountain pure denay,
Of grace, wherewith to quench my fainting ghost,
Eternal death expects my soul as pray,
And lust assaults me with a hideous host.
Stretch forth hand Lord, smite thou my heart of stone
With rod of true repentance, grief and moan.
SON. LXIII.
THou have o Lord of mercy, me enricht
With flocks of favor, and of graces great,
Since I in Bethell first the pillar pitched,
Of praises to thy name and mercies seat,
Yet fleshly Esawes foul affections threat,
A ruin to the fruit faith forth should bring,
With pleasing humors him for to entreat,
I fear it be to soul a dangerous thing:
Shield me Lord under thy protecting wing
Of mercy, which may save from Satan's rage,
My heart and voice shall still thy praises sing,
If thou the malice of my foes assuage;
In Sychem shall my heart an alter rear,
The mighty God to love, to serve, to fear.
SON. LXXXVII.
THe talent which thou pleasedst Lord to give,
To me thy servant that I should bestow,
Whilst in thy service on the earth I live,
My diligent increase thereof to show,
I have abused Lord (too long) I know,
And fear thy coming to be nigh at hand,
I see for breach of duty what I owe,
And of thy judgments do in terror stand:
Thy grace has left me in a foreign land,
Where inexpert of virtue I do straie,
I shall be thrown to Satan's thralfull band,
Void of thy heavenly joy and bliss for aye,
Unless thou help, for thou do use to give,
Grace unto grace, and faith from faithless drive.
SON. LXXXVIII.
SInce that it pleases thee thy self to show,
A just revenger Lord of Heathenish sin,
And bring the pride of bold Philistines low,
Who thee defame, when holy Arc they win;
Now that to fetch it home I do begin,
And in the temple of my heart to place,
Grant so I may thy secrets see therein,
That plagues, for my presumption do not chase
It so from me, as they that fled the face
Of glory thine, which therein did appear:
Let faith and love draw home by trusty trace,
The constant cart, whose carriage is so dear;
And let me order so this holy work,
That dregs of sin not in my deeds may lurk.
SON. LXXXIX.
IN famine great of grace, and comfortless,
Thy servant Lord does in Samaria dwell,
For Lord fierce Aram does with sin oppress
The city where my soul to harbor fell:
I want the strength his armies to repel,
Of lust and of affections most unclean,
My mind whose love does motherlike excel,
Her children (thoughts of mendment) sees so lean,
That forced by famine, she can find no mean
To feed them long, her faith so poor is grown,
That native pity now secluding clean,
Her greedy nature does devour her own.
Believe in time this siege, Lord cause a fear
Of thee, this camp of cruel sin to rear.
SON. XC.
ON sweet and sauorie bread of wholesome kind,
Which in thy word thou offrest store to me,
To feed upon the flesh does lothing find,
And leaves, to lean (o Lord) alone on thee:
The leaven of the Pharisees will be
The surfeit of my soul, and death in fine,
Which coveting to taste forbidden tree,
To carnal rules and reasons does incline:
So lauishly my lusts do taste the wine,
Which sowrest grapes of sin filles in my cup,
That lo my teeth now set on edge, I pine,
Not able wholesome food to swallow up,
Unless thou mend my taste, and heart do frame,
To love thy laws, and praise thy holy name.
SON. XCI.
OVt of thy flock o Lord through my defect,
A silly sheep my self (behold) am lost,
To seek me forth in time do not neglect,
Since I so precious price to thee have cost.
By many bypath Lord my feet have crossed,
And cannot find the way unto thy fold,
Through many storms of deep despair thus tossed,
To crave thy aid at last I now am bold:
If thou of silly groat that count do hold,
That thou do search the house to find the same,
No doubt my soul to sin by nature sold,
May mercy find, by calling on thy name:
The Saints in heaven conuertids gain rejoice,
On earth thy praise is song, in heart and voice.
SON. XCII.
BEhold amidst worlds desert all alone,
Seduced by the frailty of the sprite,
Accompanied with fleshly comfort none,
My soul with sin compelled is to fight
Where suddenly alas before my sight,
I Satan see, me ready to assail,
By two his servants which are most of might,
Presumption and despair, which seldom fail,
The best perfections of man's strength to quail,
By pride, or want of faith, or couetise,
By lust, or gluttony, or fained veil
Of virtue, which does mamy sins disguise:
But chase him Lord away by written word,
Which is more sharp then his two edged sword.
SON. XCIII.
THe dream which thou to Pharo did reveal,
Thou in my self have made me see in deed,
The state (alas) of man's weak common weal,
Whereas affections of all sorts do feed;
The fruitful soil of grace some whiles did breed,
Full fair effects in truth of heavenly kind,
But many barren thoughts alas succeed,
And threaten famine to a virtuous mind.
Store of such years as yet I fear behind,
Which Lord will starve the comfort of my faith,
Unless thy mercy and thy wisdom find,
A store house to lay up what scripture says:
In hope of which thy goodness, lo I live,
Which of thy grace Lord do thou to me give.
SON. XCIIII.
THe seed which thou the husbandman have sowde
Within my soul (o Lord) by Prophets hand,
Has taken root at last, by deaw bestowd
Form heavenly grace, which fructifies my land:
But lo I saw the worlds deceit to stand
In readiness to mingle tares therein,
Whilst sleeping, me in vanities he fand,
He made my fruits to ouerflow with sin:
But ere thy harvest to approach begin,
Vouchsafe to weed these frailties so away,
That when thy corn is to be gathered in,
I may be clean, and in thy garner stay.
Burn Lord with chastisement my fleshly lust,
And cleanse my life by faith both pure and just.
SON. XCV.
WHat strength has man? wherein may he repose
A power to stay him in a virtuous way?
To love thy flock thou Lord my soul have chose,
Whom to obey my vows and words did say:
But in my power alas there is no stay,
For light temptations made me clean forget
My duty to my Lord, and to denay
Him who thus long I have too lightly set:
But now my heart with tears my cheeks does wet,
In sorrow of my so inconstant faith,
Repentance has my sin before me set,
And conscience now my error duly way'th:
Grant that thy word crow thrice and thrice to me,
And warn me of my duty unto thee.
SON. XCVI.
THe malice of this monster ancient foe
Of man, and of the Church which thou did plant,
Even Satan Herod-like about does go,
To make my fruits of faith to grow more scant,
Whilst yet with weakness feeble youth does pant,
And wants grace to strengthen their estate,
The motions of the mind does straight recant,
To see souls safety which sin feign would hate;
The counsels of affections do debate,
And do conclude to murder virtues breed:
Lust, pride and envy, open wide the gate,
To furious flesh, that does the wicked deed.
My soul (their mother) mourns o Lord their end,
My future fruits of grace do thou defend.
SON. XCVII.
SO foolish Lord have my affections bin,
So careless of the blessing thou do give,
So prone my nature unto every sin,
So thanklesse of thy grace by which I live,
That violently thy love away I drive,
And sell the patrimony to ensue,
I carry water in an open sieve,
And change for lentil pottage birthright due.
Too late (alas) my folly I do rue,
Who worlds delight preferred have so long,
Rejecting heavenly knowledge treasure true,
Unto my soul imposing open wrong,
Yet not so late o Lord I pardon crave,
But yet one blessing thou for me wilt have.
SON. XCVIII.
A Sinful Syrian Lord my father was,
Exilde from Paradise by just desert,
I wandered into Egypt, there alas
To find in world some food to please my heart:
Where servile bondage unto sin and smart,
I suffered so long through Satan's rage,
That heavenly aid I craved thence to depart,
Which only able was my grief to assuage:
From silly servant and an abject page,
Thou broughtst me forth to knowledge of thy truth
(The blessed land) and showdst me on a stage,
A pattern how to guide my wandering youth,
Such fruits therefore as faithful soil does yield,
I offer here first crop of blessed field.
SON. XCIX.
I See (alas) proud Satan has too long
Defrauded thee, o Lord, of that is thine,
And love of world has drawn me unto wrong,
Whose heart thy offerings to bestow repine:
My outward knees unto thee do incline,
My tongue does promise present of my store,
I say these gracious gifts are none of mine,
But will them all thy Altar lay before;
But vanities does press me evermore,
And want of faith to leave some part behind,
Although I see death ready at the door,
My hollow heart and lewd deceit to find:
Grant that I may my soul, my power, my will,
Present o Lord to serve thee only still.
SON. C.
SInce thou by grace out of wild Olive stock,
Have pleased me Lord within thy Church to plant,
And reckon me as of thy proper flock,
Who else all pleasant fruit by nature went,
Vouchsafe my thankful fruits be not so scant,
As cause thee to reject me back again,
Of former bounty Lord do not recant,
But let me in thy garden still remain:
By mercy not by merit I attain,
This blessing promised so long before,
Let not this gift of thine return in vain,
But let thy goodness multiply the more:
Make sweet the fruits which bitter are by kind,
Increase thy grace in body and in mind.
CONCLUSION.
Mourn thou no more my soul, thy plaint is heard,
The bill is canseld of the debt it owes,
The veil is rent, which thee before debard,
And Christ his righteousness on thee bestows;
Thus comfort to the patient always grows,
If they attend the time God has assignde,
Our strength to bear, our maker best he knows,
And at a need is ready for to find,
Our Savior is so merciful and kind,
Unto our selves he will not leave us long,
He castes our faults through love his back behind,
And turns our plaints into more pleasant song.
And when we are even at the gates of hell,
His glory, mercy, power, does most excel.
THE SECOND PART OF CHRISTIAN PASsions, Containing a hundred Sonets of Comfort,
Joy, and thanksgiving.
PREFACE.
SOme men do mourn for suddeine joy they say,
And some likewise in midst of sorrow sing,
Such diverse fruits do passion often bring,
As reason cannot course of Nature stay,
And happy sure he is (I not denay)
That both these motions has from heart contrit,
When frailty of his flesh appears to sight,
And mercy calling him back from decay.
Who can behold the flesh and spirit fight,
The doubtful issue and danger of the thing,
The loss whereto our nature might us fling,
And gain which grace does give through Sauiors might,
And not delight, To glorify his name,
And yet lament his proper native shame,
SON. I.
AS through a mist, or in a cloud a far,
I see a glimse of heavenly grace to shine,
And to revive the fainting faith of mine,
And spirits which with darkness shadowed are.
The fleshly fog of sin did judgment bar,
Of proper use, of power, of reason sound,
(Which in first parents franckly did abound)
And better part of natures strength did mar;
But since my eyes of grace a sight have found,
Of that eternal light which does incline,
Fro out these fogs of fear I hope t'vntwine,
And force of fainting faith for to confound,
And on a ground More firm will build my trust,
And that in Christ whose promises are just.
SON. II.
CLeng'd are the clouds and darkness fled away,
And now in triumph does my Savior ride,
Sin, hell, nor death, dare not his sight abide,
The world nor Satan can his progress stay:
This piercing light of truth shall so bewray
Each stratagem their practice does devise
Against my soul, that there shall not arise
One cloud of care to darken this my day.
But that my thoughts (like to the Pilate wise)
Shall look about, lest that my heart should slide,
And by this sun my course so constant guide,
That all their slightes shall not my soul disguise,
Which now espies The malice they me owe,
Which long they clothd with shade of plesa^t show.
SON. III.
WHen as my conscience lays forth before
My thoughts, the sins which daily I commit,
I think my self an instrument unfit,
To witness forth thy glory any more:
But when I see that sin was first the door,
By which death entered and such hold did take,
That death did first our want apparent make;
And want first cause that man did aid implore,
That prayers first thy mercies do awake,
That mercies do renew our dulled wit,
That ioyed heart should not unthankful sit,
And thanks to thee does fleshly glory shake,
It straight does slake The fear which bad me stay,
And bids me still proceed to praise and pray.
SON. IIII.
SInce to so holy use I consecrate
The silly talent Lord thou lentst to me,
That it a trumpe unto thy praise might be,
And witness of their woe that thou do hate.
Do thou o Lord forget the abject state
Of flesh and blood, base mettle of my frame,
And since that thou have sanctified the same,
Vouchsafe thy grace my weakness may abate:
Thou that my former wandering will did tame,
And me prepare in mind to honor thee,
Can give me gifts the which thereto agree,
How ere my proper power be weak and lame,
So shall thy name Be precious in my sight
And in thy praise shall be my whole delight.
SON. V.
Would God I were as ready to confess,
And yield thee praise sweet Savior day by day,
As to crave my wants I am forward ay,
And fervently at need to thee to press,
To beg of thee alone, thou wilst no less,
Because thou only able art to give,
And with each needful thing by which we live,
Thou promisest our prayers thou will bless;
But we with use of them should not so stay,
And only seek to thee when need does drive,
(Whose blessings running through an open sieve,
No praise for recompense unto thee pay)
But when we pray, We should thee laud also:
Our thankful hearts with bounty thine should go.
SON. VI.
I Have begun o Lord to run the race,
Where flesh and blood against the world must fight,
On heavenly kingdom gazing with my sight,
Where is appointed scope of resting place:
Wingd with the will of zeal of heavenly grace,
I do endeavor always to proceed,
In constant course unto the arc indeed,
Where in thy mercies I behold thy face,
A fervent faith it does my courage feed,
And make my heavy limbs become more light,
When in thy son I see thy glory bright,
The pledge unto my soul that hope shall speed,
This blessed seed Thou have Lord sown in me,
And all the fruits shall to thee offered be.
SON. VII.
Where shall I find fit words or proper phrase,
Wherewith to witness all the love I owe?
Whose grateful mind in thankfulness does grow,
And to the world thy worthiness would blase:
Vnfrutefully the greater ^ort do gase,
Upon thy works and blessings they receive,
And carelessly thy honor they bereave,
And suffer chance or wit thy same to raze,
Whilst vnacknowledged thy love they leave,
Forgetting all the gifts thou do bestow,
Whose blinded nature so does ouerflow,
That most unkind to thee, themselves they show.
But since I know By grace thy blessing great,
My pen thy praises always shall repeat.
SON. VIII.
THe more I seek to dedicate my power,
In celebrating of thy honor great,
(Whose throne is fixed in thy mercies seat)
The more my duty grows every hour,
Some times with Eagles flight aloft I tower,
And seem to see the glory of thy sun,
But ere my willing wings have scarce begun
To mount, they droop with clog of heavy shower:
Upon the hill of truth I footing won,
By faith which labors with fervent heat,
Of worthy praises thine for to entreat,
But ere I have begune my work is done,
So far I run In seeking to begin,
I cannot write, such maze my muse is in.
SON. IX.
AS fares with the man the which has bin.
I perilll but of late to have been drowned,
Though afterward he do recover ground,
Knows not at first, the safety he is in:
So when I think upon the floods of sin,
Wherein I was near drenched over head,
What time all hope of comfort clean was fled,
And I into despair to sink begin.
My fainting faith with fear even well nigh dead,
My mind amazed it does so confound,
That though thy mercies freely do abound,
In port of peace I am not free from dred,
But being led Fro out the perils sight,
I shall enjoy more pleasure and delight.
SON. X.
SInce thou o Lord have given to me at last,
The victory against the deadly foe,
Who like a Lion roaring still does go,
My soul (poor Lot my kinsman dear) to wast
Since grace at length his pride has now defast,
And by the hand of faith he is subdude,
And that my strength by thee is so renude,
That his affections almost are displast.
Since thy high Priest with present me pursude
Of bread and wine, the which he did bestow,
And with the same the blessing gave also,
Whence life, whence liberty, whence health insude,
I have indude* As proper unto thee,
Thy Church, with tyth of faith thou gave to me.
SON. XI.
IF he to whom his Lord did but remit
A silly debt was thankful to him found,
And that the more the sins forgiven abound,
The more he loves that pardond is of it,
Then sure it seems it were good reason fit
That I whose soul was sold to death and hell,
Whose sins in multitude did so excel,
With idle brain should not ungrateful sit:
But as the flowing favors daily swell,
So should my voice thy praises ever sound;
And since thou have powrde oil into my wound,
I should not spare thy mercies forth to tell:
And (so as well as thou shall give me grace)
I will thee laud, each season, time and place.
SON. XII.
NOw that I have some safety Lord attaind,
Fro out the laberinth wherein I was,
Since grace as guide therein to me did pass,
And love was line which me my issue gaind;
Since that my wandering steps faith has refraind,
And that thy word, was Sybils branch to me,
Through hell and death away to let me see,
To Elizian fields where bliss for aye remaind,
I must not Lord so much unthankful be,
To break the vows which once I made alas,
But I will show thy mercies in a glass,
That by my words men may acknowledge thee,
The only he Has any power to save,
And raisd my soul fro out the very grave.
SON. XIII.
I Shame to see how large my promise are,
How slow my deeds that should perform the fame,
I know the constant meaning whence they came,
But will and power are fallen at strife and jar,
What soul begins to do, does body mar,
What love would build, distrust would overthrow,
A plenteous offering, zeal does bid bestow,
But fainting faith likes not to set it far;
My will at least his good intent shall show,
Which thou o Lord cause unto better frame,
A free will offering Lord thou will not blame,
Of such weak fruits as are on earth below,
Which yet shall grow More fruteful by thy grace,
And as they be, wilt in thy son embrace,
SON. XIIII.
THe end whereto we all created were,
And in this world were plast to live and dwell,
(If we with judgment do observe it well)
Was nothing else but God to serve and fear,
In which we badges of his glory bear,
To yield him right the most our weakness may,
Which (to our strength) we ought not him denay,
Who out of earth to heaven this dust shall rear:
Which when within my self I deeply way,
I do condemn the dullness which befell
To me, whose gifts in nothing do excel,
By which I might his glory great display,
On whom do stay, All things that being have,
Who to each creature all things freely gave.
SON. XV.
AS is the treasure frutelesse which is hid,
And bliss no bliss a man does not enjoy,
(But rather is a mean to work annoy,
To him that carefully preserve it did:)
So often times the wisest sort have slid,
Into like error, whilst they do conseale
The gifts of grace, which God did them reveal,
And hide the talent which is them forbid:
As frutelesse is it to the common weal,
That men respectively become too coy,
And triflingly their time away do toy,
And without good to others let it steal,
I therefore deal To world, and do impart
These silly fruits, which grow on feeling heart.
SON. XVI.
THe pleasures of this new possessed land,
Fore-promised long since to children thine,
Whereto I have arrived safe in fine,
And to enjoy the same assured stand,
To paint with praises I would take in hand,
That so I might encourage many more,
To follow forth the conquest where is store
Of corn, of wine, and oil, for faithful band:
Our Jesus Christ himself is gone before,
And shows the clusters of the healthful wine,
Whereof who tastes, shall not with famine pine,
Nor starve, when plenty is at City door:
Ne need deplore The strength of Anaks race,
For he the power of hell will clean deface.
SON. XVII.
BEtwixt two strong extremes my thoughts do fly,
Twixt heat and cold, twixt height and depth below,
And both of them from one desire do flow,
The surest way to saving health to try,
Faith bids me mount unto the heavens hie,
Upon the merits of my savior dear,
A guilty conscience bids me not come near,
Lest in consuming Jealousy I die;
A heart contrite does will me to appear,
With works of righteousness, true faith which show
Faith says, that god my strength and power does know,
And that I cannot find salvation here,
But bids me cheer My soul, and nothing fear,
Love in his son will make him me forbear.
SON. XVIII.
FRom far I see the stars which guide the way,
From East to West, to find my savior out,
I well might wander all the world about,
To seek salvation and in one place stay:
I shining truth did not his house bewray,
Which in his word points forth his dwelling place,
By which directed, I will walk a pace,
Whilst yet I do enjoy the light of day;
And when I come before his blessed face,
To offer up my presents will not doubt,
Although their baseness all the world should flout,
So that my faith I may him once embrace,
Which gives grace And makes accepted well,
Mean works, as much as those which more excel.
SON. XIX.
NOw will I dance o Lord before the train,
Of those which following thee seek home to draw
Thy holy Arc, the treasor of thy law,
That it with us may pledge of peace remain,
I care not though the world my deed disdain,
And think it not beseeming thing for me,
In such a work an instrument to be,
Whose years they deem more fit for other vain:
For so I Lord thy saving heath may see,
And escape the harm of cruel Satan's paw,
Though all the scorners of the world me saw,
Yet would I not ashamed be of thee,
For being free, Of holy promised land,
I care not how my state on earth do stand.
SON. XX.
NO recompense o Lord is fit for thee,
If duly thy desert we do regard,
Ne have thou want or need of man's reward,
At whose command all creatures ready be:
Yet if our thankful minds thy goodness see,
Confessing whence to us these blessings flow,
And in the use of them obedience show,
Although alas it be in mean degree,
Thou yet do frame thy love to ours below,
And as thou findst the giuers heart preparde,
(Who to his power his present has sparde)
So do thou cansell debt which he did owe,
And do bestow More graces then we crave,
For which naught else but thanks thou lokst to have.
SON. XXI.
HOw precious are the prayers of thy Saints,
Which able were thy threatened wrath to stay,
And make the sun return in pride of day,
When as Josias heart for fear it faints,
Thy favor unto Abram us aquaints,
Of how great force repentant heart is found,
When (having vowed vile Sodom to confound)
To stay at servants suit thy wrath thou daints;
By prayer man has power even death to wound,
By prayer he may move amount away,
A faithful fervent prayer finds no nay,
If that the thing we crave be pure and sound,
Yea God has bound Him self by them to man,
Whose worthy praise no tongue well utter can.
SON. XXII.
THanks will I always study Lord to pay,
To thee, the giver of all good and grace,
And thankfully thy mercies will embrace,
And witness forth thy works from day to day,
My heart, my mouth, my pen they never stay,
To take occasion freshly to renew,
The memory of praises to thee due,
Lest natures weakness let them pass away
My frailty (in this point) indeed I rue,
Who till I see new blessings in the place,
Forget the favors late before my face,
And mercies thine, from which such bounty grew,
For it is true So dull our senses are,
That often thy blessings do our judgments mar.
SON. XXIII.
WHere so I cast about my wandering eye,
By chance or choice, by hap, or else by will,
Before my sight some object is there still,
Wherein thy power and love I do espy;
In view whereof, if I my thoughts do try,
To raise my heart to Joy, I matter find,
And unto thee my love so firm to bind,
That tongue nor pen should never idle lie;
Whose grace unto thy creatures is so kind,
As patrons of the same the world does fill,
Who made not only, but do still instill
Some feeling of the same unto the mind,
Which is not blind, Or too much obstinate,
Which later nature chiefly thou do hate.
SON. XXIIII.
Whilst I do study fitly to begin,
To utter forth some part of my intent,
Which to thy praise with zeal and love is bent,
For freeing me from due reward of sin,
I find a laberinth that I am in,
Of many merits which do me enclose,
Which as this holy motion in me rose,
Of diverse subjects for to treat do win,
Among the rest my heart has chiefly chose,
To give thee thanks for comfort to me sent,
In staying me the wandering course I went,
And feeling faith, with knowledge where it grows,
And though I lose Therewith the worlds delight,
Yet will I joy in hope of heavenly sight.
SON. XXV.
SInce thou have Lord vouchsaft to send me aid,
By holy spirit thine in time of need,
(As Philip to the Eunuch came indeed)
Which in my wandering iourny me has stayde;
Since he has taught me what thy Prophets said,
And what humility was in thy Son,
(Whose patience like a lamb has freedom won,
Unto my soul, for which he ransom paid)
I see no earthly things should stay undone,
The duties which requirde of me I reed;
By faith upon thy promises I feed,
And to thy Sacraments for strength I run,
And thus begun, I will continue still,
To learn thy laws, and to obey thy will.
SON. XXVI.
HOw can I limit well my tongue or pen,
Within what bownds may I my self enclose,
Who such a theme to write upon have chose,
Whereon the more I muse, more growth it then,
It fares with me herein, even right as when
A hasty mind forgets what to speak,
When sta^mering words the perfect sense do break,
And makes us not be understood of men:
Such worthy matter in my mind there grows,
So plentiful, and I of skill so weak,
So pleasing to me, and so proper ^ake,
That in the choice of them I judgment lose,
And even as those Want matter silent be,
So plenty of thy praise confounds me.
SON XXVII.
NOw that thy mercies do so much abound,
As thou vouchsafest Lord with me to dwell,
And glorious Arc of hope which does excel,
Drawn home by hungry faith my heart has found,
Since power thereof, did sinful Dagon wound,
And yet disdaineth not my humble state,
I freely open Lord, my lowly gate
Of lips and tongue, which may thy praises sound,
Thy blessings seem to flow to me of late,
Since in my soul thy word I did embrace,
My zeal refreshed is with heavenly grace,
My comfort, wealth that hell cannot rebate,
In such a rate Thy favor do I find,
As binds me love a father found so kind.
SON. XXVIII.
WHat should I render thee my Savior dear,
For all the gifts thou do on me bestow?
Whose gracious measure so does ouerflow,
As power of recompense cannot appear,
I do embrace thy gifts with joyful cheer,
And to thy alter speedily do run,
To follow forth thy praise (but new begun)
Till all thy people may thy mercies hear:
Thy glorious image shines in thy Son,
Thy love to man did his obedience show,
His love and mercy unto man has won
The gifts of grace, whence faith and comfort grow,
Where through we know That we are thy elect,
And these our feeble fruits wilt not reject.
SON. XXIX.
THe powerful pen the which records thy praise,
O Lord of life, has many volumes made,
Thy wondrous works each leaf does ouerlade,
Which aye increase as growing are my days,
Unsearchable indeed are all thy ways,
In multitude they number do exceed,
In glory they do admiration breed,
Their goodness power of recompense denayes.
The hungry thou with plenteous hand do feed,
Thy favor to thy creatures does not fade.
The more in view of all thy works I wade,
The more I find my sense confound indeed,
But yet in steed Of Echo to thy fame,
I will give thanks and laud unto thy name.
SON. XXX.
THis stately stage wherein we players stand,
To represent the part to us assignde,
Was built by God, that he might pleasure find,
In beauty of the works of his own hand,
All creatures of the air, the sea and land,
Are players at his appointment of some thing,
Which to the world a proper use may bring,
And may not break assigned bownds or band:
Some do in joy still forth his praises sing,
Some mourn and make their moan with heavy mind,
Some show the fruits of nature weak and blind,
Some show how grace base sin away does fling,
God (like a King) Beholds, Christ does attire
The plaiers with the shape, their states require.
SON. XXXI.
WHo so beholds with constant fixed eye,
The favor and perfection of my choice,
He cannot choose but must in heart rejoice,
That mortal sight may heavenly bliss epsy,
All earthly beauty he will straight defy,
As thing too base to occupy his brain,
Whose fading pleasures so are paid with pain,
That they true taste of pleasure do deny:
But who so can this perfect sight attain,
Cannot contain, but yield with cheerful voice,
An Echo to the Angels heavenly noise,
Who to his praise do singing still remain:
They then are vain Who fix their sight so low,
That such a glorious God they will not know.
SON. XXXII.
O Heavenly beauty of love the fountain true,
Whose shining beams do penetrate my soul,
With such a zeal as former thoughts control,
And draws heart, power, and will thee to ensue,
Thou make my fainting sight for to renew,
And dazeling eyes new strength thus to attain,
To whom alone perfection fair is due,
Thou make earths bewteous shadow seem but vain,
Thy works of glory, and of power remain,
Engraven in thankful hearts which them inroll;
Thy love and mercy made thee pay the toll,
Which to our dying souls true life did gain,
Thy love does wain, My thoughts from baser love,
And make my heart and mind to soar above.
SON. XXXIII.
IF beauty be as men on earth suppose,
The comely shape and colors which agree,
In true proportion to the thing we see,
Which grace and favor both do never lose;
If white and red be borrowd from the Rose,
If bright and shining to the sun compared,
If high and straight to goodlinesse w'award,
And beauty have such base descriptions chose,
Then let the wise this beauty true regard,
Where all perfections in one subject be,
Surpassing fruit of the forbidden tree,
Which (but to taste) man suffered deaths reward,
Which is prepared, And offered to our sight,
In Christ to love and feed us day and night.
SON. XXXIIII.
HOw may this be, that men of searching mind,
Whose curious eyes in beauty do delight,
(The pleasing object of their fancies sight)
In outward shape and color, comfort find:
And yet the better beauty leave behind,
Unsought, or unregarded of at all,
Compard to which, none can it beauty call,
Unless a buzzard whom affections blind,
This earthly form of flesh it is so small
Of worth to charm the sense of noble spright,
As is a star before fair Phoebus bright,
Whose glory does their borrowed beauti apall:
Thus wise men fall, Whom camall eyes do guide,
Whose judgment may not virtues sight abide.
SON. XXXV.
O Heavenly love, with God thou dwelst for aye,
Thou passest faith and hope in dignity,
Thou keepst the law, thy feet step not awrie,
In all men's danger, thou the surest stay;
To our request, thou never say nay,
Ne wrath, ne envy, move thee ere a whit:
Thou multitude of sins in man do quit,
Thou law and Gospel both do over sway:
Thou do with God aloft in heavens sit,
With God in counsel thou art always by,
Thou causest Christ man's weakness to supply,
And make us receive the fruit of it,
And every whit Of goodness that we have,
Love made him send, who love therefore does crave.
SON. XXXVI.
THe shining face of my fair Phoebus dear,
Whose glory does eclipse each other light,
Presents himself unto worlds open sight,
Their blinded eyes with joyful view to cheer:
But sluggish so the greater sort appear,
That (sleeping in self-love and mind secure)
The clear aspect of truth they not endure,
Nor of their blindness willingly would hear;
But so my senses do his beauty allure,
To gaze upon his lovely favor bright,
That therein only have I may delight,
Where is all happiness, I do assure,
He does procure A plentiful increase,
Unto my soul, of perfect love and peace.
SON. XXXVII.
AVaunt base thoughts, incomber me no more,
By laying forth these earthly wants of mine,
As though thou would persuade me to repine,
Because of wealth I have not needless store:
If thou did know thy nakedness before,
He clothed thy soul, and fed thy fainting mind,
(With righteousness and faith in Savior kind)
Thou would that former state much more deplore;
And then confess, the comfort thou do find,
By peace of conscience, in this flesh of thine,
Is greatest riches truly to define,
(So that contentment be not left behind)
These gifts me bind* To praise his holy name,
And place chief wealth in knowledge of the same.
SON. XXXVIII.
I Will not fear with feruency of zeal,
To follow forth this fair affect of mine,
(To love of thee which does my soul incline)
O Savior dear, who sure my grief wilt heal:
Unto thy proffred kindness I appeal,
Who of thy self did call me unto thee,
And promisedst I should thy darling be,
Made free within thy Church and common weal,
Disparagement there is not now in me,
Ne shall distrust forbid me to be thine;
But faith shall fly aloft to thee in fine,
Where all thy treasures safely I may see,
And happy he Bestows his love so well,
Whose hope is paid with pleasures that excel.
SON. XXXIX.
Love then I will, and love thee Lord alone,
For fellowship in love there may not be,
Love for thy love (o Lord) shall be thy ^ee,
For other recompense thou crauest none;
My vows and deeds they shall be always one,
All dedicated to adorn thy name;
My heart, my soul, my strength shall do the same;
Thy love shall be my faiths true corner stone;
The love of thee shall my affections frame,
To follow that may pleasing be to thee,
My eyes no beauty but in thee shall see,
And thy regard my wandering will shall tame,
Yea I will blame, And scorn each other thing,
Save what shall me unto thy favor bring.
SON. XL.
Feign would I praise thee Lord with such a zeal,
And feruencie, as might my love express;
Feign would my love yield unto thee no less
Due praise, then thou did love to me reveal;
But wanting power thereto, I yet appeal
To that thy goodness, which thee first did move,
In fragill flesh of mine the strength to prove,
Whose weakness thou by heavenly power did heal:
Man's wit in words comes short in this behoue,
To recompense (nay only to confess)
The many ways thou do our bodies bless,
Much more our souls, which freely thou did love,
Thy trusty dove, Thy holy spright of grace,
Makes yet our weakness stand before thy face.
SON. XLI.
O Perfect Sun, whereof this shadow is
A slender light, though it some beauty show,
On whom thy influence thou do bestow;
Whose constant course still shines in endless bliss:
To scan thy glory, wit of man does miss;
How far thy mercies beams abroad extend,
Tongue cannot speak, nor wit can comprehend,
And humane frailty is bewrayd in this;
The fire, air, water, earth they wholly bend,
The host of heaven, and creatures below,
To pay their duty unto thee they owe,
Which did their being and their virtue send,
And I intend With them (in what I may)
To witness forth thy laud and praise for aye.
SON. XLII.
WHat present should I bring of worthy prise,
To witness well the love to thee I owe,
I nothing have but what thou did bestow,
Ne likest thou the toys of man's devise;
I would not spare my power in any wise,
No treasure seems to me for thee too dear:
The pleasures of the world the which are here,
Too base they are, how ere wit them disguise:
To yield thee faith, it does the best appear,
But mine is very weak (alas) I know,
To yield thee praise, does make a decent show;
But to thy merit neither does come near,
With garment clear, Yet clothd of righteous son,
My self to offer unto thee, I run.
SON XLIII.
WHo so beholds the works (o Lord) of thine,
The stretched heavens, the seat where thou do dwell
The earth thy footstool, which dares not rebel,
Which all unto thy will do still incline,
The Sun and Moon by day and night which shine,
The changing floods, the firm and fruitful land,
The Planets which do firm for ever stand,
All which against thy behest dare not repine:
The host of Angels in thy heavenly band,
The Infernal fiends with Lucifar which fell,
The fish, the foul, the beast agreeing well,
And all obedient to thy heavenly hand,
May understand, Thy glory, love, and power,
Without whose help, man could not live an hour.
SON. XLIIII.
AS does the Moon by daily change of hew,
By growing, or decreasing, beauty show,
The influence, the greater lights bestow,
Whose absence, or whose presence, her renew:
So must all flesh confess, and think most true,
The faith or fear they have for to proceed,
From heavenly grace, which heavenly gifts does feed,
Without whose face, blind darkness does ensue;
Man's proper power is so ob^curde indeed,
With shades which rise from earthly thoughts below,
That nothing but blind ignorance would grow,
Unless this sun did shining comfort breed,
Which serves in steed Of fire unto the same,
Fro whence this light of faith receives his flame.
SON. XLV.
IF Saba Queen, a journey took in hand,
From South to North, wise Solomon to hear;
If humane wisdom was to her so dear,
That she did visit thus his holy land,
Then do I muse why men do idle stand,
In pride of youth, when wit and means abound,
Their tender brains to feed with wisdom sound,
Far passing that this Queen for travel found.
This error is the scarre of Adams wound,
Who sought his knowledge not in fountain clear,
To whom forbidden skill did best appear,
Neglecting graces him enclosing round,
But on the sound And written word I build,
Not Solomon such Oracles could yield.
SON. XLVI.
HOw fond a thing it is which men do use,
To beat their brains, and so torment their heart,
In compassing the thing which breeds their smart,
And do not know what is the thing they choose;
They childishly the name of love abuse,
And would define the nature of the same,
By passions which belong to hatreds name,
Wherein to pine with pleasure they do choose.
Who ever saw that figs on thorne-tree came,
Or thistels roses bear by any art?
With pain, with grief, with shame, with loss impart
Their passions, which they for their love do frame,
With judgment lame; Love is a heavenly thing,
Where being plast, it perfect love does bring.
SON. XLVII.
LEt earthly things in earth their love repose,
For flesh and blood on faith they cannot feed,
It is a fruit indeed of heavenly seed,
Which who disgesteth well life cannot lose;
The soul fro out of other matter grows,
And unto other matter turns again,
Immortally to live in joy or pain,
As grace to sundry uses it has chose.
Then is it time my thoughts at length to waine,
From laying up my treasure for my need,
Where mothes and canker do so common breed,
As in the world whose wealth is merely vain,
If I attain, But faith laid up in store,
In Christ my Sauious, I desire no more.
SON. XLVIII.
Fie fainting faith dissuade me not so much,
From following of my lovely heavenly choice,
To think on whom, I cannot but rejoice,
Whose name or memory my heart does touch,
What travel ere befall, I will not grutch,
Through fire and water I will him pursue,
Whose sight my fainting soul does straight renew,
His love and mercy both to me are such:
If I should dye for him it were but due,
By him I live, and follow will his voice,
Regarding lightly fame or common noise,
Which threaten pain and travel to ensue,
There are but few That pass the narrow way,
But crown of honor does their travel pay.
SON. XLIX.
I Find my heart is bent for to amend,
And follow thee, forsaking wicked way,
From wickedness my fo^tsteps for to stay,
And to thy will my works henceforth to bend:
But yet the cause which makes me this intend,
I find is rather fear, then love of right.
Yet free will offerings do thee more delight,
And to such works thou do thy blessing send.
It is not ill to set before my sight,
Thy heavy plagues for sin from day to day;
But I had rather forth thy favors lay,
And for their love in quarrel thine to fight,
Which if I might By fervent zeal attain,
Then should I hope the victory to gain.
SON. L.
NO sooner love entirely me possessed,
But see how jealousy does me assail,
She seeks with deep distrust my faith to quail,
And to remove from conscience, quiet guest,
She tells me my Lord does sin detest,
And that my deeds they too unworthy are,
That from his favor they will me debar,
Whose love is fixed only on the best:
Fear had begun to work in me so far,
That to amaze my mind it could not fail,
Till to my love my state I did bewail,
Who shining sweetly like the morning star,
Did stay their jar, And bid my soul to rest
In Christ, by whom I surely shall be blessed.
SON. LI.
HE is unworthy to receive a gift
From any man, that him mistrusts before;
I will not ought of thee Lord doubt therefore,
Although no reason can my hope up lift,
I know in deed it is slye Satan's drift,
To lay before me this my vile estate,
Which (being sinful) thou of force must hate,
And I rejected be without all shift,
But when I with my self thy works debate,
Which have examples of thy mercies store,
His reasons are of force with me no more,
Because that faith sets open wide the gate,
To me of late, Which leads to treasure thine,
Where (in thy son) thou do in mercy shine.
SON. LII.
Feign would I follow thee through sea and land,
My lovely Savior whom far off I see,
Zeal makes my mind with speed to have to thee,
But native weakness makes me doubtful stand:
If to my aid thou gave not forth thy hand,
And by thy word incourdgdst me to row,
I should so shun afflictions which do flow,
That fear should bend my faith like feeble wand;
But by thy offered grace now strong I grow,
And through the troubles of the world will be
Bold to proceed, and faith shall succor me,
To witness forth the thankfulness Iowe;
Thou do bestow On me both power and will,
And with them both, I will thee honor still.
SON. LIII.
AS do the stars amidst the firmament,
With borrowed light bear record unto thee,
(O Lord of might) in which we men do see,
The image of thy power to them but lent,
So when our weak endeavors Lord are bent,
To publish forth thy praises, which excel;
These silly sparks of light which in us dwell,
Do show thy grace which us this motion sent.
Although therefore no speech or tongue can tell,
How infinite thy glory ought to be,
(Which passes humane sense by high degree,
As wisest men to grant, they do compel)
Yet thou like well, We show herein our will,
Which I have vowed unto thy service still.
SON. LIIII.
CAll me o Lord, for lo I do attend
To follow thee where so thou do direct,
I know thou will not my intent reject,
Who gladly would proceed where so thou send,
I doubtful stand, which way my course to bend,
Because I find such ignorance of skill,
To follow forth according to my will,
A fruitful course the which I did intend,
As thou with forward zeal my mind did fill,
So show me Lord whereto I am select,
And I shall carefully the same effect,
And fervently thereto go forward still,
Depend I will, Upon occasion fit,
That faithfully I may accomplish it.
SON. LV.
LIke silly babes, such must thy servants be,
In innocence and obedience still,
Unto thy holy laws (o Lord) and will,
From wrath, pride, malice, lust, and envy free:
With Serpents eyes of wisdom must they see,
And stop their ears, which Satan would deceive,
With charms of pleasure, which a scar do leave,
And only lend obedient ear to thee:
Yet with simplicity of dove receive
The yoke of law, whose rule they must fulfill,
And suffer patiently, the word to kill
The force of sin, which would souls health bereave,
Such thou will heave, And hold in heavenly arm,
And with protecting hand, defend from harm.
SON. LVI.
WHo so could like to Steu'n behold and see,
The throne triumphant where our Savior sits
In Majesty aloft, as best him fits,
A Judge and Savior to his Saints to be,
Coequall with his father in degree,
Possessor of the place for us prepared:
Who ready stands our weak works to reward,
And from the fury of the world to free;
He were but base, if ought he did regard
This transitory honor, which so flits,
Which to attain so much does tire our wits,
And yet so niggardly to man is shard,
And afterward Does leave a sting behind,
Of care of conscience, and of grief of mind.
SON. LVII.
Who seeks not with all his power and might,
To eternize unto himself his state?
That chance or time may not his bliss rebate,
Or death it self may not dissolve it quight?
Thus some therefore for honor fiercely fight,
And some for wealth do travel far and nigh,
Some worldly wisdom with great study buy,
To make them famous seem in vain worlds sight:
Which is the readiest way they do espy,
To keep their name from death, which so they hate,
Yea all suppose, posterity the gate,
T'immortalize this flesh, whose flower must dye:
But all go wry, wealth, honor, wit have end,
And children pass, faith only life does lend.
SON. LVIII.
What wealth may be to this alone comparde,
To be co-heire with Christ of fathers love?
To have our earthly thoughts so raysd above,
That world and worldly things we not regard?
To see by faith a kingdom rich preparde
For us, which shall eternally remain,
(Made free from worldly cares and troubles vain)
Which is for children his, a due reward?
Who can discouragde be with earthly pain,
Or tedious combats which the flesh does prove?
Since care of us our Partner Christ did move,
To share our griefs, his joy for us to gain:
Which thoughts should waine Our wills from base desire,
And us encourage higher to aspire.
SON. LIX.
IF Paradise were such a pleasant soil,
Where all things flourisht first and prosper day,
Wherein who lived, never could decay,
Till sin by Satan's slight gave man the foil:
Which blessings afterward did clean recoyle,
And left man naked in reproach and shame,
To dust to turn again from whence he came,
On baren earth to live with sweat and toil;
Then is our state much better then that same,
Our Paradise a place of bliss to stay;
Our Savior (Abrams bosom) does displaye,
Wherein our souls shall rest most free from blame,
Where he our name Has writ in book of life,
To be exempt from fear of care, or strife.
SON. LX.
What is felicity whereof men wright?
Which to attain, our studies still are bent,
Which to procure, such time and pain is spent,
By endless travel therein day and night:
Sure if it be naught else but firm delight,
And that delight consist in peace of mind,
Then here on earth this treasure none shall find,
Whose pleasures quickly vanish out of sight:
The earth does change, as seas do rise with tide,
And storms ensue the calm before that went:
This happiness but for a time is lent,
And paid often times with penance more unkind
By fortune blind. True bliss consists herein,
To love the Lord, and to abandon sin.
SON. LXI.
HOw many privileges great and rare,
Do we enjoy, that do thy name profess?
Even many more by far (I do confess)
Then we observe, or how to use be ware:
To give thy only Son thou did not spare,
Us to redeem from deaths eternal wound;
The sting of hell and sin he did confound,
And way to heaven for us he did prepare.
Yea so his mercies do to us abound,
That all the worldly creatures more and less,
Yea heavenly Angels do themselves address,
To serve man's needful use are ready found:
He does propound, In Christ all these to man,
And having him, no want annoy us can.
SON. LXII.
BY many gifts (o Lord) thou do declare
Thy mercies unto man, whom thou will save,
The use of all the which in Christ we have,
By hand of faith, that precious blessing rare,
That does his righteousness for us prepare,
Our stubburnnesse with his obedience hide,
His patience does our gross impatience guide,
His temperance with our intemperance share,
His continence our frailty lets not slide:
(For changing nature ours, his strength it gave)
Our pride it hides, and hopes which faithless wave,
And shades our heart with love, which still shall bide;
Thus every tide, It ready is at hand,
For our defense a buckler safe to stand.
SON. LXIII.
HOw should the quiet mind in peace and rest,
Possessed of the thing it most desirde,
(A thing so precious, none durst have aspirde
To gain, unless the giver had him blessed)
How may it morn, how may she be oppressed,
Who has the bridegroom always in her sight:
Who in her love does take so great delight,
As by his bounty hourly is expressed?
The doleful darkness fitteth blinded night,
The shining Sun has clouds of care retirde;
With heavenly heat my heart it has inspirde,
Since in thy sun I saw thy favor bright,
The which did fight, As champio^ strong for me,
From clouds of darkness and from sin to free.
SON. LXIIII.
WHo so of perfect temprature is framde,
Must needs delight in heavenly harmony:
His senses so shall be renewd thereby,
As savage beasts by Orpheus harp were tamde;
Young David's harp, Saul's furious spirit shamde,
And Dolfins did Aryons music hear.
Such sympathy in all things does appear,
That never music was by wisdom blamde:
But he that could conceive with judgment clear,
The sweet records that heavenly motions cry,
Their constant course that never swarues awry,
But by discords, whose concords after cheer,
Would hold so dear, The mouer of the same,
That love of him should base affections tame.
SON. LXV.
GReat is thy power, and more then we conceive,
Thy glory more then can discerned be;
Man's greatest gift is this, that he may see,
Or know, that virtue thine does his bereave:
His dazeling eyes each shadow does deceive,
His judgment builded on inconstant ground,
His strength but weakness in it self is found,
His glory, greater glory must receive
From thee, in whom all glory does abound:
What majesty dare man compare with thee,
To whom all creatures bow obedient knee?
Whose contemplations thou do clean confound,
Upon this ground. True bliss and wisdom stand,
To know, our wisdom flows from thy hand.
SON. LXVI.
AS but vain hope it is for man to trust,
To thing not promised, or not in power
Of speaker to perform at pointed hour,
Which is the case of flesh and blood unjust:
So call that hope, no wise man can or must,
Which is performance of expected thing;
When as possession does assurance bring,
Of thing whereafter we tofore did lust:
The Saints in heaven in joyful rest do sing,
Whom hope nor fear do raise or yet deuower,
But men on earth have hope a resting tower,
To shield them from despightfull Satan's sting:
Faith is the wing Makes me to hope ascend,
And truth in Christ will make my hope have end.
SON LXVII.
GReat are the gifts o Lord thou do bestow
On sinful man, by thy abounding grace,
Who when they want, do never hide thy face,
But still a patron of thy bounty show:
Which makes us both thy power and mercy know,
And so with shame and sorrow to repent,
Our thanklesse natures so unkindly bent,
So slack to pay the praises which we owe:
But when I do consider thou have sent
Thy Son himself for to supply our place,
Whose patience did the death on cross embrace,
Those to acquit, who did with faith assent:
All speeches spent, Seem then to me in vain,
And only I admyring do remain.
SON. LXVIII.
I Have been blind, and yet I thought I saw,
And now I see, yet fear that I am blind;
No blindness like to that is of the mind,
Which does the soul to deadly danger draw:
My careless steps did stumble at a straw,
And yet supposd my walk had been so ware,
That to have erred had been a matter rare,
When every thought did violate thy law:
But since to search my felfe I do prepare,
So dark of sight my soul and sense I find,
That if thy Christ (my love) were not more kind,
Eternal death I see should be my share.
But now I dare In spite of wicked foe,
A better course with constant courage go.
SON. LXIX.
WHy should he faint or think his burden great,
That has a partner to support the same?
Why coward-like should he his honor shame,
That has a champion ready at entreat,
Who can and does death and confusion threat,
To all impediments which stop our way?
On whom repose our trust we boldly may,
He being judge, and plast in mercies seat?
He sees our thoughts, and knows what we would say,
He does our mouths to fit petitions frame,
He hides our errors if our faith be lame,
And he himself does also for us pray,
We need but stay, And trust to his good will,
And we are sure he will our want fulfill.
SON. LXX.
ALthough the world do seek to stop my way,
By many stumbling blocks of fear and doubt,
And bid me seek a farther way about,
And on the staff of carnal strength to stay;
Though sin, though hell, though death do me denay,
That any power shall bridle their intent,
But would compel me walk as worldlings went,
The headlong path of pleasure to decay,
Yet will I not this purpose mine repent,
So long as faith will be my soldier stout,
To overthrow this fearful thronging rout;
Whom to subdue, this grace was to me sent,
No shall be spent In vain this pain of mine,
Hope against hope, shall win the field in fine.
SON. LXXI.
IT were unfit a concubine to keep,
Or that her children should possession have,
Among the fruits which lawful wedding gave,
By vetuous spowse which in the soul does ^leepe;
And yet behold how shamefully do creep,
Into possession of my power and will,
These thoughts and works which motions are to ill,
And trench themselves in fleshly fortress deep:
Whose base society will with vices fill,
The holy brood which grace would spotless save;
In such a boubt my young affections wave,
That they consent I should them foster still,
But that would spill More virtuous heritage:
Therefore exilde these be, though hell do rage.
SON. LXXII.
SOmetimes my nature seems to repine,
To see the pleasure and the plenteous store,
The wicked do enjoy for evermore,
Abounding in their corn, their oil and wine:
But when I see my weakness so incline,
To the abuse of portion I possess,
My heart with joy, full often does confess,
Thy love does much in earthly scarstie shine;
These things are good and bad, as thou do bless,
Which I dare not directly crave therefore,
Such danger follows them even at the door,
That plenty lightly does the ^oule oppress;
And as I guess, Contentedness does grow,
In grateful mind, though state be near so low.
SON. LXXIII.
IF he unworthy be the sweet to taste,
That shuns the sour (as we in proverb say)
To honor, pleasure, profit, in the way
Great peril, pain, and cost, so often plast;
If as unworthy health, he be disgrast,
That will refuse a bitter purge to take,
When he does know it will his fever slake:
So do temptations prove the mind more chaste,
If we with courage do the combat make,
And to the end immovable do stay:
The more that Satan does his spite display,
The more the pride and power of him we shake,
And he will quake, And sin shall have a fall,
And faith in Christ shall triumph over all.
SON. LXXIIII.
TO shun the rocks of dangers, which appear
Amidst the troubled waves of worldly life,
Which in each company are always rife,
Which with souls peril most men buy full dear,
I fear almost to keep my course so near,
The conversation of such tickle tides,
And think him blessed, that banished abides
In desert, where of sin he may not hear:
But when I note where so a man him hides,
That still affections breed an inward strife,
That nature bears about the bloody knife,
And to the death the proper soul it guides:
That fancy slides Away, and I prepare,
In combats of the world to fight my share.
SON. LXXV.
WEre it not strange, that members of the same
One liui^g body, and one parents child,
Should by the other daily be defilde?
And of unseemly thing should have no shame?
And yet we which of Christ do bear the name,
And children of his father us do call,
At discord with this parent daily fall,
And Christ our eldest brother do defame;
It seems well we be but bastards all,
Though stock be true, we be but Olives wild,
Who thinks us better, he is but beguilde,
Our fruits are bitter, and increase but small,
And who so shall Examine well his works,
Shall see, that gall in purest thoughts there lurks.
SON. LXXVI.
IT is no light or curious conceit,
O Lord thou know, that makes me to strain
My feeble powers, which blindfold did remain,
Upon thy service now at length to weight;
But only shame to see man's nature freight,
So full of pregnant speech to little use,
Or rather oftentimes to thy abuse,
Whilst to deceive, they lay a golden baight;
And do not rather think it fit to choose,
By praises thine, true praise themselves to gain,
And leave those fond inventions, which do stain
Their name, and cause them better works refuse:
Which does abuse The gifts thou do bestow,
And oftentimes thy high contempt do show.
SON. LXXVII.
FOr common matter common speech may serve,
But for this theme both wit and words do want,
For he that heaven and earth and all did plant,
The fruits of all he justly does deserve:
No marvel then though often my pen do swerve,
In middle of the matter I intend,
Since often so high, my thoughts seek to ascend,
As want of wisdom makes my will to starve:
But thou o Lord who cloven tongs did send,
Unto thy servants, when their skils were ^cant,
And such a zeal unto thy praise that brant,
As made them fearelesse speak, and never bend,
Unto the end, One jot from thy behest,
Shall guide my style, as fits thy glory best.
SON. LXXVIII.
HOw happily my riches have I found?
Which I no sooner sought, but it is won,
Which to attain, my will had scarce begun,
But I did find it ready to abound:
The silly faith I had was settled sound
In Christ, although for fear it often did pant,
Which I did wish more constantly to plant,
That it might all temptations so confound.
With feruency this little sparkle brant,
Till it inflamde my zeal, and so did run
Unto the fountain of true light (the sun)
Whose gracious soil to feed it was not scant
Men find more want, The more they covet still,
But more man couets this, it more does fill.
SON. LXXXIX.
WHen desolate I was of worldly aid,
Unable to relieve my self at need,
Thou had a care my fainting soul to feed,
Because my faith upon thy favor stayde:
My dying hope thou have with mercy paid,
And as thou did relieve thy servant dear,
Elias whom the Ravens in desert cheer;
So am I comforted, whom sin affrayde.
The cries of little Ravens thine ear does hear,
And slakst their hunger kindly (Lord) indeed,
When parents do forsake deformed breed,
That so thy providence might more appear,
Which shines clear, In blessings every day,
To me, much more then I can duly way.
SON. LXXX.
AMidst this pilgrimage where wandering I,
Do trace the steps which flesh and blood does tred,
My comfort is, that aye mine eyes are led,
By gracious object which in faith I spy;
Whose brightness guides my steps, which else awry
Were like to slide, through Satan's subtle slight,
Against whom his holy Angels always fight,
And suffer not my strength too far to try:
By day his word and works are in my sight,
Like to a cloud to comfort me in dread;
By fire through deserts, and the sea so red,
His hand does govern me in dangerous night,,
His favor bright, Conducting this my way,
An host of stops shall not my journey stay.
SON. LXXXI.
I See a storm me thinks approach a far,
In darkened sky, which threatens woe at hand;
Unto my tackle I had need to stand,
Lest sudden puffs my purposd course debar:
These tempting thoughts full often forerunners are,
Of fierce affections, which do move the mind,
Which if resistance not in time they find,
The strongest tackling they do stretch or mar;
I closely therefore will my conscience bind,
And arm my vessel with courageous band,
Of skillful sailors, which do know the land,
Whose harbors for my safety are most kind:
And in my mind Shall faith the Pylot be,
Whose skill shall make me wished port to see.
SON. LXXXII.
HOw is it that my course so soon would stay,
Before I have begun the thing I thought?
If ease or pleasure I herein had sought,
I had not then made choice of such a way:
More facill is the course unto decay,
More favor with the world it will attain;
But I mislike the joy requit with pain,
And faining words, not meaning as they say:
Men break their sleeps some silly pelf to gain;
With loss of life small honor some have bought,
Yea Philosophers pleasure set at naught,
To win a name of virtue to remain*
Then I will waine My self from earthly rest,
With heavenly crown and honor to be blessed.
SON LXXXIII.
When I begin to faint in my conceit,
To see the little power I have to good;
How sin has virtue in me still withstood,
And frailty on my flesh does always weight;
I am confounded and amazed straight,
And readily could turn and fly the field,
And all my travel to the tempter yield,
Before I would adventure more to fight:
But when I duly note whereon I build,
My faith, which watered is with Christ his blood,
Of force sufficient to withstand the flood,
And me from peril and destruction shield,
I easily welde Each burden on me laid,
And of my safety nothing am affrayd.
SON. LXXXIIII.
THe chastisements which often do befall,
Unto the most beloved of God, and blessed,
Does breed unto their souls both peace and rest,
And home from wandering thoughts their mind does call,
And sure are tokens not of favor small,
Who father-like does us in time correct,
Who else the care of him would soon reject,
And have no heed unto our ways at all.
The good Physician that would life protect,
Cuts of a limb sometimes as it seems best,
And yet the patient does the same digest,
Or any pain that works good effect:
Should God neglect Us then to exercise
With rods, whereby to make us grow more wise.
SON. LXXXV.
HOw should my fear or sorrow long remain,
(Although the world did swell, and ouerflow
With danger, which naught else but death do show)
When I by death do find a present gain?
Faith me assures that all assaults are vain,
That seek to sever me from heavenly blis:
The love of Christ assures me of this,
That I with him shall safely still remain.
What though of earthly pleasures I do miss?
And though the care of them unpleasing grow,
Yet this by good experience I do know,
All things turn to the best to children his:
I therefore kis, The cross with joyful cheer,
Because in chastisement does love appear.
SON. LXXXVI.
ALthough those Gibeonites, the native borne
Of sinful flesh, have slily me beguilde,
When as I thought all lust to have exilde,
By showing faynd repentance raggd and torn:
Though flesh and blood unto this league have sworn,
Not asking counsel of the Lord at all,
By which into a snare my soul did fall,
And deep hypocrisy my power did scorn;
Yet mean I them unto account to call,
And since they have my holy thoughts defilde,
Accursed I will hold them, and as vilde,
Will hate their ofsprings all, both great and small,
And be they shall, But bondmen to my soul,
Who daily may their proud attemps controwle.
SON. LXXXVII.
WHen I began a conquest of my will
To make, and yield it unto reasons law,
My reason to the rule of God to draw,
And by that rule to guide my actions still,
It had been wisdom first the flesh to kill,
Who breeds affections, which do still withstand
The building of the work I have in hand,
And thorns are in my sides to work me ill,
But now my error I do vnderstannd,
And must (by fear of wrath) keep them in aw,
And by the chastisements of sin they saw,
Make them to yield unto obedient band,
Then shall my land With faithful soldiers be
Replenished, and armed strengthen me.
SON. LXXXVIII.
NOt every one that with his lips does pray,
Or praise thy name is grateful in thy sight,
Thy searching eyes have not so much delight,
In those that cry, Lord, Lord, each hour of day,
But such as in thy bounds obedient stay,
And make thy will a law unto their mind,
That in thy promises do comfort find,
And follow not the worlds deceitful way,
To such thou showest thy self a father kind,
And do coroborat their heart with might,
Against all powers wherewith they daily fight,
Their sores thou take to cure, and do up bind,
Angels assignd, Do them inuiron round,
And to their comfort, mercies do abound.
SON. LXXXIX.
HOw should I quicken up my self indeed,
To true and faithful love even as I ought?
Unless I call to mind whence I was brought,
And by whose aid, who did this kindness breed,
Which when I only weigh, my heart does bleed,
To see that bounty of a God so kind,
And note the dullness of my nature blind,
That should forget the Lord, who me does feed.
When I was almost lost, he me did find;
When I forgot him clean, on me he thought,
When I was sold to sin then he me bought;
When I was wounded, he my sores bid bind;
Yea when I pind, He gave me plenteous store,
Which gifts I will record for evermore.
SON. XC.
Why should I faint or fear, or doubt at all,
How fierce so ever fleshly combat show?
Since I so sure a succor ready know,
To shield me safe, what ever do befall?
If he have such regard of sparrowes small,
As none of them (till God appoint) do dye,
If to our hairs which fall, he have an eye,
That none of them unnumbered perish shall:
Why should I think him deaf when I do cry?
As though he had no care of us below,
As though he would not needful things bestow,
Although our patience he delight to try,
Who can deny, But flowers that grow in field,
In glory stain the beauty pride does yield.
SON. XCI.
HOw do Gods blessings to his Saints abound,
Whose gifts of grace, although they be but small
At first, yet more and more increase they shall,
As seed well watered in a fruitful ground,
The proof whereof I (sinful) wretch have found,
Whose faith nigh famished, he now has fed
From heaven, with great increase of fish and bread,
Which strengthen dying soul with comfort sound,
His word for table he did open spread,
His servants for to feed me, he did call,
Their dole so free, I find more fragments fall,
Then in my basket, senses home have led,
Yet he has bed To such more to bestow,
As greatest store of former treasure show.
SON. XCII.
I Know not Lord how to discharge aright,
The duty that for graces great I owe,
No need thou have of me at all I know,
Yet in thy service shall be my delight,
To publish forth thy praises day and night,
To serve thy Saints with gifts I shall possess,
Thy wondrous works by all means to confess,
I will employ my substance, wit, and might.
The remnant of my life shall well express,
That (dead to sin) in Christ to life I grow,
Which shall to world, my mind regenerate show,
Although that I, cannot sin clean suppress,
And will address My thoughts to thee alone,
Because on earth true joy or bliss is none.
SON. XCIII.
IF I did hope by pen to pattern out
The many merits of thy Majesty,
(Which of thy mercies we do daily try)
And endless matter I should go about,
But I (alas) my strength so much do doubt,
That nothing less then such a thought I have,
To point forth others to a thought I crave,
Whose confidence in skill is much more stout.
Yet dare I say that nature never gave
The power to flesh and blood to look so hye,
Nor gifts of grace, full few there are apply,
To give him laud aright, that did them save.
How to behave My self herein I learn,
And wish my will might others likewise warn.
SON. XCIIII.
What tongue or pen can show it self unkind,
Unto a father full of mercy so,
Who freely does such benefits besto,
And of our case has such a careful mind?
Before we were, a way he forth did find,
Whereby to purchase us in heaven a place,
When native strength our glory should deface,
A remedy therefore his love assignd:
He gives us knowledge of the same by grace,
Which offered is to them the which will go
Unto the word where saving health does grow,
And faith through which our Savior we embrace,
And being base By birth, and thrall to hell,
He us adopts in childrens room to dwell.
SON. XCV.
Why should this worldly care have now such power
To quench the comfort which the soul shall find
In this our God, who is to us so kind,
The memory of which should fear devour?
If faith were watered well with heavenly shower
Of grace, and knowledge of our happy state,
It would the force of all assaults abate,
And be a bulwark strong, at trials hour.
If we the world and flesh did truly hate,
And made his will a law unto our mind,
If doubt of power or will, did not us blind,
Which to distrust, sets open wide the gate,
Then would this rate Of worldly care be less,
And he our faith with favor more would bless.
SON. XCVI.
HOw loath this flesh of mine remains still,
To part from sin his old companion dear,
Of death or of a change, he would not hear,
But would embrace him aye with his good will,
The very thought of death his thought does kill,
The very fear thereof his sorrow brings,
So sweet the pleasures seem of earthly things,
That naught else can our fond affections fill.
But who is wise, fro out the snare he wrings,
Before perforce, death does approach him near,
That abstinence no virtue does appear,
When want of power subdues affections stings,
But who so flings, From them when they pursue,
To him pure name of virtue indeed is due.
SON. XCVII.
Who so would live, of force he first must die,
Death is the door which leads unto life,
Life which shall be deuoyd of change and strife,
Whose comfort shall our tears of sorrow dry;
The way is straight the which man must go by:
If to the heavens he purpose to ascend,
His gross corruption must to grave descend,
And dead the power of sin therein must lie,
If he to be regenerate intend,
First must he mortify the motions rife,
Of lust, which kill the soul with cruel knife,
And eke his ruin presently pretend,
For God will send A happy change indeed,
As harvest paies with plenty plow-mans seed.
SON. XCVIII.
When I with grief sometimes to mind do call,
The woeful loss that sin to man has brought,
And want which to all creatures it has wrought,
By Satan's slight, and Adams fearful fall;
I find no comfort in worlds use at all,
But wish to be dissolved with Christ to dwell,
From whom all blessings flow and do excel,
In thought whereof my comfort is not small:
Yea I do grow by thinking hereof well,
Into a doubt, if that in truth I ought
More sorrow parents fall, which death has brought,
Or joy the life through Christ to me befell;
Yet truth to tell, I find the change so good,
Our state is better now then when we stood.
SON. XCIX.
IF I can speak and like a coward crake,
If I can tell the thing the which is best,
If I in muster seem to battle pressed,
And yet shrink back when I should trial make,
If I endeavor others to awake,
Fro out the deadly slumber they are in,
And yet my self cannot revolt from sin,
But in the pride thereof do pleasure take,
By all my travel I no gain shall win,
Although my pain might prove to others blessed,
But (as the Symbals sound does to the rest)
I might haps morn, when others mirth begin,
The feast but thin, Would be unto my share,
Though many dishes to the guests I bare.
SON. C.
FOrtune and chance, blind guides to bliss farewell,
Upon your leasures I no more attend,
I not regard what good or ill you send,
Nor in your tents of pleasures wish to dwell,
A greater bliss then ere through you befell,
Ye made me to neglect I now do see,
Whose hope from fear could nere continue free,
But aye distrust did against my faith rebel:
The earths delight the which ye promised me,
Could not my soul from sorrow ought defend,
Your sweet with sower was mixed in the end,
So vain and variable both they be,
Then happy he That seeks blessed rest,
In Christ alone, and does the world detest.
CONCLUSION.
Words may well want, both ink and paper fail,
Wits may grow dull, and will may weary grow,
And worlds affairs may make my pen more slow,
But yet my heart and courage shall not quail,
Though cares and troubles do my peace assail,
And drive me to delay thy praise awhile,
Yet all the world shall not from thoughts exile,
Thy mercies Lord by which my plaints prevail.
And though the world with face should grateful smile,
And me her pedlers pack of pleasures show,
No hearty love on her I would bestow,
Because I know she seeks me to beguile,
Ne will defile My happy peace of mind,
For all the solace I in earth may find.
FINIS.
SUNDRY AFFECTIONATE SONETS OF A FEELING CONSCIENCE.
PREFACE.
Where have thou rangd my retchles soul so long?
How too securely have thou luld my mind?
In so long space, no cause or means to find,
To (once again) renew thy vowed song.
Be not too bold, think not thy peril past;
May be, thy journey is but new begun,
Pleasures do vanish, dangers fly as fast
To stop thy course, if slowly thou do run.
Thy vows are made, they may not be undone,
And cause thou have (if blessings not thee blind)
To keep thy promise to a God so kind,
By whom alone, thou freedoms rest have won:
To him (nay to thy self) then do not wrong,
To whom thy heart, power, will, by vow belong.
SON. I.
OF thee and of thy praise (Lord) will I sing,
Who rid'st on winged Chariot of the sky,
Whose throne is plast above the thrones most hie,
Whose will does form and change each formed thing:
To thee the offerings, of thy bounties gift;
To thee the due, of my attaynd desire
I will present, and with a voice vplift
Contend to cause the world thy name admire.
Thy praises do not mortal praise require,
For lo (alas) they no way can come nigh
Unto the holy hymns thy Saints apply,
And Angels sing, inflamed with heavenly fire:
Yet shall my soul, such zealous present bring,
As shall record my love to heavens high king.
SON. II.
EXild be mortal cares, raysd be my song,
To treat (with style condign) thy honor still,
O mighty Jove, who heaven and earth do fill
With myrror of thy power: to thee belong
All powers and wills, of body and of mind,
Thou make and blessest with thy providence,
Thy bounty to the needy is so kind,
As naught but mercie^and love proceeds thence:
At our right hand a ready safe defense,
If Satan's practice once assail us will,
Thou holy motions do in us distill,
And do illuminate our dulled sense:
Thou do redeem, fro out the enemies throng
The innocent, whom worldlings use to wrong.
SON. III.
VVRo out what dream, what sleep, what charmed rest
Rouse I my self? who too too long have stayed,
(With worldly cares and vanities dismayed)
And clean forgot almost souls solace blessed?
My greedy nature, quaffed over much,
Restrained poison (potions of delight)
New liberty did former diet grutch,
Though life the one, death other showed to sight;
Nature, against grace; provoke still this fight,
World to our wills does yield accursed aid,
Satan our senses dulles, that not affrayd,
We work our wrack with greedy force and might:
But waken me (o Lord) I thee request,
With pleasure, pain, wealth, woe, as likes thee best.
SON. IIII.
WHat is thy measure full? do thou suppose
Of strength, of perfectness, of plenteous store,
Of fruits of faith professed; that now no more
Thou carest, albeit thy tree true beauty lose?
It can not be, whilst life and sap remain,
That barren branch, so holy plant should bear:
A fair green tree of goodly leaves were vain,
Unless that kindly fruit also there were.
Words are but leaves, works fruits that should be there,
Show that thou live, by charity therefore;
True holiness does teach a righteous lore,
Whereby to neighbors good, our thoughts we rear;
Vain is our knowledge and our holy shows,
If in our life the fruit of love not grows.
SON. V.
HOw can I hope for all my forward speed,
My fresh incounters of the riuals first,
My bold intent and zeal, which venture dirst
To run so hard a race, and long indeed,
To win the prize? if past the greater pain,
I faint or do begin, my speed delay,
Or trusting over much the goal to gain,
Let every leaden heel, lead me the way.
In race of soul to heaven, light many a stay,
And fainting body does for pleasnre thurst:
The world strowes golden fruits (of taste accursed)
Which touched with love, we lose to souls decay:
Then let me still run on, so have I need,
For constancy, stands most the soul in steed.
SON. VI.
ALl will not serve, the more I would beware,
The more I headlong fall and drown in sin:
So far unlike the victory to win,
That to his building mortar I prepare.
One thing I say, an other thing I do,
One show of work I have, an other deed:
I run clean from the mark I look unto,
With one hand quench the fire, with'other feed.
One error does a hundred errors breed,
If one I cut, to grow do ten begin.
This fleshly laberinth that I am in,
Is of the sinful race of Hydras seed,
But yet my travel still I will not spare;
Because I know, God has on me a care.
SON. VII.
Feign would I bring some fruit of sauorie taste,
For offering of freewill and of my zeal;
But I do fear my weakness to reveal,
(Like new wine in a crazed vessel plast)
The vessel yet (not liquor) being mine,
And it filled in by master of the store,
I hope he will not at my gift repine,
But (if it fail) will it replenish more.
My weakness, I do oftentimes deplore,
And for relief, to him I do appeal:
Yet joy, the bounty, that he daind to deal,
And halting have, to those that go before.
In hope that my (nay his gifts) shall be grast,
Through love unto his son, whom he imbrast.
SON. VIII.
I Marvel much sometimes to see my will,
Contraried by my self with hearts consent;
To see me cross the course my purpose meant,
And yet the event thereof prove better still.
I am by nature unto evil prone,
And that pursue, with forward fleshly aid:
Straight way my mind is cha^gd (by means unknown)
And heart consents, my former will be stayed.
The cause hereof, and issues I have wayd,
And find them strange, yet bending in intent
Unto my good (sometimes though ill I meant)
And fayld of plots, my greatest wisdom laid:
Which does my soul, in fine with comfort fill,
To see Gods providence, my purpose spill.
SON. IX.
I Now begin to doubt my present state,
For that I feel no conflict in my mind:
A settled concord, needs must be unkind,
Twixt flesh and spright, which should each other hate,
They near agree, but to their common woe,
And that through sin which luld them both a sleep,
A warfare in this body would I go,
Lest fraud, or treason in through rest should creep.
The practices of Satan are so deep,
Armed with flesh and lust (whom prone we find)
That hardly can the soul his freedom keep,
But that these fiendes would him with frailty bind.
Unless with heavenly weapons at debate,
With them we stand, and fight, both rare and late.
SON. X.
When I remember, with what speed in post
The Jews (returned from bondage) took in hand
Their Temple to restore, and armed stand,
In breach of walls to build, what enemies crossed.
When I their bounty note, in offering store,
All freely given, and more then they could use,
How true their treasures were that would no more,
Their workmens faith (accounts whilst Kings refuse.)
How these our latter times (which we accuse
Of ignorance, through fraud of Balaams band)
Did yet power forth the plenty of the land,
To holy use, which other did abuse.
I sorrow much to see true zeal clean lost,
And pure religion shakt for saving cost.
SON. XI.
What love is this whereof the world does tell,
Which they to God profess and men admire?
Love has his laws, and does effects require
Of charity (to neighbor) to excel.
For as the members of one body be
Partakers of the passion others have,
And speedily concur to help we see,
Because (thereby) the bodies good they crave.
So if their love to God they freely gave,
And held him head; their zeal would burn like fire
To serve his Saints, the needy to attire,
And home the stray to call, the lost to save.
For how can they th'inuisible God love well,
When they neglect their neighbors, near that dwell?
SON. XII.
Who so will serve the Lord, he must bestow
The whole (not part) of body or of mind:
If in his heart dislike hereof he find,
His soul not yet, regenerate we may know.
Betwixt two stools no sitting safe there is,
And kingdoms so divided cannot stand:
We must embrace and love or that, or this;
And not look back, if plough be once in hand.
If Gods we be, we Beliall must withstand,
We cannot him well serve and Baall blind,
To Balak (Balams kindness of such kind)
Did draw him to accurse the blessed land,
Whereby his Ass, did masters blindness show;
And still bewrays, weak faith, where this shall grow.
SON. XIII.
Give all to him, that all did give to thee:
More then his due, thou have not to bestow:
By yielding all, thou thankfulness may show,
The more thy store, the more his gifts would be.
A cheerful giver God does best accept,
Though he does give that gift thou do present;
His blessings must be used and not be kept,
(Like fruitless tallents) not to profit spent.
Thy soul and body both, since God has lent,
The use of them (entire) to him should grow,
What is our power and strength, he well does know:
And gives the will; which (used) he is content.
But for to share a part, that scorneth he
Who knows our thoughts and secret heart does see.
SON. XIIII.
But will you know (indeed) the surest way,
To make the child of God a loathing find
Of sin (which does infect both heart and mind)
And us the grace of God does so denay?
Let man but see the fierce and angry face,
Of God for sin which in his word is found;
Let him behold a man deuoid of grace,
Whom every thought and deed to death does wound.
Let him (if ever grace did so abound
In him, as he found God a father kind)
But call to mind, how much it should him bind,
And how salvation stands on that ground.
Then will he in his conscience surely say,
I'will dwell no more in sin, nor mends delay.
SON. XV.
SOmetimes clean tired, or shamed of sin at last,
(If not for love of good, or fear of hell)
I seek to stay affections which rebel,
And how to quench their heat my wits I cast:
I find even whilst the thought is in my head,
A liking thought thereof does me possess:
From thoughts to liking are my humors led,
And liking longs again to work no less.
My laberinth felt, I seek in vain to express,
An idle thought can not such thoughts expel:
I think to exercise my time so well
In some good work, as may vain thoughts suppress;
But I do tire, ere little time be past:
Prayer alone withstands the greatest blast.
SON. XVI.
ME thinks sometime, I muse and much admire,
The dullness of the Jews, who daily saw
The powrefull works of Christ, which well might draw
A stony heart, to love of him t'aspire:
Much more I marvel that the words he spoke,
Seemed parables, and dark unto his own
Disciples; who his scholars he did make,
To whom all secrets, should by time be known;
But when I find the wonders on us shown,
Unnoted or acknowledged, by awe
Unto his will, or word, or holy law,
And common ignorance by most men shown.
It makes me fear, we want the holy fire
Of faith, love, zeal, which duty would require.
SON. XVII.
What vain lip-labor is it men do use
To speak of God, his name in word confess?
When as in life no duty they express
Of godliness, but fleshly freedom choose:
Not every one that cries often Lord,
Shall enter to possess eternal rest:
Vain ostentation was (we see) abhord
In Pharise, whose speech and shows were best.
Hypocrisy the Lord did aye detest,
And chiefly that in them, his name should bless,
As Anany, with Saphira no less
Do witness by their death, at hand adrest:
Let us therefore this babbling form refuse,
Of boasting holiness, which does abuse.
SON. XVIII.
I Go about full often (like Jews most blind)
To offer up, to God a sacrifice
Propitiatory, grateful to his eyes,
Thereby remission for my sins to find:
But lose my labor whilst I clean forget,
First with my neighbor to be reconcild,
A heap of rankor does my conscience let,
From looking for remorse in father mild.
The mercies on the which my hopes should build,
My own malicious purpose me denies,
For how should I that grace to gain devise,
Which from my neighbors suits I have exild?
At Temple door my offering stays behind,
Henceforth therefore, till malice leave my mind.
SON. XIX.
O Happy Simon of Siren, art thou,
Who chosen were that office to supply,
To bear part of the cross, on which should die
Thy Savior, (worlds new life and comfort true:)
Not wood I mean so much, which thou did bear,
But that remorse, which thereby I suppose,
(Through shame and sorrow, pity, care, and fear)
Which for his innocence in thee rose.
Such crosses and full many more then those,
(Even for my sins and for my self) wish I
As many as on fleshly strength might lie,
Or grace would aid, ere faith did comfort lose:
That for his servant so he would me vow,
And try and use me as he best knows how.
SON. XX.
What are our senses drowned and past recure?
Are rest and ease (the needful aides of man,
Without vicisitude of which none can
Continue long) become by peace impure?
Shall blessings prove our curse, desire our bane?
Shall wish attain his will? will work our woe?
Shall profit be our loss? loss turn to gain?
Shall Gods great goodness be requited so?
Should fathers kindness make a child a fo?
(O God forbid) our vows were other, when
Our tired souls, our prayers first began
To send, as suitors to our God to go.
His love to us did our desires procure,
Let our desires his growing love allure.
SON. XXI.
WHen I do see the mercies manifold,
Which God does use t'extend to his elect,
Whose actions always he does so direct,
That love and favor in him they behold:
How things restrained unto them are free,
And all things holy to the holy are,
How priuiledgd in every thing they be,
And nothing from his love can them debar.
My mind from common comforts flies far,
And finds (on earth) no true joy in effect;
On God alone, I place my hearts affect:
Where peace is perfect, without strife or jar,
And through these worldly cares I wander (bold,
Secure) in courage, more then can be told.
SON. XXII.
COme to the Council of your common weal,
Ye senses mine (which have confederate bin
With world and Satan to infect with sin
My soul, whose harbor in your house befell)
Think ye your safety great, when he is thrall?
That ye can escape, if soul once captive be?
That plagues she feels, shall not on ye befall?
And ye with her, bring endless woe to me?
What earthly beauty can eyes brightness see?
What melody hear ears? what liked smell?
What vnloathd taste, or feelings please so well,
That are not often noisome unto ye?
Then (since such hazard great, short joy ye win)
To watch with me, against common foes begin.
SON. XXIII.
IN midst of plenty, and of happiest state,
Wherein by nature all men do delight,
Me thinks I see, most cause of fear and fright,
Most perils, and most dangerous grown debate:
A masking rout of treacherous bayted hooks,
Cast forth by Satan for to choke the mind,
By every sense, where so the thought but looks,
To draw us to destruction wretches blind:
It was grave providence of Job I find,
(Fearing the charms and dangers like to light
On feasting children) praying day and night,
To mollify the wrath of God most kind.
Which would to God were vsd by us likewise,
So should less evil of our mirth arise.
SON. XXIIII.
HOw little comfort do I find (alas)
In these vain pleasures, which my flesh desires?
The use of them full soon me cloyes and tireth,
And solace gone as thing that never was:
I strive sometimes to taste the same content,
In mirth and company that others find;
Yet seldom taste the bliss I not repent,
And leaves no bitter sting or grief behind:
In fine I find the body is too blind
To judge of happiness, since it admireth
A shadow, which from memory retyreth,
And therefore choose henceforth to feed my mind,
With some such solace, as that will not pass,
And I with comfort see, in faithful glass.
SON. XXV.
Well, if I find no greater be my power,
But yield and reele with every puff that blo'wth,
And that my nature still such frailty show'th,
As that my constant purpose fayles each hour:
If I can not approach, or see the tree
Of fruit forbid, but needs I must it taste;
If lust unlawful so abound in me,
That headlong I must needs to ruin have:
The readiest way to keep my conscience chaste,
Must be to shun occasions, where do grow
The roots, whence fruits of deadly poison flow,
And therein only think my safeguard plast:
For (if I see) I hunger to deuowre
The bayt (souls bane) and dwell in sinful bower.
SON. XXVI.
WHo touches pitch shall therewith be defilde,
(The proverb says, and practice shows plain)
The purest conscience custom soon will stain,
And wisest wits, by boldness be beguilde:
We therefore warily had need to walk,
And stop temptations when they first do rise;
For evil deeds ensue of evil talk,
And evil company polutes the wise.
We know that Satan always wa^chfull lies,
By many means, us to his will to gain;
If we a little yield, it is in vain
For safe retreat to hope, or to devise:
Unless Gods grace the bulwark stronger build,
By which hels power is quenched, and he exilde.
SON. XXVII.
HE that to do no evil does intend,
He must do naught that may thereto belong;
He that is purposed to do no wrong,
To thought our speech of ill he must not bend:
Sin is a thief, and searches every part,
And power of man, to find a harbor fit;
He can disguise his purpose well by art,
And in a trap us unawares can git.
If we but kindly talk (to practice wit)
He soon can frame the mind to pleasing song:
The mind, the body soon can draw along,
To yield consent unto, and practice it:
In fine he can us teach sin to defend,
And (noozeld once therein) to find no end.
SON. XXVIII.
WHen I look back upon the slipperie way,
Wherein my youth with other worldlings past,
I half amazed do remain, aghast
To see the ruin whereunto it lay:
So many by-pathes, crooked and unjust,
So many stops and stays, and ways impure;
So little hold of help whereto to trust,
So many blocks my peril to procure:
Such flattering trains to ruin to allure,
As had not grace the graceless stayed at last,
I had my self to hell, even headlong cast,
There to remain without remead or cure:
I then (compeld) with thanks to God do say,
That in man's proper strength there is no stay.
SON. XXIX.
AMong the many fierce assaults we have,
To me impatience, seems most strong of all,
Which makes us from our best defense to fall,
Of wisdom, reason, faith, which all do wave:
Our temperance thereby we do quickly loose,
Humility and love we often do shake,
From law and reason we our ears do close,
And bit in teeth (like stubborn coltes) we take:
Of heavenly promised aid, no count we make:
Of our deserts, we take no heed at all;
For vengeance we with fury only call,
Or with despair, we comfortless do quake,
When we (like David) should, lewd Simei save,
In fear least God, forth his commission gave.
SON. XXX.
Who seeks aid his frailties to withstand,
He may be sure he shall not deadly fall;
Who but for grace, to God does truly call,
He shall find comfort doubtless out of hand:
To see his sins, to fear their vengeance due,
To call for grace, to seek the same amend;
Of Gods elections, tokens are so true,
That such (as his) he doubtless will defend.
If that his humbled heart, his soul do bend
To will of good, though fruit there be but small;
He cannot fruitless said to be at all,
Because his merits Christ to him does lend:
And he as free shall be of promised land,
As those in who^ more righteous work he fand.
SON. XXXI.
IT is not causeless, Christ did use compare
Man's mind unto the soil that tilled is;
They both fulwell indeed agree in this,
Untilled, they unfruitful are and bare:
Such seed as is bestowed, they do receive,
And both yield fruit as God does give increase;
Some seed is spilt, some Satan does bereave,
Some prosper, and produce a plentious peace:
And as devouring fowls do never cease,
Ne worms, ne swine, to seek do never mis,
Each one to spoil a part, whilst plowman his
Due recompense of pains cannot possess;
So does the soul, though tild with studious care,
Great store of weeds bring forth, good fruits full rare.
SON. XXXII.
IF woe there was by Christ pronounst indeed,
Against Corasin and Bethsaiday,
Because unpenitent they sluggish lay,
And to his preaching gave not careful heed;
Then woe and double woe I fear (alas)
Belongs to us, who scornefully reject
The same word preached, which unheard does pas,
Or vnobayd (at least) through foul neglect:
Our lives, our double hearts does well detect,
Our want of charity, self love bewray;
Our pride, our lust, our covetous denay,
That ears have heard, or heart does grace affect:
Then woe is me that woe our selves we breed,
And that for fear of woe, or hearts not bleed.
SON. XXXIII.
IT should not seem, that we do sin detest,
As we profess, and make the world to think;
When we not only at foul faults do wink,
But rather at the doers make a jest:
How could a thing displeasing, mirth produce?
Or hearty laughter grow, by hearts displeasure?
To laugh at others fall, does show an use
Of our like guilt, who sin so slightly measure,
The mouth does speak from hearts abounding treasure,
The heart delights, when mind consent does bring;
The mind (polluted once by bodies sting)
Infects whole man, on whom sin then has seasure,
And when (thus) sin has built a place of rest,
He makes us every evil to digest.
SON. XXXIIII.
THe fatal haps, and judgments which befall
On others and on us, remorse should breed,
For warnings of our selves they stand in steed,
And us unto repentant fear do call:
They are not always worst, who do sustain
The greatest plagues, ne yet the others free
Of guilt (how be it unpunished they remain)
But rather for the more part worse they be:
Christ's holy judgment teaches this to me,
By fall of Sylo tower (the which indeed)
Slew not the worst; and even the best had need,
Their due deserts in others doom to see.
Let one man's woe, be warning then to all,
And life reformd, amend, sins great and small.
SON. XXXV.
I Often times endeavor to prepare
My mind, to bear with patience natures due,
Death which (though fearful) must perforce ensue,
And which no humane flesh did ever spare:
I therefore when I see the many woes
That others do sustain by living long;
The sickness, want, dishonor, spite of foes,
Which most men must sustain by right or wrong.
The hazards which on earth to us belong,
The doubtful hopes and fears which aye renew;
Ten thousand fained pleasures (for one true)
And care to compass them we have among:
I grow to grant, that life is but a snare,
Death, way to life, a life deuoyd of care.
SON. XXXVI.
Who sees the seed that in the ground is cast,
Clean from all weeds, without both chafe and straw,
Yet afterward when harvest near does draw,
Shall see the weeds increase therein so fast:
Who sees the travel to receive again,
The corn from chafe, and stubble cleansed made,
May see corruption in the soul remain,
Which so with dross, the slender crop does lade.
And in the soul may see like daily trade,
(By natures weakness, which us keeps in awe)
So much; that though we hear and fear the law
And Gospel, and in them a while do wade:
We bring few fruits (and them most bad) at last,
Which Satan, world, and flesh, with sin have blast.
SON. XXXVII.
THough lawful many things indeed I find,
To such as do them with a conscience pure;
Yet like I not my self, for to inure
To things, not pleasing to the weaker mind;
And many lawful things there are beside,
Which be not yet expedient to be done;
A Christians actions, must the tutch abide
Of such, as by example will be won.
For why, the ignorant do blindfold run
The trade that others tread, as way most sure,
And memory of ill, does more endure
Then good, wherefore we warily should shun
The action which may chance ensnare the blind,
Although the wise from hazard safely wind.
SON. XXXVIII.
Vain are the brags, and faith but fruitless is,
Of such who bost of virtue and holiness,
When as profaned speech does yet express
A hollow heart, by tongue that talks amiss.
The tongue declares the abundance of the heart,
And by our speech we use to express our mind,
A truly touched soul, with wound does smart,
When vain or fruitless speech to rise they find:
But nature (forced) will foone return to kind,
And who his seemelesse speech will not suppress,
Vain and deceitful must his brags confess,
And that delight in sin is yet behind:
Who therefore has no care at all of this,
His knowledge, zeal, and life receives no blis.
SON. XXXIX.
I Often others hear lament, and say
They cannot see, the fruit they do expect
By prayer; and my self feel like effect,
Because indeed, I unprepared pray.
Not that my knees with reverence do not bow,
Or that my tongue, it does not crave relief;
Or that my heart, my words does not allow;
But charity does want, and firm belief,
Which to true prayers are assistants chief,
Both which (for most part) man does use neglect,
For want of either of which we are reject,
And to our weakness adds double grief:
Who does till reconcilement, offering stay,
His faithful lawful prayers find no nay.
SON. XL.
THe season of the year, the native kind
Of every creature to produce some thing,
Into my conscience does this motion bring,
To God and nature not to be unkind:
Two soyles I have, and both unfruitful be,
Through weeds (of sin) which both them over grow:
The body barren and the soul I see,
Of virtuous fruits, which God and world I owe.
Vouchsafe yet Lord (Phauonean breath) to blow,
With heavenly grace inspiring so my mind,
That soul regenerate, in body find
Reformed life, true life in me to show:
For fleshly fruits (too rife) to hell do fling,
Souls blessed seed, ascends on Angels wing.
SON. XLI.
ALl men by nature greedy are to know,
And (knowing much) the more they do contend;
(To draw unto true knowledge perfect end)
By practice to the world, some fruits to show:
What knowledge is there then in heaven or earth,
(For one of wisdom great) so high and fit,
To travel in, even from the day of birth,
As that is gathered out of holy writ?
Therein is matter for each kind of wit,
Strange, ancient, pleasing, subtle, for to spend
The finest wits, and make them stoop and bend,
Whilst weakest brains, find skill and joy in it.
Though high it reach, it bears fruit below,
Which (tasted once) makes stomach stronger grow.
SON. XLII.
STrange are (in truth) the fruits that man does win,
And plentiful by use of study indeed,
Which appetite and matter still does breed,
If but to gather them we do begin:
But heavenly study much more copious is,
Containing all that humane art does teach:
And (not alone it feeds our minds with this)
But souls true solace it does farther reach:
It doctrine supernatural does preach,
And does divinely sow the sacred seed
Which shall our souls with lasting comfort feed,
And worldly skill, of ignorance appeach:
That is the study we should never lin
To spell, read, conster, and to practice in.
SON. XLIII.
Down let us fling these battlements begone
Of sin, which in our souls so fast are built,
At first, or not at all it must be spilt,
Or else his fort (once made) the field is won.
If we neglect our watch, and not prevent
His practices, but even a little while:
Our travel afterward is vainly spent,
And he our best attempts will soon beguile:
If we at lusts assaults but seem to smile,
(Though lowly first he creep, yet straight on stilt)
He will vpstart, and make us yield to gilt,
And we our selves souls slaughter be the while,
Because we stay not sin till it be done,
But (rather) after it do fondly run.
SON. XLIIII.
THere is great ods we see and must confess,
Betwixt the speakers and the doers faith,
Words well, but deeds much better man bewraith,
And both conioynd, do duty best express.
One promises to come (as was required)
To feast; the other it denies, but went:
The first he did neglect what was desired,
The latters deeds, do show he did relent:
He had the praise and feast, who did repent,
His words, his blame, who breaking promise stayth
Whose life does not comfirme what tongue it says,
(For all his brags) in end shall sure be shent,
But who does tongue and heart to God address,
His deeds (be sure) with grace he still will bless.
SON. XLV.
Have we not cause to blush full often for shame,
To see how we neglect our neighbors need?
How slow to help, where we might stand in steed,
How slight excuses we do use to frame:
When yet our Savior seems to respect,
The silly Ox which in the ditch does lie,
Whose aid a stranger ought not to neglect,
If (but by chance) he saw it passing by:
But if our brother ready were to dye,
(For very want necessities to feed)
We let him sterue, and take of him no need,
Yea (though he crave) we stick not to deny,
As though it us suffisd, to bear the name
Of Christians, yet in life deny the same.
SON. XLVI.
NOt only does the Lord, repute as good,
The deeds which he in us himself has wrought;
(Yea though our wills against him in the^ have fought,
And he perforce (by grace) our powers withstood,)
But if we evil do, by stubborn will,
And seek indeed no good at all thereby;
But even our lewd affections to fulfill,
(So that all grace in us do seem to dye)
Yet even in them, this good we shall espy,
(If we his children be whom Christ has bought)
That he permits us not to fall for naught,
But that our frailty and our wits we try:
And so more earnestly unto him pray,
And find that precious fruit a Christian may.
SON. XLVII.
WE had not need in idleness to spend
The days (both few and evil) which we have;
The reason, power, strength, health which God us gave,
To some good end (no doubt) he did us lend.
Full many businesses shall we find,
Enuironing our life on every side,
Which if they were retained still in mind,
In watch and travel they should cause us bide.
The worldly cares of all men well are tried,
The danger of the soul I seek to save,
A world of lusts attend us to the grave,
And Satan lies in wait to lead us wide
From heaven, whereto true wisdom wills us bend;
Think then if man have need watch to the end.
SON. XLVIII.
SInce it has pleased the Lord to send such store
Of blessings to the body, that it may,
In peace and plenty spend one joyful day,
(Which many want, and it longed for before:)
I not repined that it the same should use,
But feared the frailty of the flesh (alas)
Which made my soul, for safest way to choose,
(With Job) in fear and care my time to pas:
For sacrifice, my soul there offered was,
Thy holy spirit, the Priest, my will did slay;
His zeal inflamed the thoughts which prostrate lay,
And quenched thy wrath with tears like fluent glass,
So that (though Satan ready was at door
Me to accuse, and try) I fear no more.
SON. XLIX.
What miracle so great has ever bin
So far from reasons, or from natures bounds?
What thing Gods glory and his praise resounds,
More then his mercy in forgiving sin?
If things contrary to their native kind,
(To join accord, producing strange effects)
Do admiration breed in every mind,
What thing so much Gods glory then detects,
As this, to see, how daily he protects
And blesses us in whom all vice abounds?
How he does hide our faults which so him wounds,
Supplies the want which proper power neglects.
Then (since distrust his miracles keep back)
Let us be sure, that we true faith not lack.
SON. L.
AS those whose skill with colors life-like draw
The portraitures of men, with shadows rare,
Yet shapes deformed, they ne will nor dare
To show to others, as themselves them saw:
So when I make suruay (by rule of truth)
Of all my actions, and my souls estate,
I am ashamed to see the scapes of youth,
And fear to look on that I loved of late:
And as I do my self even for them hate,
So fear I others could no more me spare,
If I should show my self naked and bare,
Who with these foul affects held no debate;
Yet since they are but breaches of the law,
The Gospel will me shroud from Satan's paw.
SON. LI.
AMong the many travels of the just,
The last, which holy Job (alas) sustaind;
I think his soul and body most it paind,
And like thereto, us likewise martyr must,
When we (upon us) feel Gods heavy curse
For sin, from which no one of us is free;
That comforters should seek to make us worse,
And friends like foes, should our tormenters be.
To hud-blind us, when most we need to see,
By coloring sin, which ought to be explaind,
Or amplifying errors which are faind,
To make our souls and bodies disagree:
All these he felt by friends he most should trust,
To hell by pride, or by despair to thrust.
SON. LII.
SLow is our God (indeed) and very slo
To wrath, and that the wicked dearly find;
His children sooner feel correction kind,
And so repent; whilst sinful forward go.
Slow though he be, yet sure his judgments are:
They are deferd, they are not clean forgot;
He tries our natures, letting raines so far
Lose to our wills, till we regard him not:
But when we furiously to hell do trot,
He stays our steps, and wills does gently bind,
Whiles he the reprobates the more does blind,
Till they (through sin) do fall to Satan's lot:
By Gods correcting hand and patience so,
The one to sin inclines, the other fro.
SON. LIII.
When I consider of the holy band,
Of love and mercy with the Jews was made,
The heavenly and earthly blessings which did lade,
Their souls and bodies, whilst in grace they stand.
When I examine cause of this their change,
And note in soul and body woeful fall;
How exiles (comfortless) the earth they range
Deprived of knowledge, glory, hope and all:
When I (as cause hereof) to mind do call,
Their stubborn, faithless, and ungrateful trade,
(With which the Prophets did them often upbraid,
And causes were of wrath from heaven not small)
Me thinks I see like judgment near at hand,
For trespass like to punish this our land.
SON. LIIII.
O That we could be ravished awhile,
Fro out these fleshly fogs, and seas of sin,
Which gross affections daily drench us in,
And do the taste of perfect sense beguile:
That so whilst self-love slept, true love might show;
That pride might so put on an humble mind,
That patience might in steed of rankor grow,
And naked truth, from craft might freedom find:
That virtue had some harbor safe assignd,
And reason had his scope, and did begin
(Of these foul siends) a victory to win,
And them in bondage to the soul to bind:
Then should we see how far they do exile
Our perfect bliss, whilst thus they us defile.
SON. LV.
LIke master like the servants prove (say we)
We therefore are (of like) of Satan's train,
His ancient lesson which did parents stain,
We learn as yet, and lie as fast as he.
False are his rules, himself an old deceiuer,
Untrue he is, untruth he first did teach;
God being truth, naught can so soon disseuer,
And no one sin to more offense does reach:
Satan himself can not Gods laws appeach
To be unjust, nor say, we just remain,
But by new names does his frail scholars gain,
To follow follies which affections preach,
Lust, wrath, and couetise, pride called we see,
Love, value, thrift, and clenlinesse to be.
SON. LVI.
WE may rejoice, but yet in Christ alone;
Alone in him, is cause of true joy found,
All other joy is but indeed unsound,
Perfection or continuance elsewhere none:
If man with Solomon the hap might have
To taste each earthly pleasure he desired,
He would but give that praise the other gave,
That (once possessed) their pleasure straight retired:
From earth to heavenly knowledge he aspired,
And human wisdom he did thoroughly sound;
In which he saw calamities abound,
And did neglect as vain, things most admired.
In this alone, contented joy is shown,
To love, fear, serve, this Christ our corner stone.
SON. LVII.
Wise Moses and grave Talions law severe,
Do well agree to reason natural:
And God in like sort, lets his judgments fall;
So that our sins their proper vengeance bear,
As eye for eye, and tooth for tooth was due:
So nature does our faults for most part pay,
With penance by it self which does ensue,
As we shall find if we our actions way:
And God himself does on th'adultrer lay,
On wrathful, covetous, and proud men all,
Shame, blood, want, scorn, unless in time they call
For grace, which only can their ruin stay:
Whereby we see, whom men keep not in fear,
God makes (by nature) badge of trespass wear.
SON. LVIII.
IT seems strange since death so common is,
That daily we experience thereof have;
By rich, and poor, wise, fools, that go to grave,
That we so little heed do take of this:
Since naught so much contrary to our will,
Does flesh befall, or art does seek to shun;
That yet we headlong have to ruin still,
Of soul and body, which to hell would run.
Scarce we so soon to live have but begun,
But (drenched in affections fearful wave)
We seek to slay the soul, we wish to save;
And no outrage in body leave undone:
So that if God did not (of mercy his)
Perforce our wills restrain, we heaven should mis.
SON. LIX.
Who would not crave to have his wounds be heald?
Who can be heald that will not show his grief?
Who (senseless of his pain) would know relief?
Who can give cure, whilst truth is not reueald?
Who can be judge of ill, that knows no good?
Who can know good, that shuns to learn the same?
Who can it learn, that self-love has withstood?
Who can condemn himself, that knows no blame?
Knowledge must first our minds more lowly frame;
Through lowliness will fear and sorrow grow;
Fear will seek forth a pledge for debt we owe,
And pledge and portion find in Christ his name:
Thus knowledge of our state, and pride repeald,
Is way to saving health, by Scripture sealed.
SON. LX.
THe weapon which I did unwieldy find,
Of native strength, and power of flesh and blood,
(With like whereof Goliath me withstood)
And I for changed sling (left once behind)
By Gods good grace (who courage gave and strength)
Is now become a sword more fit for me,
Who (practisd in his battles now at length)
The use thereof, find not unfit to be:
For since to him it dedicate I see,
And I refreshed am with holy food,
My courage makes me hope I wear it shood,
And cause my souls great foe therewith to flee*
For humane arts and knowledge of the mind,
Do serve the Saints, though worldlings they do
SON. LXI.
IT is not rest from travel and from pain
Alone, that in the Sabbath is required,
Not abstinence from meat, that was desired
So much, when Jonas did his fast ordain.
As rest from sin and inward meditation
Of Gods great works, and mercies which abound;
As feeding of our souls with recreation
Of heavenly doctrine, in the scriptures found:
As by prostrating humbly on the ground,
Our stubborn hearts, puffed up and almost fired
With wicked lusts, (with vanity attired)
Festerd with all affections most unsound;
A Sabbath or a fast so spent, is gain,
When flesh beat down, the sprite does raisd remain.
SON. LXII.
What is the cause that men so much eschew
The reading of the sacred written word?
For naught else sure but that (like two edged sword)
It separates and shows the faults from true:
No sentence in it read or truly wayd,
(Or by the preacher vtterd) turns in vain,
But wounds the soul with sorrow; which affrayd,
(If Gods it be) to grace it calls again:
But such as Satan's be, to hear refrain,
The heavy judgments that they have incurd;
And (faithless) think, God can ne will afford
To them, the bliss that children his attain.
It is a sign therefore, grace never grew,
In such as shun to hear, and learn anew.
SON. LXIII.
WHen I do hear sweet musicks pleasant sound,
By which the Angels records are expressed,
(Who sing to God due praises without rest)
Me thinks to pray with them my self am bound.
When I the concord sounds of true consent
Do note, which by their different voice is bred,
It makes my heart to melt to see man bent,
By discord to dissolve the bliss, that led
To heavenly comfort, which the Angels fed;
And is of Christian love perfection best;
Whose unity in Christ has made them blessed,
To live in him when law had left us dead:
The Saints therefore on earth should aye be found,
With thankful, joyful, hearts of love t'abound.
SON. LXIIII.
AS does the fire, with imbers ouer-spred,
And powder in the Cannon rammed hard,
(By which his furies but awhile debard,
When they break forth) procure more fear and dred:
As air in cloud, or earth restrained long,
Does by his nature in the end prevail:
And (in revenge of his so suffered wrong)
Does earthquake breed, or thu^dring firebolts hail:
So when increasing sins, afresh assail
Our God of mercy, then is he prepared,
Our insolences fiercely to reward
With double ruin, which he will not fail
To terrify those that in sin are dead,
Whilst his to live (reserved) thereby are lead.
SON. LXV.
When I do see a man of lofty mind,
Delighting in the pomp he does possess;
A ruin or a shame at hand I guess,
For which effect God does his judgment blind:
For as most daintily we use to feed,
The beasts to slaughter that we have ordaind:
So surfeit of delights, a fear should breed,
Least sowrer penance afterward remaind:
The proof hereof has still the godly waynd,
From pride or too much trust in happiness;
Which do not still Gods favor firm express,
But vsd as trials are, of conscience faynd,
We therefore cause of care in plenty find,
To move us pray, and watch the end behind.
SON. LXVI.
AS does the morning comfort to us bring,
By giving light to guide us in our ways,
As sunshine beams his beauty then displayes,
To solace, feed, refresh each earthly thing:
So should (me thinks) a thankful heart thereby,
Be moved, to weigh the fruits by them we have,
And by that light a greater light espy,
Who these (for bodies good) unto us gave.
Like light unto his soul forthwith to crave,
Whereby it sleeping (void of holy rays
Of grace) in sin does spend away the days,
Which Christ our Savior died, the same to save,
Unto thee Lord, (Creator, powrefull king)
With birds by break of day they praise should sing.
SON. LXVII.
I List not judge nor censure other men;
As I do judge, so judge me others will,
And God himself that part can best fulfill:
With others faults I will not meddle then,
Unless so far as duty does desire,
Which is with love to warn them of the way,
Whose weakness does our loving aid require,
To stay their steps wherein they are astray:
But I must judge my self (does scripture say)
And that I will, but not by native skill:
The law and Gospel they shall try me still,
And their true touch, shall my estate bewray:
My conscience witness more then thousands ten,
My heart confess my faults with tongue and pen.
SON. LXVIII.
I See sometimes a mischief me beset,
Which does amaze me much, and grief procure:
I have a hope or hap I wish to endure,
But it does vanish straight, and I do fret.
I crave sometimes of God with feruencie,
A thing (me thinks) which might work to my joy,
My prayers yet he seems to deny,
And by the contrary does work my'annoy:
I find at length the thing I scorned (as coy)
Fall to my profit, and does me assure,
That God by this his goodness, does allure
Me to depend on him, and not to toy,
(By native reason guided,) but to let
His providence have praise, and honor get.
SON. LXIX.
HOw should I use my time henceforth the best?
The little that remains ought well be spent:
Too much lost time, cause have I to repent,
Best mends must be, well to employ the rest.
To pray and praise the Lord, is fit for me,
To crave things needful, and his mercies tell;
My spiritual wants and carnal plenties be,
As many yet his blessings which excel:
But multitude of words please not so well,
He knows the heart which righteously is bent;
All holy actions are as prayers meant,
And he is praysd, when sin we do repel:
Then if my life, the world and flesh detest,
I pray and praise, and shall find actions blessed.
SON. LXX.
Good words are praisd, but deeds are much more rare:
One shadow is, the other substance right,
Of Christian faith (which God and man delight)
Without which fruits our barren tree is bare:
Once well done, is more comfort to the soul,
More profit to the world, to God more praise,
Then many learned words which sin control,
Or all lip-labor that vain glory says.
Who in a holy life does spend his days,
And still maintain against sin a valiant fight,
He preaches best, his words are most of might,
He shall convert men most from sinful ways:
Such shall have honor most (affirm I dare)
With God and man, and less of worldly care.
SON. LXXI.
SInce we by baptism, servants are professed
To Christ, whose name we (as an honor) bear,
It is good reason, we his livery wear,
And not go ranging vainly with the rest:
Since we do feed (by bounty of his hand)
On precious food, which he does give and dress,
(Who at the well of life does ready stand
Us to refresh, if thirst do us oppress.)
We are too slow our selves to him t'addresse,
To crave and use these gifts in love and fear:
His righteous livery we do rather tear,
Then whom we serve by use thereof express:
Little he got that was such bidden guest,
And how can thanklesse servants then be blessed?
SON. LXXII.
SInce shame of men much more then godly fear,
Restrains us from sin, as proof does preach;
Since more we after name of virtue reach,
Then to the truth thereof we love do bear:
It were a part of wisdom to devise,
To use our nature (of it self so vain)
From so base custom (even for shame) to rise
To actions good, which might true honor gain.
The best remede I therefore find remain,
To purchase praise, and virtues habit teach,
Is to profess in speech the same, whose breach
In life we should refrain, least we should stain
Our name, which would at length our liking rear,
To love of God indeed, and sins forbear.
SON. LXXIII.
THe difference is right great (a man may see)
Twixt heaven and earth, twixt soul and body ours,
Twixt God and man, heavens power and earthly towers;
As great the difference, in their use must be,
By high, ambitious, and by wrathful sword,
Are earthly, transitory kingdoms gaynd;
Humility with patient deed and word,
To heavenly crown and honor does attain:
Man will his conquest with vain glory stain;
Heavens kingdom former pride forthwith deuowrs,
It equals all estates, sects, skils, and powers,
And makes the body well unite remain,
Whereof the head is Christ, the members we,
And held coheires of heaven with him we be.
SON. LXXIIII.
FOr us who do by nature still incline
Unto the worst, and do the best forget,
Who do all passed benefits lightly set,
And so unthankfully against God repine:
It were great wisdom daily to observe,
Such sundry haps as do to us befall,
By which to learn, how much God does deserve;
Who those, and passed benefits gave us all.
And since there is not any bliss so small,
But for the which, we ought acknowledge debt,
On each occasion we should gladly get,
A means our minds to thankfulness to call.
For naught God craves, new can give in fine,
But drink with thanks his cup of saving wine.
SON. LXXV.
THe parable of seed well sown on ground,
Which did according (as the soil did sarue)
Some never bud, some bloome, some straightway starve,
Some grow, and in his crop so much abound:
Does well describe (as Christ full well applies)
The nature of the word, the which is sent
By written Gospel and by preachers cries,
Into the heart, which (hearing) it does rent:
And (as well tild) sometimes begins relent,
And yields blessed fruit and praise desarue;
As God the showers of grace does freely carue,
And diligence in weeding it is spent:
For many times such sinful tares are found,
As good had bin the seed in sea had drowned.
SON. LXXVI.
I Cannot choose (but yet deuoyd of pride)
To note the happy and the glorious time
Wherein we live, and flourish in the prime
Of knowledge, which those former days not tried:
For all preheminences which are read,
(Forespoke of latter age by Prophets all)
As happily were performed, as promised,
When Christ those mysteries did on earth unfold,
And those accomplish which were long foretold:
The same, yea more by far (we dust and slime
Unworthy wayers of thee, high we clime)
Enjoy, through preached truth more worth the^ gold.
But woe is me, this grace is us denyde,
We (to our selves) have not the same applyde.
SON. LXXVII.
IF thou do feel thy fleshly thoughts repine,
When thou do bear the crosses God does send,
And that thou under burden of them bend,
And out of due obedience would untwine:
Remember when as yet a child thou wast,
Thou sufferedst patiently thy parents rod,
Because thou knewst his hatred could not last,
Though he thee punished, doing thing forbod:
And wilt not thou, much more yield unto God
Obedience, who thy good does still intend?
Whose fatherly protection does defend
Thee from his wrath, when sin had made thee od:
The father to thy soul he is in fine,
His wrath asswag'd, his love does soon incline.
SON. LXXVIII.
TRue is it sure, and none will it denay,
That faith inableth man to be more fit
For heavenly knowledge, then a humane wit:
To which, hid secrets God will not bewray.
But what is faith, and how it may be known,
How best attaynd; in that most men mistake:
In judgment of the same would care be shown,
And of true faith from false, this difference make;
If worldly strength and wisdom man forsake,
If he by humble prayers seek for it,
If of Gods promises he doubt no whit
In Christ, but for his strength that rock he take,
It builded is on ground which still shall stay,
From fleshly bondage free, at latter day.
SON. LXXIX.
What high presumption is there grown of late,
In abject shrubs of Satan's darnell seed?
That (bramble-like) sin thus aspires indeed,
To top the Cedar, that his pride does hate?
I grant the fault, in suffering him so long,
In humble shape to creep and clime so hie;
Sin (poyson-like) with age becomes more strong,
And Crokadell-like does slay with tears in eye:
But since therefore no other shift I spy,
I like and will my lofty top abate,
My prostate soul, may so restrain the state
Of his increasing power, whereby that I,
In building of Gods house may serve some steed,
And sin confounded lie, like loathsome weed.
SON. LXXX.
Who sees in common view of human kind,
The exild captiue-state of sinful man,
Sold unto death (which only ransom can,
Appease the wrath for fall of parents blind)
May (if he be of faithful number) prove
A greater comfort then he can express,
To see himself, whose sins these plagues do move,
Freed from the eternal death, whilst nerethelesse,
The wicked reprobate, who not confess
Their fall, nor feel the favors Christians wan,
Headlong proceed, in path first parents ran,
And to the double death, themselves address:
But happier he ten thousand times shall find,
His weakest state, then their great gifts of mind.
SON. LXXXI.
Who gives may take, we ought not to repine,
Both wealth, and ease, yea life also by right,
God gives all, all things are in his might,
And he can send and will, good end in fine:
Why should we then grudge any thing to bear,
That he does send? or nigardly bestow
Our lives or goods? since to that use they were
Given us, as nature teaches us to know.
The great increase of fruit the same does show,
Which from one grain produced is in sight,
(Which as thing cast away appears to light,
Till he (by blessing his) do make it grow)
Which should our hearts to faith in him incline,
And not distrusting seek for farther sign.
SON. LXXXII.
Our blinded natures that cannot foresee
The Effect of nature, or what may succeed
Of actions ours, this error forth does breed,
That we the event, by chance suppose to be*
To us they may in deed by hap befall,
(As things beyond our skill or power to stay)
But (as Gods works) chance can we not them call,
Or fortunes deed, or hap as we use say:
God does foresee, and guide each thing the way
It shall proceed, and he does give the speed,
That does ensue, and present are indeed,
Things past and future, as they stand or stray:
Him as true cause of all things we agree
To be, and from all chance or fortune free.
SON. LXXXIII.
IT is a thing we lightly do neglect,
And yet a thing (me thinks) we most should fear,
As which within our conscience still does bear
A witness of our guilt, and foul infect:
When we by fame do find our spotted name,
(The greatest plague a man on earth may find,
The hardest witness of our worthy shame,
And sorest censurer of deed or mind)
Yet so self-love does judgment often blind,
Or ignorance our native reason bleare,
That what is said or thought, by whom or where,
We little care, but let it pass as wind;
Though proverb truly say, by fames affect,
Gods judgment lightly does a truth detect.
SON. LXXXIIII.
IF common fame be lightly, likely found,
And fame for ill be such unhappiness,
Then this (me thinks) a man must needs confess,
That ill report (from persons good) does wound.
If by report, much more if poor oppressed,
If innocents, if they to God complain,
If vengeance they do call, to have redrest,
The griefs and agonies they do sustain:
If God (as so he has) has witnest plain,
That he will hear their cries whom men oppress,
And will his care of them herein express,
That their complaints and cries turn not in vain;
What iron age is this, that such a sound
Of cries against oppression does abound?
SON. LXXXV.
MY younger thoughts do wish me to withstand
The grave advise, which grace with love does lend
Their rash decrees to tyranny do bend:
These wish me (wisely) note the cause in hand;
The safe possession of a crown in peace,
By abstinence a while, and patience vsd:
Sins power to show, the others urge, ne cease
To say, that pleasures should not be refusd:
The worser part my soul had almost chusd,
And for the pleasures which an hour does send,
(And to eternal bondage after tend)
I bin by law and reason both accusd:
But since thy goodness Lord gave blessed land,
Keep in thy laws my fleshly subjects band.
SON. LXXXVI.
ALas, how watchful and how diligent
We are to further every fond desire:
How slow again to thing God does require,
And how against the hair, good motions went.
Full many more solicitors we find,
To satisfy each trifle flesh does crave,
Then to the things good conscience would us bind,
And which (as duties) God in law us gave:
The wit, will, memory we ready have
To blow the bellows of affections fire;
The soul may drenched perish in the mire
Of fleshly thoughts, ere any seek to save,
Or spare one minute (which is fondly spent)
To succor it, though it to good were bent.
SON. LXXXVII.
WE have been babes, babes yet by nature we,
Unskillful, ignorant of heavenly law,
And babe-like should be then in fear and awe
To God, by whom create and ruled we be:
Weak food best fits weak stomachs (as is said)
And charity would wish true weakness bear;
Like strength to all Gods wisdom has denayd,
But by long sucking it were fit we stronger wear:
Nothing to bear away, though much we hear,
To speak of faith, which forth no fruits can draw,
To feed with greediness the bodies maw,
And yet no spiritual strength to let appear,
Is sign the soul is dead, in thee or me:
For living trees, by kindly fruit we see.
SON. LXXXVIII.
NOt every action which to happy end
A man does bring, is token as I find
Of goodness in the doer, though our mind
And common sense some reason so pretend:
The deed which meriteth (for virtue) praise,
Must be premeditate in will before,
Indeuour'd lawfully, and which bewrayes,
No private object or respect we bore;
And God himself things judges ever more,
Not by effects, as men of wisdom blind,
But by intentions faithful, honest, kind,
Of such as doing them his aid implore:
He issue does to actions different send,
As he to greater good (ever ill) will bend.
SON. XCIX.
IF God should measure us as we deserve,
(For each offense, requiting equally)
His justice we, with horror should epsy,
From which excuse (to shield us) could not serve:
But justice his by holy bound restraind,
Of mercy, which does waighour weak estate,
A proper counterpoise for us has gaind,
Whilst justice wrath, Christ's mercy does abate;
His Son our Savior, does set open a gate
To safety, by the pardon he did bye,
With blood most innocent, lest we should die,
Guilty of sin, which justice needs must hate.
Thus we (by faith) cannot be said to swerve,
Our faults are his, of merits his we carue.
SON. XC.
IT is a custom that deserves blame,
And over common with us now adays,
That every man his fault on other lays,
And some excuse for every evil frame,
And rather then we will the burden bear:
We lay on God (whose providence rules all)
The cause of what, our wicked natures were
Producers of, with wilful bitter gall.
Thus from one sin to other we do fall,
And hairs herein our nature us bewrayes,
Of parent first, who his offense denaies,
And rather God, wife, serpent guilty call,
Then to confess his proper free will lame,
And by repentance praise Gods holy name.
SON. XCI.
HOw can he be the author held of ill,
Who goodness is it self, and only true?
To whom alone perfection still is due,
And all the world, with goodly works does fill?
It is not God, it is our selves alas,
That does produce these foul affects of sin,
Our sickly nature, first infected was,
And lacking taste of truth, delights therein:
Our deeds in us, how foul so'ere they have bin,
What good soever of them does ensue,
That part is Gods, our corrupt nature drue,
The worser part; and flesh, death snares did spin,
And even our deeds, the which our souls do kill,
Are good to God, and work his glory still.
SON. XCII.
Does any man desire his life to mend,
And that of sin he might a lothing find?
Let him but on his actions look behind
Forepast, and see where to they most did bend:
Let him on others look with equal view,
And note deformity of lothfull sin,
Let reason (not affections) tell him true,
The brickle state himself to fore was in;
As doctrine, that to penitence does win,
And true repentance, one of honest mind,
When he in other sees affects so blind,
As he in reason thinks could not have bin:
Such as him self ashameth to defend,
And to be guiltlese off, he would pretend.
SON. XCIII.
I Have desired, and held as chief delight,
To lead my life, where mirth did always dwell,
From soul, so sorrow thinking to repel,
In feast and sport so past I day and night:
But if (as often there did) a dismal chance
Befall, whereby I found some cause of grief,
I was amazed, dispair'd, and as in trance,
No comfort found, or means to give relief:
My former joys provoked sorrow chief,
I loathd the thoughts before did please so well,
My meditations then of death befell,
And of worlds pleasures, which were vain and chief,
Which made me change my former humor quight,
For tears, cares, sorrows, still to be in sight.
SON. XCIIII.
SInce we are found (if we our selves do know)
To be a barren ground and good for naught,
Unless by husbandry we will be brought,
To aptness for some good whereon to grow:
Since preachers are the husbandmen ordaind,
And preaching of the Prophets is the seed,
By whose endeavors only fruit is gaind,
Of holy life, the which our faith does feed;
Me thi^kes it should a greater aptness breed,
In tennants to this soul, which Christ has bought,
To have it so manurde and daily wrought,
As it might grow to betterd state indeed,
And yield some crop of goodness, which might show
The thankful hearts, which we to God do owe.
SON. XCV.
WHen I behold the travel and the pain,
Which wicked men in evil actions bide,
What hazards they assay to go aside,
When with more ease, they virtue might attain:
How thieves and murderers such boldness use,
Such watchful painful means their wills to win,
As even religious men do often refuse,
To taste of like, though they would feign begin.
I find too true, that we are sold to sin,
And that the body does the spirit guide,
That reason yields to sense, and sense does hide
Lust in his liking, which does forward slide
From ill to worse and never does refrain
Sin, which may sin; nor pain, which pain may gain.
SON. XCI.
SInce nothing is more certain then to dye,
Nor more uncertain, then the time and hour,
Which how to know, is not in Phisickes power:
Yet nature teaches it, to be but nie;
For that death steals on us like a thief,
And nothing living is exempt therefro,
His malice to prevent, is wisdom chief,
That unprovided he not take us so:
As that on sudden he appear a foe,
And us compulsiuely he do deuowre,
That God by him in wrath do seem to lowre,
And that to death, (not life) we seem to go;
So let us live that death we dare defy,
Since heavens eternal life, we gain thereby.
SON. XCVII.
GReat are the graces God in man does show,
All tending chiefly to souls proper gain,
That by some means at length he might attain
To higher thoughts, from earthly base and low:
Yet since no benefits we do receive,
Can so assure us of his love indeed,
That love of world, and earth they can bereave,
And make our minds on heavenly joy to feed;
Much less a new desire in us can breed,
To win the heavens by loss of life so vain,
This common way by death he made remain,
Inevitable to all humane seed;
By force those heavenly joys to make us know,
Which after death in lasting life shall grow.
SON. XCVIII.
MIght Elizeus wish allowed be,
And prayer blessed, which Solomon did make,
And can thou then thy travel undertake,
For worthier prize then they have shown to thee?
Sure heavenly wisdom earthly wisdom teaches;
Such wisdom finds grace with God and man,
Who seeks these first, God plenteously him reaches
All other earthly gifts, he wished or can:
That will I seek, that will I study than,
No plenty shall my thirst thereafter slake,
With Elizeus will I always wake,
And watch the Prophets ways, and manner when
My Savior does ascend, that I may see
His glory, ^and he his grace redouble'in me.
SON. XCIX.
LOng do the wicked run a lawless race,
Vncrost and uncontrolled in their will;
Their appetites at pleasure they do fill,
And think themselves to be in happy case:
But stay a while, and let me see the end,
(Which crowns every good and perfect deed)
And you shall find their slipperie way to bend
To ruin, if in time they take not heed:
For earthly ease security does breed,
Security, the soul does lightly kill,
It breeds forgetfulness of God, and still
Does quench the spright and body pampering feed;
Who therefore does delights too much embrace,
Among the blessed, may hap to lose his place.
SON. C.
LIke as the sun whose heat so needful is,
Produces daily different effects,
According to the nature of objects,
Which hardneth that, yet molifieth this:
So does the Gospel preached, even the same;
It makes some to repent and melt in tears,
Some stubborn hearts repine, and cauils frame
To quarrel at, and scorn such needless fears:
The lowly heart, in joy and hope it reares,
The haughty mind, as low as soon deiects,
In zealous hearts it neighbour-loue reflects,
Whiles other conscience, spite and rankor bears:
The native power it keeps of perfect bliss,
And holy heat consuming all amiss.
EPIL.
TEmpt me no more to dwell in Cedar tents,
Pauilions of Princes and of pride,
My tickle strength is daily like to slide,
And makes my body do what soul repents:
My years forwarne me to forbear annoy,
In liked things which do the senses feed,
In costly colors, gems, or games to joy,
Or stately troops, or honors fruitless seed.
For passed vanities my heart does bleed,
And vowed has the resting time I bide,
(If God in constancy my heart shall guide)
Some ryper fruits on former soil to breed;
Which grant me Lord, that so thy servant I,
May in thy Courts remain, and flesh defye.
AN INTRODVCTION TO PECVLIAR PRAYERS.
TO thee (o Lord) who only know my sin,
And only able art, my state redress,
To thee alone my plaints directed bin,
To thee my guilt alone I do confess:
In hope thy gracious aid at need to win,
Who give me grace, these prayers to address:
My words can not express, My inward grief,
My deeds declare too well my true disease,
Yet doubt I not to crave of thee relief,
Because thy Son did first thy wrath appease:
These are my wants, and many more then these,
But of them all, unfaithfulness is chief:
Yet as repentant thief, On cross found grace,
Vouchsafe my plaints with mercy to embrace.
SON. CI. Craves grace to pray.
O Powrefull God in Christ our father dear,
Who made and rul'st all things even by thy will,
Whose truth and love, the heavens and earth do fill,
Vouchsafe my will to frame, and prayers hear,
Touch thou my heart, my blinded judgment clear,
That sorrow for my sins may tears distill:
Let true repentance kill. All carnal lust,
Let purpose to amend, my soul direct,
To crave thy aid, who only can protect
Man's feeble strength from thoughts, words, deeds unjust:
Frail is man's power and will, his substance dust,
His purest actions, hourly it detect;
Yet do thou not reject, Thy work in me,
Who crave a will to pray, and faithful be.
SON. CII. Salutation of the Church.
Hail sacred seat of Gods eternal peace,
Where all his blessings kept in treasure are,
Twixt soul and body, which accords the jar,
And causest cumbers of discord to cease;
From wandering worldly thoughts, thou do release
My doubtful hope, which sought for help from far:
In Satan's fiercest war A bulwark strong,
In natures hot assault a sure defense,
An Arc of safety for our feeble sense,
A watchmans tower to those to thee belong,
A harmony of heavenly musicks song:
Kind shepherd to the soul, which strayes not thence,
For still with sweet insence Thy lights do flame,
And Christ thy Priest and Captain gards the same.
SON. CIII. For constancy.
ALas o Lord, how frail the flesh I find;
How ready to revolt unto distrust;
How willing to seek help in flesh unjust;
Ungrateful fruit of graceless humane kind,
Which harboreth such monsters in the mind,
As soul and body both needs ruin must:
Like wavering sand or dust, With winds which move,
From good to ill, from ill to worse we fall,
We have not sooner grace for help to call,
And budding faith thy mercies for to prove,
But weary long to seek our joys above,
We quench this spright, and have no help at all:
The peril is not small, (Lord) I am in,
Inflame the faith, and zeal thou did begin.
SON. CIIII. For faith.
SInce thus myself I find to be unclean,
Unfit to bide before Gods justice throne,
Who recompense for sin accepts none,
But to the rigor of desert does lean,
To fly to thee my Savior Christ I mean,
Who paydst my debt sufficiently alone:
I need but make my moan To thee I know,
For thou art ready to relieve my want,
Thy fathers love, and thy obedience brant
With zeal, thy mercies on us to bestow:
Whereof since faith the use to us must show,
And as it is more fervent or more scant,
More powrefull is to dant Deaths bitter sting,
craunt faith may prayers frame, and comfort bring.
SON. CV. For grace to judge of good and evil.
AMidst these dangerous days wherein I live,
Poor silly Orphane distitute of skill,
By parents fall forlorn, by nature ill,
Crave grace of thee o Lord: and therewith give,
Power to my weakness sin away to drive,
That so I may thee serve and honor still:
Reform my feeble will, And it incline,
To have henceforth a wise and solid taste,
Of truth and falshod; let my choice be plast
On perfect pattern drawn with virtuous line:
With serpents wisdom let my judgment shine,
To shun the snares whereto my lust would have:
Vouchsafe my suit be grast, With help from thee,
Thy word the lamp of light unto me be.
SON. CVI. For innocence in evil.
SInce so simplicity, thy word does praise
(O Lord) as that thy Son example gave
By all his life, and works that he did crave,
His servants wherein to direct their ways,
Like to the babe on mothers breast that stays,
And sylly Lambs, and doves which no guile have.
Since he is pressed to faue, And to embrace
The lame, blind, naked, leaporous, reject;
Since to yield health to all, and such protect
As simply do with faith approach the place,
When he in mercies seat does show his face,
And prayers hear, and needful suites effect:
Lord do me not neglect, Poor, silly, blind,
Who meritelesse, yet mercy hope to find.
SON. CVII. Shame of sin.
HOw could I Lord but be ashamed indeed,
To lift my eyes to thee, to crave for aid;
When I of thought, word, deed, have sins displayed,
With multitude of monstrous of springs breed,
The true portrait of Adams carnal seed,
Which made him hide himself when he it wayd:
I therefore am affrayd, And shun to show
Unto the world, the shameful brood I bear,
Which thoughts do hatch, and vile affections rear;
Too hateful for a Christian soul to know,
And do so hastily to hugeness grow,
As vain it is a fig tree leaf to wear:
I know no other where My shame to hide,
But with thy merits; or thy wrath to bide.
SON. CVIII. Against defection.
When I (o Lord) unto my mind do call,
The fearful records of the Patriarchs best,
In whom great gifts of grace did seem to rest,
And yet to foul and fearful sins did fall;
I do deplore the frailty of us all,
And fear defection even in those are blessed.
And since I am the least, O Lord (alas)
Of many, that in word profess thy name,
And I some feeling taste have of the same,
Which does not forward to perfection pas;
It makes me see (as in a looking glass)
The feeble strength of this my present frame,
Which clogd with sin is lame, And would look back
To hell (from which I fly) if grace should lack.
SON. CIX. Not to trust in flesh.
WHat trust may I, o Lord, on flesh repose?
Whose mould is earth, whose substance is but dust,
His thoughts unclean, his actions all unjust,
As is the stock of parents, whence it grows;
Whom fraud, untruth, pride, lust, distrust enclose,
By which (by nature) ruled we are and must:
I know the feeble trust, I may expect,
And safety which on such a frame is found;
Where weak foundation is the sand unsound,
Which may ^^t bide the brunt of stormy day,
When as temptations shall their power display,
Or yet afflictions us enuiron round:
Upon a surer ground, Faith must me build,
And Christ my savior so my soul may shield.
SON. CX. Pray for humility.
SInce thou o Lord and Savior do confess
Thy self a true Phi^ition, unto those
Who with humility their griefs disclose,
And unto thee for aid, by prayers press;
Vouchsafe thou so my heart to thee address,
That on thy help alone my faith repose.
Vouchsafe my sight unloose, Make me to see
The naked show of natures power and shame;
Let me behold my works, weak, lewd, and lame;
And let my heart with sorrow pierced be,
And pressed down, procure such moan in me,
As may in fine repentance truly frame:
That humbly so thy name, I may adore,
And faithfully in fine thy help implore,
SON. CXI. For Comfort in affliction.
Leave me not Lord, most humbly I thee crave,
In this distress, whereto my sinsme bring,
Which headlong unto hell, my soul would fling,
And make me think, there were no power could ^aue
My wretched state from deaths eternal grave,
Which poisoned is by Satan's deadly sting*
But teach thou me to sing, O Lord thy praise,
Amids thy saints which see thy mercies still,
With joy and comfort do my courage fill:
Once Lord my soul, which yet in terror stays,
Make me to bend unto thy will my ways,
And frame my powers unto thy holy will:
The power of Satan kill, And so increase
My soul with comfort of thy lasting peace.
SON. CXII. I^ prosperity not to forsake God.
THe more o Lord I see before my face,
The daily blessings, which thou do bestow
On me unworthy wretch, who well do know,
How far affections vile in me have place:
The more I see, just cause to call for grace,
Lest for abuse of them thou vengance s^ow;
For then most soon we grow, For to forget
The giver, when the gifts we once have gaind,
Ingratitude our natures so has staind,
Thy greatest blessing we most lightly set,
So far we are from paying praise for debt,
We do forget the nurse us fed and wainde:
As Israel not refraind, Thee most to offend,
When most thou them did feed and comfort send.
SON. CXIII. Man's Sorrow for sin.
I Must commend the thing the world does hate,
And like the thing that flesh and blood detest;
The cares and griefs by which I was oppressed,
Which made me see and know my wretched state:
Wisdom is dearly bought, but not too late;
Who tastes true fruit of care, knows cumfort best:
Make me then Lord digest each bitter pill,
Which for correction of my sin is sent:
Purge thou thereby, my dross, make me repent
Each lewd affect offensive to thy will:
A new and better nature Lord in still,
Which to thy service always may be bent:
With sorrow often rent, My hardoned heart,
And let repentance purchase cure of smart.
SON. CXIIII. For true fear.
Fear is a frailty known to humane kind,
Which witnesses a guilt where it does dwell:
Since Adams fall, his offspring knew it well,
And every man in conscience does it find;
It takes possession in atroubled mind,
And (if grace want) despair drives down to hell:
Yet these thy praises tell, O Lord they shall,
Who danted for their frailties, do require
Grace to resist their lusts, and do aspire
For strength of true perfection for to call,
And have a fear of sin (though near so small)
For love of right, as well as shunning ire,
Kindle their love with fire, Sprinkle it with fear,
That incense of obedient smoke it rear.
SON. CXV. Sorrow for coldness of compassion.
I Feel o Lord, and sorrow for the same,
The slender feeling, and compassion small,
The which I have of neighbors case at all;
Which to assist their states my heart should frame,
Who with my lips, profess a Christian name,
But stop my ears when they for help do call,
So easily we fall, And do forgett,
The lesson which our Master Christ us gave,
Who us with mourners to lament would have,
And on our brothers good, chief care should set:
But self-love and cold charity, does let
No fruit of faith proceed, though neighbor crave:
Yet thou did freely save Me wretch clean lost,
Whose life the blud of thy dear Son has cost.
SON. CXVI. For Patience.
WHen I o Lord in troubles sore oppressed,
My heavy state with careful thoughts do way,
Which hope of happy issue does denay,
And frailty of the flesh can scarce digest;
I only find here in at length some rest,
When on thy mercy promised I stay;
And when from day to day, I see with shame,
My new offenses, which do trespass thee,
And note how long thy judgments spared me,
Which justly might burst forth in vengeance flame;
Ye when my Saviors sufferings show the same,
Which ought a rule to his elect to be:
I crave that I might see, Like fruits of grace,
So that impatience hold in me no place.
SON. CXVII. For continuance of Gods word.
THe greatest plague that I see cause to fear,
To such as I, who have so careless bin,
By reading and by preaching, for to win
True knowledge, which our hearts to thee might rear
Is, lest thy Prophets sound should so forbear
To preach thy word, that we should dwell in sin:
And wallowing therein, We should delight
In ignorance (the headlong path to hell)
And wickedly in carnal tents to dwell;
And so surcease with sin, or lust to fight:
Grant therefore (Lord) thy sword may always smight
My soul, till sin it from me clean expel:
Let Prophets always tell To us thy will,
And keep us under thy obedience still.
SON. CXVIII. For grace to bring forth fruits.
ALthough (o Lord) I do as truth confess,
No power in humane art that can thee please;
That all polluted are with first disease
Of sin original, which did transgress
By parents fall, and works in us no less,
On whom by just succession sindoth cease:
Yet since Christ does appease The penance due,
By bearing burden on his back for me,
And faith herein suffices me to free;
Which faith must fruitful be if it be true,
And works of grace regenerate ensue,
Which perfect pledge of safety ought to be:
I crave (o Lord) of thee, From day to day,
To guide my steps unto a righteous way.
SON. CXIX. Aid in conflict with sin.
VVEake are my Cha^pions Lord which fight with sin;
I mean my will, and power which take in hand,
The fury of their assaults for to withstand,
And victory of him do hope to win:
Some sign it is of courage, to begin
To fight, but cowards part to leave the land.
I feign would come in band, And liege would make
With thee my Savior, ere I be assayld:
No other comfort ever man auayld,
But trust in thee, when troubles them did take;
Thou helpst thy flock, thou do not them forsake,
If so their faith in thee be nothing quayld:
No syllable is fayld Of all thy word,
Thy truth sub dues the force of wrathful sword.
SON. CXX. Comfort in affliction.
Why do we not rejoice, whilst Christ we have
Our bridgrome, wedded sure to faithful band?
His own free liking made our merit stand,
And by his word, his love to us he gave;
First pledge whereof was Baptism, which forth drove
Our fear, and lent a gracious helping hand.
And that in sacred land We might be free,
And there possession have of endless rest,
His Testament he made, and with the blessed,
Our heritage (by faith) he made us see:
He signd the writ with his assurance best,
Of bread and wine, which might a Simboll be,
His corpse nayld on the tree, For our discharge
From sin, hell, death, which sets our soul at large.
CONCLUSION.
THough long (my soul) thou banished have bin,
From place of thy repose, by tyrants might;
By world and worldly cares, by flesh, wherein
Thy wandering thoghts have dazeld judgments sight:
Learn yet at length to guide thy course aright,
Unto that end which must begin thy rest;
Learn once for shame, so constantly to fight
Against affections, which please fancy best,
That all unfruitful thoughts thou may detest,
And hold those common pleasures, combers great,
Whose issue, age and time with ruin threat,
When death unlooked for, seems a fearful guest,
Retire thy self, as wise Barzilla did,
From worldly cares, thy purer thoughts to rid.
A TABLE DIRECTING BY PART of the first verse of each, to the
A Book. Sonet. A Base borne 1. 54 According to thy 1. 41 A husband man 1. 53
Although the world 2. 70 Although these 2. 86 Amidst the graves 1. 42 A
merchant 1. 21 Among the prease 1. 22 Among thy sheep 1. 9 Amidst this famine
1. 37 A Moabite 1. 80 Amidst this pilgrimage 2. 80 A poor Arabian 1. 20 A
tenant 1. 50 As thou art pure 1. 24 As often as thou 1. 31 A sinful Syrian 1. 98
A servant Lord 1. 73 A se^uant sold 1. 75 As through a mist 2. 1 As fares with
2. 9 As is the treasure 2. 15 As but vain 2. 66 As does the stars 2. 53 As
does the Moon 2. 44 A virgin pure 1. 29 Auant base thoughts 2. 37 A wicked
Pharisie 1. 16 A wicked thief 1. 78 A wicked soul 1. 19 B BEhold o Lord the
city 1. 10 Behold o Lord a tree 1. 14 Behold amidst worlds 1. 92 Betwixt two
strong 2. 17 By many gifts 2. 62 Borne blind I was 1. 38 C CAll me o Lord 2. 58
Cleansd are the 2. 2 F Feign would I fence 1. 32 Feign would follow 2. 52 Feign
would I praise 2. 40 Five foolish virgins 1. 17 F^e fainting faith 2. 48 For
common matter 2. 77 Fortune and chance 2. 100 For out of darkness 1. 2 From
luda wandering 8. 82 From far I see 2. 18 G GReat are the 2. 67 Great is thy
2. 65 H HE is unworthy 2. 21 How should my 1. 1 How hard it is 1. 48 How often o
Lord 1. 63 How drunken are 1. 39 How precious 2. 21 How can I limit 2. 26 How
may this be 2. 34 How fond a thing 2. 46 How many privileges 2. 61 How should
the quiet 2. 63 How happily 2. 78 How is it that 2. 82 How loath this 2. 96 How
should my 2. 85 How should I 2. 89 How do Gods blessings 2. 91 I I Follow thee
1. 25 I seek o Lord 1. 13 I will not fear 2. 38 I justly am 1. 52 I see alas
1. 99 I find my heart 2. 49 I have been blind 2. 68 I have begun 2. 6 I see a
storm 2. 81 I shame to see 2. 13 I know not 2. ^2 In humble wise 1. 4 Into thy
vineyard 2. 23 In bondage long 1. 79 In famine great 1. 89 In deadly sleep 1.
43 In pride of youth 1. 6 If thou vouchsafest 1. 45 If he to whom 2. 11 If Saba
Queen 2. 45 If beauty be 2. 33 If Paradise 2. 59 If he unworthy be 2. 73 If
I did hope 2. 93 If I can speak 2. 99 It is not Lord 1. Pref. It were unfit 2.
71 It is no light 2. 76 L LAme of my limbs 1. 7 Let earthly things 2. 47 Like
pined child 1. 27 Like silly babes 2. 55 Lo how I groueling 1. 81 Love then I
will 2. 39 M MY body Lord the house 1. 36 My body Lord infect. 1. 60 My soul
like 1. 76 My sins behold 1. 33 My wicked flesh 1. 44 Mourn thou no more 1.
101 My traitorous heart 1. 49 N NO recompense 2. 20 No sooner love 2. 50 Not
that my faith 1. 84 Not every one 2. 88 Now that thou have 1. 12 Now that I see
1. 61 Now that it pleases 1. 69 Now that I have 2. 12 Now will I dance 2. 19
Now that thy mercies 2. 27 O O Heavenly beauty 2. 32 O heavenly love 2. 35 O
perfect son 2. 41 Of sinful race 1. 30 Of every creature 1. 47 Of parents
first 1. 26 Of sweet and sauorie 1. 90 Out of the fountain 1. 18 Out of thy 1.
92 P POlluted with 1. 28 S SInce it has 1. 46 Since with Goliath 1. 11 Since
thou have raisd 1. 65 Since thou by grace 1. 100 Since that it pleases 1. 88
Since to so holy 2. 3 Since thou o Lord 2. 10 Since hou have 2. 25 So blind o
Lord. 1. 77 So foolish Lord 1. 97 Some men do mourn 2. Pref. Sometimes my
nature 2. 72 T THe temple Lord 1. 67 The selly babes 1. 57 The greediness 1.
34 The many trials 1. 85 The dream which thou 1. 93 The seed which thou 1. 94
The malice of 1. 96 The talents which 1. 87 The only daughter 1. 56 The more I
seek 2. 8 The end whereto 2. 14 The pleasures of 2. 16 The powerful pen 2. 29
The shining face 2. 36 The chastisemnts 2. 84 The thundering voice 1. 8 The
slender City 1. 83 This stately stage 2. 30 Thou formest me 1. 72 Though with
thy Saints 1. 40 Thou have o Lord 1. 86 Thanks will I 2. 22 To shun the rocks
2. 74 V Unto thy Princely 1. 5 Void of true life 1. 35 W Were it not strange
2. 75 Where shall I build 1. 58 Where shall I find 2. 9 What am I else 1. 71
Whilst in this world 1. 70 Whilst with the wholesome 1. 64 Whilst in the garden
1. 51 Where so I cast about 2. 23 When thou vouchsafest 1. 55 Whilst in the
veil 1. 59 Whilst that the chosen 1. 62 Whilst that in wealth 1. 66 What
strength has 1. 95 When I begin 2. 83 When as my 2. 3 What tongue or pen 2. 94
What should I render 2. 28 What present 2. 42 What wealth 2. 57 What is
felicity 2. 60 When I began 2. 87 When I with grief 2. 95 When desolate I was
2. 79 Who so beholds 2. 43 Whilst in the plenty 1. 74 Whilst I do study 2. 24
Why should he faint 2. 69 Why should this 2. 95 Why should I 2. 90 Within this
Arc 1. 3 Within thy garden 1. 15 Within thy house 1. 68 Who so behold 2. 31
Who so could 2. 56 Who seeks not 2. 57 Who so of perfect 2. 64 Who so would
live 2. 97 Would God 2. 5 Words may well want 2. Conclus.

A TABLE OF FEELING AFFECtions, being the third Centenarie of Sonets.
Sonet. ALl will not serve 6 All men by nature 41 Alas how watchf^ll 86 Alas o
Lord 103 Although o Lord 118 Amidst the dangerous days 05 Among the many
fires 129 Among the many trials 51 As those with skill 50 As does the fire 64
As does the morning sun 66 But will you know 14 Come to the counsel 22 Does
any man desire 92 Down let us fling 43 Exilde be mortal cares 2 Feign would I
bring 2 For us who do 74 Fro out what dream 3 Fea^e is a frailty 114 Give all
to him 13 Good words are praysd 70 Great are the graces 97 Heal sacred seat
102 Have we not cause 45 He that to do no evil 27 How can I hope 5 How little
comfort 24 How should I use my time 69 How can he be 91 How could I Lord 107 I
cannot choose 76 If woe there was 32 I feel o Lord 115 I go about 18 I list not
judge 67 If thou do feed 77 If common fame 84 If God should measure us 89 I
have desi^ed 93 I ma^uell much 8 I must commend 113 I now begin 9 In midst of
plenty 23 I oftentimes 53 I often hear 93 I see sometimes 68 It is not
causeless 31 I should not seem 33 It seems strange 58 It is not rest 61 It
is a thing 83 It is a custom 90 Leave me not Lord 111 Like master like 55
Kike as the sun 100 Long do the wicked run 99 Me thinks sometimes 16 My
younger thoughts 85 Might Elizeus wish 98 Not only does the Lord 46 Not every
action 88 Of thee and of thy praise 1 O happy Simon of Siren 19 O that we
could 54 O powerful God 101 Our blinded natures 82 Since it has pleased the
Lord 48 Since we by Baptism 71 Since shame of men 72 Since we are found 94
Since thus my self 104 Since nothing else 96 Since thou o Lord 110 Since so
simplicity 106 Slow is our God indeed 52 Strange are in truth 42 Sometimes
clean tired 15 Tempt me no more of feeling affections. Epilogue To thee o Lord
who Introduction to Prayer. The fatal haps 34 Though lawful many things 37
The season of the year 40 There is great odds indeed 44 The weapons which I 60
The difference is 73 The parable of seed 75 Though long Preface to prayer. The
more o Lord 112 The greatest plague 117 True is it sure 78 Vain are the
bragges 38 What va^ne lip labor 17 What is thy measure full 4 What are our
senses drowned 20 When I remember 10 What love is this 11 Who so will serve 12
When I do see the 21 Well if I find 25 Who touches pitch 26 When I look
back 28 Who seeks aid 30 Who sowes the seed 36 We had not need in
idleness 47 What miracle so great 49 When I consider of 53 We may rejoice 56
Wise Moses and grave 57 Who would not crave 59 What is the cause 62 When I do
hear 63 When I do seamen 65 What high presumption 79 Who sees in common 80 Who
gives may take 81 We have been babes 87 When I behold the travel 95 When I o
Lord 108 What trust may I 109 When I o Lord 116 Weak are my champions 119 Why
do we not 120 Where have Preface to affections,

FINIS.
Sonnets of the Author to diverse, collected by the Printer. And first to the
Lords of her Majesty's privy council.
To the right H^. and most reverend father in God, my Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his grace.
IF David did in passion just arise,
When he recorded his exiled state,
Compared with happier Swallows, which devise
To build their nests so near the Temple gate:
May I not mourn, to see the world alate,
So swarm with books, which every where do fly,
Whose subjects as most base might merit hate,
(Though curious brains their wits therein apply)
When better matters buried long do ly,
For lack of favorers or protectors grace?
May I not take occasion thus to try
My pen, and crave that you the same embrace?
Yes sure, world knows, you can, and will protect
The cause, why God and Prince did you erect.
To the Right Ho. Knight, Sir Thomas Egerton, Lord Keeper of the great Scale of
England.
What fame reports (by mouth of good and wise)
It is not flattery to record the same.
The public echo of your praise does rise,
That you by justice balance judgment frame:
Then may you not, my pen of boldness blame,
If it present to your impartial eye,
This holy work, to shield it with your name,
Which may among profane in daungerly.
Wise Solomon, child's parent true did try,
And Daniell false accusers fraud bewray,
By searching hearts affects, and words, whereby
Ones fained love, the others guilt to way:
So judge this work, and him shall it deprave;
So I desire, you justice praise shall have.
To the right Hon. the Lord Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, one of
the most Noble order of the Garter, etc.
IF Romans held Sibillaes works so dear,
Because they from Deuining spright did grow;
More precious present then, receive you here,
Which God on king, king did on world bestow.
Our Sibill you, our Solomon we know,
And so your words and works the world does prise:
To virtue you, your self a father show;
Hence honor yours, hence countries good does rise:
Then this (no fiction that man does devise,
But built on best experience life can bring)
With patience read, and do it not despise;
Y^^ wise experience can confirm each thing:
It is not rated as Sibillaes were,
But (prized by you) it will the value rear.
To the Ri. Ho. the Earl of Esse^, Great Master of the Horse to her Highness,
and one of the most Noble order of the etc.
NOt Neptunes child, or Triton I you name,
Not Mars, not Perseus, though a Pere to all;
Such word I would find out or newly frame,
By sea and land might you triumphant call,
Yet were such word for your desert too small:
You Englands joy, you enemies terror are;
You vices scourge, you virtues fenced wall:
To Church a shield, to Antichrist a bar.
I need not fear my words should stretch to far,
Your deeds out-fly the swiftest soaring pen,
You praise of peace, th'vndaunted power of war,
Of heavens elect, the happieloue of men:
Not knowing then, How to express my mind;
Let silence crave, this gift may favor find.
To the Ri. Ho. the Lord Charles Howard of (...) Admiral of England, one of
the most Noble order of the garter, etc.
When as wise Salomons most happy reign,
Is registered in books of holy writ;
His greatness seems increase of honor gain,
By store of worthy Peers his state which fit,
Whose excellence of courage and of wit,
His Impery'causd with wealth and peace abound,
Whose heads and hands, did never idle sit,
But seeking commons good, through world around,
By sea and land their swords free passage found,
Which subjects safety bred, and fear to foe;
Like fame unto our Prince, you cause to sound;
Both far and near, whilst you victorious go:
For which her trust, our love to you is due,
As pledge whereof, I this present to you.
To the Right Ho. the Lord Cobham, Lord Chamberlain of her Majesty's household,
Lord Warden of the Sink ports, and of the Noble order of the Ga^ter. etc.
Gifts are not measured by the outward show,
Nor by the price, of Peers of Noble kind;
They shadows are, the hearts intent to know,
And simple figures of a faithful mind:
Then since your virtues high, all hearts do bind,
To strive to testify their grate intent,
Vouchsafe suppose, my power cannot yet find
A present fit as will and heart was bent:
And what king (writing once) thought time well spent,
That read you once, as thing of some regard:
His mind meant well, that it unto you sent,
Time not spent ill, in view thereof is spard:
If it more worth, I more love could express,
My due regard of you should yield no less:
To the Right Ho. the Lord North, Treasurer of her Majesty's household.
I May not say, I shun to show my want
Before your self, whom I true noble hold,
Since I to others have not made them scant,
And may of meaner men be well controld:
This common guilt of mine, makes me more bold
To prosecute the error I begun,
Who crave your favor not my faults unfold,
Although my folly ouer-rashly run:
If with the best they have a pardon won,
They may the boldlier pass the common view:
What Princes like, the people hold well done,
And fame in passage does her force renew:
Which good or bad, your censure is to make,
When now first flight it in the world does take.
To the Right Honorable the Lord of Buckhurst.
AS you of right impart, with Peers in sway
Of common weal, wherein by you we rest:
So hold I fit to yield you every way
That due, the which my power affoordeth best.
But when I call to mind, your pen so blessed
With flowing liquor of the Muses spring;
I fear your dainty ear can ill digest
The harsh tuned notes, which on my pipe I sing.
Yet since the ditties of so wise a king,
Can not so lose their grace, by my rude hand,
But that your wisdom can conform the thing,
Unto the model does in margent stand:
I you beseech, blame not (though you not praise)
This work, my gift; which on your favor stays.
To the Right Honor. Knight Sir William Knowles, Controller of her Majesty's
household.
OF ancient virtues, honored ofsprings race
Of true religions, you blessed progeny:
(On which two pillars virtue built your grace,
And court by gracing you, is grast thereby)
Of such (since this work treates) such work do I
Well fitting hold, for you to read and shield,
Whose wisdom, honor, virtue, does apply
To true religion, on the which you build:
My self too weak so heavy a task to wield,
(As was the treating of so high a style)
At first attempt began to fly the field,
Till some (which liked the theme) bid pause awhile,
And not dismay, the title would suffice,
To daunt the vain, and to allure the wise.
To the Right honorable knight Sir John Fortescue Chauncellor of the Exchequor.
HE who in duty much to you does owe,
In power is little able to present,
For pledge of grateful mind, is forced bestow
These ill limd lines, best signs of hearts intent:
The scope whereof by Solomon was bent,
To teach the way to perfect happiness,
By me transformed thus, and to you sent,
To show that I do wish to you no less:
To wish well, is small cost I do confess,
But such a heart as truly it intends,
Is better worth esteem, then many guess;
And for all other wants makes half amends.
Such is my heart, such be therefore your mind,
Then shall my mite, a millions welcome find.
To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Cecill Knight, principal Secretary to her
Majesty.
TO you (my hopes sweet life, nurse to my muse,
Kind foster father of deserving sprights)
This Poem comes, which you will not refuse
(I trust) because of blessedness it wrights:
Your aged youth so waind from vain delights,
Your growing judgment far beyond your years,
Your painful days, your many watchful nights,
Wherein your care of Common good appears,
Assures him that of your fame once hears,
That you some heavenly object do aspire;
The sweet conceit whereof your soul so chears,
That earths bred vanities, you not admire:
Such is this theme, such was first writers mind,
For whose sakes, I do crave, it favor find.
To other Lords, Ladies, and aproued friends. To the Right Honorable, the
Earl of Oxford Lord, great Chamberlain of England.
IF Endors widdow-h^^d, had power to raise,
A perfect body of true temperature,
I would conjure you by your wonted praise,
Awhile my song to hear, and truth endure,
Your passed noble proof does well assure
Your bloods, your minds, your bodis excellence,
If their due reverence may this pains procure,
Your patience (with my boldness) will dispense:
I only crave high wisdoms true defense,
Not at my suit, but for works proper sake,
Which treats of true felicities essence,
As wisest king most happiest proof did make;
Whereof your own experience much might say,
Would you vouchsafe your knowledge to bewray.
To the right Honorable the Earl of Northumberland.
Who would entreat of earthly happiness,
He need but take a pattern of your state,
Borne noble, learned bred; whose acts express,
That honor cannot virtues force abate,
In home-kind love, abroad vnmenast hate,
In bodies value and in spright of mind:
You have no cause to blame your adverse fate,
Which such a great aspect, has you assignd:
Yet that you yet, more happiness might find,
The common love your country you does owe,
To offer you, this means thereto does bind
My will, which in this lowly gift I show:
Which yet accept, for worthy Princes sake,
Who of each point a perfect proof did make.
To the Right Ho. the Earl of Shrewsburie.
Well placed virtue in high honors seat,
Well bending honor to a Christians state,
Vouchsafe my pen your pardon may entreat,
Who this my vowed service offer late:
Your shining glory did my hope abate,
When first to seek your sight my fancy meant;
Your fame for virtue, yet did animate
My pen, which unto you this present sent:
Your true nobility, which seems bent
To foster innocents from powrefull foe,
Does promise me, wished fruit of hearts intent,
If under your protection it does go:
The rather since of honor I do wright,
And happiness which is your souls delight.
To the right Honorable, the Earl of Cumberland.
THe Crowned honor justly which befell
To valiant Joshua, and wise Calebs race,
(Whose faith to fainting people did foretell,
The fruitful spoil of proud resisters place:)
Their native virtues which you have by grace,
(Whose sword does fight the battles of the just,
Which makes our Hemis-phere your fame embrace,
And feebled hearts on your stout courage trust;)
My confidence in you excuse they must,
Who do my Poems muster in your train,
Whose theme has bin by wisest king discust,
And in your practice do of proof remain,
Which lead the way unto the holy land,
For which (whilst here you live) you fighting stand.
To the Right honorable the Earl of Sussex.
THe skillful Pilots that the Ocean haunt,
In storms are found to be of merry cheer,
Whom fairest calmes, with fear and dread do daunt,
Because a sign of change does seem appear.
The expert soldiers used to the war,
In time of peace do arm them for the fight,
And careful Christians will foresee from far,
The fierce temptations may in pleasure light:
Then since no settled rule there can be here,
Whereby to know the issues growing are,
But change of times may comfort, clips, or clear,
And so our present state amend or mar:
Learn here (brave Cha^pion, noble, virtuous, wise)
To bear all brunts that may in life arise.
To the Right Ho. the Earl of Southampton.
AMongst most noble, noble every way,
Among the wise, wise in a high degree;
Among the virtuous, virtuous may I say;
You worthy seem, right worthy Lord to me.
By blood, by value, noble we you see,
By nature, and by learnings travel wise,
By love of good, ils hate, you virtuous be:
Hence public honor, private love does rise,
Which has invited me thus to devise,
To show my self not slack to honor you,
By this mean gift (since power more fit denies)
Which let me crave be read, and held for true:
Of honor, wisdom, virtue, I delate,
Which (you pursuing) will advance your state,
To the Right Honorable the Lord Zouch.
What have I done? that I would take in hand,
To pick forth Patrons should my work defend,
When such a Lordly troop of Nobles stand
As in the choice of them I find no end?
But having thus begun, I do intend,
To fawn on those, whose favors I have found;
Amongst the which I trust you help will lend,
Because the building is on such a ground:
I know your learned skill, and judgment sound,
Which might deter it to approach your sight;
But whereas love (they say) does once abound,
There fear and all suspect is banished quight:
Your virtues love, your honor force me yield
To you, on whose kind favor I do build.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord Willougbie of Ersbie.
MIght I forget the Comforts of my prime;
Might I neglect the matter which I wright;
Might I not know the hopes of present time,
Forgetting you, I might my self acquight:
But parents favors, once my youths delight,
Your self apatterne of a happy peer,
Whose proofs of virtue public are to sight,
Might me vpbraid with peevish silence here,
If I should hold so mean a gift too dear,
For one (whose ancient) debtor yet I rest;
For whom my Poem does so fit appear,
Since you our age records among the best:
Then think not, I by slight would kindness gain,
But hold this due, If honest I remain.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord Burrowes.
I Not intend, by present of a book,
Which for the title most men will allow,
For equal praise (with first true author look)
Because I newly it transformed now:
Nor for my own presume I it to'avow,
(Unworthy herald of that princes says)
Which duly to deliver few know how,
And I (of all) most weak by many ways:
Yet since your high praisd bounty not denays,
A grate acceptance of a kindly gift,
Upon that hope my present boldness stays,
Who in my purpose have no other drift,
But let you see, earths vain, heavens perfect blis,
Which with my heart I wish you taste in this.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Mountioy.
TO you the noble light of happy I Will,
In whose most virtuous breast the holy fire
Unquenched lives, when all the world the while,
Nigh drowned lies in dreams of vain desire;
Whose holy zeal the godly do admire,
Whose worthy constancy the wise commend,
For whom heavens glory waights, as virtuous hire,
To whom the hearts of men with honor bend,
Who do pure virtue to your power defend:
Whom vain delights of earth cannot defile,
Whom (to protect religion) God did send,
Vouchsafe to listen to my song a while,
Which right true tidings to the world does bring
Of what observed was, by wisest king.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord of Hunsdon.
OF good king David's holy'and careful bent,
Of wise and happy Salomons desire,
Their lively patterns, here I do present,
To you brave Lord as kind deserts require:
Your gifts of nature rare, I not admire,
(Since heir you were unto so noble a father,
Whose wisdom to true honor did aspire)
But gifts of grace which by your life I gather,
And for the which you reuerenc't are the rather,
As heir to both those kings in common care,
Of God and realm, against which most lewd deprauer
Is forth his poisoned tongue for shame to spare.
As for that good to me by you has flowne,
Was but one fruit of many virtues known.
To the Right reverend father in God To by Bishop of Duresme.
IF double cumber of the public care,
Of Paul's and Peter's sword and keys may rest,
I would entreat you some small time to spare,
To view the face of your invited gest:
Of all men you have cause to use him best,
Because you more then half the father are;
To you therefore, I have him first addressed,
To have his grace ere he proceed too far:
Your countenance may his progress mend or mar,
Because (as of you first his life did grow)
So must his course be guided by your star,
Which him first hope of heavenly light did show:
Vouchsafe then to bestow, one reading more,
To welcome him, or thrust him out of door.
To the grave and learned Sir John Popham Knight, Lord chief Justice of
England.
O Would I might without my hearts deep grief,
(For common crosses, following men oppressed)
Record your worth, whence many find relief,
Which makes you justly chief of all the rest:
Your careful thought and bodies pain addressed,
To reconcilement of contentious mind;
Your universal love to truth professed,
By which the desolate do favor find,
Does (as me seems) in common duty bind
My pen to challenge you, truths true defense,
Though dull my Poem be, my sight not blind,
That sought to take his privilege from thence:
You (chief of Judges) best of truth can treat;
To you therefore, I truth of truths repeat.
To Sir Edmond Anderson Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common pleas.
YOur ears so daily exercisd to hear
The plaints, and the petitions suitors make;
Make you most fit of many to appear,
My self and works, protection both to take:
Not for my self, but for the Commons sake,
I press it thus into your presence now,
Whose theme may hap some drowsy heads awake,
To challenge, if I dare this work auow:
But if that you, whose wisdom best knows how,
That lawful make to speak, what Scripture taught,
I know the common sort dare but allow
My publishing, what from wise king I brought:
Then you the common shield to guiltless wight,
Vouchsafe this work find favor in your sight.
To Sir William Perriam Knight, Lord chief Barron of the Exchequor.
THou kind accorder of the dreamt discord,
Twixt law and conscience, Gods and man's decree,
By whom oppression'and brib'rie are abhord,
The common poisons of lands peace that be:
I not unfitly do direct to thee
These monuments, of wisest kings experience,
Them to allow, if you them worthy see;
Me to reprove, if I have made offense:
I no man crave to stand in wrongs defense,
I may (as all men do) some weakness show,
If great my fault, spare not; if small, dispense;
Because it did not of mere malice grow:
This will you do vncrau'd; that done, I pleased,
Both God and man, submission has appeasd.
To the valorous Knight, Sir William Russell, Lord Deputy of Ireland.
IF justly David did by law ordain,
That they an equal part of spoil should have,
Who (when he fought) behind did still remain,
The carriage from the spoil of foes to save:
Does not your merits by more reason crave,
To be recorded in my Calendar?
By whose blessed work, God of his goodness gave
Part of our peace, amidst such threatened war?
In worthy virtues, most men's peer you are,
In true religious zeal, by none excelled;
Your noble house (like to a blazing star)
Has shown, wherein true honor ever dweld:
Then share with worthies all in blessed fame,
And read this work, which treats of the same.
To the valorous Knight, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Lord Warden of the Stannerie, and
Captain of the Guard.
OF happiness when as I hapt to write,
Me thoughts did make a period (Sir) in you,
Who being sworn to Mars, and Pallas knight,
They both with equal honor did endew,
And therefore might become a censurer true,
Of greatest blessings men propound or find;
Vouchsafe you then this tract thereof to view,
As if that Solomon had it assignd:
Whose interest in you expects your kind
And grate acceptance of his grave advise,
From whom (though many other men were blind)
He chalengeth a doom right godly and wise:
But as for me his messenger, suffiseth
The praise, too truly speak what he deuiseth.
To the valorous Knight Sir John Norris, Lord General of her Majesty's forces
in Ireland.
AMong the blessed worthies of our time,
Your flickering fame aloft I do espy,
Whose toylesome travel, such a pitch does clime,
As every ancient worthy came not ny.
The modern Marses did your virtues try,
Whilst you, the proud Iberian forces quayld
In Britany, and in Netherland, whereby
With equal arms they seldom have preuayld:
The treacherous practice, wherewith they assayld
The Inconstant humors of the Irish foes,
Your policies have stayed, when force has fayld,
Whereby your merits measure daily grows:
So that I must of due, make room for you,
Though twice nine worthies should be coynd anew.
To the valorous Knight Sir Francis Veare.
MY pen was stayed, but purpose changed anew,
So soon as I amidst the noble train
Of worthy knights, did cast a thought on you,
Who yet (vnsu'd to) did for grace remain:
If you I win, I shall not little gain,
Because both much you can, and much you will
For wisdom, virtue, honor, sure sustain,
Which have been your supporters hereto still:
I need not then perswasiue lines to fill,
The matter will suffice to move your mind,
If that my hand the beauty of it spill;
Then let my love of good, your favor find,
Whose wisdom can, whose goodness may excuse
The faults, which want (not malice) made me muse.
To the worthy Knight Sir John Stanhop Treasurer of the Chamber to her Majesty.
NO common thing it is to find (I grant)
Humility and honor both in one:
Who loves virtue, of them both may vaunt,
True honor still has mild and virtuous shown;
Then since this work of virtue treats alone,
(For sure true wisdom does pure virtue teach)
It shall offensive be (I trust) to none,
Their words of favor for truths shield to reach.
Much less a shame, what mighty king did preach,
The same to suffer pass them uncontrolled;
But now adays, men every work appeach,
As barren, borrowed, base, or over bold:
This makes me crave by you, wise, noble, good,
My wrong deprauers malice be withstood.
To the worthy knight Sir Edward Dyer, Chauncellor of the most Honorable order
of the Garter.
NOt last nor least, for common good deserts
I you repute, though fortune point your place:
Your love to virtue wins many hearts,
And virtues followers do your love embrace.
I know my argument requires no grace;
Because grace it does send, it brings delight:
For both all sue, all love their pleasing face,
Yet vainly world, for both of them does fight.
To make more plain the way for every wight,
This princely moderator pains did take,
Which (to your equals) men of learned sight,
A full accord (if well judged work) will make:
You then kind Courtier and sound scholar known,
Accept, read, and protect these as your own.
To the worthy Knight Sir Henry Killegrew.
THe native duty which of right I owe,
To you good Knight (for many favors past,
To me and mine) do will me now bestow
Some token of my thankful mind at last:
Which I more fitly no way yet can show,
Then by presenting of this volume small,
Which from repentant heart of king did flow,
And may a warning be unto us all,
Who daily into new temptations fall,
And daily need assistance against the same,
In such respect this work you well may call,
An Antidote a happy life to frame:
Whereto since hitherto your virtues bend,
You will accept (I trust) the gift I send.
To the virtuous gentleman Robert Bows Esquire, Ambassador for her Majesty in
Scotland.
AS Painters use their Tables set to show
Of every sight, ere they perfected be,
By others better skill the truth to know,
Of faults which they themselves could hardly see:
And as best drugs on meanest shrub and tree,
By skillful Simplers gathred are sometime;
As gold in sand, as pearls in shellfish we
Do find, and amber in the sea shore slime:
So under this ill-couched ragged rhyme,
Which to your clearer sight I do present,
It may appear how high his thoughts did clime,
That first to frame the same his study bent;
And I excusd, who only do bestow,
What I to you, by ancient promise owe.
To the virtuous Gentleman Fulke Greuill Esquire.
Who can of learning treat, and you forget?
Who may of virtue talk, and you neglect?
Who would true fame, from your due praises let?
Who should not (knowing you) your love affect?
I therefore forced am in this respect,
To offer publicly for you, to reed
The thing the which vncrau'd you would protect,
If (by malignors blame) it stood in need:
In diverse, diversely this work will breed
I know, an humor in the censurers brain,
The wisest, on the best contents will feed,
The curious (for some scapes) count all but vain:
But of the better sort true praise must grow,
The praise of some is mere disprayse I know.
To the reverend Doctor Andrews, professor in Divinity.
I Would not flatter Court, the Church much less,
But honoring both, I would them homage yield,
In Courts I lived, in Church (I do confess)
I wish to die, and on that hope to build:
Then marvel not, I also seek to shield
My bold attempt, with favor of your wing,
Since your divine conceit, can easliest wield
The burden; which this weighty theme can bring.
I meant in English dittie only sing,
The tragike notes, of humane well away,
But weighty matter of so wise a king,
Compeld me yet a greater part to play:
Wherewith (half fainting) for your aid I crave,
Well meaning mind, from feared blame to save.
To his especial friend Richard Carew of Anthony Esquire.
AS parents of their children fond appear,
Often times because with travel them they bare,
Which makes them prise the^ sometimes over dear,
When other see small cause for them to care.
As such likewise are often times to spare,
In care of children that themselves have none,
So is it like (with this my work to fare)
With many readers, when they are alone,
Who senseless of my travel like a stone,
(As never having yet so tried their brain)
Will think I cocker this my brood, as one
Grown proud, that I some issue do attain:
But you whose painful pen has shown your skill,
Can judge my part, and it well conster will.
To his loving brother in law Robert Moyle of Bake Esquire, and Anne his wife.
IF like the world a while I seem to you,
Forgetful and unkind for kindness shown,
Think it not strange their natures I ensue,
Where most I live, whose proof is dearly known.
The world to me unkind and careless grown,
Conuerts my nature to her temperature;
My youth (with love of her puffed up and blown)
Is cause that I now justly this endure:
Yet worlds delights, nor cares nere altered sure,
So far my mind, that I ingrate did prove:
Heavens faith, earths friendship, does my soul inure
To take far greater pains where once I love:
You then (by blood and friendships holy vow)
Right dear take this, and for loves seal allow.
To the Gentlemen Courtiers in general.
Reject me not, (ye Pears of gentle spright)
Because I do appear in plain array;
Sometimes for change, the curious do delight
In mean attyres, and homely food we say;
They are not limbd the best, that go most gay,
Nor soundest meats that most the taste do please;
With Shepherds russets, shield from cold ye May,
With hungry meals, prevent often times disease:
Such home-wouen robes, such wholesome diet these,
(Even these rude lines, of my compiled frame)
Do offer you, your judgments to appease,
As may him nourish that does use the same:
Not mine (but wisest Salomons) recait,
To gain the blessed state we all await.
To the Right Ho. the Lady Marquess of Northampton.
THe part which I have taken now in hand,
To represent on stage to common sight,
With my true nature seems at strife to stand,
And on an actor far unfit to light:
Accustomed more on vainer theames to write
Then with the task which now I do pretend;
Which being to be viewed by judgments bright,
Makes me to seek your favor it defend:
Vouchsafe a gracious gloss thereto to lend,
I then beseech you (worthy Patroness)
To whose applause, full many more will bend,
Because they know you virtue do profess:
And virtue is this theme, and that divine,
With grace consent then, to my suit incline.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of Darby.
WHen this my bold attempt to mind I call,
Who Phaeton like would Phoebus Chariot guide;
From doubtful thoughts into despair I fall,
How such clear light, my weak sight may abide:
From one presumption, unto more I slide,
And give the reign so much to rash desire,
That I make public what I ought to hide,
And seek my sanctuary in that heavenly fire,
Whose Image of perfection I admire,
In our rare Goddess, wisdoms clearest light,
Whose grate aspect, my many wants require,
To cleanse the clouds, which blind my judgments sight:
And such fair stars, as you (who influence have
Of her bright Beams) to give some light I crave.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of Cumberland.
AS one whose rashness once has made him bold,
To break the bands of used modesty,
If of his error he should hap be told,
Will hardly yield that he has gone awrye,
So worthy Lady, I confess that I,
Unworthy scribe, of such a heavenly style,
Now that I needs my boldness must epsy,
Would cover from just blame my self a while;
With borrowed grace, therefore I seek beguile
The common sights, who least would spare my name;
If worthy you therefore but kindly smile,
I know that many more will do the same,
For wisest sort on virtuous do depend,
And virtuous ones will virtues cause defend.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of Warwick.
IN Courtly life to keep a conscience pure,
In youngest years to show a matrons stay;
In honors type, a lowly mind t'inure,
No doubt a heart regenerate does bewray:
Such you are held, of such as rightly way
The practice of your life, to your great praise,
Whose virtues all temptations ouersway,
And your rare gifts, unto the heavens raise:
No common thing it is, in these our days,
To see such stars in our dark firmament;
Your worth, your sovereigns influence well bewraies,
Which so transformes, where so her vigor went:
Your birth, your marriage, natures gifts most rare,
With gift of grace herein may not compare.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of Pembrooke.
OF all the Nymphs of fruitful Braitaines race,
Of all the troops in our Dianaes train,
You seem not least, the Muses Trophes grace,
In whom true honor spotless does remain:
Your name, your match, your virtues, honor gain,
But not the least, that pregnancie of spright,
Whereby you equal honor do attain,
To that extinguished Lamp of heavenly light,
Who now no doubt does shine midst Angels bright;
While you fair star, make clear our darkened sky,
He heavens; earthes comfort you are and delight,
Whose (more then mortal) gifts you do apply,
To serve their giver, and your guiders grace,
Whose share in this my work, has greatest place.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of Essex.
THese Oracles, by holy spright distild
Into the heart of wisest happy king,
To you most virtuous Lady here are wild,
As heir to parent worthy in every thing:
His careful travel countries peace did bring,
His solid wisdom virtue did pursue,
His bounty to the poor the world does sing,
Whose honor him suruiueth, crowned in you:
So nobles (if to God they yield his due)
So people ought to Nobles render fame,
So shall succeeding ages still renew
By old records, his ever reverent name,
Wherein your double blessed spousall bed,
Shall wreath an Olive garland on his head.
To the Right Honorable Lady, the Lady Scroope.
THe bounty which your virtues do pretend,
The virtues which your wisdom has imbrast,
The wisdom which both grace and nature lend,
The gracious nature which so well is plast,
Does witness well the heavens your beauty grast,
With borrowed wisdom not of humane kind,
Which so has fostred virtues mild and chaste,
As benign beauty might a dwelling find;
Fit to receive such presents as in mind,
Are consecrated to that sacred shrine,
VVhereon (as vestall Virgin) you assignd,
Do worthy weight, whose eye vouchsafe incline,
To take in worth, read, judge of, and defend,
This work, weak record of my hearts intend.
To the Honorable Lady, the Lady Rich.
THe perfect beauty, which does most reclaim,
The purest thoughts from base and vain desire,
Not seen, nor levied is by common aim
Of eyes, whom coullers use to set on fire:
The rare seen beauty men on earth admire,
Does rather dazell then content the sight,
For grace and wisdom soonest do retire,
A wandering heart to feed on true delight:
Seldom all gifts do in one subject light,
But all are crowned, with double honor then,
And shine the more, adornd with virtue bright,
But (with Religion grast) adord of men:
These gifts of nature, since they meet with grace,
In you, have power more then fair Venus face,
To the Right Honorable, the Lady of Hunsdon
OF soul and body both since men consist,
Of diverse humors since our bodies be;
Since sundry affects do one self thought resist,
Since body, soul, thought, will, are all in me,
Think you not strange these passions new to see,
Which to my wonted humors different seem,
They both are fruit of one and self same tree,
The first for younger hold, this elder deem:
If you of my endeavors well esteem,
Whom well the world does know can judge the best,
Whose course of life a happy pitch does cleeme,
In verteous proves wherein your fame is blessed:
Then shall I have a part of my desire,
Who for my travel crave but likings hire.
To the Honorable gentlewomen Mistress Elizabeth and Anne Russels.
THe double gifts of nature and of grace,
Redoubled in you both with equal share,
(Whilst beauty shines in the modest face,
And learning in your minds with virtue rare)
Do well express, of what descent ye are,
Of heavens immortal seed, of blessed kind,
Of earths twice honored stock, which ye declare,
In noble parts composd of eithers mind;
Them both in you (rare gems) we blessed find,
Ye both by them are honored happily:
Then both, vouchfafe what I to both assignd
To read, and to conceive of graciously:
So ye (like to your kind) the world shall know,
And to your selves (from hence) some fruit shall grow.
To the Honorable Gentlewoman Mistress Elizabeth Bridges.
SInce I have grown so bold, to take in hand
A theme so far indeed unfit for me,
As by the reading you will understand,
Whereto my style in no sort does agree;
I cannot choose but fear, lest you should see
Some sign of high presumption in my mind,
Which cause of just reproach to me might be,
And for my sake the work less favor find:
Unto you therefore have I this assignd,
To crave for me remission at your hand,
Whose virtues show, you cannot be unkind,
If kindness may with modest virtues stand:
And of and for true virtue do I plead,
Which to desired bliss and honor lead.
To the Honorable Lady, the Lady Southwell.
TO you the vowed service of my mind,
(Fair Mistress of the purest thoughts I bred)
As youths conceit could best invention find,
I dedicated with affection fed.
My elder thoughts with your high honor led,
Have often strove to show continued zeal,
But was discouraged through mistrust and dred
Of my defects, which did my will conceal:
Yet now compeld my weakness to reveal
Unto a world of worthy witnesses;
I crave to be excusd, if I appeal
To you for grace, to whom I guilt confess;
And hope you will for ancient service sake,
Excuse my wants, and this in worth will take.
To the Honorable Lady the Lady Cecill.
IN counter-poise of your right high desert,
My duty made my grateful mind consent,
To strain my brain to equal with my heart,
In finding forth for you some fit present:
Which to perform, thus will and power (first bent)
Was checked by just regard of your esteem:
Which me prevented of my hopes intent,
Since for your worth, vain things not pleasing seem:
Yet (least a mere excuse you that might deem,
To cloak a thanklesse heart with idle hand)
With more then native strength a pitch I cleeme
To treat of bliss, which I not understand:
But Gods inspiring grace (to king once tought)
I here as pawn of duty, have you brought.
To the Honorable Lady, the Lady Hobbye.
LEst that this change of style at first might breed
A doubt in you, whose work it were and gift;
I think it fit your searching thoughts to feed,
With truth who writ it, and therein his drift:
When scorn of hap, did force my hope to shift,
The place wherein felicity I sought,
As tired on earth, to heaven my thoughts I lift,
Which in me this strange Metamorphos wrought:
But so imperfect fruit, of what it ought,
Mixed with the dregs of old imprinted phrase,
Require a favor in the Readers thought,
With kind construction frailties forth to raze:
To you my wants, to me your virtues tryde,
Gives me good hope, this suit is not denyde.
To the virtuous Lady the Lady Layton.
SInce stranger like, to Court but newly come,
This homebred child, may hap for to be used,
Inquired of by most, censured by some
Which cannot judge, yet will not be refusde:
Where wants are pride into, and soon accused,
If shape, attire, grace, skill, be not the best;
Where curious conceits will seem abused,
If every word, phrase, period, bide not test:
Least that this work too rashly be suppressed,
Untried, half understood, disgraced quight,
I needful think it be to some addressed,
Who can and will protect from causeless spite:
Which that you will vouchsafe, I nothing fear,
Since to the matter, you such zeal do bear.
To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Woollie.
Far fet, dear bought, does fit a Lady best;
Such you deserve, such would my will bestow:
Good things are rare, rare things esteemed you know;
Rare should yours be, as you rare of the rest:
Such hold this gift, fetched from a foreign land,
Which wisest King, as precious did provide,
Who viewing all the earth, has naught espide,
Whose worth (herewith co^par'd) may longer stand:
The price (I dare assure) is very dear,
As puchasd by your merit and my care,
Whose travel would a better gift prepare,
If any better worthy might appear:
Then this accept, as I the same intend,
Which duty to the dead would will me send.
To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Carey.
IF any thing might in this work appear,
Worthy the reading, fit for to content,
I should then hold it best bestowed here,
Where most my time in frame thereof was spent:
By view of your rare virtues I was bent,
To meditate of heaven and heavenly thing
By comfort of your counsel forward went,
My halting muse, this heavenly note to sing.
And now that time does forth this harvest bring,
Which must (till need) be laid up in store,
(As medicine meet to cure cares deadliest sting,
And to restore healths comfort, weak before)
You (Lady) who of right best interest have,
Must here receive, and keep, what first ye gave.
To the virtuous Lady the Lady D:
IF kindred be the neerenesse of the blood,
Or likeness of the mind in kind consent;
Or if it be like pronenesse unto good,
Or mutual liking by two parties meant:
If kindness be in truth a firm intent,
With open heart to testify good will;
If true good will, be to contentment bent,
If true contentment cannot be in ill;
I know you will repute this token still,
A pledge of kinsmans love in each degree;
Which though it do your treasure little fill,
Yet way to perfect wealth will let you see.
My self in kindness wish and hope in you,
Profit of mind and souls content t'insue.
To the virtuous Gentlewoman Mistress E. Bows.
AMong the many profits which do rise
Unto the faithful, which the truth do love,
A greater comfort can I not devise,
Then is the sweet society they prove,
When each does seek for others best behoue,
To strengthen that which flesh and blood does shake,
Their weakened souls (I mean) which sorows move,
Through fear of sin, and guilty thoughts, to quake.
Whereof by you since I experience make,
Whose mild and kind accord, with neighbors woe,
Does cause them often the cross with patience take,
And forward still in hope and courage go:
I were ungrate, if I should not indeuer
To nourish that (your grace) I honored ever.
To the Honorable Ladies and Gentlewomen, attendants in the Court.
YE worthy Nymphs of chaste Dyanaes train,
Who with our Sovereigns presence blessed be,
Whereby ye perfect beauty shall attain,
If ye affect the gifts in her you see:
Scorn not to yield your mild aspects to me,
Who with you do attend her high behest;
It can no whit disparage your degree,
To look on that is liked of the best:
This work for style inferior to the rest,
Which many worthier wits to you present,
Craves welcome yet, as some (no common guest)
Whom best to greet your greatest care is spent.
For kings words these, do guide to bliss you crave,
The fruit of favor which you strive to have.
To all other his Honorable and beloved friends in general.
WHat shall I do? proceed or stay my pen?
To either side, great reason urged my mind;
Unto most powrefull would I yield, but then
Defect of power, makes hand to stay behind:
Of well deserving friends I many find,
Of worthy persons (unsaluted) more;
Those I neglect may hold my heart unkind,
And some my judgment partial hold therefore:
Yet (as I find) so they must grant the store,
Of happy Englands well deserving state,
Exceeds the bounds my work prescribd before,
And does restrain my mind to stricter rate:
But if one word may show a world of loves,
Use this and me, to all your best behoues.

