A BRIEF Discourse, declaring and approving the necessary and inviolable
maintenance of the laudable Customs of London: Namely, of that one, whereby a
reasonable partition of the goods of husbands among their wives and children is
provided: With an answer to such objections and pretensed reasons, as are by
persons unadvised or evil persuaded used against the same.

AT LONDON Printed by Henry Midleton for Rafe Newberie. 1584.

Iuris ciuilis de consuetudine Axiomata sieve maximae.
Consuetudo vim habet rei Iudicatae.

Consuetudo est optima legum interpres.

Conuentio and consuetudo vincunt legem.

Consuetudo firmata est vbi simili aliquando contradicto, Iudicio quid est
obtentum seu Iudicatum.

Caepta vsucapio vel praescriptio per defunctum, continuatur per haeredem, cum
in omne ius defuncti succedat haeres.

Profunda requie humano generi prospexit vsucapio. Barto.

Vsucapio est quies periculi solicitudinisque litium. Cicero.

A BRIEF discourse declaring and approving the necessary and inviolable
maintenance of the lawdable Customs of London.
WE find it necessary in all common wealths, for subjects to live under the
direction of Laws, constitutions or customs publicly known and received, and
not to depend only upon the commandment and pleasure of the governor, be the
same never so just or sincere in life and conversation. For that the Law once
enacted and established, extends his execution toward al men alike without
favor or affection: whereas if the word of a Prince were a law, the same
being a mortal man must needs be possessed with those passions, and
inclinations of favor or disfavor yt other men be: and sometimes decline from
the constant and unremovable level of indifferency, to respect the man
besides the matter, if not to regard the person more than the cause. Wherefore
it was well agreed by the wisest Philosophers and greatest politics, that a
dumme laws direction is to be preferred before the sole disposition of any
living Prince, both for the cause before touched, and for other reasons which I
will here omit. But to descend to the particularities of my intention, and to
treat of the validity and inviolable observation of some laudable (I might
term them sacred) customs, being the principal joints and very sinowes of
all good corporations and fellowships, and being also the mainteiners of a
sacred unity and natural amity between the husband and his wife, the
parents and their children, which (as Aristotle the wise Philosopher terms
it) is the beginning of a city. For what is a city but a manifold and joint
society consisting of many housholdes, and living under the same Laws,
freedoms and franchises? so I must needs confess them to be the procurers
and causes of sundry good effects to the general estate of the city wherein
they be observed: as of the other side they may breed sundry inconveniences
in such a city where the same are violated and broken with allowance and
impunitie. I will therefore shortly show the nature of a Custom, and the
difference which it holds from a public Law. And next I will declare how
necessary the same are to manage the government and to entertain the
prosperity and traffic of this city: and namely that one good custom which
I entende to speak of. Lastly, I will endeavor to answer those pretensed
reasons, and coulourable objections made against the precise maintenance and
defense thereof.

First then I suppose that a Custom which justly deserves that name, is of no
less reverent regard and authority than a written law, passed and allowed
in Partliament: which notwithstanding I do grant that there are certain
differences between a law and a custom: for the Custom takes his force by
degrees of time, and consent of a certain people, or the better part thereof,
but a law springs up in an instant, and receives life from him that is of
sovereign authority to command. A Custom enlarges it self by plausible
entertainment, and acceptable circumstances of time and occasion, with
general liking and allowance, whereas a Law is commanded and published by
power and received by dutiful constraint, and that often against the goodwill
of them that are bound by it, for which cause Chrysostom not improperly
compared the Custom to a King, and the Law to a tyrant. Moreover the Custom
does neither promise a reward for observation, nor inflict a punishment for
violation thereof: whereas the Law always imports either a consideration of
gain, or a terror of punishment or damage, if the same be not a Law of
enlargement or permission that disanulleth the prohibitions of a former Law.
Finally a Custom is applied to the commodity of some one province, circuit
or city, and grounded upon a special reason of conueniencie or commodity,
for those persons or place where it is observed: whereas the Law has a
general reason, See 34. H. 8. B. custom, 59. A man may not prescribe or plead
a custom per totam angliam, for that is common law and no custom, otherwise
if the custom had been pleaded to be in such a city or county as Gauelkind
Gloc. Fee and such like.
extended to the whole Nation bound by the same, without private consideration
of the due importances, of any peculiar place or people. Therefore it is well
said and put in ure by the common Lawyer, Quod consuetudo ex rationabili causa
profecta private communem legem. That a Custom grounded upon reasonable and
honest consideration abridgeth or alters the judgment of the common Law. So
that in Customs the estate or condition of the people are to be respected, and
such Customs as are consonant to reason, and most appliable to the estate and
quality of such people, are to be allowed. For example the Custom of
Boroughenglish, Burchenglish.
yet in force in sundry places of England, whereby the younger son is to
inherit his fathers land, has taken strength by this reason, that the father
may (if he be not careless and secure to do his children good) train up his
elder sons in some good trade or occupation by which they may be able to get
their own living: whereas the youngest, by the impotency and tenderness of
his years, may be perchance unapt and unable for such instruction. And so the
Custom commendable that provides for the relief of the young and impotent.
Also by an old custom of this land, in sundry boroughes and towns, lands
were deuisable by will, though the Laws of England pronounced such devises to
be void, and the reason was, But see now the statute of 32 H 8. ca 2 and 34.
H. 8. c. 5. of Explanation.
for that inhabitants of Boroughes or Cities, whose traffic and trade rests
much upon mutual trust and credit, are oftentimes indebted at the time of
their death. Wherefore it was thought meet, that they might devise their land
for the due satisfaction of their creditors, which to do, they were enabled by
the Custom. In Kent and other places of this land the Custom of Gauelkind is
maintained, which imports an equal division of the enheritance to be made
among all the brethren: a Custom partly grounded upon a natural
consideration, for that all the sons hold the like obligation of nature and
desert with their parents, in the which they have an equal interest: and also
suffered to take place in Kent and other places of this land in those days
most inclinable to rebellion, to the intent to enfeeble their forces, and to
bring their great houses and families to impuissance and decay, thereby to
disable and discourage them from such unlawful and violent attemptes.

And to come nearer to the matter, this famous and renowned city of London
has many laudable and ancient Customs: which though they derogate and differ
much from the rules of the common Law, yet have they been not only approved
by inuiolate experience of sundry ages, but also have been of old ratified
and confirmed by sundry acts of Parliament, and charters of Princes, and
namely by the statute of Magna Charta, by these words following, Magna charta.
cap. 9.
Quod ciuitas London habeat omnes libertates suas antiquas and consuetudines
quas habere consueuit, which is, That the city of London have all their
ancient liberties and customs which they have used to have. The words
following for other cities, etc. be, Quod habeant omnes libertates and liberas
consuetudines suas, which signifies, that they shall still retain their
liberties and free customs, that is to say, their freedoms and immunities, as
to be discharged of toll, pontage, and such like: Whereas the City of London
has provision made by that estatute, for all vsages and customs whatsoever.
Verily as ye city of London bears odds, and prerogative over other cities
in England, being the Metropolis or mother City thereof, so are the
inhabitants of it no less necessary than profitable members of the common
wealth, in transporting our commodities into other lands, and enriching us with
the benefits and fruits of other countries. The city of Rome, and Citizens of
the same had that prerogative as in other things so also in their executions
for causes capital, that they should not be crucified, being a death of great
torment and infamy, but only beheaded. The benefit of which Custom S. Paul
claymed and obtained in the time of Nero: pretending that he was a citizen of
Rome. The said Citizens also by the dignity and reputation of their city
were not for any transgression or offense to be fettered, whipped, or scourged,
which privilege likewise the said S. Paul took hold of, who being oppressed
by the calumnious accusations and outcries of the Jews, was by commandment of
Claudius Lisias the captain to be examined by torture of whippes, Acts. 22.
what was the cause of that general murmr and exclamation of the people
against him: yet S. Paul by alleging that he was a free man of Rome, not
only delivered himself from the injury and rage of the people, but also made
the captain much afraid of question or punishment for the indignity offered
unto him, so great was the majesty of that City, and so reverent the
reputation of all such as were accounted members thereof. Athenaeus termed Rome
in those days very fitly, Epitome totius orbis, an abridgement of the whole
world, for the continual concourse and resort of all nations thither. We may
derive thence an argument for our purpose, that London being worthy that
title, Epitome totius Angliae in respect of the necessary repair and frequent
assembly of al estates therein, whether it be for Justice by the Laws of this
land, which are here administered, or by trade of merchandise, which is here so
great that it may be termed totius occidentis emporiu^: and chiefly because of
the favorable and often soiorne of our most royal and gracious sovereign,
whose majesty's chamber this is as it always has been of her most noble
progenitors: the same is no less worthy of sundry preheminences which by
Custom and Charter it enjoys above other Cities of this land.

We find in our Law books that the scholars of Oxford claymed a privilege
by custom to have preferment of any house or lodging that was to be let in
the city of Oxforde, 40. E. 3. fo. 17. Vide Brook, Prescr. 8.
and the same was allowed in the common place in Westminster, where Justice
Finchden a man of great reckoning at that time said, that it is reason that
they which are principal instruments of great good in the common wealth, should
have beneficial customs for the maintenance of their societies: the like
reason (says he) serves for the merchantes of the staple in Westminster, and
also for the Justices of Assizes, or Justices in air, to have the like
prerogative. Also it is not unfit to remember, that the barons of the land
have diverse prerogatives above other subjects, that is, they shall not be
sworn when they pass upon their Peers, and if they bring an appeal, the
defendant shall not wage battle against them, and they are exempted out of
all returns in Iuries, and shall not be sworn in Leetes, and all in respect
of their dignity and for the necessary use of them in government of the
common wealth. So that persons of needful employment in the estate, have
always been sauoured in all their honest Customs or prescriptions, and
especially the Citizens of London, and the rather for the great presumption and
opinion conceived of their experience, who being trained by hard education, in
great use of service and affairs: and also by their travail and traffic
beyond the seas, by continual negotiation with other Nations must needs (by all reasonable likelihoode) procure unto themselves great judgment and
sufficiency, to manage a politic regiment in their city, according unto that
verse of the Poet Homer in the beginning of his treatise of wise Ulysses his
adventures remembering his travail into sundry Nations and Cities.

Die mihi musa virum captae post tempora Troiae,
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and vrbes.
The sense whereof may be well expressed in English verse without time thus:

All trauailers do gladly report great praise of Ulysses:
For that he knew many men's manners, and saw many cities.
Which opinion of their policy and experience conceived and approved by the
noble Princes of this land, in all ages does evidently appear by the manner
of their government, whereat strangers do no less envy than admire seeing so
populous a city, containing by true estimation more then 500 thousands of all
sorts of inhabitants managed not by cruel viceroyes, as is Naples or
Millaine, neither by proud Podesta, as be most cities in Italy, or insolent
Lieuetenantes or presidentes, as are sundry Cities in France, (whose presidents
are noble men or captains, having their persons environed with a guarde of
soldiers, and holding their cities possessed with a garrison as well in the
quietest calm of peace as in the hoatest combustion of war) but by a man of
trade or a mere merchant, who notwithstanding, during the time of his
magistracy, carries himself with that honorable magnificence in his port, and
ensigns of estate, that the Consuls, Tribuns or pretors of Rome, (namely, when
as the same was reduced to a monarchy) much less the Podesta of any city in
Italy never bare the like representation of dignity, and that not only in
peaceable seasons but in time of greatest war: for such credit the Princes
of this land have still reposed in their fidelity and wise direction, that we
have few examples in any chronicle of any noble man or other appointed to
assist the L. Mayor in his government, much less to be sole ruler or
lieutenant for the time, were the state never so troublesome, and the affairs
of never so great consequence and importance.

And to add a little more in proof of the singular good conceit had of their
service to the common wealth, and that the same has in all ages from the
conquest given them prerogative above other cities of this land, we read in
the vij year of Henry the vi, 7. H. 6.32.
that in a natiuo habendo brought by the Lord to recover his villen, it was
adjudged a good return made by the Shiriffe of London, that such was the
Custom of London, that a villen having remained there the space of one whole
year and a day, could not be fetched or removed out thence. For so great is
the prerogative of that place, that it gives protection to the villen or
bondsman against his lord while the said bondsman shall be resiant there.
Likewise it was taken for a good custom in the city of London, that no
attaint should be maintained for a supposed false verdit given in that city.
7. H. 6.32. and the same case was adjudged in 2. E. 3.
In the which case the Shiriffe of London made return upon a writ of attaint
sued against a Londoner, that such was and had been always the custom of the
city, that no attaint should be allowed against any commoner or other citizen
of the same, for which cause he might not saluis libertatibus without
impeachme^t of their liberties, serve or execute the writ. Then was there a
writ directed out of the Chauncerie to the Justices of the Kings bench with
express commandment to allow to the Mayor, Shirifes and Citizens all their
liberties, immunities and customs, and further out of that writ was a Venire
facias directed to the Mayor and Shiriffes, whereby was day given them to come
and make declaration of their custom, at which day the parties plaintiff and
defendant being present, the Mayor and Shiriffes had full allowance of their
customs, the Shiriffes were holden excused for their return, and the parties
writ was abated, and himself punished by imprisonment for his vexation. I have
here at large remembered this case, to the end it may appear both what credit
and opinion of conscience and truth, the law ascribed to the citizens of
London, and also how careful and vigilant the Mayor and Shiriffes have always
been to preserve and uphold their customs, although sithence that only
custom was for especial causes abrogated by the statute of 11. H. 7. and an
attaint given in London. 11. H. 7. ca. 21.
Moreover, we find it recorded in M. 2. E. 3. that whereas a citizen of London
brought an appeal of robbery, M. 2. E 3. cor. pl. 157.
and the defendant would have tried his innocence by battle, as he may in
semblable case against another man, Wilby then Justice answered him, that he
was not to have allowance of battle in an appeal commenced by a citizen of
London, for that by custom of their city they were exempted from it. The like
appeal was sued P. 20. E. 3. wherein the defendant made offer of the same
trial. P. 20. E. 3. cor. pl. 125.
And although he that sued the appeal would have joined battle without
regard of this fraunchise, the Lord Mayor with the rest of the corporation
sued a writ out of the Chauncerie reciting their custom or franchise, and
prayed allowance of it in disturbance of the battle 20. E. 3. Coron. 125.

If a free man or free woman of London be committed to Ludgate, they are to be
excused from the ignominy of Irons, if they can find suerties to be true
prisoners, and if the sum be not above an hundred pounds. Upon the like
reason is that custom established for the liberal and mild imprisonment of
the citizens in Ludgate, whereby they have indulgence and favor to go abroad
into any place by baston as we term it, under the guard and superintendencie
of their keeper, with whom they must return again to the Prison at night, a
custom verily, though quarelled with by some, and supposed to be the
hinderance and delay of Justice, and oftentimes a mean to defraud men of their
true debtes and executions, yet the ground thereof being well examined, it
wants not a sound maintenance in the course of reason (as I think.) For the
prescription or custom is but a mitigation of the extremity of their
imprisonment, serving rather for the expedition of their discharge and speedy
satisfaction of their creditours, than for any other purpose: so that this
scope and license in proper construction and sense of law, cannot be termed an
enlargement or liberty. For to remain in the material prison in the night,
and to go forth out of the same in the day, under the restraint and control
of a continual keeper, is always an imprisonment, though exercised with
greater mildness and lenity. And diverse causes there are to warrant the same
in London rather than in other places: the one is for that the city of London
stands chiefly upon the traffic and intercourse of merchants and the use
of buying and selling of their sundry commodities, which is not always
performed by themselves but by their factours and servants, and oftentimes one
factor or agent serves the turn of many merchants, whereby he is pressed to
sundry and several accountes. Wherefore to the end the prisoners may inform
themselves upon their mutual reckonings, both what they owe and what is due
unto them, and also that upon conference and account with their agents
returning from other countries they may be made acquainted with the increase
of their adventures or commodities, it is necessary they should have places of
meeting which will not be so convenient in a close prison, the same being no
place of assembly or free access (especially it being no common duty in the
Jailer to permit any person to come among his prisoners for any such occasion)
and if the Jailer were bound to endure or suffer such common and voluntary
repair unto his prisoners, yet will it be no fit place for merchants to treat
and negotiate their causes which cannot be well determined without their books
of accounts, and witnesses of their contracts, and often must the same be decyded
before the masters of their trades or companies. So yt this custom made in
furtherance of mutual accounts does very much enable the prisoner to procure
his liberty and pay his det. Also if the prisoner be poor and of himself
unable to pay, Vide 4. E 6. plo* com. 36.
this toleration of their going abroad with the keeper is a good mean for him
to procure the alms and relief of other charitable people, thereby the sooner
to purchase his liberty. Whereby it appears what reckoning the law makes
of them, in consideration of their great hazard by sea (through danger of
shipwreck or piracie) and adventure in strange countries (by falsehood and
negligence of factours) or by wars between Princes, the inconveniences and
mischiefs whereof, are not so offensive or prejudicial to any, as to
merchants, whose condition as it may by a fortunate voyage be much enriched,
and advanced: so may it by any of the mischaunces aforesaid, be so empaired
and overthrown, that it may turn himself, his wife, and family to utter
calamity and distress. Therefore as the hope and comfort of the wife (having
commonly no assurance of ioynture in the city, nor expectation of dower as
other women have) and also of the children (being for the most part borne to no
great patrimony, other than that which their fathers shall by their virtuous
industry acquire) does only depend upon the fortune of their husbands or
fathers travail, it has laudably and conscionably been observed for a
custom, and is yet by the wiser and better sort religiously regarded that when
any citizen of London dies, his wife shall have the third part of his goods,
and the children another third part, equally to be divided among them,
according to the proportion of his goods, and himself another third part to
dispose by his last will and testament at his pleasure. A partition so
reasonable and grounded upon so good consideration, (the quality and estate
of the Londoners considered,) that if it were not approved by custom, but to
be proposed in the wisest and highest court of Parliament, whether it were fit
to have the force of a law, I think no man (unless he were a Timon by nature,
or a Diogenes by disposition) no man I say possessed with common humanity
would gainesay or impugn it. Does not the common law now in force give the
husband presently by the intermariage all the goods and chattels of his wife,
though the same be of the value of 10000. pounds, so that when she is once his
wife, the law disableth her to give or dispose any thing that was hers before?
And shall not the husband be bound by semblable obligation of reason to leave
his wife the third part of his goods, and if the law be in that respect
defective (as what law in the world, except the law of God, is without his
imperfections?) shall not the custom supply it in such sort that no barbarous
and uncharitable or cautelous, and unkind practices by deed of gift, or
otherwise, shall disapoint or defraud the same? especially here in London,
where the good estate of men, for the most part consists in mouables, by
reason of their continual trades and exchanges, so that their wives cannot
assure themselves of their dowry commonly called thirds, as they might if
their husbands were seized of lands in fee simple. Also the comfortable socitie
between husband and wife, is of that precious estimate and honorable
reputation before God and man, that there may not possibly a more sacred and
strait conjunction be imagined among the children of men. Charondas the
Philosopher calls them Homosipios, which signifies, fed with the self
same food. And Epimenides another Philosopher calls them Homocapuos, which
is as much to say, as using the self same smoke, and the self same manger,
and as it were drawing the self same breath. Finally, the scripture gives
express charge to each man to tender his wife with extraordinary good offices
by saying, Thou shall leave thy father and mother, Matthew. cap. 19 Mark. cap.
10. 1. Cor. cap. 7. Ephesians. cap. 5.
and cleave to thy wife. If the force of custom did not enforce the matter,
these only considerations were sufficient to prove, that there should be
nothing private, nothing peculiar, nothing proper, but every thing in common,
every thing equally interested between the husband and the wife. The like
though not equal affection is commanded by the Apostle to the Colloss. 3. by
the fathers toward their children. You fathers be tender and loving unto your
children, and discourage them not.

But let us see what account our common law has made of the like customs,
sounded upon the love and affection between man and wife. It was used of
ancient time in Gauelkind land, and has received the allowance and judgment
of a good and lawful custom, that if the husband be attainted and executed
for a felony by him committed, M. 8. H.3 presc. 60.
yet shall his wife for the solace of her loss and desolation have her dowry
of his land, 8. E. 2. Itin. can. prescript. 50.
and also the heir shall inherit the same according to that old saying: The
father to the bough, and the son to the plough, although the common law by
rigorous imputation to make men more fearful to offend in crimes of such
quality, P. 35. H. 6.58.
extends ye punishment though not to the persons of the wife and children,
yet to their fortune so far as it may turn to their utter impouerishment and
discomfort.

In the city of York there is a custom, that the husband may enfeoffe his
wife of such laud as he shall purchase, which though it be against the rule of
the common law (which disableth the husband to convey any land to his wife)
by feoffement or deed, 12. H. 3. pre^* 6.1.
yet by force of the custom it was adjudged to be lawful and effectual. Also
the custom of many places in England is, that the wife shall enjoy the whole
land of her husband in name of her dowry, as it appears by M. Litt.
himself, Litt. ti. Dower
and the husband cannot by any cautele or devise defeat her thereof. And in
some other countries they have the moitie or tene part, and generally by the
common law the third part. In Northwales the custom is so beneficial for
wives, (that although they be sure of their thirds of such land as their
husbands shall chance to be seized of at any time during the marriage) yet are
they to have the moitie or tone part, not only of his goods and moueables,
but also of his leases, be the terms thereof never so long. Not many years
ago the custom of Taunbean was alleged and allowed by the court of the Kings
bench, 14. Eliz.
that the husband or wife whether so ever of them did happen to ouerliue should
have the inheritance or fee simple land of the other by suruiuor, a custom
verily neither contrary to reason nor repugnant to religion, as no well
disposed or good husband can deny, when he enters into consideration of these
holy duties and good obseruances that are commended and commanded in holy
scripture. Read the Epistle to the Ephesians, ca. 5.
If then these customs bear sway in sundry places, and are publicly
approved by judicial sentences, what citizen will be so senseless, what Londoner
so loose, what merchant or other freeman so inconsiderate, and vnregardfull of
his own good estate, and so ready to defile his own nest, as once to attempt
or practice the violation or breach of so good a custom? What is he who seeing
the estate of London is preferred before other cities of the land by the
benefit and means of their most profitable customs, that will give a
dangerous example to abrogate the same and to call their vsages in question? A
custom, if it have been once notoriously discontinued, or interrupted, loses
the title and appellation of a custom, and by instance given of the time when
it was disused lacks a great part of his authority. Then unnatural or at
least wise unadvised is that citizen which to serve his private humor brings
a general custom either into question by his fraud, or by his example into
contempt. Pernicious also is the president of one custom called in question to
the ruin of the rest: Namely, when as the city by their counsel in her
majesty's courts of Westminster, claiming the benefit of their customs, See
before in the case of robbery how careful the city was to avoid this danger
and to preserve their custom, and also in ye case of the attaint before 7. H.
6. etc.
may be encountered and confronted, and with a counterplea given by themselves,
that such of their own Aldermen and commons have by their deeds and devises
either disaffirmed or disanulled the same. A practice as of great condemnation
in them that do it, so no doubt of great oversight and incircumspection in them
that suffer it.

But somewhat to satisfy the idle cauils pretended to the contrary says some
one, is not the general law of England sufficient to manage the government
of London as well as of all other subjects, but that Londoners must have
private customs and vsages of their own? This objection made by the enuiers
or enemies of the wealth of London (howsoever they make show to the contrary)
rather deserves a hiss than a replye, and is sufficiently confuted in the
former discourse.

But it is further urged by some hard husbands, my wife is froward and
undutiful, and has not deserved it. She is a fool and cannot rule it. She
will marry again, and enrich some other with the fruit of my travail.
Wherefore I think it necessary to abridge her of that liberality which the
custom does extend. Also my children be evil inclined, disobedient or
intractable, or some of them be. Wherefore I may with reason deprive them of the
benefit of this custom. First to answer the undutifulness, I wish thee
whosoever thou art to summon and convent thy self to the tribunal seat of
thy inward mind, Aug. in lib. confess.
as S. Augustine says, and to make conscience thy judge, thy cogitations the
witnesses, thy actions the accusers, thy memory the register or record to give
in evidence: and let it be discussed in all due circumstances, whether thou
did not likewise forget the offices of a good husband and defraud her of her
duties, 1. Corinthians. ca. 7,
(as S. Paul says) or provoke her to impacience which the same Apostle
forbids in these words, You husbands be loving to your wives, Coloss. ca.
3.
and no way be bitter unto them. Peter. Epist. 1. ca. 1.
Which also S. Peter remembers in aduising husbands to dwell with their wives
sincerely and according to knowledge in doing honor unto them as to the weaker
vessel. Let it I say be examined in the consistory of thy conscience whether
thou either by thy fault wittingly, or negligently by thy default, or by thy
unkindness unduly, have caused her being the weaker vessel to be the more
intolerable. If thou find thy self condemned by thy conscience, let remorse
be thy executioner, and amendment with kindness toward thy wife be thy
penance: but if thou find thy self guilty of no want of affection, love or
good carriage of thy self toward her, so that her undutifulness proceeded of
her self: yet I pray thee remember the benefits which God has given thee by
her means, whether they be gifts of fortune in bettering of thy estate, or
eschewing of sin, by her lawful and comfortable company, or the blessing of
children a sovereign good in this world, thy children being the monuments of
thy life and being upon earth, and the repayrers of thy decaie. And let these
favors and graces enioied by her company cover and counteruaile her other
imperfections whatsoever. Follow therein the example of the wise Socrates, who
being demanded how he could endure the continual scoulding and vexation of his
wife Zantippe, likewise asked of the other why he suffered the rackling and
unpleasant noise of hens and Turkeies in his house, because said the other they
lay eggs and breed chickens for me, and so said Socrates, Zantippe bears me
children, which good turn alone covers and dispenses with infinite
defectes. Calicratides the Athenian being demanded why he a man so nobly
descended, but having matched with a base Thessalian woman, yet by his last
will bequethed unto her all his substance, leaving his other friends and
kinsfolks unregarded: because (said he) she is my wife, meaning that she who
was by his judgment and choice made worthy to be his wife, should be
unworthy of nothing that was his. Which may also satisfy that second point
of supposed folly in the wife, and want of discretion to marshall so great a
proportion of wealth, as the custom will give her. Wherefore would thou
marie with a fool, if thou thoughtest her unworthy of the rights of marriage?
then seeing thy choice has estopped thy testimony of her folly, thy duty
toward thy wife shall bind thee to favor and conceal her weakness, and
to perform that which the custom pronounces to be convenient. It can not be
evil bestowed upon her, whose right by custom demands it, and whose estate
and imperfections have need of it, whereas if the husband may be permitted by
this color to defeat his wife, many inconveniences and disorders might ensue.

Leges se acco^modant ad ea quae frequentius non quae raro accidunt. Bartolus.
First a general Custom, which is as also a general Law never provided for
such rare accidents as seldom fall in experience, but for things that
ordinarily and commonly happen, should be broken, to the general scandale and
offensive example of all through the inhabilitie of one, which were a thing
unreasonable. Likewise then might husbands, (if that were admitted for a just
allegation) easily devise and publishe that or some other imperfection to be
in their wives, and thereby bereave them of their right. No more then it is a
just counterplea or bar to a woman's dower to allege that she is a fool,
no more is the imputation of such simplicity honest and sufficient to exclude
her from her portion. No it is well said and maintained for a maxim in the
common Law, Better it is to suffer a mischief than an inconvenience. Less
harmeful and hateful it is for a man to swallowe twenty of these light
offenses, and to digest sundry of these pretensed scruples, than by violating
of a custom no less common than commendable to leave to posterity an odious
memory and obloquie of his name.

The last objection against wives is no less ridiculous than Tyrannical,
grounded upon an unjust desire to restrain them from marriage. Marriage is an
honorable ordinance of God, fit and necessary for all persons disposed
thereunto, to the avoiding of sin, and maintenance of a comfortable and
sociable christian life. To restrain or prohibit the same either in maids or
widows, (as S. Paul says) is the doctrine of devils. Tim. ep. 1. ca. 4
And to indent or condition with any that he or she shall not marie, 43. E. 3.6.
is a condition limited against law, and by the same pronounced unlawful and
unreasonable. Make it thine own case, admit thou did match with a
welthie wife, whose furniture and riches has increased thy estate, if God
should call for her, would thou in a kind memorial of the benefittes
attained by her means, make thy self a votarie to live unmarried? Do those
which marie great heirs being women, and after their wives deaths enjoy their
whole inheritance by the courtesy of England, making their wives heirs to
expect during their lives, take it for any matter of conscience or scruple to
marie again? Unless it be in some place where the force of the custom and the
benefit of the living joined together work a contrary resolution in some
husbands: which Custom annexed to Gauelkind lands in Kent and other places is
of this quality, 16. E. 3. aid 129 19. E. 3. aid 144
that the husband shall after the desease of his wife be tenant by the courtesy
of her land as long as he remains unmarried, whether he have issue by her or
not: but upon his next marriage shall utterly forgo all his interest therein. A
custom therefore the less unreasonable because the restraint of marriage of the
one side is counteruailed by the beneficial favor of the other side to have
the land by the courtesy without issue, and also for that he is to deprive the
next heir of his wife, who perchance has been married with him but few
months or days, of the profit and commodity of the whole land during his
life. But chiefly because it is a custom grounded and grewen in continuance to
such religious observation and regard, that it seems an offense of conscience
to infringe it. But in our case since there is neither custom nor conscience
to warrant thy will, why should thou then seem to quarrel with the lawful
liberty of thy wife, if she survive thee, she being weak by kind and
education, and thereby less able to direct her occasions, and govern her
estate without a companion and coadiutor? no on Gods name refer her to her
own choice and conscience therein, and make it no pretense and color to
abridge her of her right, because she seems inclynable unto that, which God
has ordained, and all men and women do embrace. As to the fear and suspicion
pretended, that another in matching with thy wife should be enriched by thy
travail, what should move thee to make that superstitious account of thy goods
when thou art gone? Were they any longer thine, than while thou had life and
license to employ them? Thou must needs know and acknowledge besides thy
daily experience, by the very Etymology and signification of the word, the
true nature and quality of the thing. These worldly goods are called
temporal, because they serve one but for a time, they are termed transitory,
for that their property is fleeting from one owner unto an other, they are
named moveable or current, because all their grace and credit is in running
and removing into diverse hands, according to that rude and old (but yet true)
latin ryme,

Omnia mundana per vices sunt aliena,
Nunc mea nunc huius, post mortem sunt alterius.
This worldly wealth each day does change
Their owners as we see,
Now mine now his and after death
An others goods they be.
Then sithence thy wealth has waited upon thee all thy life long, would
thou require the same to rest at thy devotion after thy death? If that seem
impertinent and unprofitable unto thee then relinquish this care and suffer the
goods of this world to have their natural course and condition, which is to be
still in exchange, passage, and posting from hand to hand, serving all men,
vt peregrinationis viaticum, That is, A pilgrims charge or defrayment in his
journey, Hieronymus in Epist.
as S. Hierome terms it. And address thy mind to the desire of such goods
as are neither temporal, transitory, current nor moveable, but perpetual,
permanent, constant and not only immutable but inestimable.

But finally to satisfy the last objection against thy children, I wish thee
to look back unto that I have said, that thou may not for a private
injury or displeasure, seem as much as lies in thee to supplant and abrogate
a public custom, to the no less preiudize than offense of a great number
that have interest therein. In enriching thy son, thou do discharge the
duty of a natural father toward him, which if he prodigally or wickedly
mispend or abuse, he carries his own condemnation and proves a wilful
enemy to himself. The good father mentioned of in the gospel, Luke. cap. 15.
who at the suite of his undutiful and disobedient son, (that would needs
abandon the service and attendance on his father to run the course of an
extrauagant libertine with lewd company) gave him a great portion of his
wealth, is not any way blamed by our Savior for that indulgence, but rather
recommended to all posterity as a true pattern of a kind father. S. Paul
commands the father to be well affected to his children, Colloss. cap. 3
and no way to discourage them. What may breed greater discouragement or
coffeehouse in any child than to see himself by the place of his birth and
the good fortune of the city entitled to the commodity of a good custom, and
yet injuriously by his own father, (whose affection should be always occupied
and earnest in procuring the good of his children) disappointed of his hope and
defrauded of his right. And as well as some having just cause of displeasure
again their son and child, may in this unlawful and disorderly sort
practice their revenge, so may some other inconsiderate and wilful father upon
a conceit taken against a good son and of singular desert, for that he
concurreth not with him in some humor or disposition, most wrongfully distress
and undo him by such a president. Thus the mischiefs objected on the one side
are light and of small moment, whereas the inconveniences apparent on the other
side be manifold and of dangerous consequence.

I will not vouchsafe to answer that indiscreet Sarcasmus or bitter scoff
that some use, We may play our wealth at dice without offense to the custom,
wherefore should we not then dispose the same from our wife and children by
our deeds of gift? This amounts to as much as if a married man would say, I
may commit fellonie or treason, and be attainted and hanged therefore, and then
the law gives my wife no dower, nor my heir no patrimony, then why should I
not in reason use my discretion with the land without encumbrance by the one,
or injury to the other? Match these two cases together with judgment, and thou
shall perceive they have a sensible concurrencie in their address and
application to this purpose. It is well said by the Poet,

Nil iuuat exemplum quod litem lite resoluit. The example of one wilful or
wicked act gives no just countenance or allowance to an other. Let so much
said to thy objections take some place to alter thine humor, or at least be a
preparatiue for thine own reason in the fear of God to purge thee of the same.

But to conclude this short discourse with one consideration of great
importance, I wish thee to consider, that this city of London is and has
been happily preserved in this flourishing prosperity by the wise and
politic consent that all and always the particulers have had to increase the
general good estate thereof, thinking it their duty as they got and
acquired their substance in this city, so also to spend and defraie it in the
same: insomuch that whatsoever falls from the one comes and grows unto an
other, and by alteration of private fortunes (as chances and changes of times
do require from one citizen to another) the general estate has flourished and
never wanted particular men of wealth and ability to sustain the offices and
functions of the city. Upon which consideration by most laudable and ancient
custom, the L. Mayor and Senate of London have been and are entitled to the
tuition and custody of young Orphans and their goods, and likewise are made
acquainted by ordinary good means of inuentories taken and produced, what
substance and wealth each man dies possessed of, to the intent that although
that man which by his good travail and trade has grown to be rich among
them, be departed hence, yet his goods may remain as among his wife and
children in use and property, so to the general strength of this city in
account and reckoning. For we often see yt one rich man's wealth passes to the
increase of the good estate of an other citizen, either by marriage of the
widow, or of the Orphane: so that the city though deprived of a member or
inhabitant, yet is not destitute of such as may discharge his employment and
place. Whereas if this pernicious practice and uncharitable liberty might take
root by deeds of gifts and cautelous conueyance to strangers, not only the
wife and children may be distrested, but also the state of the city much
weakened, and in danger of a great disreputation and decay, from that that it
has been and yet is. For if it be adjudged lawefull in one, of what degree
soever he be, it is neither impossible nor unlikely that the same will be used
by many, and consequently may be practiced by all: which if it befall, what
will become of the happy condition of this City, it is not hard to
conjecture. I mean not to extend my speech to the prejudice of any true
debtes that a man owes without fraud or collusion, seeing the custom very
prouidently cares for the discharge thereof, but my purpose is to diswade men
from evil example, from insolent violation of good customs, and from odious
and unseemly practices of deceit and evil meaning toward their wives and
children: Which persuasion I would wish al professors of the Law seriously
and carefully to use and enforce to their clients, being citizens of London, as
in good conscience and discretion they ought to do.

An Apostrophe to the reader, and the motive of this treatise.
Blame not my bold enterprise (gentle Reader) nor reprove my simple censure
herein presented unto thee, which might I know both for the matter and manner
of it have been by any other, and perchance by my self more largely and
effectually delivered: if the opportunity of my leisure might have answered
the quality of the argument which I had in hand. But fearing least I should
with too long a discourse in so plain a proposition breed more lothsomenesse
than liking, I would not, for want of leisure I might not, and if I had had
time at will I minded not, seeing for any urgent occasion (the error being yet
fresh, the practice rare and not grown to an enormitie, I needed not) but in a
word or two to make thee acquainted with the cause that moved me to address
these few reasons to thy gentle view. So it happened, that I being in company
and conference with some persons (though otherwise wise and well affected, yet
in this matter strangely conceipted) it chanced that the lawefulnesse and
conueniencie of this custom came in question and debate among us, and was by
some of them (being men for sufficiency, of great opinion, and for countenance
and credit of good appearance and regard in the city) so pressed with
objections, that the most part of those which were present seemed to incline to
that persuasion. Wherefore least the authority of the men might the sooner
seduce the simple multitude unto their error, and for that I thought it a
charitable policy to prevent the peril in the prime, before it grew to a
festering sore or incurable evil, according to the Poet Ouids advise,

Principijs obsta sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per long as inualuere moras.
Withstand at first the springing evil
With medicines fit therefore,
Too late it is to take the cure
Of old and festred sore.
I thought good to apply this simple resceipt of reason to the minds of all
such as shall chance to be distempered by these disuasions: hoping that they
will yield me that friendly requital of good construction, which my offered
goodwill may seem to deserve: and although I keep my self unnamed, and
unknown: it may please them to have this opinion of me, no more favorable
than reasonable, that he which is well devoted to the defense of good customs,
is rather to be justified in his good meaning, than condemned or held suspected
of any sinister conceit.

FINIS.

