London Tryacle, Being the enemy to all infectious diseases; as may appear by
the discourse following.

London Printed by EDW: ALLDE. 1612.

To the gentle Reader, R.B. wishes all health and welfare according to his
own hearts desire.
It was my good hap gentle Reader, not many days ago, to hit upon this
discourse of London Triacle: which after I had showed unto diverse of judgment
and skill in such matters and found that they judged the book well worthy the
setting out, especially in this infectious season. I resolved thereupon to
publish it to the world, that thereby the fruit and benefit thereof might the
better be imparted to our whole nation. It should seem the discourse was fully
ended before the plague in London began this last Summer, for otherwise it is
not to be thought but the author would somwhere have made mention thereof.
Notwithstanding, I my self having made diligent enquiry as well of Physicians
as of Surgeons and Apothecaries what trial has been made thereof in the time
of pestilence, I am by many of good judgment assuredly certified that amongst
the poor especially (whom it most haunted) this Triacle by good trial and
experience has been found to be of singular virtue, and to have saved the
lives of hundreds which have taken it: for very few which in the first or
second day of the dissease took any reasonable quantity of it (for little of it
as of all other preservatives can have small force) and therewithal laid
themselves to sweat, very few I say miscarried: yea the most part did within
few hours perceive the venom of the disease to be driven clean from the
heart to the outward parts, whereby within a day or two after, they found
themselves past all danger. But because it is no part of my meaning, neither
presume I to have skill enough to set down at full the due praises of so
precious a preservative. I will surcease to proceed any further in commending
the same unto you: and that so much the rather, because the Author in the
discourse it self has at large declared the virtues thereof. Only this I
will say thereof by the way, that I can in nothing resemble this Triacle better,
then to the most valiant and victorious champion Hercules for his worthy acts
and conquests canonized amongst the Gods. For as Hercules is reported to have
travailed continually from country to country throughout the whole world,
every where as he went destroying monsters, slaying Tyrants, murderers and
robbers; clearing high ways, cleansing all pestiferous airs and noisome
waters, whereby he delivered infinite nations from thraldom and slavery, freed
all passages for trauailers and waifarers, and restored the interrupted
intercourse and trade with foreign countries, to the wonderful and
inestimable benefit of all mankind: Even so this Triacle being by good advice
recieued into man's body, destroieth all venom and poison, kills or expels
all corrupt vapors and humors, and scoureth all the pipes and conduits whereby
it saves the heart and chief intrailes from suffocation and destruction,
freeth all the veins and vessels and restores free recourse and passage of
the lively and cheerful spirits and nourishing humors into all the members of
the body, to the singular comfort and refreshing of the whole man. What should
cause or induce the Author so long to stay the publishing of so fruitful or
rather necessary a discourse, in this so fit an opportunity, it is hard to
guess, unless peradventure it be that he perceived straight upon the
perfecting of his book the plauge to begin, and therefore thought it not
amiss to defer the setting out thereof until either by him self or some
learned men, sufficient trial might be taken of the forcible effects thereof
in the plague it self, as already very good experiment had been proved in
many other disseases, Wherein if I have guest aright, I hope the Author has
less cause to be offended with me considering I have but done that which he
meant to have performed himself, in making him do his country good a little
sooner then he intended. And my hope herein is the greater, because it is
apparent by the suppressing of his name, that he neither ambitiously thereby
hunted after praise, nor greedily gaped for gain, but wholly respected the
benefiting and profiting of his country, By how much the more his good meaning
is of all men to be taken in good part. And thus presuming that the Author
will bear with my boldness and not doubting but so well a meant work shall
be acceptably received of the gentle Reader, I commit them both unto the
almighties protection.

R. Band.

The contents of the Book,
1. The occasion of making London Triacle.

2. The first invention of Theriaca, and in what estimation mighty princes ever
have had it.

3. Why it was called Triacle or Thiriaca.

4. The virtues and qualities of London Triacle.

5. The order of using this Triacle.

6. For what cause the receipt is not yet published, and wherefore the making
of it is (by authority) committed to one Apothecary.

The occasion of the making of London Triacle
THe Masters and Wardens of the Grocers company, having by sundry years
searches, well marked and observed, that a filthy and unwholesome baggage
composition, (termed commonly Triacle of Geane) has been craftily, and by
couine of certain lewd persons, in a monstrous quantity, some thousand weight
yearly brought into this Realm, and here to the foul deceauing, and danger
of the lives of many thousands, been publicly sold, carrying credit with all
sorts of people, only for the bare name sake of Theriaca, or Triacle: (as
their duty to their country bound them) did diverse years use all such good
means and orders, as they could devise, to bannish clean out of the realm,
or at least to hinder much the vente of such a uoysome and poysonish drugge.
For although that the most of the company were not greatly learned, yet many of
them being discreet men, and of good insight and experience in such matters,
did out of the rules of bare reason, gather that this so named Geane Triacle,
being (as it is well known) made only of the rotten garble, and refuse outcast
of all kind of spices and drugs, hand over head, with a little filthy
molasses, and tar to work it up withal, was so far from either curing or
preventing any disease in man's body, that by all likelihood it must needs
engender most rotten and corrupt humors. And with good reason might they judge
that composition of no great virtue and force, which has been often sold of
late years for xxx. s^. and sometimes for xxviii.s.^ the hundred, which
falls out iii. d or at most under iii. d.q. a pound.

Now, what good Spice, Sugar, Honey, or other drugge of any virtue can be sold
for so bace a price, let any man judge? So as it is most apparaunt to one that
has but half an eye, that so base a composition must needs be made of such
dregs, and refuse, as are more fit for the dungcartes, then the
Apothecaries, or Grocers shoppes. And surely it is great pity, that some
severe punishment is not by the superior maiestrates, inflicted upon such lewd
persons, as being so often warned do still bring in, or otherwise by
themselves, or their servants make, or utter such filthy and rotten drugges,
and that under the cloak and name of so comfortable a preservative, as Triakle
has in all ages been esteemed to be.

But to go forward, the Grocers finding that their good care, and discreet
orders for the bannishing of so unwholesome a drugge, did not take such effect
as they looked for and wished: and observing that the very cheapnes of this
misnamed Geane Triacle, together with the excessive dearnes of Venice Triacle,
and Mithridate, were the only causes, that still contiinued so marvelous a
vent thereof, After deliberate consultation had, thought it best to entreat the
learned Society of Physicians, to set down some effectual receite of Triacle,
which might be both forceable against rotten and venomous disseases, and also
of an easy and moderate price for the poor subject.

Unto which, their so honest and reasonable request, the College of Physicians
did readily condescend: and thereupon they presently committed the charge of
the setting down of the receite, unto three choice men of their company, which
should (by a certain day) deliver unto Mr. Besse an Apothecarie (to whom both
by the Physicians and Grocers order, the making thereof was only committed)
their prescript, which they did after diligent conferring of sundry receats of
learned writers, together (according to the charge to them committed, carefully
perform:) within few days after Mr. Besse did bring to the College, both
the prescript to him before delivered, and also a pound of the composition,
which he by their order had made up for a trial sake, to the intent that all
the whole company of Physicians together, after diligent examination of the
prescript, with such trial as Art could take, by the color, taste, smell,
and consistence of the Tryacle it self, might either resolve upon that receat
already set down, or elsby adding, and rebating, as by their skill should
seem good (with some little change) set down another. And so it fell out
indeed, that some little alteration, being in one simple or two made, the
receate, was (with the College seal annexed unto it) redeliuered to the said
Mr. Besse, to be yearly by him accordingly dispensed and prepared, with
straight charge, not in any jot or point, to vary from the very words of the
same prescript: And that every year before the dispensing thereof, he should
give notice to the President, and Censors of the Physicians College, that for
the carefuller preparing thereof, they might with any other of their Society,
come to his house and there make examination, and trial of all the simples,
ingredients, before they were put together, and compounded.

And that to the good of all the Realm, the said Triacle might be the more
faithfully prepared, the Master and Wardens of the Grocers, first presented
M.W. Besse to the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen his brethren, as a very fit Man
both for skill, and honest carefulnes in his profession, to perform the
Compounding of such a Tryacle: where was given him a corporal Oath, for the
true, and careful preparing thereof: And afterward, the said Master and
Wardens did deliver unto M.W. Besse in writing, both the receate new writ out
again, and withal, all the points of his Oath, with the Seal of their
Company, reserving the Physicians receate and seal, for their discharge, in
the Grocers Hall. Which course and order of examining yearly the simples, and
careful making up of the Composition, has now these five years been
accordingly put in execution, and the Triacle it self (by so many years
experience) thoroughly tried to be of singular virtue, and of wonderful force,
as well in comforting nature, as in expelling all noisome, and venomous matter
from the heart, and principal parts of man's body.

In setting down of which receate, the Physicians took especial care to
appoint such ingredients as were perfectly known, not hard to be gotten, and
(as much as might be in so forceable, and effectual a preservative) home
bredde: and this they chiefly did, for the good and ease of the poor subject,
whose purse cannot reach unto the price of costly medicines. All which things
well considered, there may be more said justly in the commendation of this
London Triacle, then may be of any other medicine whatsoever heretofore
devised, and set out in this Realm: And if I should say foreign Realms too,
it might well be justified, considering the sound learning, deep judgment,
and long experience of the whole College of Physicians, that devised it with
the great care which both they, and also the magistrates of the City have
taken, for the diligent, and perfect preparing thereof. As for the price, it is
so reasonable (a pound not amounting above ij. s^. viij. d. an ounce by retale
not above ii. d.) as no wise man will spare so much to do his horse or dog
good withal.

This Tryacle is made, and to be had at the house of M. William Besse, dwelling
in the Poultery, near the Counter.

Of the first invention of Theriaca, and in what estimation mighty Princes
ever have had it.
ALthough Andromachus the Elder, Nero the Emperors chief Physician, be of
most men esteemed, as the first inuentour of Triacle, or Theriaca, yet you must
understand, that he did only add vipers, first to some old composition
thereof, which he liked best, and withal gave it a new name, tearming it, not
Theriaca, but Galene, as much to say as calmenes, or stilnes. This Galene did
Crito (a famous practicioner under the Vespatians reigns) name Theriaca,
because it received the flesh of vipers: of Physicians, by a pre-eminence named
in Greek (...) But that the Reader may, together take a view both of the first
beginning, and original, and also what great credit Theriaca was presently in
with mighty Princes, even upon the very first invention: He must understand,
that the very first Theriaca, recorded of in writers, is that of Antiochus,
whom Pliny surnameth Magnus, and Galen Philometor. He reigned in Siria some
200. years before Christ. This was called Antiochus his Theriaca, because that
great and mighty King himself did continually use it as a preservative
against all poisons, and venomous stingings. By whose countenance, it grew
presently into such estimation and credit, that the famous Physician Endemus,
(as Galen reports) put the receate thereof in verse: And that all men might
partake the good and profit of so forceable a preservative: The verses (as
Pliny records) were engraven in stone, over the porch door of Aesculapius
his Temple, as a medicine of so divine power and virtue, as not to be esteemed
for any man's invention, but rather a divine receate revealed unto mankind, by
the great God of Physic himself. Within two or three ages after Antiochus,
did Nicander, that learned Physician and Poet, dedicate his book, named
Theriaca, unto Attalus then King of Perganum, where after, Galen was borne.
This Attalus was a noble Prince, greatly favoring and advancing all kind of
good learning: but above all things, wonderfully given to make trial of the
virtues of medicines, and especially of such as were thought of force against
venomous beasts, and poisons: which both he then, and by his example afterward,
Mithridates the great (as Galen truly testifies) did curiously and diligently,
make experiment of upon condemned persons. The experiments of this learned King
Attalus, ro^ming within an age or two after unto the hands of Mithridates, and
being by his like study, and trial in immitation of Attelus ((...)) much
increased, he culd out of both their experiences, the very choice simples, and
thereof devised a most effectual composition, named by Galen Theriaca
Mithridatis (much differing from that which we commonly call Methridatum) by
continual use of which medicine, he preserved himself many score years free
from all danger of poisoning: so that (as Galen writes) being straightly
beseiged by the Conquering Romans, and out of all hope to escape, to prevent
their cruelty, and to avoid his own shame, he twice took rank and strong
poison: but the force of his so often received Tryacle was such, as no poison
never so great could prevail against it, whereby in the end, the good king was
compelled to dye upon his own sword.

About fourscore years after Mithridates miserable end, did Aelius Gallus,
Tiberius the Emperors lieftenant in Aegipt and Arabiae, in his return from
thence, bring two receates of Theriaca home with him: wherewith he presented
the Emperor Tiberius, esteeming them as fit presents for so mighty a Manarch.

Now in what wonderful estimation, or rather admiration, Tryacle was had in
Galens time, Galen himself does at large set down, in his book Entitled of
Triacle, and dedicated unto Piso a noble Roman: which book (as may be gathered
by the text) he writ in the beginning of Caracalla his Reign, before he had
made away his brother Geta. For Marcus Aurelius (in the beginning of whose
reign Galen first came to Rome) a Prince for his deep and profound learning,
named Marcus the Philosopher, and which (as Galen testifies) had a perfect and
exquisite knowledge of his own temprature and complexion, by the daily use of
Triacle (being both by nature, and also by travail, as well of body as mind,
of a weak constitution) lived many years (notwithstanding) in excellent good
health, and state of body. So that the wonderful opinion, which was had
through all the world of this Emperors wisdom, and learning, together with
his long continued health, procured by the only use of this preservative,
brought Triacle into such credit and estimation, that all great men, as well in
the Court of Rome, as else where in the Country and Provinces abroad, following
the Emperors example, fell to the use thereof. And least the reader should
think that Marcus Aurelius only used Andromachus his Triacle: let him read
the last chapter of Galens second book of Counter-poysons, where, in the very
first line he shall find the receate that Aurelius so much used, compounded
but only of four simples, and God he knows, a simple composition indeed (for
all the great credit it had) if it be compared with our London Tryacle.

Some fourteen year after M. Aurelius his departure, succeeded in the Empire
Soptianus Seuerus, a prince though not greatly learned, yet both very wise and
valiant.

This Emperor made that most renowned Physician (or rather Prince of all
Physicians) Galen, to prepare and compound for the Emperors own use, the
Theriaca of Andromachus, and that of the chiefest, and most choice simples,
which could be got in the whole world: whereby through the renounce of so
famous a Physician, the glorious name of Triacle was ever after amongst all
posterity wonderfully increased and advanced. From Galen until our days
(almost 1400. years) If one overrun the stories of all nations and ages, He
shall find that Triacle has been from time to time, of all mighty Princes
had in wonderful estunation and reputation. Yea that most Tyrannous and
Barbarous Monarch, the great Turk, every year in Egypt (because that Country
lies most fitly to get all Indian and Arabian simples freshest) has by the
hands of the skilfullest and learned Physicians, which that sauadge and
unlettered nation yeildeth, a composition of Theriaca prepared by the name of
Tharach Faruc, which both of the Emperor himself, and of all his Bashawes and
great men, is had in wonderful estimation. Although that through the ignorance
of their Physicians in the making thereof, both the vipers themselves (for whom
they substitute a kind of Serpent with horns, called therefore of the Greeks
Cerastes but of the Egyptians Tahyr) and many other especial simples besides
are mistaken and falsified: whereby it comes to pass, that the Alexandrian
or Egyptian Theriaca is in no degree to be compared with any kind of Triacle
artificially prepared in sundry Cities of Christendom, where all kinds of
good learning, and namely of Physic do most plentifully flourish.

Why it was called Triacle or Theriaca.
FOr the naming of it Theriaca or Triacle, diverse and sundry reasons may be
alleged. First, because it was of purpose ordained to supply the use, or
rather to reform the abuse, and to enjoy and possess the room and place of
that bastard Triacle, which has these many years, to the unspeakable
annoyance of many thousands, been too too much used in this Realm, by the
name of Geane Triacle. The second, but principal reason is, for that all, or
most of the ingredients, having singular force against, either inward poisons,
or outward venomous bytings* or stingings of venomous beasts, it must needs
follow, that so perfect a composition made of so choice counter-poysons, and
those so orderly in weight and measure proportioned, could not but be of
wonderful virtue and efficacy, not only against poisons and venomes, but also
against all corruption and rottenness, either of humors or spirits: Neither is
the name Triacle or Theriaca to be thought, as unfitly attributed to the London
composition, although it receive no vipers flesh in it at all. For
notwithstanding that Crito a famous Empericke about Vespatianus his days, gave
that same composition, which Andromachus Neroes Physician, first either
invented or enlarged, and withal termed it Galene the name of Theriaca,
because it received vipers flesh, (which kind of Serpent is of many Greeks
both Physicians and Philosophers, by a prerogative called (...) yet the name of
Theriaca has both before Neroes time and since, been commonly attributed not
only to compounds, containing no vipers flesh at all, but also to very simples,
only for that they were judged of force against the bytinges and stinginges of
venomous beasts. For compoundes, who so doubts, let him read the 10. chap.
of the 2 book of Galen of counterpoisons (for so I translate Antidotus) where
he shall find five several Theriacaes upon a row, into none of which, vipers
flesh is any ingredient. The first, of Antipater, The second, and third, of
Aelius Gallus (under whose conduct in our Savior Christ's time, Strabo that
learned Geographer did travail both Egypt and Arabia) The fourth, of Euclide
by-named Palatianus. The fifth, of Zeno the Laodician. Again, in the
fourteenth chap. he shall find Theriaca Antiochi, Philometoris (Plini calls
him Magnus) which reigned in Siria some 12. score years before ever vipers
flesh was put into any Theriaca. For Andromachus Neroes Physician, by Galens
own testimony, was the very first that added vipers flesh unto Theriaca. Now
since Andromachus time, we may find infinite receipts of Theriaca in sundry
Physicians, clearly void of vipers flesh: As namely, that which M. Aurelius
so much used with so good success, then the vulger Theriaca diatessaron a
simple receate, in show of four common simples, yet a receate no doubt of
singular force and virtue: And last of all, that baggage composition, thrust in
under the name of Geane Triacle, has these many years usurped the name of
Theriaca, although it has no vipers flesh in it at all.

As for simples, both Galen calls Garlic the country man's Triacle, and
Pliny makes mention, of a kind of Vine in the Island of Thasos, called
therefore Theriaca, because, as well the grape, as the wine would heal the
bitings, and stingings of Serpents. Besides, Valeriana is of sundry late
writers, named Theriaca for the same reason: which things considered, the
learned College of Physicians of this famous City of London, did very aptly,
and advisedly (to this their Composition) attribute the name of Theriaca. And
that so much the more, for that this London Triacle, besides the choice of old
simples, contains in it, at least a dozen spices and herbs, not known to
the old writers: whose wonderful virtues, are notwithstanding against all
poisons and venomes (by many a hundred years trial) sufficiently approved.
And these late known simples were added, by warraant both of reason (the
perfect rule and level of all Physicians actions) and also of Auerroes, the
best learned, both Philosopher, and Physician of all the Arabians, which in his
abridgement of Physic, (commonly called the Colliget) does justly reprove the
opinion of Auicen, (otherwise himself a most famous Physician) affirming the
Andromachus his Triacle, takes his so wonderful force, not from the virtues
and qualities of the simples which are in it, but from a fifth supernatural
hidden property, proceeding from the essential form (as he terms it
forsooth) of the whole mixture, and therefore strictly warns all Physicians,
neither to add too, nor diminish any thing from Andromachus his first
prescript: Which opinion of Auicen, as too superstitiously tying all posterity
to our forefathers receipts, Auerroze does, and that justly confute, wishing
(which in this composition, the Physicians of London have with great reason put
in practice) that diverse of such excellent counter-poyson simples, as later
times have discovered, should be either added over and above the old
ingredients, or else substituted in some of their places, which were found to
be of least force and virtue.

Of the virtues, and qualities of London Tryacle.
TO recite all the virtues, and uses of the London Triacle, as well in
preventing, as incuring most grievous disseases, would require a learneder, and
larger discourse, then at this present is either requisite, or intended to be
set down. Notwithstanding the chief, and most principal quallities thereof,
and those from which the reasons and grounds of all the rest must be fetched,
are these that follow. First, this Triacle heateth, and dries about the midst
(as Physicians term it) of the second degree, and withal, is of very thin
parts. Secondly, it has a skowring, or deansing virtue, with a moderate
astriction. By his heat, it helps all kinds of concoction, and ripeneth all
crud humors, or drines in man's body. By his heat, and thinnes of parts, it
opens all poares and passages, it thinneth and breaths out gross humors
and winds, it softeneth hard tumors, and relaxeth stifnes of parts, and
consequently mittigateth all kind of pains, and greifes: It provoke sweat,
urine, and women's courses, it opens the Emerands, and furthereth all
euacuations: By his drynes, and cleansing power, it consumes and wastes, or
else wypeth away all gross, tough, and clammy humors: and thereby delivers
obstructions, and mightily resists all putrefaction, and poisons, either
inward or outward. By his mild astriction and moderate warmth, it strengthens
all the principal members of man's body, and thereby renueth good spirits,
ingendereth pure blood, and stays all immoderate wastings, and euacuations,
either of humors or spirits. So that what soever infirmity in man's body,
proceeds either from too much abundance of humors and wind, or else from
their faultines in coldness, grosenes, toughnes, clammines, or rottennes:
likewise what soever is caused by stopping of the conduits, and passages, or by
the astriction, and shutting of the poares: Besides whatsoever imperfections or
defaultes possess the chief and principal parts, and thereby hinder or
deprave any of their functions or works: all these (if they be by inward
medicines curable) may by this Triacle (artificially and skilfully used) be
either wholly, and altogether cured, or at least greatly eased, and amended. To
a Physician, or any other man trained up in good literature, these breife
instructions are sufficient, to direct him fully to the perfect use of this
Triacle, in all convenient disseases. But because this discourse does chiefly
respect, and is especially written for the ignorant, and unlettered multitude
of the common people, which is no ways able to conceive the natural causes of
things: it will not be amiss, for the simple persons better instruction, to
set down by name, such common and running disseases, as this Triacle is most to
be used against. First, of all therefore it is of marvelous force against the
Plague, Sweating-sicknes Pocks (small I mean) or measels, or any other
malicious and pestilent Fever. For being given the sick person to drink with
Dragons, Carduus Benedictus, or Angelica water, it drives out from the heart
and principal parts to the skin, all the venom and corruption of the
dissease. By the same virtue it both preserves, and also cures as well any
inward poison, as any biting or stinging of mad dog or venomous beast: yea,
being outwardly applied to the bytings and stingings: or to the Carbunble or
Bubo in the plague, it does (as it were) miraculously draw out all the inward
venom, and corruption by that issue. As for long headaches, and megrames,
Turnsicknes, dulnes of sight, thicknes of hearing, and such like disseases of
the brain, sinews, and instruments of Senses, which proceed from cold and
tough humors, or from wind, all these by the continual usage hereof, may in
time be either clean taken away, or else greatly assuaged and diminished: For
by comforting the brain, it cheareth the spirits, sharpeneth the wit,
strengthens the memory, quickneth all the Sensces. Against the falling
sickness, and worms, being disseases most commonly troubling children this
Triacle is an especial remedy: as having diverse choice ingredients,
perticularly respecting those infirmities of purpose inserted into it: For the
Wheasings, and old coughs, being taken with the water or decoction of Hysope,
or Horehound, it is very effectual: as also with the decoction of Comfrey
roots, or conseruc of old red Roses, it excellently stays any lingering
spitting of blood, issuing from the lungs or chest: Likewise it heals any
stitches in the sides (if they proceed not from hot inflammations or
pleurifles) being either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied hot. Now in the
stomach, it provoke appetite, helps concoction, and distribution, breaks
and discusseth wind and either digesteth or drives out from thence, all raw
and corrupt humors, whereby it heals the inflation, or puffing up of the
stomach with wind, and cures that kind of greedines (which Physicians
term the dogs appetite) which dissease forces them that have it, to eat
their meat greedily, and that very much, but presently after to cast it
again: notwithstanding after they have vomited, their appetite is no whit
stayed nor abayted, but straight way they become as greedy again as before: In
the liver it delivers all obstructions, and cures the yealow Iaundise,
espetially being taken with the decoction of worm wood (ground pure)
Horehound, Alecoast, Maudline, or Succory: Whereby it cures the green
sickness, and the dropsy, not being grown too far, nor rooted. The like
force it has in infirmities of the spleen, wherein it helps all stoppings,
discusseth windinesses, and diminishes all sort of cold swellings or tumors:
namely, being received with the decoction of Tamariske, bark of Capers roots,
or of Finger-fearne. Neither is it of less power and virtue, in curing the
disseases of the entralls or guts: for it singularly helps the Colic, and
stays all lares, and aswageth all torments, and grypings, if it be orderly
taken with fit, and convenient liquors, strops, or conserues. But the most
especial, and singular virtue thereof, is the wonderful comfort and strength
it yields and imparteth to the heart, the principal part of the life of man:
which his force is most mightily perceived in faintings, and swoundings. The
same effects it shows in tremblings of the heart, and in all
melancholie-passions and frights.

But to go forward: in the kidneys and bladder, it mildly scowreth away and
cleanses sand, gravel, or stones, and thereby often times cures the stoppings
of Urine, and the Stran(...)rye. For the Gowt (after general euacuations
orderly administered) the continual use of this Tryacle, is a most effectual
remedy: which effect it works by helping concoction in the stomach and
Liver, by comforting the brain, and by drying up, or driving out, either by
sweat, or inscensible outbreathings, all superfluous moisture, both there and
in all other parts of the body. Besides all these, it is a singular remedy,
both for Palsies and cramps, either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, and
anointed with some convenient Oil or grease. In women's matters, although the
virtues thereof be excellently effectual, notwithstanding, I think it not amiss
to omit the rehearsal of them at this time, because any large discourse
thereof, especially in the mother tongue, may seem unfit for chaste ears, and
besides, is more likely to do harm then good, in unchaste minds.

But here I may not over pass the mighty power it has in driving away any
long lingering Ague, proceeding from cold, gross, or tough humors, and
namely, of an old quartane Ague, if it be orderly given in good large
proportion, with the decoction of Germander, or Tamariske half an hour before
the fit, the party withal being put into a warm bed, and with store of warm
clothes provoked presently to sweat: marry here great heed must be taken,
that first the body be well purged, and let blood (if need be) and that the
humor be ripe and concocted. To set down at large, all the particular virtues,
and effects of this London Triacle, would make up a large volume. For because
therefore both I mean to be short, and these virtues already expressed are
sufficient to direct any reasonable man to the orderly use of this London
Triacle, in most common disseases: I will surcease to discourse any longer of
the quallities thereof, and proceed to the order of using it.

The order of using London Triacle.
IN the use of London Triacle, three things are to be considered: first, the
quantity, next the time, and lastly, the manner of ministering of it. A
certain quantity, either in weight or measure thereof, cannot precisely be
declared in words, by reason of the manifold diversities, as well of the
strength, age, sex, temperature, and complexion of the sick body, as of the
disseases themselves, their causes, and the parts of man's body therewith
possessed: In sucking children half a scruple will be a reasonable quantity:
In women with child, or in childbed, in very old folks, or young children
past sucking, a whole scruple may be well borne: in stronger bodies, and abler
constitutions, a larger proportion may be allowed, (due consideration being had
of the vrgencie of the dissease, and the strength of the party) as from a
scruple weight upward to a whole dra^me or four scruples in very urgent and
hard disseases, as in driving away of a quartane or such like. But when poison
is already received inwardly, or any body newly bitten, slung with a mad dog,
or venomous beast, you must ascend yet higher, and increase your dasts to two
dragmes weight, yea, and in strong poisons and venomes, unto three dragmes, and
this you must often times do, and not be content with once giving it.

And here because most men knows not these names of Scruples and Dragmes, and
many men though, they peradventure know them, yet have them not ready at hand
when need requires, it is to be understood, that a drag-weight in English
silver is vii. d. ob. just, and a scruple (which is the third part of a dragme,
weighs just ij. d. ob. now who so cannot half or double any of these, is too
simple to be thought fit to minister medicines unto any sick body being in
danger. Furthermore, for because that most of the common and vulgar people,
though they had weights, yet they know them not: and which is more, knows
not how to weigh any thing by those coins which they best know, it is thought
not amiss, to set down such directions in giving of this Triacle, as the
ignorantest man of all cannot much go amiss. For a scruple, they are full the
bigness of a mean and ordinary hasell. Nut husked: and for a dragme, the
quantity of a small nutmeggo, may safely be administered, and so the rest
^atably: And thus much for the quantity. Now for the time and fit season of
giving it (which, as in all other medicines administering, so in this Triacle
giving is the difficultest point of skill in all physic) two things are
chiefly to be noted: The time of the day, and the time of the dissease. Of all
times of the day the morning is most apt, and fittest both for this medicine
and all other such like to be taken in. And good cause why: For in the morning,
after the whole nights rest, the former days meat being fully digested and
dispearsed into the outward parts of the body, the inward parts, as the
stomach, liver, spleen, and belly veins, are then empty, and therefore more
apt both to receive in themselves, and to dispearse throw into the whole body,
the force and virtue of the medicine then taken. For always, especial care
and regard is to be taken, that neither this Triacle, nor any such like strong
and forceable medicine, be administered inwardly after meat, or upon a full
belly. Yea, and if the belly be not either by nature loose, or by Art made
soluble, the use of Triacle can no ways be safe.

The other time to be observed, is that of the dissease it self, which caryeth
so great sway, that often times it ouerruleth the time of the day, and alters
it at pleasure, according to the time of the whole dissease, or of that present
fit then possessing the sick body: for the time of the whole sickness, as a
long Ague, or other lingering dissease, it is against all rules of Art to
minister Triacle, either in the beginning, or in the increase of the dissease,
until manifest tokens of concoction and ripenes appear: after which time (if
the obstructions of the liver or spleen continue not still great) you may
safely, accordingly as the ripenes increase, and the obstructions decrease,
ratably augment the quantity of your Triacle. The same is to be observed in
the time of the fit: for until the matter of that fit make show of ripenes,
and that the passages of the outward parts and skin be somewhat opened, you
may no ways give any Triacle: but after that time you may safely minister it,
the better thereby to further the issue of sweat, and insencible
out-breathings: by which kinds of euacuations (being abundantly performed)
very often times it falls out* that the whole dissease is dissolved and rid
away.

Besides the two times rehearsed, she one of the ^^y, the the other of the
dissease, the age of the Triacle it less is diligently to be considered: for
the newer he is, the better, (...) readi^^ he stays any euacuation,
especially by vomitto or stool, and withal asswageth any inward grypings or
pains, chiefly such as proceed from hot and fretting humors. As gain, the
older this Triacle is, the more forceable and effectual are his virtues, in
opening all stoppings and obstructions of the principal parts, and
consequently in expecting, and driving out from the inward to the outward parts
all venomous and rotten, either humors or vapors.

Now for the manner of giving it, you must note, that if your intent be to stay
any flux or euacuation, by strengthening the principal parts, or else to
mittigate and assuage any inward point, in such cases you must minister your
Triacle in solid or dry form, either alone, or with some conserve, or
Electuary, and then sleep upon it: unless you mean to stay immoderate
sweating. Contrariewise, if you mean and desire to drive out, and expel any
corrupt or noisome humor or vapor, then give it dissolved in some convenient
liquor, and sleep not after it: except your meaning be to procure sweat,
which of all euacuations is only furthered by sleeping: And thus much for the
right use of this London Tryacle.

For what cause the receate is not yet published, and wherefore the making
thereof is committed only to one Apothecarie.
NO doubt many will not a little marvel why the receat and proscript of this
London Triacle, is neither in this discourse, nor any where else published to
the view of all m^n, especially of Physicians abroad: that by the examining at
the simples, they may better judge of of the force and virtue of the whole
composition: An exam^^^ whereof there is no president to be showed, either in
former ages, or foreign countries, unless one would fetch a president and
(...) from the barbar(...) Turks, who those many years have ^once^led the
r^^eate (...) till now of late, Prosperus (...) ^^ing sundry years in Egypt,
(...) prescript thereof, at the hands (...) Simpler, which yearly had the
(...) days, all the simple ingredients for th^^ (...) in the presence of all
the skilfullest Phis^^ (...) does yearly make up the whole Composition: (...)
^^ceate, the same Alpinus has very honestly, and to (...) praise, published to
the whole world. In ancient tim^^ (...) pr^^decessors were so far from
concealing and supp^^^^ any such effectual medicine, that the first
Composition of Triacle (whereof record is found in any writer, Antioc^^us his
Theriaca I mean) was presently by Endemus a famous Physician put into verse,
and the verses engraven in stone, and set up over the good Esculapius his
Temple doo^^e, the every man to read over, and copy out at his pleasure. What
cause or reason then should move the Physicians of London, to keep their new
receate of Triacle so much concealed? Assure your selves they did it not
without great reason, and good consideration.

The very true cause of suppressing the receats, is the entire affection they
bear to the whole nation, their native country, together with a diligent
carefulnes they have, that the Composition may without fraud or cou^^n ^^e
truly and perfectly prepared. For seeing how great (...) grown in the world,
by suffering every man that would take it upon him to make Geane Triacle hand
over hand, and that without over looking or correcting after ad^^is^^
deliberately taken, they could fi^^e in th^^^ughly, and disorderly age, n^^
other means to avo^^e (...) inc^^^^nience, or rather mischief, saving only
by committing the making and compounding thereof, with some one (...) and
skillful Apothecary alone: which their good (...) meaning could not have been
compassed, if the (...) have published to the world: For so every other, (...)
(...) by the (...) (...), might (...) (...) as he is whom (...) (...) the
(...) (...) is committ the (...) (...) only Apothecary, that thereby (...)
(...) themeselues of the perfect (...) (...) viewing, and diligently examining
all the (...) at his house, which thing would have been (...) and labor for
them to perform in so many (...) and Dr^^^ers houses as would have (...)
^^on^^ above the (...) thereof. Neither is it their m^^^ing altogether to
s^^ppresse the rec^^t^^, but only: to conceal it for a (...), until good
order may by authority be set down, for (...) t^^e and orderly (...) of it,
and such other live. (...) they were the ^^^^rly (...), and (...) and to (...)
for a season, that before the publishing, they might make perfect proof, and
full trial of the effects and virtues thereof.

FINIS.

