To the most Honble Assembly of the high Court of Parliament, The humble
Petition of many thousands of poor distressed Carpenters, Bricklayers,
Smithes, Plaisterers, Glaziers, Painters and other handy-crafts men.
IN most humble wise shows, that whereas your poor Petitioners exhibited
their humble Petition unto the Honorable house of Commons, concerning the
manner of building and rep^iring of houses being denied, which they lovingly
heard, and presently gave order for the cal^^^g in, of M. Innago Jones to
answer the cause, how be it he did not attend the Committees at D(...)day of
hearing, as your poor distressed petitioners did, which made the Kings
Majesty conceive (as we take it) that the Commissioners were never called
before the Honorable House of Commons, as it appears in His most Royal speech
at the last Session.

In tender consideration whereof, it would please your Honors, to take into
your Noble and grave considerations, the few Arguments and Reasons hereunto
annexed, which do tend unto the general good, benefit and safety of the
Honorable Cities of London and Westminster, and to grant, that if their be
any opposition made, their may be a public hearing, between those apposers
and us, whereby the said Arguments and reasons may pass with authority to the
general good, as shall seem best unto this most Honorable Assembly.

And your poor Petitioners shall (as duty binds them) daily pray unto God,
for your Honorable healthes, peace and tranquillity long to continue.

Reasons moving this their humble Petition.
1 First it does undo many, that can repair their houses but not new build
them.

2 Secondly, Whereas five or ten pounds, will make a house serve 30 or 40.
years, whereas three or four hundred pounds will not new build it.

3 Thirdly, it has and will be a means to wast abundance of timber, when
houses must be pulled down before they have need.

4 Fourthly, if a man take a Lease of 21. years, and if the house stand not
above 14 or 16. years, but must be repaired, and being denied repairing, the
house must either fall or else the building will be to chargable for the
remainder of the years, besides breach of Covenants contrary to Law.

5 Fifthly, If a caviling tenent be not disposed to repair his house,
according to his Covenants but to wrong his Landlord will complain unto the
Commissioners for building, and so ^ave it pulled down, when reasonable
reparations will serve.

6 Sixthly, by this occasion, many thousands have been cast out of employment in
their lawful callings, and by this means many have perished.


