LACHRYMAE Londinenses: OR, LONDONS LAMENTATIONS and TEARS.

In this Treatise is contained; LOndons Lamentations and Tears; wherein
variety of matter of that Subject is contained and discussed. A Map of the
Cities Misery, etc. A Christian Expostulation and Admonition to such as fled,
etc. Private Prayers; A Prayer of Thanksgiving upon the decreasing and ceasing
of the said Sickness. A fervent Prayer to be used by Londoners in time of and
during the Contagious Pestilence. A zealous Prayer to be used by Londoners
that fled from the City; and others in the Country, during the Contagion. A
Prayer for our gracious King Charles. A Prayer for Queen Mary, our Kings Wife.
A Prayer for Frederick and Elizabeth, King and Queen of Bohemia, and their
hopeful Children. A Prayer for the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs and Aldermen, of
London. A Prayer for the Counsel of War, established by Act of Parliament. A
Prayer for his Majesty's Nauy-Royall, the Forces and Admiral, now at Sea. A
brief Prayer for private Persons in tempestious weather. A brief Prayer for
our afflicted Brethren, wheresoever. A brief private Prayer, for preparation
to the public Fasts, whether in City or Country.



LACHRYMAE Londinenses. OR, LONDONS TEARS AND LAMENTATIONS, for Gods heavy
Visitation of the the Plague of Pestilence. WITH, A Map of the Cities Misery:
Wherein may be seen, A Iournall of the deplorable estate of the City, from
the beginning of the Visitation unto this present. A Christian Expostulation
and Admonition to such as fled out of the City. Wherein is showed;
Magistrates, that have the care of the Commonwealth. May not flee in time of
the greatest Contagion. Ministers, that have the care of Men's Souls, May not
flee in time of the greatest Contagion. Physicians, that have the care of Men's
Bodies, May not flee in time of the greatest Contagion.
Whereunto is added, A Prayer of Thanksgiving upon the decreasing of the
Sickness, and other fervent and zealous Prayers, appropriated to the present
pensive times, for private Persons.


The like not yet Published.

LONDON, Printed for H. Holland and G: Gibbs, at the Golden Flowerdeluce in
Pope's Head Ally, 1626.

THe Reader may take knowledge that this Treatise was penned about the mids and
heat of this Great Sickness, now through Gods mercy so much assuaged: and it
should have been published above six Weeks since, but could not till now, by
occasion of some accidents. Read all, or read none: and in reading, rectify
these few Errata that have passed the Press:

Page 3. line 32. for presence, read, person. page 5. l. 13. for Debrees, r.
Decrees. p. 11. l. 24. for of a, r. of the. page 12. l. 9. r. reduce to. p. 14.
l. 19. r. Rab^^akeh. p. 29. l. 25. r. about. page 30. l. 30. for our, r. their.
In marg. p. 25. for Deuteronomy. 1. r. Exodus 18.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN GORE, Lord Major; ROVVLAND HEYLIN, and ROBERT
PARKHVRST, late Sheriffs, and now Aldermen, of the famous (though forlorn)
City of LONDON.
TO You, and to Ye three alone (Right Honorable, and right Worshipful) prime
Guardians of this his Majesty's Imperial Chamber, am I bold to commend these
ensuing Lines ( Prosopopaeia) of the Lamentations and Tears of this whilome
flourishing, now forlorn City: the which I (whoever I am, an unworthy member
of the said City) have Compiled, not without many salt Tears, and in the
Meditaions of mine own Mortality; when as so many Thousands have fallen, daily
and weekly, on my Right hand and on my Left: And what am I (a seely Worm and
no Man) that should be left alive, amids the Thousands that have fallen, to
relate the sad Story hereof? But, it is the Providence of GOD it so should be:
By him Kings do Reign; and by him also subordinate Magistrates do Govern:
By him, I say, and by his especial Providence, doubtless, You my Lord Mayor,
and Ye Mr. Sheriffs, (all three Professors of Religion) were Chosen and
Sworn for this Year; a Year full of fatal and memorable Accidents; the
ending of a mighty and prudent King, the beginning of a mighty and prodigious
Plague, besides the marriage of a mighty King, and the setting forth of a
mighty Navy,) such an one, as no Age, no Record, no Chronicle ever mentioned
the like, within this our faery Land, in this our famous City: I pray GOD the
Country and whole Land do not drink of the same Cup: Yea, Lord, if it be
thy will remove this Cup from this City, from this Land.

So as, to this present Plague of Pestilence, all former Plagues were but
petty ones, as I may say: This, to future Ages and Historiographers must needs
be Kalendred the Great Plague. I must acknowledge also, that by GOD we live
and move and have our being: But, Right Honorable, and right Worshipful, by
your Residence and religious Discipline, we that remain in this desolate
City have lived in greater safety: for had you not been with us, we had
been in danger to have had a further Plague added; our Throats cut and to be
despoyled of our Goods, by a certain Rout of Rascals that continually lie
lurking and hunkering about this City: as I have further demonstrated in the
ensuing Treatise: For the which, your indefatigable labor of Love, Care, and
constant Residence, what should my poor self say? but, for a farewell now at
your going forth, The blessing of him that dwelt in the Bush be with you and
yours evermore: And so I humbly take my leave of your Honor and your Worships.

October: 27. 1625.
TO THE READER, whether in CITY or COVNTRIE.
Beloved READER, (whether Christian, Courteous, Gentle; either, or neither.) If
you expect in these ensuing Lines any scarce credible or feigned matters of
wonderment, made in some Tavern or on some Ale-bench, to tickle your Ears and
help you to sing Care-away, you will be deceived: for there are enough, if not
too many such like Spuriall Pamphlets, which the Press has of late already
spewed out, (Broods of Barbican, Smithfield, and the Bridge, and Trundled,
trolled and marshalled up and down and along the Streets; and happily the
Countries also:) and certes (excepting one ingenious and ingenuous Writer
lately extant, Vox Civit.
and published since this Tract was penned,) they are mad Mountebankes that
dare venture to vent their Quacksaluing Conceits, to move mirth, in time of a
mighty Mortality, and when GOD and KING calls for Mourning; The very Title of
this Tract is Tears; the Subject, Sad; the Matter, Mournful; in a sorrowful
Season; in a perplexed Place: All true, and really too true: If it were the
will of GOD, would it were not so: Yet all is here related by way of
Meditation, and but generally: particular Sad and Mournful accidents, I do
but touch, though I know many: For example, of whole Families swept away by the
besome of GODS Destroying Angel; some consisting of 5. some 6. some 7. some 8.
some 9. and 10. persons in a Family; and none left to lament the loss of each
other: nor any lawful Inheritour left, or hardly to be heard of, to lay
claim to the Goods and Estate remaining: and if any such found out, how shie
and fearful to enter and take possession of the said Goods? I know, I say,
the names of such Families, the places where they dwelt: yea, and Nurses, and
such like keeping-Creatures going away with the best part of such Goods as are
left in the Houses: whiles Friends and Neighbors hearken after the right
Inheritours. And who is there remaining in this City, that has not a share in
the knowledge, more or less, of this Tragedy, of those that are dead from us?
Now, for our Londoners that fled from us, their enterteinment in the Countries
about us, and in the several Shires of this Kingdom, I must leave you to
those forced and farced, if not feigned, Relations before specified: or rather
to their own Reports by their Letters, and at their returns: bad enough, and
too bad, I partly hear it has been: for which the Countries
hard-heartednesse to Citizens extended my Prayer shall be, that God have not a
scourge in store for them. And so not to trouble farther with Preface, I
refer and commend you to more purpose, to the ensuing TREATISE.

Vale and fruere.
MATTER LONDINIA deplorat, filijs Civibusque suis.
I Must begin with the Prophet Jeremies Complaint and wish: O that my Head were
Waters, Ier. 9. and 1.
and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that J might weep day and night, for the
manifold Sins of my Children the Citizens and Inhabitants of LONDON, and for
the heavy hand of GODS Plague of the Pestilence thereon, for the same: I
London, that have been styled by Strangers, Emporium celeberrimum totius
Orbis; The most famous City and Marketplace of the whole World. By others
styled, Trinobantum, 1. Troynovant or New Troy: by others, Augusta, 1. An
Imperial City* by all, ever held, Camera Regis, 1. The Imperial and Royal
Chamber of the Kings of this Nation, the Metropolis of this Land. I, I say,
that even the other day, was graced with my Royal Sovereigns Presence, and
with my Sister Westminsters help, I contained not only the Courts of Justice
for the whole Kingdom, but the high Court of Parliament also, the
Representative Body of this whole Kingdom: I London, I say again, that
yesterday also enjoyed all my Children the Citizens their presence, with free
Commerce, Merchandising and Trading with all Merchants of Christendom; yea, I
may say, of the whole World, am now become the most forlorn place of the whole
Kingdom: For, by reason of the Contagious Infection of the Pestilence reigning
within my Circumference and about my Skirts; First, my Gracious Sovereign has
forsaken me, and high time it was, (considering the disasterous accident in his
Majesty's House at White Hall) that his Sacred Majesty should abandon me: for
his Majesty's Life and safety is more worth than many Millions of others his
Subjects: Heavens grant his happy days may never end,
Since on his Life Millions of lives depend.


But, I have not only lost his Presence, but the presence also of all the
Nobility, and Gentry of this Land: also the Terms and Courts of Justice have
suffered interruption by reason of my Visitation: the High Court of Parliament
adjourned and removed far away from me: but all this I must confess not
without just cause. That which grieueth me most and adds to my Affliction,
is, my natural Children the Citizens, all the wealthier sort, who have sucked
the best sap of their Estates from my Breasts, have abandoned me in my greatest
Affliction; and whom have they left, but the poorest sort to defend and support
me? And although I will be more charitable than to censure all such as fled
from me: For, I hold it lawful in time of Infection for men to lessen their
Houses and remove themselves and their Families with moderation: Yet as a
Learned man has lately counseled them, they shall give me leave to advise
them in the same words; Let not rich Citizens by fleeing (unless they likewise
flee from their sins) think to escape scot-free: So long as they carry their
sins with them, the Lord will find them out, and his hand will reach them
wheresoever they are. And I add thus much.

For mine own part, although I will not deal so harshly with you as St. John
the Baptist did in the Gospel, in another case, with the Multitude, in these
words: O ye generation of Vipers, who has forewarned ye to flee, etc. Yet
because I your Mother have to deal with a Multitude also, let me advise with
you my Children in a milder manner, O ye Generation of Citizens, (beloved
Londoners) Men, Fathers, Brethren, (yea and Sisters too) tell me, who has
forewarned you to flee from the Vengeance of the Pestilence? Ye may call to
mind that Gods Plague of the Pestilence is called in Holy-writ, the destroying
Angel, and I must tell you that Angels have Wings, and can flee faster than
any of your Coaches can hurrie, or your Geldings can gallop; And does not
woeful experience tell you already since the beginning of this Visitation of
the Pestilence, that some of you having sent your best-beloued beforehand into
the Country: (as Wives, Children) meaning to follow after your selves, and
those your best and dearest beloved have been infected with the same Sickness
before you could come, and some against you came unto them: and others of you
have been your selves arrested and surprised with the same before you could
follow: How say you? Is not this true? And was not, I say, the destroying
Angel quicker therein than either you, your Coaches or Geldings could be? I
say unto you therefore again, as I said before, (and I speak to all such as
flee hand over head without taking counsel of God, etc.) Who has forewarned
you to flee from Gods Vengeance? First, what warrant have you to flee? And I
come unto you more particularly, Art thou a Magistrate? Show me thy warrant to
flee, and who shall supply thy place to see Justice executed? Art thou a
Private man, rich and wealthy? who shall relieve the Poor in thy stead?
Peradventure thou will answer me, that though thy presence be absent yet thy
Purse is present: and if so thou can say, and say truly, it is well. But
alas, how many score I might say Hundreds of you have gone; nor leaving nor
sending any succor for the Poor? Insomuch, that I may say, ye have left in a
manner none but the Poor to relieve the Poor. 1. The poorer and meaner sort
of House-holders (many whereof have need of relief themselves) to relieve
poor, aged, impotent, blind, lame, sick and diseased people: who daily die
in the fields and streets for want of succor and sustenance.

Our Calamity extends yet further: For we that remain in about London,
being for the most part, but poor I say our selves, and men of mean estates;
some of us having had our Houses visited, and so shut up for a long space; and
others of us taking no money at all, neither for our Wares nor work, the whole
Country and Kingdom in a manner baulking us, and refraining to send or buy
any Wares of us: and all this while, we having our selves, wives, children and
servants to care for, and to maintain, and besides sitting at great Rents,
(yea, and many of us having unmerciful Landlords,) and having no Rents nor
Revenues our selves; nor other means to help us, besides our manuell Trades,
Occupations, and Shopkeeping. All which considered, was not, and is not our
case lamentable?

And as a further Addition to our present Affliction; There are a Generation of
Justices of Peace, who devised an unjust and unpeaceable way to famish us that
remained; For, first, they hindered our London Butchers to come into their
adjacent Towns and Hamlets to fetch Cattle, for our food: Secondly, they made
Decrees, Orders, and Inhibitions, which they caused to be read publicly in
Churches, (and this their fact, because public, will purchase either fame or
infamy to posterity:) that our Market-folke of the same Towns and Hamlets be
restreyned, upon penalties, to bring us into London fresh Victuals, (as Mutton,
Veale, Butter, Eggs, and the like,) for our Moneys; whiles they themselves
drink their Wine and strong Beer in Bowls, (little thinking on the
Affliction of Joseph,) follow their sports; as Hawking, Hunting, Gaming,
Bowling, and the like; and faring deliciously every day: but let them take heed
it fare not with them hereafter as it did with the rich Glutton in the Gospel.
(who certes was a Country Justice of Peace) for this their inconsiderate
Cruelty: Insomuch, that were it not for the wonderful providence of God, who
feeds the Ravens, yea, all the World (beyond the comprehension of their
gross capacities,) many thousands in and about this City that remain, might
have famished and starued. I doubt not but after this great Mortality, some of
us shall Vuruiue to make our complaint unto his most Excellent Majesty of this
their cruel Plot; but I doubt they will not easily answer it. The Prophet
Isaiah has a shrewd sentence against such unjust Justices: the words are
these, Isai. 10. and 1.
Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Debrees, and that write grieuousnesse,
which they have prescribed. And howsoever, because they cannot restrain us
from Charity; We will and do with our Savior Christ, pray, Father forgive
them they know not what they do, and with holy St. Stephen, Lord lay not this
(Cruelty) unto their Charge.

And now let me your Mother come, and condole with you my Children the
Citizens, and Inhabitants that remained in and about the City; resolving to
endure the heat of the Day of Gods Visitation: and again, I wish the Prophet
Jeremies Wish: Ier. 9. 1.
For, go we into the Suburbs, what do we hear but lamentable voices and
cryings of the visited Poor? O we are sick, and we die, we perish, for want
of relief, means, and looking to? go we into the Fields-here lies one sick
and fainting with the same cry as before, there lies another dead: Come we
back into the heart of the City, in one house sits one lamenting, O I have
lest my dear wife and fellow helper, dead of this heavy sickness: in on
other, O I have lost my dear Husband, the staff and stay of my life, and of
my Childrens: in an other, Father and Mother lamenting the loss of their
child, their children, nay, I know some Rachels, mourning for their children
and will not be comforted; in another, helpless children lamenting the loss
of both their Parents: in another place, whole Families swept away; Parents,
Children, Servants, and all: and at leastwise, in what street or Family can
we come? but we hear a voice of mourning for one kinsman or kinswoman or
other, in this or that place deceased of this devouring disease: July. --
August. --
Sure I am, that even I, the writer hereof, (who ever I am,) am not without my
share of cause of mourning in this kind. But come we again to the State of
this City: In the day time, what else hear we almost but Bells ringing of
Knells? and in the night season (when we should take our rest,) we are
interrupted by the continual tolling of Passing-Bells, and anon the ringing
out of the same: In the day time also, how many both men and women have been
seen suddenly to sink down in the streets, and there draw their last
breathes? yea, some of them of good rank and fashion: All which compels me,
and I can no longer forbear me to borrow the very words of the Prophet
Ieremies Complaint. Lam. 1. and. 1.
How does the City sit solitary that was full of people? and how is she
become as a widow? she that was great among the Nations and Princess among the
Provinces, how is she become tributarie? she weepeth sore in the night, and
her Tears are on her cheeks: among all her lovers she has none to comfort
her, all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her
enemies. Verse 4.
And again, The ways of Syon do mourn, because none come to the solemn
Feasts: all her Gates are desolate: her Priests sigh: her Virgins are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness: and further, let us but turn the Name
Jerusalem into London, how fitly does the Prophets prosecution of the Complaint
serve us? Verse 7.
viz. (London) remembered in the days of her affliction, and of her miseries,
all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her people fell
into the hand of the Enemy, and none did help her; the Adversaries saw her,
and did mock at her Sabbaths. Verse 8.
Again, London, has grievously sinned, and therefore she is removed: all
that honor her, despise her, because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she
fights and turns backward. Her filthiness is in her skirts, she
remembers not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no
comforter, etc. It is worth your reading, to read over that first chapter of
the Lamentations, when you think upon the present estate of desolate London:
especially, have recourse unto the 20. verse* and the latter end thereof.

I cannot yet forget the want of you my Children the Inhabitants of London, for
whose absence still the cry of the Poor ringeth the lowdest peale in mine
ears: Put the case that the Magistrates now in place of Government for this
year, (whose lives are as dear unto them as any of yours) I mean the right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs, should flee
from my Confines as ye have done; what Ryots, Rapines* and vproares would be
committed in and about the City? by a multitude of Sharkes, Shifters, Decoyes,
Roarers and Robbers, that continually live and lie lurking about the City,
upon the Ruins of other men: And may we not well remember even since the
beginning of this Visitation, and no longer agone but the last Trinity Term,
what a horrible Riot was begun in Holborne? when a company of Swaggerers had
combined to rescue a Gentleman, (bearing the name of L. L. a Nobleman) out of
the Undersheriffs house, and what a deal of blood had been like to be spent
in the same business? had not the Sheriffs of London been sent for speedily,
who came with a strong Guard; at whose coming and presence the Rescuers
betook themselves to their heels, and not one of them durst stand to it, or
strike one blow more, though in enterchange of blows before they came between
the Rescuers and the Undersheriffs Officers, there was some blood shed: All I
say appeased at the presence of the Magistrate: and the Gentleman the Prisoner,
submits and commits himself into the hands of the Sheriffs of London: Who, had
they been absent out of London, which mischief I say had happened upon that
Riot, I leave wise men to judge. And again, since that time, when the
Prisoners in the Kings Bench Prison combined to rescue themselves out of
Prison, and to that end had gotten the Keys and bound the Keepers: in which
Riot some blood was shed, and though some of the Prisoners enlarged themselves,
yet other some for their labors lost their lives: but how much more blood had
been shed, and how many more had been slain, if some in Authority had not
interposed their help, we may well guess.

Let us come yet more particularly to the government of this City, which is
divided into so many several Wards: and every Ward has its particular
Alderman to govern it, in seeing to the Orders and disorders in it. Now, the
Alderman he flees into the Country, and for his excuse he says, he leaves his
Deputy behind him: the Deputy he follows the Alderman (if he be not gone
before him) and leaves Constables behind him, to see to matters: the
Constables happily they follow the Deputy, and peradventure they leave the
Beadle behind them: Well, the Beadle he is left behind for all: he sees many
disorders and Ryots happen in his Ward: Now, I would feign know, who will obey
a Beadle as a Magistrate? or what power has a Constable or Beadle to reform
or punish without the Alderman, being the Magistrate? Again, the Constable or
Beadle happily may be visited with sickness; yea, peradventure dies: I would
feign have any absent Alderman answer what mischief against God and King may
not be done in his Ward without any control at all: And for those few worthy
Magistrates that have continued the heat of the Day with us, see the blessing
of God extended to them, in their calling: for all this time past of mortality,
I have not heard that scarce the head of any of them has aked: We may well
conclude therefore that Magistrates, especially such as are in present
government, and sworn for their year, may not flee from the City in time of
greatest Contagion, though their lives be far more worth, for the Good of
the Commonwealth, than the lives of ordinary men.

And now I come to the Ministers of Gods Word: whether they may flee, I mean
such as have the charge and Cure of Souls: (such also their lives are as dear
unto them as others, yea and of more value than other ordinary men:) yet they
may not nor is it lawful for them to flee in this time of Contagion: And I
will send them to be resolved of a Reverend and learned Divine, Doct. Hall,
Epist. Decad. 4. Epist. 9.
a man of their own Coat and Calling, who has long since written to conclude
the vnwarrantablenesse of their flight in the time of the Pestilence, in these
lines following:

How much better is it to be dead, than negligent, than faithless? If some
Bodies be contagiously sick, shall all Souls be wilfully neglected? There
can be no time wherein Counsel is so seasonable, so needful. Every
threatening finds impression, where the mind is prepared by sensible
Judgments. When will the Iron hearts of men bow, if not when they are heat in
the flame of Gods Affliction? Now then to run away from a necessary and
public Good, to avoid a doubtful and private Evil, is to run into a worse
evil than we would avoid. He that will thus run from Niniue to Tharsis,
shall find a Tempest and a Whale in his way. Not that J dare be an Author to
any of the private Visitation of infected Beds: I dare not without better
warrant. Who has ever said we are bound to close up the dying eyes of every
departing Christian? And upon what-euer Conditions to hear their last groans?
If we had a word, I would not debate of the success. Then, that were
Cowardlinesse, which now is Wisdom. Is it no service, that we publicly
teach and exhort? That we privately prepare men for Death, and arm them
against it? That our comfortable letters and messages stir up their fainting
hearts? That our loud voices pierce their ears afar, unless we feel
their pulses, and lean upon their Pillowes, and whisper in their ears? Daniel
is in the Lions Den; Is it nothing that Darius speaks comfort unto him
thorough the Grate, unless he go in to salute him among those fierce
Companions? A good Minister is the common goods, He is not his own but the
Peoples, he cannot make his life peculiar to one, without injury to many. In
the common cause of the Church, he must be no niggard of his own life; in the
private cause of a neighbors bodily sickness, he may soon be a Prodigal. A
good Father may not spend his substance on one Child, and leave the rest
Beggars. If any be resolute in the contrary, J had rather praise his courage,
than imitate his practice. I confess, I fear, not so much death, as want of
warrant for death. And so much for that reverend Doctors writing, a faithful
labourer in Gods Harvest: which I hope is vnanswerablie, enough to prove rhat
Ministers may not flee from their Charges in time of the Pestilence.

I must now proceed to Physicians (with whom I include Chirurgions) whom,
Ecclus: 38.
I find ordained of God, and we ought to honor them: but, wherefore ordained
and to be honored? Why, the same Divine Author says, even for the uses which
we may have of them. 1. For the health of thy body: Are they therefore to flee
from us in the time of the Pestilence? Surely nothing less: for then we have
most use, need, and necessity of them: If therefore the Magistrate, that has
the care of the Commonwealth committed to his charge by the King: and the
Minister who has the care of men's Souls committed to his charge by God, may
not (with a safe Conscience) flee in this time of contagious Sickness, as is
before proved; I see no reason why the Physician, who has the care of men's
bodies, should flee and leave us destitute of his help, for which he was
ordained: Can he gather so much out of the time of a common Mortality, by his
Fees of us, that the ground will not hold him, but he is mounted on his
Foot-cloth? and must he needs flee from us, when we have most use and need of
his company and his Counsel, when thousands are daily sick, and many die for
want of means? But me thinks I hear Physicians answer, They leave us not
destitute, they leave us inferior foot-Physicians: We confess, indeed,
through the Providence of God we are not altogether destitute, God moving the
hearts of some Physicians and Chirurgions to stay amongst us, in their Calling;
but that is no thank to them: for they flee, not regarding so many thousands
they leave behind them, whether they sink or swim, live or die: but with what
Conscience, considering the premises I leave to their own considerations:
Howsoever, those Physicians and Chirurgions that have in a conscionable respect
to their Callings,) more than in respect of gain,) stayed with us, given, and
used their best counsel and endeavors to such as have been visited, this
great Mortality: they certes are the men that deserve the honor, which we are
conselled to give to the Physician: we may make question whether such as are
fled from us, though never so brave and wealthy, deserve any of that honor, or
no: Yea, in my judgment we owe those that have stayed double honor.

Well, for all this that has been said or can be said, of Magistrates,
Ministers, Physicians and Chirurgions; many of each nevertheless have fled
from us, and their excuses and apologies are diverse and various: yet for the
most part they jumpe in this one voice and song; They flee, they say; for their
Lives, from the danger of a Contagion: to which I answer, they were deceived,
for some of them, upon my knowledge, have fled for their Deaths: I will say no
more unto them, Sapienti verbum sat est.

And for such Magistrates, such Ministers, and such Physicians as have stayed
and endured the heat of the day with us: I shall not need to name them: I make
no doubt but their names are taken in Gods Book, who is able to reward the
labor of their love: My poor and unworthy Prayer for them shall ever be, The
good Lord requite them: and the Blessing of him that dwelt in the Bush be with
them for ever.

That private and ordinary men may not take that liberty they do, to flee in
these times some leaving their Callings, some their Families, promiscuously and
preposterously, I have said enough in the premises to satisfy any reasonable
men.

But now, beloved Londoners, let us come and search the cause of this
contagious Pestilence, which causes your fearful flight: Surely, it is
naught else but our sins which have incensed the heavy wrath of God: And which
I may reduce these seven Heads following; Swearing and blaspheaming: Profaning
and not sanctifying the Sabbath: Adultery and Fornication: Drunkennsse and
Gluttony: Oppression and Extortion: Contempt of Gods word and Sacraments: To
which I may add, Pride and fullness of Bread, and Contempt of the Poor: (I
pray God the other not to be named sin of Sodom be not also perpetrated in
some corners and Sinkes of this City:) which sins now reigning, I briefly
display as followech; First, for Swearing, does any Age or any Record make
mention of the like swearing and taking the most sacred Name of God in vain,
as in now adays, by Men, Women, and Children? yea, many Children no sooner
taught to speak, but they learn also to swear by the most sacred name of
God; before they know God: nay, there are a sort of swaggering Swearers, who
think themselves not Masters in their (cursed) Art of swearing, till they have
devised, and do use some new Oaths and manner af Swearing: (O fearful!) so
as I may say for this one sin, the Land mourns: for this sin, this City
now mourns: Commendable and agreeable to Gods word, was that pious Statute
Enacted last year by the worthy House of Parliament against Profane Swearing:
though by negligence of men I fear it takes not so good effect to restrain
that sin as was hoped: For what reformation can we see?

Secondly, for the Saboath day, commonly called the Lords day, what Feastings,
what Gamings and unlawful Recreations? what sly and secret Reuellings and
haunting of Tauerns and Taphouses? more than Gods house, on that day, by many
loose people? what Surfeiting and Drunkenness, on that day? some eating and
drinking on that day so much, that either they sleep it out at home, or if
they come to Gods House they sleep out the time of divine Service and Sermons:
Insomuch, as I may say, they have polluted the Lords Sabboths: which also is an
other cause of Gods heavy Visitation of this City, at this present.

Thirdly, for Adultery and Fornications, they have been, and I fear me are
so common, especially about the skirts of this City, as if there were neither
Laws of God nor Man against them: insomuch, as I may be bold to say they have
been so openly and commonly used in some places, as if they had been allowed
and countenanced by Authority: Yea, there are a company of swaggering
Whoremasters about this City, who not content with their ordinary prostitute
Strumpets* but will brag and boast of their abusing this and that man's Bed
infamiliarity with his Wife: and of their deflowring of this and that Maid:
who happily are honest Women, and chaste Maids, that never had any acquaintance
at all with such Companions: This sin therefore I may as boldly say, is
another cause of Gods Visitation of this City.

Fourthly, for Drunkenness and Gluttony, they abound, as if they were
uncontrollable sins, nay, as if they were no sins at all: many taking such
liberty in Drinking, that they think they are not truly merry, until they be
verily drunk; and they being friends one with another, cannot (as they say)
love each other, except they be drunk together: and such when they are told of
it by any true Friends indeed, such, as fear God, they are ready fearfully to
plead for their Drunkenness, etc. We call such Drunkards, Beasts, but certes
they are worse than Beasts, for what dumb Beast is there that uses to be
drunk? This sin therefore must needs be another cause of Gods Visitation of
this City.

Fifthly, for oppression of the Poor, and the covetous extortion of many
griping Usurers, and Lease-munging Landlords, the careful complaint of many
poor Prisoners and Tenants, both Men and Women, in and about this City, does
cry loud in the Lords ears, and proclaim this Sin: Yea, how many a sad
weeping and mournful Countenance have I, and may we daily see of Men and
Women, especially at the Quarter days (as we call them) that are subject to
viperous Usurers and unconscionable Landlords? This sin therefore is
undoubtedly no small cause of this Gods heavy Visitation.

Sixthly, for Contempt of Gods word and Sacraments, and the faithful Ministers
thereof, this manifestly appears by the small reformation of men's lives,
especially with the profane multitude, who give no ear nor regard to hear
the sacred word of God, which ought to be heard as it is Preached, in season
and out of season: and for their persons that are the sincerest, and most
zealous Preachers, every foul mouthd Rabshecay having his tongue set on fire
by the flame of Hell, has the most odious terms and aspersions to cast upon
them and their doctrine, though it be the message of Christ, and they the
Messengers thereof: And for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, a Reverend and
zealous Divine has delivered publicly, and is persuaded, that this present
Pestilence was sent, and did begin about Easter last, when a multitude of
miscreant people came unprepared and unworthily, hand over head, to receive the
Sacrament, viz. Such as were Swearers and Blaspheamers; Sabboth-breakers:
Common Whoremongers and Whores; Panders and Bawdes: Drunkards and Epicures, or
Belly-gods: Oppressors, and Covetous wretches: Contemners and Scoffers of Gods
word and his Ministers, yea, of the Sacrament they came to receive: which they
came to receive only for fashion sake, or else because they would not be liable
to the Law, penal in that kind.

Seventhly, for Pride; this Luciferian Sin has infected the City as much,
if not more, than the Plague, at this present: And though by the hawtie looks
of Men and Women, we may judge and discern too much of the Pride of their
hearts, yet because God is the tryer of the heart, I leave that; and come to
the horrible Pride and and prodigality, more apparent, in Apparaill: For, we
have seen Merchants and their wives apparelled like Princes: we have seen
ordinary Tradesmen and their wives like Noblemen and great Ladies. Knaves,
Cheaters, and Cunny-catchers, clad like Knights: Lawyers like Lords; Taylours
like Thieves: Shoomakers in Satin: Tapsters in Taffety; Horse-scoursers and
Hostlers wearing gold lace: Nay, I have seen a Cobblers Daughter attyred like a
Merchants Daughter: a Kitchen-maide wearing a silken Cobweblawne Ruff: and it
is not ordinary to see Seruingmen in siilken Stockings, and Prentices wear
far better clothes than their Masters? And this sin of Pride, the premises
considered, we may persuade our selves, that it is in a higher degree than the
Pride of Sodom: Which Sin therefore must needs be one special cause of
drawing down Gods Vengeance of this present Pestilence.

And lastly, for fullness of Bread, and Contempt of the Poor, because I have
spoken of them in the Premises, though I could speak much more, yet I desist
to display them further.

There is another sin lurking, nay, too apparent, in and about this City,
which is the pride of the Clergy, many Ministers and their Wives, (who should
be Lamps of Humility:) the which I heard a zealous Preacher of Gods word
deliver publicly, he was persuaded was not the least cause of incensing Gods
wrath of the Present Pestileuce: for me therefore, Satis superque.

In respect of which heinous sins before named, the Prophet Zephanies
Denunciation, or Gods by his mouth, and complaint, may be fitly applied to
London in these words following;

Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, Zeph. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
to the oppessing City: She obeyed not the voice: She received not
correction: She trusted not in the Lord: She drew not near to her God. Her
Princes within her are roaring Lions: Her Judges are raeuening Wolves, they
gnaw not the bones till to morrow. Her Prophets are light and treacherous
persons, her Priests have polluted the Sanctuary, they have done violence to
the law.

J have cut* off their Nations: Verse 5.
their Towers are desolate: I made their Streets waste, that none passed by:
their City is destroyed, so that there is no Man, no Inhabitant. J said;
surely, they will fear me, thou will receive instruction, so their dwelling
should not be cut off, howsoever J punished them, but they rose early, and
corrupted all their doings.

The Prophet Jsaiahs saying and accusation may also be verified and applied to
this City, in these words following:

How is the faithful City become an Harlot? It was full of judgment, Isa* 1.
and 21:
Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murders. Thy Silver is become dross,
thy Wine mixed with Water. Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of Thieves:
Every one loves Gifts, and follows after Rewards: they judge not the
Fatherless, neither does the cause of the Widow come unto them. Therefore
says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel; Ah, J will ease
me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. And J will turn my hand
upon thee, and purely purge away all thy Sin. And J will restore thy Judges
as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning: afterward, thou shall
be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City.

And the same Prophet Isaiah, prosecuteth his Complaint, which we may still
apply to London, in these words following:

The Lord will enter into judgment with the Ancients of his people, Isai. 3
and 14.
and the Princes thereof: For ye have eaten up the Vineyard, the spoil of the
Poor is in your Houses. What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and
grind the faces of the Poor, says the Lord God of Hosts? Moreover, the Lord
says; because the Daughters of Zion ( London) are haughty, and walk with
stretched forth Necks, and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and
making a tinkling with their feet, etc. And so unto the latter end of that
third Chapter, obseruable and worthy your reading, with Chapter ends in these
words; And her Gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate, shall
sit upon the ground.

And now let me come again to ye beloved Londoners, that fled from me your
Mother; Tell me, have not ye your parts and shares in these reigning sins of
this City before named? Surely, such of you as have not, and have your
Consciences to bear you witness that you are guiltless, it is well for you:
But then tell me, which of you, even the best of you, can say but you have
been slack and backwards in performance of Holy duties to God, and just
duties to your Neighbor? If there be any such amongst you, I dare pronounce
them guiltless and Righteous Persons, that need no Repentance: But otherwise,
ye that did and are run away, must all join with us that remain, in
Repentance and Humiliation to God, before we can look that God will withold
his hand and cease the Plague wholly: To which end take this Counsel in brief
from me your indulgent Mother following;

Let him and her that has been accustomed to Swearing swear no more: but
rather let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay: and so let every one speak
truth to his Neighbor: And consider who has said, The Curse of God shall not
depart from the House of the Swearer.

Let every Sabboth-breaker learn from him that has commanded it, to keep
holy the Sabbath day: that you may be the better prepared to celebrate an
everlasting Sabbath with God in his Kingdom.

Let all Adulterers, Fornicatours, Whoremongers, and Whores, learn to possess
their Vessels in Chastity: considering your bodies are (or ought to be) the
Temples of the Holy Ghost: and remember who has said, Whoremongers and
Adulterers the Lord will surely Judge.

Let all Drunkards and Gluttons, leave their Drunkenness and Gurmandizing,
considering who it is that has denounced, Woe to them that rise early, and sit
up late to drink, and that are mighty to drink Wine and strong drink: And
remembering what became of the rich Glutton in the Gospel.

Let every Oppressor and Grinder of the Faces of the Poor, repent them of
their sins, and consider the third Chapter of Jsaiah, before recited: and
with Zacheus, let them learn to make Restitution; and consider who has said,
Let him that has stolen steal no more, etc.

And for Viperous and gryping Usurers, let them often read and meditate on the
15. Psalm.

Let all Contemners of Gods Word, his Sacraments, and faithful Ministers
thereof repent, and learn to receive the Food which is able to save their
Souls, with all meekness: and to have the Ministers thereof in due reverence
for their Message sake.

Let all Proud and high-minded People, learn of St. Paul, Coloss: 3. and 12.

Nay, let them learn of a greater than Paul, even of our Savior Christ
himself, Matthew. 11. and 29.

To conclude, let all sorts of Men and Women; Rich and Poor, old and young,
forsake their sinful courses, and strive to find out the Plague in their own
hearts: whether sins of heart, or sins of life, sins of commission or
omission, and turn unto the Lord with true Repentance: and according to John
Baptists Counsel, Bring forth fruits meet for Repentance: Yea, let us with the
Apostles in the Gospel cry, Is it I Lord? Is it I? etc. Nay, let us every one
say, Is it not I Lord? Js it not J? etc. And so hand in hand, Let us all
approach the Throne of Grace by hearty and fervent Prayer, and never give over
importuning the Lord, until he be pleased to hold the hand of the destroying
Angel, and cause him to sheath his Sword: and so this grievous, fearful, and
devouring Sickness of the Pestilence, (as it is wonderfully assuaged) shall
cease from this City, To which end I your indulgent Mother have collected
these ensuing Platformes of Prayers, to help those that cannot otherwise pour
out their souls unto Almighty God in Prayer. Which I wish may yield some
profit and comfort to every honest-hearted Christian, that shall view and make
use of them, in these sad times of Mourning and Humiliation. Amen.

And above all, beware of Security, now GOD has, for the time, so much and
mercifully withdrawn his hand.

PRIVATE PRAYERS appropriated to the present perplexed times.
A Prayer of Thanksgiving upon the decreasing and ceasing of the Contagious
Sickness.
O Almighty Jehovah! who, as thou art the GOD of Judgment, so thou art the
Father of Mercy: And in the days of old, did in thy just Judgment drown
the whole unrepentant World by thy Deluge of Water, except thy Servant Noah and
his Family; and yet at length thou did remember Mercy, and ceased the Flood,
and sent dry Land: And in the days of thy Servant David for his and his
Peoples sin, did destroy a mighty Multitude with thy Plague of Pestilence,
and yet at length did also remember Mercy, commanded the Destroying Angel
to sheath his Sword and cease. And in the time of thy Servant Jonah, did
remove the deserved Destruction of Nineveh, remembering thy Mercy. Thou art the
same God of Justice still, and we do confess we have most justly deserved
thy Wrath, and provoked thee by our infinite sins, to send this present
Pestilence amongst us, which has swept away so many Thousands of us: And
seeing thou remembering thy wonted Mercy, have heard the Prayers of some Noah,
some David, some Jonah, thy Servants remaining: and have begun to show us
favor, insomuch, that first the tops, then the midst, and lastly the whole
Mountains of thy Mercies have appeared, and do appear unto us, after this
thy great Deluge of Destruction, by the hand of the Destroyer: we do upon the
bended knees of our sorrowful souls return unto thy merciful Majesty, all
possible and hearty praise and thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching thee, for
thy Christ's sake, still to show us thy favorable Countenance, in withdrawing
more and more this thy heavy hand and Visitation of the Pestilence: and
withal, make us so thankful for this and thy many other favors, that we that
remain, may rejoice in thy Salvation, and praise thee in the Congregation of
the living.

O Lord! as thou have permitted the Black Horse of the Pestilence to trample
on us in so great a measure: so thou have given us a glimpse of the Pale Horse
of Famine, and no less of the Red Horse of War: Wherefore furthermore, O
blessed God, we do most earnestly entreat thee, to be yet more merciful
unto us, and remove and auert all or any other thy Judgments, which do
deservedly hang over our heads: and when thou have with-drawne the Pestilence
from us, let not as bad or a worse Plague overtake us: But Lord, we pray thee
look mercifully upon us: and Lord, if it be thy will, let the Cup of thine
indignation and wrath pass from us of this City, from this Land wherein we
live: although we do confess that the crying sins of this Land, yea, of
this City, do deserve, that thou should utterly destroy us from off the
Earth; yet we know that thou art a God, that can not forget to be merciful:
therefore we beseech thee to spare us, oh spare us good God, for thy infinite
mercies sake: and in sparing us, give us grace to redeem the time, because the
days be evil: that so we (our Wives, Children and Servants) that remain
alive, may bless and laud thee in the Land of the living; even now, and all
the days of our lives: and to that end, give us we humbly crave, health of
body, and peace of Conscience, that so we may daily grow up, from grace to
grace in this world, and hereafter reign with thee in the Kingdom of Grace
and Glory, where thou reignest with thy Son our Savior, and the Holy Ghost,
a God of Eternity, Individual, Immortal, and the only wise God, for
evermore. Amen.

A devout and fervent Prayer, to be used by all Londoners and members of the
City, in time of, and during the contagious Pestilence.
VVHither shall we go, O Lord, in the day of our Affliction, but only unto
thee? Thou alone can save, and out of thy hands none is able to give
deliverance. Heavy at this time is thy hand upon us in this City, and
fearful is the Disease with which thou have afflicted us: We are even afraid
one friend and neighbor of another breath: nothing is before us but present
Death* Scarcely can we look forth, but we may see some one or other amongst
us carried away to the Grave, and the Mourners going about the Streets. We must
needs confess, that though this be grievous, yet it is the smallest part of
our desert: It is just with thee to smite us with Botches and Scabs that cannot
be healed, and to make the Pestilence even to cleave unto our loins, and to
sweep us away from off the Earth, even as a man sweepeth away dung, till all
be gone. For, how have we multiplied our iniquities before thee, and to what
a shameless and intolerable measure are our sins increased? Many warnings
have been given us by thy Ministers, thou have risen early and late, and sent
unto us by them; yet we have made our hearts as Adamant stones, and have put
far from us the Euill-day, persuading our selves that their Sermons were but
wind, and that they did but commend unto us their own fancies. Thus have we
encouraged our selves in Evil, and have set thy judgments at naught, every
one turning to his own course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, adding
Drunkenness to thirst, and falling away from thee more and more. But O Lord
give us now at the last remorsefull and repentant hearts, make us (as it were)
to smite upon our thighs, as a sign that we see our wanderings, and that we
are ashamed of our sins. Embolden us in the name of Christ, to come into thy
Presence, and in all earnestness of spirit to cry unto thee, Take away our
Iniquities, and receive us graciously. Teach us as well to fear sin, the
cause of this wasting Sickness, as we do the Sickness itself, which is the
fruit of Sin. Comfort us according to the days that thou have afflicted us,
and let the sweet feeling of the gracious testimony of thy Spirit, speaking
Peace unto our Souls, prevail against all other sadness or cause of grief
or sorrow whatsoever. Say, O Lord, unto the destroying Angel, It is
sufficient, hold thy hand: Or if it be thy pleasure to stretch thy hand yet
further, and to take us or any of us away also, O prepare us to thine own
purpose, endue us with a holy patience to endure the utmost Trial: and grant
that whatsoever befall our earthly Tabernacles, yet our souls may be always
acceptable unto thee; and all this for Christ Jesus his sake, who has loved
us, and given himself to be a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto thee.
Amen.

A Zealous Prayer in time of the Plague to be used by all Londoners that are
fled from the City, and all others that are sensible of the Cities Calamity,
wheresoever.
O LORD GOD, our only helper and Defender, who amongst all other Evils, have
promised to deliver thy People from the noisome Pestilence; We beseech thee,
take this thy heavy Plague away from us; and especially withhold thy hand from
off the City of London, the Metropolis of this Kingdom, where thy Name is
daily called upon. And let our humble Supplications (which at this time, upon
our knees we make unto thee in the name of CHRIST JESUS,) procure our happy
Release, and appease thy Wrath, which we have justly procured against us
through sin. Lord, we being heartily sorry for our sins, (fully purposing
by the assistance of thy holy Spirit to amend our lives) do humbly entreat
thee to have mercy upon us, to take away this Plague from us, and not to suffer
us to perish after so miserable a sort. We thank thee, O Lord, that thou have
not left us altogether comfortless, nor cast us off without hope, but have
somewhat withdrawn thy heavy hand, and spared many of us; we pray thee to
continue thy favor daily more and more toward us; to deal with us in Mercy,
not in Justice; to bless us and all those that depend on us; To set thy saving
Mark upon our Houses, as thou did for the Jsraelites in Egypt; To give
order to the Destroyer, that he hurt us not, to put thy strength to our
Medicines; to let thy good blessing make the preservatives of Physicians
effectual; and to make our shifting places, for more security, profitable
unto us. Give us grace, O Lord, not to trust too much on outward means, but
only on thy Mercy. Protect us always in all our ways; have pity upon our
destressed Brethren and Sisters, whether in London or elsewhere; Comfort the
desolate Widow; provide for all Orphans and Fatherless Children; gather us
together again, that by these means are dispersed: Send us Health, Peace with
men upon Earth, and peace of Conscience toward thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for our gracious King Charles.
O Thou mighty Jehouah, whose habitation is in the highest Heavens, who rulest
all things, every where by that same wisdom, by which thou did first create
them; even thou the Lord of Lords, exalted far above the Princes of the
Earth, who have no power, rule nor Authority, but what is given them from
thee: For by thee Kings Reign and Princes Rule. Forasmuch as thou have
commanded by thy Apostle Paul, that we shall make Jntercessions for Kings, as
being a thing good and acceptable in thy sight: We are bold upon this Warrant
to appear before thy Throne of Grace, and to present thee with a Prayer and
Supplication, in the behalf of our Dread Sovereign and Liege Lord King
Charles, for whom we thy Servants, his most loyal and faithful Subjects, by
thy appointment; do most humbly Supplicate, that seeing thou have chosen him
(as thou had appointed it long before) to be now a King to us thy people, and
a Judge of thy Sons and Daughters: and he knowing that the Throne on which
he sits as King in thy stead, is thy Throne; may be illuminated with thy
Spirit of Understanding, and all Princely knowledge from above, fully
replenished with that Wisdom, which sits by thy Throne; So do according to
Equity and Righteousuesse, and execute Judgment with an upright heart. For
he, thus enabled by thee, shall know how to go out and in among thy people,
whom he is to judge, being now in the midst of them. Kindle rherefore in his
heart (which is in thy hands, as the Rivers of Waters) a true and constant
zeal of godliness, which may argue in him a sound and perfect knowledge of
thy heavenly Will; that so principally and above all things, seeking and
procuring th'aduancement of thy glory; he may be unto thy people a Noursing
Father, to defend, maintain, and preserve thy Church, against all Enemies,
Foreign, Domestical, Atheist or Papist, open or secret, which trecherously
seek to disturb the peace of it, and of his Kingdoms. For the better
maintenance whereof, as also for establishing a common tranquillity in his
State politic, in thy fear, give him the wise heart of Moses thy Servant, to
obey the godly Counsel of some Iethro, cause him to provide, Ministers under
him, such as are men of courage, fearing Thee, his and their God; dealing
truly; hating Covetousness. And grant, O Lord, that these so ordained and
constituted Magistrates under him, for his ease: (For who is able to overcome
such a People alone, Deuteronomy. 1. 18.
as Iethro speaks?) may be as his Eyes, Ears, and Hands, to see and look
clearly in all parts of his Kingdoms, with a sincere and single sight; hear
the Causes and Controversies of his people, with an Ear of Wisdom, and
understanding, deal righteously in all matters with every Man and his Brother,
and the stranger that is with him; without respect of Person, or fear of any
man's face, as Moses speaks. O Lord hear us praying unto thee for our King,
out of loyal hearts. And thou, O Lord, thus blessing our King with wise and
discreet Ministers, stablish his Kingdom, and settle his Throne in his
Posterity, and so we and our Posterity may pray for him and them, and praise
Thee for him and them, that may proceed from his Loins, even while the Sun
and Moon shall endure. Lord protect his sacred Person from the Pestilence, his
Mind from Papistrie, make his days as Methusalems and in fullness of time,
give him a Celestial for his Terrestrial Crown, Amen.

A Prayer for Queen Mary, Wife to our Gracious Sovereign.
O Lord God, our only God and Father, Thou did open our mouths, and we
prayed to thee for our Dread Sovereign, thine Anointed, Charles, our King; Be
pleased we beseech thee to untie our Tongues now also, to utter a Prayer unto
thee for our Queen his Wife: for whom, She being a person of Princely
Majesty, we presume to intercede, witnessing that loyalty toward her which
may be acceptable unto Thee. We crave and humbly entreat thee, that thou will
bless her, with all heavenly Graces, such in special are best befitting her
Personage, and may also testify the love and care thou had of thy Glory, to
be advanced by her, now thou have called her to this high Estate, of an Eminent
and illustrious Dignity, above others here with us of her Sex. Grant, we
beseech thee, that as thou have made her the Wife and Consort of our most
Gracious King, so thou will bless her as thou did Sarah, whom thou did
bless to be a Mother of Nations and Kings: and that it may be a means to
continue a Succession for the Peace of thy Church. So, forasmuch as thou have
promised by the mouth of thy Prophet Isaiah, that Queens shall be Nurses to
thy people, begotten by the Immortal seed of thy Word; She, being the Queen
to our King, who is to us a Nursing Father, may likewise in a mutual consent
of one and the same thy Religion, here established amongst us, employ all her
Endeavor, Power, and Authority, for Her part, to the preservation of the
Peace of Israel, which is in the person of a Queen, to be a careful Nursing
Mother of the Church. For this cause, Lord, inspire her mind from above,
direct and guide her Will, that she may serve thee, in fear of thy Majesty,
who have the Hearts of Kings, yea, of Queens also, as the Rivers of Waters, to
turn them as thou please. Enlighten her Mind and Understanding, we beseech
thee with the true knowledge of thy Will, revealed in thy Word; that she
having first received a sanctified apprehension thereof, by instruction from
thy Spirit, may resolutely persist in the Profession of it; and so, she living
here in thy fear, may die in thy Love, to live in thy Glory, with thy Saints
for evermore in Heaven, Amen.

A Prayer for Frederick Prince Elector Palatine, King of Bohemia, Queen
Elizabeth his Wife, and their hopeful Children.
WHO are we, O Lord, that thou should hear us? and what can be our
worthiness, that we should dare now again to intercede by Prayer, before
thee? We confess it is thy free Mercy that thou hear, and not of any
worthiness in us, praying. And in this Name, that thou art the Father of all
mercies in Christ, we pray and beseech thee to behold from above, with the Eye
of pity, Frederick whom thou have created Prince Electour Palatine, and Lady
Elizabeth, etc. our Kings Sister, by thy ordinance coupled together Man and
Wife, and so made one-Flesh. Forasmuch then, as thou have so appointed it, and
the end also of Matrimony, to be for the Propagation of Seed; and that thy
favor in no outward thing more appears, than in the increase of Children:
and which has appeared in thy giving them many sweet and hopeful Children:
Good Lord bless them, and let thy Grace grow with them: and let that Noble and
Excellent Lady be still as a fruitful Vine on the side of her Husbands House,
and his Children like Olive Plants round about his Table. Bless them, O Lord,
even with this Temporal favor, because of the Spiritual blessings, which
thou have made to thy Church, whereof they are, and their people, to profess
thy Name and Truth after thy Word. Lord, cast thy Eye of pity and compassion
upon their present downe-cast Estate: Comfort them according to the days
wherein thou have afflicted them; Let their Enemies and thine no longer triumph
over them and their Inheritance; Exalt them whom thou have humbled, and in thy
good time, wipe all tears from their Eyes. Let thy Power and Wisdom
ouer-shadow them, O thou most High; Thy heavenly grace lighten and preserve
them* in thy Love; that they may also govern their Subjects, in the Truth of
thy Faith; in mutual Charity; and so have them always, obedient in all
Loyalty, in thee, for thy sake. Prolong the days of their lives, with many
years, to see their Childrens children; If it be thy will, let them enjoy
Health, Wealth, Peace, and Prosperity of all things; That they living in thy
fear, to set forth thy Glory and Worship, here on Earth, may after this
temporal euer-dying life, be translated from hence into thy Kingdom, to live
there with thee, for ever and ever, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer for the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the
Sheriffs and Aldermen, of this City of London.
O Heavenly Father, the All-sufficient and Everliving God, we thy servants
and children in Christ, do acknowledge thee to be the sole Preserver of all
Orders and States Politic wheresoever, ruled and governed with good
Discipline, wholesome Laws, and just judgments in Equity, by Magistrates as
thy Lieutenants, appointed and constituted over thy people, for the good of
both Church and Commonwealth, a very manifest and singular Testimony of thy
Providence and presence among men: Setting, Establishing, and upholding
Authorities, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. In this acknowledgement and confession, we give thy most divine
Majesty our hearty thanks, (which we pray thee accept as a sweet smelling
Sacrifice) beseeching thee further in the name of Christ, (for whose sake thou
have promised to hear and grant our Petions) that forasmuch as thou have
commanded us to make Intercessions for all that are in Authority, and do
account it for an acceptable service in thy sight; thou will be pleased to
look down from thy high Throne of pity and mercy; beholding us from thence
with a gracious Eye, even now, that we do Supplicate for the whole State of
this City: especially, the Lord Mayor, and the Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the
same: The Lord Major, who is placed in Authority, and chief Ruler under our
King; by thy gracious permission and ordinance, we in these our Prayers first
and principally commend unto thy Almighty protection; most humbly entreating,
that he being in that high place above the rest of his Brethren, for their good
so appointed, thou will give him so much the more wisdom and understanding,
that may truly guide and conduct, both his mind and will, to the true
obedience of thy heavenly Will, knowing that to be the Squire and Rule of
godly Actions, above which his Function of Rule and Government, is and ought to
be always chiefly conversant, even to lay forth all his pains and industry,
to maintain by an honest external Discipline, the public peace and
quietness of the people of all sorts under his government; in special, to
countenance Virtue, for the encouragement of them that do well, and are
willingly subject for Conscience sake, because to such thou have made him thy
Minister for their Wealth. Again, to repress and beat down Vice, for the
terrifying and keeping in awe such as do Evil, and are contumatious and
stubbornly disobedient therein, resisting thy Ordinance, that they may learn
to fear the Power of thy Magistrate; whom thou have made also thy Minister, to
take vengeance on him that does evil: for he bears not the Sword (which
thou have put into his hand) for naught. For this cause good Lord, instill into
his mind a zealous care of thy Religion, to fear thee, O Lord, above all; for
thy fear is the beginning of Wisdom. Infuse into him the Spirit of Fortitude
and courage to deal truly in this his place of Lieutenancie, to execute
Judgment therein without respect of persons, neither favoring the Poor nor
honoring the Mighty, but hearing the Small as well as the Great, to judge his
Neighbors justly, knowing that the Authority which is committed to him
mediatly by our King, is for the administering true Justice under him, with
moderation and Equity, to the great comfort of every one of his Charge; and
that he is and must be accomptable, both to our King and to thee, for the same.
To our King here in this life, when he shall please to call him to it; To
thee, the King of Kings, in that day wherein thou shall say to him, Give an
Account of thy Stewardship, even of thy Maioraltie, shall thou say unto him,
how have thou discharged that? If he have walked in Justice and spoken
righteous things, refusing gain of Oppression, shaking his hands from taking
of Gifts, he may dwell on high, having his defense the Munition of Rocks. And
what we pray for him, we do humbly supplicate in behalf of the Sheriffs,
Justices and Aldermen, his Brethren likewise, that they may discharge their
several Offices of Justice, religiously and conscionably; for the good of thy
People, both in Church and Commonwealth, in this City: and the better peace
of our Consciences, when thou shall call them to a reckoning; And Lord, let thy
Power and Wisdom ouershadow them; Thy Divine and heavenly Grace enlighten and
preserve them, in thy fear and favor, now and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for the Right Honorable the Counsel of War, now established by
Act of Parliament.
O Lord of Hoasts, who have revealed thy self in thy holy Word to be a Man of
War, as thou art a GOD of Peace: And whereas, O most wise God, thou only art
the Author and perfiter of all good Works which are begun in thy Name; for
thou disposest and gouernest all things in private Families, and preseruest the
public Estates of Commonwealths, as well in War as Peace. And seeing also
that nothing can either be well begun, nor be proceeded in, and ended,
without good and fit Counsel appropriated to each Action, (which depends
upon occasions, and therefore is wisely to be laid forth by a due
consideration of circumstances for the same, except it be both entered and
likewise seconded by counsel corresponding to it in particular.) Let it please
thee, in Christ, to assist with thy Spirit of wisdom, all such Honorable
persons as are appointed by our Gracious King, Colleagues and Associates in
Counsel for the administering of Warlike affairs; Give them both a quick and
ripe wit, to enquire and search out, what is fit and meet to come into their
Consultations upon the present; And then a discreet judgment to find and
discern what is most behoouefull for effecting the present Business; And
lastly, a courage and resolution to execute what by mature deliberation shall
be decreed; and in all their Consultations, let them specially attend upon thy
fear; knowing, that no counsel can be administered to prevail and take
effect, which is not guided thereby. For, as Solomon says, J Wisdom dwell
with Prudence, and J find out Knowledge and Counsels. To this end, O Lord,
illuminate their eyes to behold right, and let their eyelids direct the way
before thee, that They turning neither to the Right hand nor to the Left, for
fear; nor by means of Corruption, or otherwise seduced from true fealty, may
at all times boldly and faithfully, advance the present Business, by such
Counsel as it requires, to thy Glory, in the lawful managing of those
Warlike affairs, even to the conquering of the Enemy, without doing wrong and
unnecessary violence, against the Law of Arms. Therefore, abandon far from
out their hearts all false, lewd, and treacherous Counsels, which respect only
profit, without a due and Godly regard of right Justice: Remove all sinister
passions and affections, working by colorable pretenses for private gain, or
by malice moving contentious questions, of purpose to interrupt the course of
their Consultation, by which the cause may be hindered, and strength of Arms
weakened, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth. As it shall seem good
to thy heavenly Will, so be pleased, we beseech thee, to be present and
President with them at all times, in all their Counsels, that no pretenses, no
particular respects, nor quarrels, may draw them apart into Factions; But
concurring in a mutual and unanimous consent of opinions, may truly, and
loyally advance the Common Cause, by presupposing in their first thoughts the
end of that which is to be presented to the Consultation; also by fitting the
best and safest means, for the atchieuing the same end; And lastly* by putting
in execution what is determined with the least charge and loss (if else it
cannot be done.) And otherwise, O Lord, if their Counsels by the favorable
assistance of thy Spirit, shall be furthered to a good and wished success,
let them out of the knowledge of thy fear, say with thanksgiving; Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us; but unto thy Name, give the praise; For thou only
give Prudence, and thou only sauest by Prudence, whom thou make wise in
thee. Be thou therefore only glorified, in all the wisdom of Men, for thy
Mercies sake in CHRIST for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for his Majesty's Nauy-Royall, the Forces and Admiral, now at Sea.
O Glorious God, we confess it to be true, that thy Prophet David has spoken
in the Spirit, Though an Host had pitched their Tents against me, yet my heart
should not be afraid; and though War be raised against us, we will trust in
this, even that thou will deliver us, and give our Faith the Victory. But
because thou have said likewise by Solomon, that War must be enterprised with
Counsel: Our humble Prayer and Supplication in Christ Jesus is, That it would
please thee to grant unto Him, who by thy appointment is chosen of our Gracious
King to be his Admiral, to rule and govern this whole Fleet, assembled
together in Ships prepared (as we hope and trust) to fight thy Battles upon
the Waters, (or elsewhere by Land) against thine Enemies and ours, unjustly
provoking us to fight; to Him we say, and to all the rest of the Captains and
Commanders of the Ships of War in this whole Fleet, now in this present
Voyage, Wisdom, Discretion, and Policy, carefully to foresee, and diligently
to prevent all the inconveniences that may hinder the Atchieuement of the
(hoped) Victory. To this end, O gracious God, give grace to Him, and to all
such as are called by way of assistance for their experience to aid and
further the Common Cause, as well with sound Policy, as with strength of
Arms, (for in the multitude of them that can give Counsel is health,) give
grace we say and pray, unto them, O Lord, (if it be thy pleasure to be so
favorable unto our King and Country) that with true and perfect Knowledge of
Wisdom and Understanding, which increases strength, they may prevent all
dangers; For thou do strengthen by Wisdom, and sauest by Understanding,
when and whom it pleases thee; insomuch as with one man guided by thy Spirit,
thou preuailest against thousands destituted thereof. Give unto them all a
constant Resolution, grounded upon firm Faith in thee, by which they may be
emboldned when they encounter the Enemy, to say in the Spirit, We trust in
God, we will not fear what Flesh can do unto us. Cause the spirit of our
Enemies to fail in the midst of them; Destroy their Counsels; let them be for
the spreading of Nets in the midst of the Sea, wherein they are emboldned
through the multitude of men, and in the confidence of a fleshly Arm, to fight
against thy people, which call upon thy Name: O Lord, for that they have
undertaken a false quarrel, and do encourage themselves in a wicked purpose,
Let them be a spoil unto us, that all other Princes seeing how valiant thou
art in Battles, may cloth themselves with a Robe of Astonishment and say;
Verily, the Lord fights for his people, the Lord went forth with their
Armies, and conducted them: he is the Shield and strength of their
Deliverance; No Counsel can stand against God; no Counsel nor Force of Arms
may dare to oppose it self and prevail, against them whom he is pleased to
protect and defend by his Counsel; And the Nations seeing how thou have
executed Vengeance upon our Enemies with rebukes of thy Indignation, may
confess thee to be the only Lord God, Mighty in Battles, and Powerful in
all Wisdom, and so be provoked thereby the more seriously to give to thee the
Glory due to thy Name, which is a name of great fear and wonder over all the
World. Furthermore, we beseech thee, be pleased in mercy to hearken unto us,
praying in the Name of thy Son Christ, forasmuch as thou art the Lord which
sit upon the Floods, to moderate the Tempests of the Wind and weather,
during their Voyage, as that neither our Ships nor men suffer any annoyance
by raging surges of the Waters, which otherwise in thy judgment might
ouerwhelme and destroy all. For, we confess that our unworthiness is great,
and our sins deserve the fury of thine Anger. But remember, O Lord, that thy
Name is called upon of us, and we are thy people, to whom thou have graciously
made thy self known by many mercies and favors, enriching us, both Prince
and People, with infinite blessings of Peace and Tranquillity, above all
Nations; For which we heartily thank thee, desiring thee, for thy Christ's
sake, to increase thy Faith in us daily more and more, and that we may still
grow forward in true love and thankfulness toward thee, both Prince and
People; So shall the King rejoice in his strength, whom thou have made glad
with the Joy of thy Countenance; and we thy People his Subjects, for all thy
favorable kindnesses, and for this Sea-Victorie, give thee praise and glory,
saying, the Lord is our Rock and our Fortress, in him do we put our trust.
Grant us these and all other thy good Blessings which thou know to be
necessary for us and thy whole Church, even for thy dear Son our Savior
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A brief Prayer for private Persons in tempestious weather.
Almighty and most merciful God, Eternal, strong, and magnificent, at whose
voice the highest Mountains, lowest deepes, and all things under the Sun do
tremble and quake: preserve us from thy insupportable anger; pardon our sins,
let thy amiable countenance shine upon us, and always be near unto us; Grant
that this grievous and terrible Tempest may pass away without hurting of us,
or any of our Brethren; Keep our bodies, our Houses, or any thing else that
belongs unto us, from Lightning, Fire, or any other destruction. Holy Father,
defend us, from all evil, sudden and unprepared death; and for thy dear Son
Christ Jesus sake, bring us to thy eternal habitation of Eternal Bliss,
where we may sing perpetually, amongst the company of the Angels and Saints
in Heaven, Halelujah, unto the glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

A brief Prayer for our afflicted Brethren, wheresoever.
MOst gracious God, we beseech thee to look upon the adversity of our poor
Brethren; relieve their necessities, and rid them out of their miseries, that
they may the more quietly set their minds upon thee, (if in thy Wisdom thou
shall see it expedient,) otherwise, give them patience, with constant minds,
and willing hearts, thankfully to bear this thy Fatherly Visitation without
grudging, or repining against thee, humbly submitting themselves unto thy
divine pleasure, with full assurance, that in the end, thou will bring them
unto thy everlasting rest, there to remain with thee world without end. Amen.

A brief private Prayer, for preparation to the public Fasts, whether in
City or Country.
O Just and righteous God, who as thou art the God of Plenty, who fillest with
thy blessings every living Creature, so thou art the God that command
Abstinence and Humility for sin: and seeing that by thy Judgments upon us
at this present, thou call for our humiliation, repentance, and amendment of
life: and this Day is thereupon set apart, and dedicated to humble our selves
before thee by fasting from food: good Lord grant, that we may now and ever
fast from sin also: and give us grace and ability to perform this days
Fast with all humility, devotion, and such repentant hearts, as may through
Christ be acceptable in thy sight.

Amen. HALELVIAH
FINIS.

