By the Mayor of London.
WHERE as a very rich L^^^erie general has now lately been erected by the
order of our iost dread Sovereign Lady, the Queens most excellent Miestie,
and by her highness commandment since publish^ within this her highness
City of London, the.xxiij. day of August, in the.ix. year of her Majesty's
most prosperois Reign, together with the Prices, Articles, and Condtions
concerning the same, as by the Charte of the said Lotterie more plainly does
at large appear. In which Charte among other thyigs it is comprised, that her
Majesty and her said City of London will answer t^ all and singular persons,
having adventured their money in the said Lotterie, to observe all the Articles
and conditions contained in the same from point to piynt inuiolably.

Now to avoid certain doubts since the publication of the said Lotterie,
secretly moved concerning the aunswering thereof, wherein though the wiser
sort may find cause to satisfy them selves therein yet to the satisfaction of
the simpler sort, The Lord Mayor of the said City, and his brethren the
Aldermen of the said City, by the assent of the common Council of the same,
do signify and declare to all people by this Proclamation, That according to
the Articles of her Majesty's order contained in the said Charte so published,
every person shall be duly answered according to the tenor of her highness
said proclamation.

And it is newly (...) for the advantage of the Adventurers, that the day of
the Readyng of the said Lotterie shall not be deferred after the.xxv. day of
June mentioned in the said Charte without very great and urgent cause: and
yet the same at the furthest, shall not be deferred past the feast of the
Purification of Saint Marie the virgin, which shall be next following, in the
year of our Lord God. M. D. Lxviij. after the computation of the Church of
England.

And that from the day of the said prorogation until the very day of the
Reading, the parties having put in their Money to the said Lotterie, shall be
allowed for the forbearyng thereof, after the rate of Twelve in the Hundred.
etc.

Proclaimed in London the.xiij. day of September, in the foresaid. ix. year of
her Majesty's Reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
Sign of the Marmayde. Anno. 1567. Septembris. 13.


