DESCRIPTION Of the taking of PHERNAMBOVCQVE.
THE Valiant and renowned General H.C. LONCK, sailed out of Goeree with 8.
Ships the 27 June 1629 and came under Tenerifa in the Canaries, where he was
in fight with the Armade of Don FREDERICO the 23. and 24. August. and the 4.
September he arrived in S. Vincent, where he refreshed, and the 29. Novem.
came by him the Coronel D. van WARDENBURGE, as also did the Commander DIRRICK
SYMONSZ come thither the 29. of the same month, who sailed out of Texel with
the said Coronel the 20. October: The Fleet being then strong 50. Ships and
Pinasses, 2. Pryses and 13. great Shalloups, where was mustered 7280. Men iong
and old, towit 3780 Mariners and 3500 Soldiers. With which Forces according
to his order he set his course toward the Coast of Pernambuco, and got land
in sight the 2. February upon 7. degrees 4. Minutes, and the 13. of February
about C.S. Augustijn: Where was resolved that the Coronell with 16. Ships and
Pinasses, and 2400. Soldiers and 600. Mariners should land 2. mile northwards
of Pernambuco in Rio Doce: and the General with the rest of the Fleet and 2.
strong Companies of Soldiers should sail to the Recif. Which resolution
being taken, the 13. and 14. they prepared themselves and all things ready,
and the 15. by break of the day, with mild weather and a still sea, they
began there Enterprise, towit the General setting toward the Recif unto the
Barra of Pernambuco, and the Coronell Wardenborge with his 16. sail, wherein
was 2400. Soldiers and 600. Mariners, who being landed presently set
forwards to the appointed place.

The General came to the Barra aforesaid about noone, and sailed with some
ships close under the Fort, which lies upon the Recif, upon which he played
with his Ordinance until the evening, and likewise upon the land Forts. The
Forts also played lustilie upon the Ships and with advantage, for the Ships
could not shoot leuel by reason of the wavering of the sea, and when they
lighted upon the Walls, it made only whit spots without doing any damage to
the Forts only a little at the very top of the Walls.

6. Ships and 11. Pinasses remained ready with small sail to run in, when
warning should be given at high water, which was expected about 3. of the
clock. But the Governor of Pernambuco it seems was long before advertised of
the coming of this Fleet, and thereupon had stopped the mouth of the River of
the Recif (namely the Poco and Barette) with soncked Ships, and fenced the
whole Vilage Povo upon the land Recif with a little wall or breastworck, so
that the Ships and Pinasses at that time could effect nothing, and the other
Ships which laye-close under the Wall were constrained to draw back toward the
evening.

In the mean while the Coronel Wardenborgh was busy with landing his Forces
with Shalloups and Boats at the place appointed, and marched foremost himself
with the vantguarde, in sight of his Enemies, who showed themselves strong both
a foot and horseback along the strand, whereupon the rest of the Forces
followed out of the Ships, with 2 pieces of Ordinance which shot 3. pound
iron, but the evening drawing on, they were constrained to lodge one the strand
under the sky that night.

In the night time haueing made all preparation, the morning drawing one he
martched forwards corragiouslie with all his Forces, parted in 3. Regiments and
a party of Firelocks, the vantguard under which the Coronell was himself, was
commanded by Lieutennant Eltsz: the Battaillion by Lieutennant Steyncalenfels,
and the rierguard by the Major Houx, haueing on there one side a thik grove,
out of which they feared much to be annoyed.

By Rio Doce which is a running River (where they were constrained to march
through to the middel) they were encountered of the Portingals, who lay there
entrenched some 1800. strong, the skirmidge was hot and ours put back twice,
and many slain and hurt one both sides, but most one the Enemies side, and so
at last they were put to flight.

From thence the Coronell marched to the Town without resting, taking by the
way some blaks, but learning noe intelligence from them, coming to the Town
they assaulted the Jesuits Closter, the gates whereof were bolwerkt toe within
side, which being beaten open and all slain that resisted, the Enemies were
forced to forsake the Closter, leaving behind many dead and maimed.

The Enemies forces in the Trenches and Forts one the Strand along the Sea,
heareing such news, and perceiueing Major Houx coming against them with the
reareguard, took the flight also after a little skirmidging, and playing of
the Ordinance, leaueing behind them some few dead and hurt.

In the mean time that the Coronell approached the Town one the North side,
the General had landed 2. Companies with good convenience one the South side,
and sent them to assist the Coronell, and so the Town was assaulted one both
sides, in such manner that about 4. of the clock in the afternoon it was
overcome with loss of about 50. or 60. Soldiers.

After the winning of the Town there was found within but about 100. Chists
with Sugar, some Wines, little Meal and other small matters of little vallew,
because the Citizens and Inhabitants were fled with most part of there goods,
notwithstanding the Governor MATTHIAS d'ALBUQUERQUE had forbidden it upon
pain of death, that noe body should fly, or carry ought out of the Town,
because the Inhabitants might help to keep the Town the better.

In the night the General caused the haven mouths to be founded, and the
Forts to be viewed, which the Enemy did hold strongly beset, so that there
was small hope to do any good against them by water.

The 17. February the Governor caused all the Packhouses to be set on fire,
wherein was above 15000. Chists of Sugar, because the Inhabitants were fled as
a prisoner reported, which fire could not be hindered by ours.

The 20. after the Town was well beset and good order set in all things, there
was resolved by the Counsel to make an Enterprinse upon the Fort, which lays
upon the land Recif; where to the Coronel commanded the Lieutennant
Steyncalenfelts with 400. or 500. Men, who quited himself well in that
Action, and stormed two hours in the night upon the Fort, but being the
skaling Ladders, which were raised were found a faddem to short, and that the
gates could not be opened, because those of the small Fort that lies upon the
Sea Recif, did much annoye ours with there Cannons, we resolved to retraite to
spare our Men, leaueing behind us about 20. dead and 40. or 50. hurt.

The 21. the Barrette being visited with Shalloups, who set fire on the Ship
that the Enemies had sunck in the mouth with stones to stop the passage, which
Ship being fired, they found good convenience to come within the Recif with
Shalloups, but seeing the Village upon the Recif, where the Packhouses were
fired, was so fenced with Walls, Brestwoorks and Palisades, it was thought
very dangerous to land there to attempt any thing against the Village.

And the 22. being busy to strengthen the Town with more Works, and also
the Jesuits Closter, and likewise in making a Bridge at the Foot of the
Town, which should come out over the Bar like a head a little Seawards to
land; and carry aboard any thing dry in time of need.

The 23. was resolved with approbation of all the Officers to draw near the
Fort (that lies upon the land Recif) with Approaches, whereto all preparation
of Fossiues and Sconcebaskets were made, most of the Mariners being employed
about cutting Rijswork and making Sconce-baskets, and others finisheing of
the said Bridge.

And the 25. haueing finished diverse Brestworks in many streets of the Town,
against any sudden Enterprise of the Enemy, the Approaches toward the
great Fort were began the 29. February by the Lieutennant Eltsz, with 500.
Men, who cast up a Trench the same night against the Fort, betwixt the Village
(that lies upon the Recif) and the Town: and the next day had Almost finished
a Battery, when the Major Houx came to relieve him, whereto the Coronell also
repaired and remained there until the next day, until the Battery was
finished, and 3. half Cartouwes planted, which played the whole day.

And afterward being the 2. March, haueing played all the morning with the
Ordinance, those of the Fort rolled up there Ancient, and put out a white
sheet and so sought to parle, sending out a Captain, who agreed with the
Coronell to deliver over the Fort upon Conditions as hereafter follow in the
Articles.

This being don the Coronell resolved to demand up the Fort which lies upon
the Sea Recif, and thereupon he advertised his intent to the General and the
rest of the Counsel, who all ratified the same, and so it was put in practice,
sending out a Tambour and an Interpreter, who they of the Fort presently gave
audience, and sent out there Lieuten^ant (taking another in hostage in his
place) who agreed with the Coronell in like manner as those of the other Fort
^id, and thereupon marched out.

The next day being the 3. of March the General gave commandment unto the
Lieutennant Steyncalenfelts, to make en Enterprise upon the Island, called
Antonie Vaz, cituated over against the Village upon the Recif, where being set
over he found noe resistance, the Inhabitants being fled haueing heard the
winning of the Castles, so he lodged a Troup of Soldiers in the Closter,
which stands upon the Island, where with the Town and Fortresses of Pernambuco
are all in hands of the Officers of licensed West India Company, under
protection of the States General and the Prince of Orange, which God long
continu to his glory.

The same day that the mouth of the Recif was sounded, some Ships, Pinnasses
and all the Shalloups run into the Recif, which is a very convenient place,
not only to lay ships in, but also te make them clean and keele them, and
the Pinnas that should depart with the good news was made clean there in the
Recif, and laden with some Sugars. The Lord General being lodged in the Povo
upon the Recif: The Coronell in the Jesuits Closter; and the Lieutennant
Coronel upon the Island of Antonie Vaz.

Articles agreed betwixt the Lord General H. C. LONCQ, and Coronell
WARDENBURGH on the one pertie, and Captain ANTONIO DE LIMA, Captain of the
strong Fort S. George, for his Majesty of Spain, on the other pertie.
FIrst that Captain ANTONIO DE LIMA does bind himself to deliver over to the
Lord General and Coronel WARDENBURGH the strong Fort S. George, with all the
Ordinance and Amonition whatsoever now in the said Fort.

Item that the said Captain Antonio de Lima after delivering over of the faid
Fort, shall depart the same with all his Soldiers, with there ordinary
Weapons, without Ancient or burning Matches, and so be set over with Barques
upon the fast Land, to march whither they please.

And for security of the said Barques the said Captain de Lima shall remain
in hostage till the Barques return, and then upon his faithful oath and
salvation does promise to return the Barque (that shall transport his person)
vndamnified.

And further the said Captain de Lima does promise for him and his Soldiers,
not to serve against the States General or the Prince of Orange in 6. Months.

All these Articles are approved by both perties in the Camp before the
strong Fort S. George the 2. March 1630. And was subscribed H. C. LONCK,
General. T. van WARDENBURGH Coronell. And ANT. DE LIMA, Captain of the strong
Fort S. George.

These Articles are also agreed upon betwixt the said General and Coronell,
and Manuel Pacheco el Guyar, Captain Major, and Pedro Barbosa Lieutenant of
the Fort upon Scaside.

Register of the Ammonition found in PHERNAMBVCO.
Upon the 2. Forts upon the Strand by North and South Side of the Town, found
in each 4. iron Pieces, shooteing 4. lb Iron. 8. Pieces.

Upon both the Forts or Castles 600 lb Powder. In the Jesuits Closter 30
Barrells Powder, each esteemed 100 lb makes 3000 lb Upon the Tolehouse 5
Barrels each esteemed 200 lb is 1000 lb. Somma 4600 lb Powder.




About 2000 lb Match. More about 200 lb. A percell of iron Bullets of 20 in
the lb. Some Rods of Lead. Some Boxes with Musket Bullets of 12 in the lb. A
great quantity Spanish Iron in Staves. 2. Hoghheads Saltpeeter. A percell
Shouels.


Artillery upon the Fort S. George, cituated by the Packhouses.
24 Iron Pieces shooteing 10 a 5 lb iron. 4000 lb Powder. A percell Iron
Bulletts. 30 lb great Musket Bullets of 10 in the lb. 40 lb Match. A percell
Hand-granades. A percell Fire-potts. 1 Brass piece shooting 8 lb. 2 Pipes
Spanish Wijn. 1 Chist Sugar. A percell great Pottyses with Water.


In the Castle upon the Sea Recif is found as follows.
15 Brass Ordinance whereupon stands the Arms of Phillip the II. and III.
Kings of Spain, and some the Arms of Portugal, shooting some 20.18. and 10
lb Iron. 1 Brass Piece a snake of 10 lb Iron, spoiled. 14 Barrels of Powder of
120 lb. A percell of Iron Cannon Bullets. A great party Cardoeses to the
Pieces. A percell of great and small Pottyses filled with water, Spanish Wine
and Viniger. 7 Sacks Meal, 4 Chists Farinie. Some salted Fish. 1 Tub with
salted Flesh.


HIGH AND MIGHTY LORDS.
SEEING that with Gods assistance I have victoriously conquered this Town of
FARNABUCCO, I could not omit according to my duty, participate unto you, what
is passed therein as far as present time will permit.

In the Bay of S. Vincent having found the General LONCK with his accompanied
Ships, we wear in all (after some weeks being gathered together 53. sails
of Ships, with healthy and sickly Soldiers, sailed from thence the 26.
December. 1629. toward the coasts of Brasill, where we came the 12. February,
in the clymake of 8. degrees, where there came unto us some Ships and
Pynnaces, which had lost us and wear sent out before us, so that afterward
we wear 56. sail; Whereafter serious deliberation we resolved to fall upon
the Ennemy in two places, to wit I with 2400. Soldiers and 300. Sailors,
with 300. Sailors more to the train being divided in 16. Ships, were resolved
to land about 2. Miles toward the North of Fernambucco: And the General LONCK
having by him two other strong Companyes in the other Ships toward the Recyf,
having resolved the 15. February to effect our enterprise. The General going
to the Recyf, but by reason those of the Castle had heard of our coming, they
had sunck certain ships in the mouth of the Haven, so that the Generals
desseyn toock noe effect allbeitt he did his best endeavors with shot of
Cannon; in the mean time in the afternoon I went toward the shore in
certain Sloopes, where there did apeare many Soldiers, both foot and horse;
and being landed in their sight, whereupon the rest of our Soldiers followed
out of the other Ships with 2. Pieces that shot 3. lb Iron, and because it
begann to grow evening, we wear forced to lodge upon the strand: Next
morning very early I did send the Boats toward the Ships, and separated my
Troops in three Regiments. The Auantguarde where I was in person, as well in
marching as in landing, was commanded by Leftennant Eltsz: The Battle by
Leftennant Steyncallenfells: The Rierguarde by Major Houcks, marching on the
strand toward the Town, coming by Rio Dolce was a small River, which we
wear forced to wade to the middle in water, where we had the first assault,
wheare the Ennemy as I am advised wear about 1800 Men, both foot and horse,
did resist us but after a hard Skermish, and many being dead and hurt on both
sides, but least of our side they wear putt to flight. Notwithstanding they
had a running River for their advantage. Coming somewhat further, stood another
Troop upon the strand, but after little resistance did also retired in the
Woods, showing themselves the third time, durst not stay for us; so that with
all diligence seeing them so frighted, I marched toward the Town, drawing
near thereunto with the Auantguarde and Battaille, did amount unto the
Iesuitts Cloister, where the Backgates wear bollwarckt, and we in clyming,
saw them in the Cloister arm themselves, but after some resistance, and
having seen our courage, they fleyed, leaving behind them many dead and
wounded, and of our Men wear also some slain. In the mean time the Trenches
and Fortes haueing notice hereof, and seeing the Rearguarde, making so hastily
upon them, after many shot with Canon, and some dead and hurt, did also fly
away, leaving behind them their Fortes which wear, after strenghtened by our
Men, and so with Gods mercy are become Masters of the Town, having lost in all
about 50. or 60. Men.

I have besett the Jesuits Cloister (where I am lodged) with Trenches. The 20.
February with consent of the Counsel; we did command Leftennant
Steyncallenfells to make an Enterprise in the night upon the Forte that stands
upon the Recyf toward the land, who has quitted himself therein, and
stormed thereupon two hours long, but our lathers being to short, was
thought good to retire, to save our men with the loss of 20. dead and 40. hurt
of our Men, and 12. of theirs. Whereupon the 23. February having thought
fitting with consent of the Counsel, to fall upon the said Town with
Approaches, whereupon present order was given for* preparation thereunto, which
being done the 27. February* we begann the Work under command of Leftennant
Eltsz, who made the same night a Trench against the Castle, between this
Town and the Recyf, and the day following the Battery almost finished, and
when Major Houcx went to relieve him, I went thither also and stayed there till
the day following till the Battery was finished: and three half Cannon planted
thereupon, and having shot all that day and next day being the second current,
having also shot the whole morning till about 9. a cloack, began to parle with
me, and set up a white sheet, sending a Captain unto us with whom I have
agreed, that they leaving the Forte, shall depart without ancient or burning
Matches, leaving behind them all Artillery, as also all Ammunition and
Provision, which we thinck they have cast in the Sea and carried away,
because we found none therein. Further we urged them to promise not to raise
any Arms against the States in 6. Months. This being done, we thought
fitting to demand the other Castle upon the Recyf, which lays in the Sea. In
the mean time the General, the Admiral and Vice Admiral had notice thereof,
who coming did approve thereof, and was putt in practice by sending a Drum,
and they sent out a Leftennant, but leaving another in hostage, with whom by
authority from his Commandor we agreed upon conditions as formerlie, which
being presently subscribed one both sides, they marched out, and so in the
afternoon we were master of both Forts and Haven, as also of the whole Recyf.
The next day being the 3. March, we gave order to the Lieutennant
Steyncallenfelts to make an assault upon the Island of Antonio Va^ cituated over
against the Village of the Recyf, which he^ put in practice, and being set
over found noe body, there God be praised, all being fled at the news of
the goeing over of the Town and Castles, so that he lodged his Troop in the
Cloister upon the Island, where with the Town and strong Holds are all in our
command none excepted, we haueing wanted in this exploict the principalest
Soldiers, which are yet behind where my best men are, yea mine own Company,
where is wanting all the Officers and about 1800. Men not many more or les. I
doubt not but my Lords the Directors of the West India Company will secunde us
in this Victory, to the end they may in time enjoy the fruits hereof, and
being as it is in effect a place (being secunded) invinceable of good
tempetance, haueing good water and good flesh, a place where most of the
Trafique of all Brasill has been driven, and being once settled in peace, by
Gods grace shall be driven again, and is abel to keep in subjection all
Brasill. With which I hope through the afright, which is in the whole Land, to
make such a progres in the Land, that your Highnesses shall have an everlasting
name thereby, and so with this place keep all the coast of Brasill in aw, and
take away all there Traffic and the Navigation, which is the only means
to withdraw the Traffic of these parts from our common Enemy the King of
Spanie, and so bring the Inhabitants to a mutuale friendship and Aliance.

The good God bless and prosper your Highnesses, and make you nursers of his
people, to the praise and glory of his holy name, and confusion of his and
our Enemies.

Actum in the Jesuits Cloister in the Town of OLINDA de FERNABUCO the 7. March
1630. Was subscribed your Highness humble Servant D. V. WEERDENBURGH.

FINIS.
DECLARATION OF T^ (...)
A the great Fort upon the Land-Recif, ca^ ^orge.

B the Fort upon the Sea-Recif.

C a niew began Fort.

D Povo or Village by the Pack houses.

E Povo the Haven.

F the small Fort under the Town.

G the Jesuits College.

H the great Church.

I S. Berto.

K Carmo.

L S. Iuan.

M R. de la Vada.

^^DA^DE^ PHERNAMBVCO WELCHE DVRCH DEI HOLLENDER IM FEBRVARI 1630 EROBERT
WORDEN.
view of Farnabucco 1. Iesutten Kirch 2. Gross Kirch 3 Das Giesshaiss. 4 Hafen
do die Schiffversuneken worden 5. Kl^ Schantz under der Stadt 6 Grost^ Schantz
^ff^^ Land Reciff 7 Schantz ^ffder See Re^^ff 8. Packh^tiser so im Brank stehen
9 Brenn end Barche^ 10 Al^ier is it das volck ^ns Land ges^^^ worden





