The order of my Lord Mayor, the Aldermen and the Shiriffes, for their metings
and wearynge of their apparel throughout the year, *

Imprinted at London by John Day. * 1568.

The first day of August for the election of the Shiriffes of London.
MY Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, with the Sherifes meet at the Guildehall at
viij. of the clock in the morning, apparelled in their violet gowns lyned,
and their scarlet clokes lyned, without their horses.

And when they have been together in the counsel chamber a certain time at
their pleasures, my Lord and the Aldermen come out and put on their clokes in
the Orphans court, and then go down in order to the Hustinges court, and
there being set, master Recorder stands up and makes his obey saunce: first
to my Lord, and then to the Commons and declares unto them wherefore they are
assembled together, showing unto the^ that it is for the election of one of y^
Shiriffes of London and the shere of Middlesex for the year next ensuing, and
for the confirmation of the other Shirife nominated by my L. Mayor according to
his prerogative.

But my Lord and the Aldermen go up to my Lords court, and there remain
until the Shiriffe be named and chosen, y^ door shut to them.

Then M. Shiriffes, M. Chamberlein, master common Sergeant, master
Towneclarke, y^ two Secondaries and the counsailers of the city remain still
in the Hustinges court, to take and receive the name of him that shall some by
their judgments, freelye, and with one consent to be nominated and elected and
justly tried out, not only by voice, but also by hands to be Sheriff for the
year following.

That done the Shiriffes, M. Chamberlain, M. common Sergeant, M. Towneclarke,
the two Secondaries, the Counsailers of the city, and the Wardens of the head
Companies carry up the report to my Lord and the Aldermen of their said
election.

Which report received, my Lord and the Aldermen come down again to y^
Hustinges court, and there being set in order and placed, master Recorder
stands up as he did before, and makes rehersall of his name whom they have
nominated and chosen, asking them whether it be their free election, yea, or
nay. And they grant yea yea. Then Master Recorder gives them thanks, and so
they arise and depart home.

On Barthelmew even for the fair in Smithfield.
The Aldermen mete my Lord and the Shiriffes at the Guilde hall chapel at ij.
of the clock after diuer in their violet gowns furred, and their horses,
without clokes, and there hear Evening prayer: which being done, they take
their horses and ride to Newgate, and so forth to the gate entryng into the
cloth fair, and there makes a proclamation, and the proclamation being made,
they ride through the eloth fair and so return back again through the
churchyard of great S. Bartholmewes to Aldersgate, and so ride home again to
the Lord Mayors house.

On Bartholmew day for wrestling.
So many Aldermen as dyne with my Lord Mayor and the Shirifes be appareled in
their scarlet gounes lyned, and after dinner their horses be brought to them
where they dine, and those Aldermen which dine with the shirifes, rides with
them to my L. house, to accompany him to the wrestlyng. Then when the wrestling
is done, they take their horses and ride back again through the fair, and so
in at Aldersgate, and so home again to the said Lord Mayors house.

The Sunday after Bartholmew day.
The Aldermen mete my Lord Mayor and the shirifes at Paul's cross, at viij. of
the clock in y^ morning, apparaled in their scarlet gounes lyned, without
clokes or horses, and there hear the sermon and if there be a wrestlyng or a
shoting after dinner, then they come to my lords place with their said scarlet
gounes lined, and their horses as before on Bartholmew day.

For our Lady fair in Southwarke.
My Lord Mayor and the shiriffes ride to S. Magnus church in their scarlet
gounes lined with out their clokes, after dinner at ij. of the clock, and
there the Aldermen mete my Lord, and after the Evening prayer they ride through
ye fair till they come to S. Georges church, and further to Newington bridge
(if it be so their pleasures,) and then return back again over the Bridge,
and there the Aldermen take their leave of my lord, and depart the next way
every one to his house.

For the swearing of the Shrieffes upon Michaelmas even.
What day soever it falls, so many of the Aldermen as be bidden to dinner to
either of the shrieues, shall come thither to breakfast, or else to drink at
viij. of y^ clock in y^ morning, in their violet gowns furred, with their clokes
brought with them, without horses. And if the shiriffe be an Alderman, the^ they
must put on their clokes, and the Shirife likewise his cloak, and so go to the
Guilde hall between.ij. of the Gray clokes. And if the shiriffe be no Alderman,
the^ to come between. ij. of the Alderme^ without clokes, and the Shirife his
livery gown and his hoode. And after when he is sworn, the^ to put on his
violet gown and cloak and his chain thereon. And y^ Alderme^ must bring him
home to his place with their clokes to diner, and so after diner take their
pleasure.

Upon Michaelmas day for the election of my Lord Mayor.
All the Aldermen mete my L. and the Shiriffes at viij. of ye clock in the
morning at Guilde hall in their scarlet gowns and their clokes furred, and
their horses, and after they have been a certain time together in the cou^sail
chamber, they come forth into the Orphans court, and put on their clokes and
so goes in order to the chapel, there hearing service, and my Lord with
certain Aldermen receive the communion.

And then after the communion ended, returns again into the council chamber
and pause awhile, return down into the Hustings court, and there being set in
order, Master Recorder arises up and makes his obeisance first to my Lord,
and after to the commo^s, and declares and shows unto them, that as they of
old custom know that the cause of their assembly and meeting together is for
thelection of the L. Mayor for the year ensuing, declaring unto them diverse
grauntes from king John's time, for this their election from time to time: That
done, my lord and the Alderme^ go up into my lords court and there tarieth
(the door being shut unto them) til the election be brought to them. Then
stands up M. common Sergegeaunt (the shiriffes standing on either side of
him) and by the shiriffes M. Chamberlain, M. Tounclarke, the two Secondaries,
and the counselors of the City in the said Hustings court before y^ commons.
And he the said Common Sergeant makes a short rehersall of that that M.
Recorder had spoken to them before: saying, there rests no more for him to
say, but to put them in remembrance in what order and sort they should use
themselves in their election. That is, how they must nominate and chose two, of
the which ij. my Lord and the Aldermen must confirm one, which two being
nominated, elected, and chosen, M. common Sergeant, the shiriffes, with the
rest before named, and certain of the head Wardens of the chief companies,
goes up to my Lord and the Aldermen, and there presents the names of those
two, y^ which the Commons has nominated in their election. Then the Mayor and
the Aldermen proceeds by Scruteny to elect one of those two persons which the
said commons had before nominated. Then comes down my lord again to the
Husting court, and he of his left hand whom they have chosen, and so my Lord
and the Aldermen sit down again in order, but he who is chosen fitteth next
unto my L. on his left hand. Then stands M. Recorder up, and redeth unto them
the names of such persons whom they had nominated and chose^, of the which my
L. and the aldermen has admitted one, whose name is N. asking the^ whether it
be their fre election yea or nay. And the commons answers yea, yea. Then the
Mayor new elected stands upon y^ Hustings court and gives the^ thanks, etc.
That being done, the old Mayor does likewise give them thanks, etc. Then they
arise up and put of their clokes, and my Lord Mayor has the L. elect riding
with him to the kings shiriffe to dinner.

For the presenting of my Lord elect, to my L. Chancellor.
Then after diner my lord elect goes to my Lord Chancellor if he be at home, at
his place, or nere unto it with v. or vj. of the Alderme^ and M. Recorder with
him in their violet gowns either by foot or by water, as the dweling place of
the Chauncelor requires.

The morrow after Michaelmas day for the Shriefs going to Westminster.
All the Aldermen must be at the ij. Shrifes houses in y^ morning at 8. of y^
clock in their violet gowns furred, and their horses, without clokes. But my
Lord, M. Recorder, and y^ ij. shirifes must be in their scarlet gowns furred,
and their clokes born to Westminster with them, and so rides to the Guilde
hal, and from thence to y^ Vintrie, there taking barge la^ding at Westminster
bridge, and in the hall puts on their clokes and so go up to the Exchequer:
and there the ij. new Shirifes be presented and the old sworn to their account.

Then they put of their clokes and take barge landing again at the vintrie,
and there takes horse and my lord rides to the kings shiriffe to dinner. M.
Recorder and the Shiriffes riding next my L. the two shiriffes carrying ij.
white rods in their hands, and their henche me^ going after them.

The order for Simon and Iudes day.
The old L. Mayor shall have so many of the Aldermen as dineth with him, come to
his place at viij. of y^ clock in y^ morning in their violet gounes furred,
with their clokes and horses, and the shiriffes to fetch him to y^ hall, and
there tarieth in y^ Council chamber, until y^ new Mayor comes, and the rest
of the Aldermen come, with the company of either of the Lords before the^. And
after they have been together a certain space, come out into the Orphans
court, and puts on their clokes and go to the Husting court, and there being
set in order the common crier makes proclamation, commanding every man to
keep silence. Then after the proclamation the old lord arises up, and gives
the new L. his place. Then M. Towneclarke gives him his oath, and when he has
sworn, M. Chamberlain delivers unto him, first the scepter, the^ the kayes
and the purce, with the seal, then M. Swordbearer the sword. Then they arise
and put of their clokes, and the old L. rides home with the new L. to his
place and there leaves him and as many of the Aldermen as dine with him. And
the old Lord with y^ rest of the Alderme^ rides to his own place the sword
borne before him, and so after dinner the Aldermon depart home at their
pleasure.

On the morrow after Symo^ and Iudes day for my L. going to take his oath at
Westminster.
All the Aldermen and the Shiriffes comes to my L. elect at viij. of the
clock in their scarlette gounes furred, A velvet whoode.
and their clokes born with them, and their horse, and so rides to the Guild
hall, and the Bachelors and the livery of my L. company before him.

But the old Lord rides from his own place to the hall alone having no
officers to wait upon him, whoode.
but the common hunt as a ge^tleman usher going before him, Velvet whoddes for
both Mayors*
and the common huntes man and one yeoma^ of the watersside with his own men
followyng him, and so tarieth at the hall.

And after they be come all together, they take their horse and ride to the
Vintrie, and there take barge to Westminster bridge.

And after they be landed, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen puts on their
clokes within y^ palace, and go round about the hall, and so up y^ Exchequer
to be sworn. Then after the oath taken in the Exchequer come down again, and
goes first to the kings bench, then to the common place and so put of their
clokes, and goes about y^ kings tomb in Westminster abbey and the^ takes
barge again. And being landed, rides to the Guildehall to diner and all the
companies of this City with him, and at their coming into y^ hall, the new
Lord Mayor with two of the ancient Aldermen and the Shiriffes go up to the
Lords table to bid them welcome, and likewise all the other guests, and from
thence to the Lady Mayresse table, and so come out to the gentlewomans table,
and so from thence my said new Lord Mayor goes into y^ Chamberlaines office
where he dineth, and the old Lord Mayor at their first coming into the hall
goes up to the high table in the Hustinges, and there keeps the state for
that feast, the^ after dinner, goes to Poules with all the companies waityng
before my Lord.

For going to Poules on all Saints day, Christmas day, Twelfth day, and
Candelmas day.
All the Aldermen and the Shiriffes come to my Lords place in their scarlet
gowns furred, Velvet whoddes for both the old and new.
and their clokes and horses, and from thence rides to the Guilde hall, my
lords company and the Bachelors before him, and there hears Euenyng prayer,
and when prayer is done, they ride to Poules and there both y^ new L. Mayor and
the old put on their clokes and goes up to the Queere, and there hears y^
Sermon, which done, they go about the church, and there put of their clokes
where they were put on. Then they take their horses again and the Aldermen
brings my Lord home, and then they have spice bread and hypocras, and so
take their leave of my Lord.

For Sunday after Christmas holy days
My L. and the Aldermen must be in their violet gounes without their clokes to
the end to hear y^ Sermon.

For monday after Twelfth day.
My lord and the Alderme^ mete at the Guilde hall at. viij. of the clock in y^
morning in their scarlet gowns furred, and their clokes without horse, to
receive of their wards their inde^tures of y^ warmot enquest, and for the
swearyng of y^ Constables and Skauengers.

For good Friday.
My Lord and the Aldermen mete at Poules cross at one of y^ clock to hear
the sermon in their pewke gounes and without their cheynes and Typets.

For monday and Tuesday in Easter weke.
All the Alderme^ and Shirifes comes to my lords place before 8. of y^ clock
to breakefast in their scarlet gounes furred, whoode.
and their clokes and horses.

And after breakefast take their horses and ride to the spittle, and there put
on their clokes, and so sit down in order to hear the sermon, which done
rydeth homewarde in order till they come to the Well with two buckets with in
bishopsgate, and there so many of the Aldermen as dines with the shiriffes,
takes their leave of my lord, and the rest go home with him.

For Wednisday in Easter weke.
Like as before on the other ij. days but that my L. and the Aldermen must be
in their violet gounes and suitable clokes.

For low Sunday.
All the aldermen mete my lord and the shirifes at Poules in their scarlet
gounes furred, without their clokes or horse, to hear the Sermon.

Upon the monday and tuesday in the Whitson week.
The Lord Mayor and Alderme^ must meet with my Lord at Poules in their scarlet
gowns without clokes, to hear y^ sermon.

For the going to Poules the first sunday of every Term.
All the aldermen mete my lord and the shiriffes at Poules in their scarlet
gounes furred, or lyned without clokes or horse, as the time of the year
requires when y^ term begins.

For the election of the Knights and Burgeses of the Parliament.
All the Aldermen mete my L. and the shiriffes at Guilde hall, at ix. of the
clock in their violet gowns and their clokes furred or lined as the time of
y^ year when they shall be chosen requires.

And sits in the Hustinges court whilst the Commons chose them. The order
is, that they must chose M. Recorder for one of their Knights, and one graye
cloak for the other, and ij. commoners for the Burgeses, which done they depart.

For the election of Bridge masters if any of them depart within the year.
My lord and the Aldermen sits in the Hustinges court while they be chosen
in their violet gounes without their clokes, and do not remove until the
election be done.

The use of my Lords cloak.
From Lammas to Whitsontide violet furred, and from Whitsontide to Lammas,
scarlet.

For the burial of Aldermen.
The Aldermen must be in their violet gounes, but those that have of their
friends black gounes.

And if any Alderma^ that dies gives my lord a black gown, M. Sword bearer
must have an other or else xl. s. in money, y^ price thereof, and so carry the
sword in black before my lord.

For the Orphans court.
My lord and the Alderme^ come to the Guilde hall in their violet gounes without
clokes, but my Lord Mayor must have his cloak on.

Which court, the common crier warns.

FINIS.

