By the Mayor.
WHereas not only of Common usage and ancient custom used within this
honorable City, But also of and by the old laws and ordinances made and
executed in the same City it is manifest That all manner of Commodities,
Clothes and Marcha^dizes made and wrought within the kingdom of England and
dominions of the same, brought unto the said City to be sold, were and ought
to be brought unto such common market places as to that purpose within the
same City was appointed, And there only and not else where ought to be bought
and sold, And the owners thereof did there pay Halladge and other duties, which
was so done as well that good and lawful wares should be bought and sold and
corrupt and unlawful bargaynes and contractes tending to the deceit of the
people, and contrary to the laws of the Realm might be avoided: As also that
there might be no forreyne bying and sellyng in fraud of the liberties,
franchesies, and customs of the said City being confirmed and ratyfied by act
of Parliament.

And where of late years diverse sorts of Cloth and other Commodityes and
marchandizes some of wolle only, and some of woollen and lynen wouen together
have been and are daily made and wrought within this realm and the dominions
thereof and daily and from time are brought to this City there to be sold, And
because they are not called by any of the same names that the clothes of Woollen
or Lynen of the former ancient time were (although they consiste of the same
substance) The makers and merchants thereof pretend a liberty to themselves
to make their markets thereof, and to buy and sell the same in Innes, cha^bers,
and warehouses and all other parts of this City and Liberties thereof at their
pleasure, As Well in the great deceit of many her Majesty's loving Subjects,
and more easy vtteraunce of naughtye and deceytfull wares: As also to the
redier and more easy intruding upon the liberties of this City by foreign
bying and sellyng: Therefore in remedy of the said disorders, The Lord Mayor
and his worshypfull brethren thaldermen, and the common counsel of this City
now assembled do ordeyne and enact, That from henceforth all manner of clothes
of new devise, commodities and marchaundizes aforesaid made of wolle or of
woollen and lynen together (not accustomed heretofore to be brought to
Blackwellhall, which hereafter shall be brought to this City to be sold, shall
be wholly brought to the common market place named the wasted halle situate at
the Northend of thold Iurye in the ward of Bassinghall within this City, And
there from henceforth shall be bought and sold and not elsewhere within the
liberties of the same City, And that no person or persons free of this City
or any other dwelling within the liberties thereof, or having any house shop or
romyth within the same City or liberties thereof shall from henceforth there or
elsewhere within the same libertyes take in, receive, harbor or bestow, or
suffer to be taken in, received, harbored, or bestowed, any of the said clothes
of new devise, Commodities or Marchandizes before the same be brought to the
market place aforesaid thereunto appointed and there harbored, taken in, bought
and sold.

And by authority aforesaid it is enacted and ordained that the markets for
the said clothes of new devise commodities and marchandizes aforesaid shall and
may be from henceforth weekly had and kept in the hall or market place
aforesaid every Tewesday and Wednesday from viii. until xi. of the clock in
the forenoone, and from one until four of the clock in the afternoon. And it
is further ordained by authority aforesaid, That from henceforth the officers
of the said hall and market place or some of them shall be attendaunt at the said
hall to receive the premises from time to time, who shall and may take for
hallage and and other charges of the said Clothes of new devise, commodities,
and marchandizes such rates for such time and in such sort as follows. That
is to say: Narrow Rash for Doblytting containing xxx. yeardes the doble piece,
for hallage. j. d. Broad Rash for Clokes and other garments containing from
20. to 25. yeardes the piece. ij. d. Borratose wrought with silk containing
under 20 yeardes ob. and the doble piece above 25. yeardes. i. d. Plomites
wrought with silk or otherwise the single piece, ob. and the doble piece. i.
d. Carrels containing xiiii. yeardes a piece one farthing. Worsted hose the
dozen pair. ii. d. Norwhich gartryng the gross. ob. Stowle lace and penny
breadth lace the dozen gross i. d. Crewell or worsted yearne the dozen pound i.
d. Friu^^^re the dozen pound weight i. d.


And that when as the halladge and other duties according to the rates
aforesaid shall be paid, the officer or his d putye in that case appointed shall
strike a seal of lead upon every particular piece of the said marchaun^izes
as well in discharge of the owner from any redemaund thereof, as also to charge
the same officer with ^he money received. And because in experience not only
towching the last recyted premises but also towching diverse ancient sorts of
Cloth, diverse disorders are daily committed: It is also by auctoritye aforesaid
ordained that if any of the premises aunciently made or of new devise or
heareafter to be devised and made within this Realm and dominions thereof
shall be brought to this City to be sold, That the same severally shall be
brought to the said several markets and there to be harbored and not else where
till the same be first bought and sold within one of the same markets. And that
if any of the premises shall be bought in the Country by any former bergayne by
any freeman of this City and after brought heither that the same or a true
certificate thereof shall be presented at such of the said halls as apperteineth
as aforsayd And the hallage therefore paid or a bill therefore given by the
same freeman to the ordinarye officer before the same shall be received or
harbored upon pain that every freeman and foreign dwelling in this City or
the liberties thereof which shall receive or harbor any of the premises
otherwise or contrary to the true meaning of the ordinances aforesaid shall
forfeyt and pay to thuse of the cominaltie of this City for every broad
Cloth so harbored vi. s viii. d. for every kersey iii. s. iiii. d. for every
Bridgewater xx. d. and for every other of the ancient woollen clothes
accordingly in an equal rate for every worsted iii s. iiii. d. for every tuffed
mockado xx. d. and for every other of the premises of new devise now being or
heareafter to be accordingly in an equal rate and for avoiding all pretense of
excuse that the premises shall be forthwith publicly proclaimed. All which
penalties and forfeytures to be incurred by force of the said ordinances,
shall be recovered by actio^ of debt, bill, playnt, or information, to be brought
or exhibeted and pursued in the Queens majesty's court in the utter Chamber of
the Guildhall of this City of London commonly called the mayors court by and
in the name of the Chamberlayne of this City for the time being. And all
sommes of money and forfeytures so to be recovered over and above the charges
of the suit, shall be employed in form following. That is to say, one third part
to thuse of the Mayor and comminaltye and Cittyze^s of this City, the one
other third part to the relief of ye poor in Christ's hospital in this
City, and the other third part to such persons as shall present and give
information of such offense and do his diligence that the offender may be
duly convicted. And for that no manner of person or persons shall heareafter
excuse themselves for lack of warning, neither be ignorant of the foresaid
(...) and rates above recited My said Lord M^^or and his right worshipful
brethren thaldermen have thought good by public proclamation to thend to take
away as much as in them lies all such feigned and untrue allegations and excuses
openly to publish and proclayme the said law and ordinance that the same may
be observed accordingly. Yeuen at the Guildehall of this honorable City of
London this present xxviii. of October in the xviii. year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by John Day.


