decorative border

THE DEcree for Tithes, to be paid in London.

Anno M. D. LXXX.

At London Printed for Gabriell Cawood. 1597.

The Decree for Tithes, to be paid in London.
AS touching the payments of Tithes in the City of London, and the Liberties
of the same: It is fully ordered and decreed by the most reverend Father in God
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England.
Thomas Lord Wriothesley, and Lord Chancelour of England. William Lord Saint
John, president of the Kings Majesty's Counsel, and Lord great Master of his
Highness household, John Lord Russell, Lord privy seal, Edward Earl of
Hertford, Lord great Chamberlain of England, John viscount Lisle high Admiral
of England, Richard Lister Knight chief Justice of England, and Roger
Cholrneley Knight, chief Baron of his Graces Eschequer, this present twenty
and four day of February, Anno Domini secundum cursum and computationem
Ecclesie Angelicane millesimo quingentesimo quadragesimo quinto, according to
the statute in such case lately provided. That the Citizens and inhabitants of
the said City of London and Liberties of the same, for the time being, shall
yearly without fraud or couin for ever pay their tithes to the Parsons,
Vicars, and Curates of the said City, and their successors for the time
being, after the rate hereafter following, that is to wit, of every ten
shillings rent by year of all and every house and houses, shops, warehouses,
sellers, and stables, and every of them, within the said City and Liberties
of the same sixteen pence half penny. And of every twenty shillings rent by
year of all and every such house and houses, shops, warehouses, sellers, and
stables, and every of them, within the said City and Liberties, two shillings
and nine pence: And so above the rent of twenty shillings by year, ascending
from x.s^. to x. s^. according to the rate aforesaid.

Item that where any lease is or shall be made of any dwelling house or houses,
shops, warehouses, sellers, or stables, or of any of them, by fraud or couin,
reserving less rent then has been accustomed, or is, or that any such lease
shall be made without any rent reserved upon the same, by reason of any fine
or income paid before hand, or by any other fraud or couin: That then in every
such case the tenant or farmour, tenaunts or farmours thereof, shall pay for
his or their tithes of the same, after the rate before said, according to the
quantity of such rent or rents, as the same house or houses, shops,
warehouses, sellers, or stables, or any of them were last letten for, without
fraud or couin before the making of such lease.

Item that every owner or owners, inheritor or inheritors, of any dwelling
house or houses, shopps, warehouses, sellers, or stables, or any of them
within the said City and liberties, inhabiting or occupying the same himself
or themselves, shall pay after such rate of tithe as is above said, after the
quantity of such yearly rent, as the same was last letten for, without fraud
or couin.

Item if any person or persons have taken, or hereafter shall take any mese or
mansion place by lease, and the taker or takers thereof his or their executors
or assigns does or shall inhabits in part thereof, and have or has within
viij. years last past before this order or hereafter will or shall let out
the residue of the same: That then in such case, the principal Farmour or
Farmors or first taker or takers thereof, his or their executors or assigns,
shall pay his or their tithes after the rate aforesaid, according to his or
their quantity therein, and that his or their executors assign or assigns,
shall pay his or their tithes after the rate above said, according to the
quantity of his or their rent by year.

And that if any person or persons, have or shall take diverse mansion houses,
shops, warehouses, sellers, or stables in one lease, and lets, or shall let
out one or more of the said houses, and keeps or shall keep one or more in
his or their own hands, and inhabiteth or inhabiten in the same: That then the
said taker or takers, and his or their executors or assigns, shall pay his or
their tithes after the rate above said, according to the quantity of the
yearele rent of such mansion house or houses retained in his or their hands.
And that his assign or assigns of the residue of the said mansion house or
houses shall pay his or their yearly tithes after the rate above said,
according to the quantity of their yearly rents.

Item if such Farmour or Farmors, or his or their assigns of any mansion
houses, warehouses, shops, sellers, or stables, has at any time within eight
years last past, or shall hereafter let over all the said mansion house or
houses contained in his or their lease to one person or to diverse persons: That
then the inhabitants leases or occupiers of them, and of every of them shall pay
their tithes, after the rate of such rents as the said inhabitaunts, leases, or
occupiers, and their assign or assigns, been or shall be charged withal,
without fraud or couin.

Item if any dwelling house within eight years last past was or hereafter
shall be converted into a warehouse, storehouse, or such like, or if a
warehouse, storehouse, or such like within the said eigh^ years, was or
hereafter shalb^ converted into a dwelling house: That then the occupier or
occupiers thereof shall pay tithes for the same, after the rate above declared
of mansion house rents.

Item that where any person shall demise any Diehouse or Brewhouse with
implements convenient and necessary for dying or brewing, reserving a rent
upon the same, as well in respect of such implementes, as in respect of such
Diehouse or Brewhouse. That then the tenant shall pay his tithes, after such
rate as is above said, the third penny abated. And that every principal house
or houses with key or wharf, hailing any Crane or gibet belonging to the same,
shall pay after like rate of their rents as is aforesaid the third penny
abated. And that other wharfes belonging to houses, having no Crane or gibet,
shall pay for their tithes as shall be paid for mansion houses in form aforesaid.

Item that where any mansion house with a shop, stable, warehouses, wharf,
with Crane, timberyard, teinteryard, or Garden belonging to the same, or as
parcel of the same, is or shall be occupied together, that if the same be
hereafter severed or divided, or at any time within viij. years last past
were severed or divided: That then the farmour or farmours, occupier, or
occupiers, thereof shall pay such tithes as above said for such shops, scable,
warehouse, wharfe, with Crane, timberyard, teinteryard, or garden aforesaid so
severed or divided after ye rate of their several rents thereupon reserved.

Item that the said Citizens and inhabitaunts shall pay their tithes
quarterly, that is to say, at the feast of Easter, the Nativity of S. John
Baptist, the feast of S. Michael the Archangell, and the nativity of our Lord
by even portions.

Item that every householder paying ten shillings rent or above, shall for him
or her self be discharged of their four offering days: but his wife,
children, servant, or others of their family, taking their rights of the church
at Easter, shall pay two pence for their four offering days yearly.

Provided always, and it is decreed, that if any house or houses, which has
been, or hereafter shall be letten for ten shillings rent by year or more,
be or has at any time within eight years last passed, or hereafter shall be
divided and leased into small parcels or members, yielding less yearly rent
then ten shillings by year: That then the owner or owners, if he or they
dwell in any part of such house, or else the principal lease or leases, if the
owner or owners do not dwell in some part of the same, shall from henceforth
pay for his or their tithes, after such rate of rent as the same house was
accustomed to be letten for before such deuisio^ or dividing into parts or
members. And the under Farmour and Farmours, lease and leases, to be discharged
of all tithes, for such small parcels, parts, or members rented at less
yearly rents then ten shillings by year, without fraud or couin, paying two
pence a piece yearly for their four offering days.

Provided always, and it is decreede, that for such Gardens as appertain not to
any mansion house, and which any person or persons, holds or shall hold in
his or their hands for pleasure, or to his own use, that then the person so
holding the same shall pay no tithes for the same. But if any person or
persons, which holds, and shall hold any such Garden, containing half an
Acre or more, does or shall make any yearly profit thereof by way of sale: that
then he or they shall pay tithes for the same, after such rate of his rent, as
is herein first above specified.

Provided also that if any such Gardens now being of the quantity of half an
Acre or more, be hereafter by fraud or couin divided into any less quantity or
quantities, then to pay tithe, according to the rate above said.

Provided always that this decree shall not extend to the houses of great men, or
noble men, or noble women, kept in their own hands, and not letten for any
rent, which in time past has paid no tithes, so long as they shall so continue
vnletten, nor to any hals of crafts or companies so long as they be kept
vnletten, so that the same hals in time past have not used to pay any tithes.

Provided always, and it is decreed, that this present order and decree shall
not in any wise extend to bind or charge any sheds, stables, sellers, timber
yards, no teynter yards, which were never parcel of any dwelling house, ne
appertayning or belonging to any dwelling house, ne have accustomed to pay any
tithes: but that the said Citizens and inhabitants shall thereof be quiet of
payment, of any tithes, as it has been used and accustomed.

Provided also, and it is decreede, that where less sum then after the rate
of sixteen pence halfpeny in the ten shilings rent, or less sum then two
shillings and nine pence in the twenty shillings rent, has been accustomed to
be paid for tithes, that then in such places, the said Citizens and
inhabitants shall pay but only after such rate as has been accustomed.

Item, it is also decreede, that if any variance, controversy, or strife do
or shall hereafter arise in the said City for no payment of any tithes: or
if any variance or doubt arise upon the true knowledge or division of any rent
or tiths within the liberties of the said City, or of any extent or assemblant
thereof, or if any doubt rise upon any other thing contained within this
decree: that then upon complaint made by the party grieved to ye Mayre of the
City of London for the time being, the said Mayre by the advice of counsel
shall call the said parties before him, and make a final end in the same,
with costs to be rewarded at the discretion of the said Maire and his
assistants, according to the intent and purpose of this present decree.

And if that the said Maire make not an end thereof within two months after
complaint to him made, or if any of the said parties find themselves grieved:
That then the Lord Chaunceller of England for the time being upon complaint to
him made within three months then next following, shall make an end of the
same, with such costs to be rewarded as shall be thought convenient, according to
the intent and purpose of this said decree.

Provided always, that if any person or persons take any tenement for a less
rent then was accustomed to be letten for, by reason of any great ruin and
decay, burning, or such like occasions or misfortunes: That then such person
or persons, his executors or assigns shall pay tithes only after the rate of
the rent reserved in his or their lease, and none otherwise, as long as the
same lease shall endure.


