WYllyam Cecill knight, high Steward of the City of Westminster, and Ambrose
Cave knight, Chauncelour of the Duchye of Lancaster, two of the privy counsel
to the Queen's most excellent Majesty: To the Baylyffe, Headboroughes,
Constables, and other officers within the said City, or within the liberties
of the Duchye of Lancaster within the said City, greetyng. Know ye that our
said sovereign Lady the Queen, having compassion of the estate of that her
City, because of the long visitation thereof with the plague, and being
desirous that it might please almighty God to continue the inclination of his
mercy toward the same, by ceassing of the infection thereof utterly, so as the
assemblees of her Justices and ministers, might return thither safely, to
minister Justice and law, and all others her good loving subjects to repair
also thither, and receive comfort thereof, according to the necessity of their
causes, and as heretofore has been accustomed: Has therefore thought meet and
agreeable to the will of almighty God, to cause all manner of good orders that
may be devised for this purpose, to be spedyly and duly executed. For which
purpose, by her Majesty's express commandment given to us, both by her
gracious speech and letters: We to whom the governance of the said City
under her Majesty does belong, in the right of our said several offices
above mentioned, do will and strayghtly command you, that you shall according
to the good example of the orders devised by the right honorable the Lord
Mayor of the City of London, and the Aldermen of the same, publishe this our
order following, and the same cause to be duly observed and kept.

First, we will and command you in the name of our said sovereign Lad the
Queen, that all and every person, now keeping, or that hereafter shall keep any
mansion house, Inn, lodgyng, or shop, within that City or liberties, being
at this present, or that hereafter shall be visited with the plague, or that has been visited within twenty days before this present day: do forthwith after
the publication hereof, shut up both their doors and wyndowes toward the
streates or common ways, by the space of forty days, then next ensuyng, from
the last time of the visitation or such sickness of any person within their
said house or shop, and that another the owner, master, or keeper of the same
house or shop, nor any person belongyng to the same house, at any time within
the same space, go forth of the same, or procure or permit any person, being
clean or whole, and not infected with the said ^^^tagious sickness, to resort
or come into their house or shop, upon pain to be committed to the op^^
stocks, and there to abide the space of seven days, or less, or more, as the
Bayliffe and Headboroughes and head Constables of the Paryshe shall think
meet: and after that, to be committed to the commen gayle, there to remain
until the end of forty days, from the time of the first committing to the
stocks, without bail or maynpryse. And yet because Christian charity
requires, that if it shall happen that the keeper or owner of the house or
shop, which shall be thus shut up as before is said, be so poor as the same
cannot without some relief of other good people, abide in their houses, and
sustain them selves and famyly with necessary victuell and fuel: Therefore the
said officers aforesaid, with the Curate of every paryshe, and the
Churchwardens of the same, shall cause a collection to be made every Sunday, or
oftener, of the charity of all the inhabitauntes of the paryshe, and shall
appoint and order certain honest charitable persons, with the said
collections, to relieve the said poor infected persons, with such kind of
victuell and fuel, as shall be mete and requisite for the persons so shut up
and forbidden to come abroad, during the foresaid space of forty days.

AND further, where it is evidently known that in the said City of
Westminster, there be greater numbres of people inhabytyng, and as it were
swarmyng in every rome, than can reasonably have their sustentation by their
honest labors or trade of living, by reason that for gredinesse and lucre*
many owners or tenauntes of houses, do take in to them other inhabitauntes and
famylyes, to dwell in some part of their chambers, shoppes, cellers, or
leanetooes, paying for the same also such excessyue wekely, or other kind of
rentes, as they can not maynteyne them selves without sekyng the same by sundry
kinds of disorder. For remedy whereof, there has been in that City ancient
good orders and burges laws provided: Therefore it is ordered, that all manner
of persons that dwell in any house, which has served within these twelve
months but for one household, shall suffer no persons, other then such as
shall be without fraud known to be part of their famylye, to dwell and abide,
otherwise then gestes do in Innes, or strangers do hyre their lodgings for
some small time, in any part of their said houses, after the.x. of Apryll
next: but that other the one or the other famylye shall remove from thence, and
the whole house, with the chambers, shoppes, and cellers, shall be occupied but
with one ruler, master, or keeper, and one famylye thereto belongyng, upon
pain that whosoever shall do to the contrary, shall be punyshed according to the
ancient orders in that behalf heretofore devised. And if that shall not be
seen sufficient, further remedy shall be by order provided, as to such a case is
requisite.

From Wyndsor the.xii. of March. 1563. VV. Cecill. Amb. Cave.


Imprinted by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


