THE KNIGHT OF the Burning Pestle.

-- Quod si
Iudicium subtle, videndis artibus illud
Ad libros and ad haec Musarum dona vocares:
Boeotum in crasso iurares aere natos.
Horat. in Epist. ad Oct. Aug. LONDON, Printed for Walter Burre, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1613.

TO HIS MANY WAYS ENDEERED friend Master Robert Keysar.
SIR, this unfortunate child, who in eight days (as lately I have learned) was
begot and borne soon after, was by his parents (perhaps because he was so
unlike his brethren) exposed to the wide world, who for want of judgment, or
not understanding the privy mark of Ironie about it (which showed it was no
offspring of any vulgar brain) utterly rejected it: so that for want of
acceptance it was even ready to give up the Ghost, and was in danger to have
been smothered in perpetual oblivion, if you (out of your direct antipathy to
ingratitude) had not been moved both to relieve and cherish it: wherein I must
needs commend both your judgment, understanding, and singular love to good
wits; you afterward sent it to me, yet being an infant and somewhat ragged, I
have fostred it privately in my bosom these two years, and now to show, my
love return it to you, clad in good lasting clothes, which scarce memory will
wear out, and able to speak for it self; and withal, as it tells me,
desirous to try his fortune in the world, where if yet it be welcome, both
father and foster-father, nurse and child, have their desired end. If it be
slighted or traduced, it hopes his father will beget him a younger brother, who
shall revenge his quarrel, and challenge the world either of fond and merely
literal interpretation, or illiterate misprision. Perhaps it will be thought
to be of the race of Don Quixote: we both may confidently swear, it is his
elder above a year; and therefore may (by virtue of his birthright) challenge
the wall of him. I doubt not but they will meet in their adventures, and I hope
the breaking of one staff will make them friends; and perhaps they will
conbine themselves, and travel through the world to seek their adventures. So
I commit him to his good fortune, and my self to your love.

Your assured friend W. B.
The famous History Of the Knight of the burning PESTLE.
Enter PROLOGVE. FRom all that is near the Court, from all that is great
Within the compass of the Citty-wals,
We now have brought our Scene.
Enter Citizen. Cit. Hold your peace good man boy.


Pro. What do you mean sir?


Cit. That you have no good meaning: This seven years there has been plays
at this house, I have observed it, you have still girds at Citizens; and now
you call your play, The London Merchant. Down with your Title boy, down with
your Title.


Pro. Are you a member of the noble City?


Cit. I am.


Pro. And a Freeman?


Cit. Yea, and a Grocer.


Pro. So Grocer, then by your sweet favor, we intend no abuse to the City.


Cit. No sir, yes sir, if you were not resolved to play the Iacks, what need
you study for new subjects, purposely to abuse your betters? why could not you
be contented, as well as others, with the legend of Whittington, or the life
and death of sir Thomas Gresham? with the building of the Royal Exchange? or
the story of Queen Elenor, with the rearing of London bridge upon wool-sackes?


Prol. You seem to be an understanding man: what would you have us do sir?


Cit. Why present something notably in honor of the Commons of the City.


Pro. Why what do you say to the life and death of fat Drake, or the repairing
of Fleet-priuies?


Cit. I do not like that, but I will have a Citizen, and he shall be of my
own trade.


Pro. Oh you should have told us your mind a month since, our play is ready
to begin now.


Cit. It Is all one for that, I will have a Grocer, and he shall do admirable
things.


Pro. What will you have him do?


Cit. Marry I will have him --


Wife. Husband, husband.


Wife below. Rafe. Peace mistress.


Rafe below. Wife. Hold thy peace Rafe, I know what I do I warrant tee.
Husband, husband.


Cit. What say thou cunny?


Wife. Let him kill a Lion with a pestle husband, let him kill a Lion with a
pestle.


Cit. So he shall, ll'e have him kill a Lion with a pestle.


Wife. Husband, shall I come up husband?


Cit. I cunny. Rafe help your mistress this way: pray gentlemen make her a
little room, I pray you sir lend me your hand to help up my wife: I thank
you sir. So.


Wife. By your leave Gentlemen all, Im'e something troublesome, Im'e a stranger
here, I was nere at one of these plays as they say, before; but I should have
seen Jane Shore once, and my husband has promised me any time this
Twelue-moneth to carry me to the Bold Beauchams, but in truth he did not, I
pray you bear with me.


Cit. Boy, let my wife and I have a cupple stools, and then begin, and let the
Grocer do rare things.


Prol. But sir, we have never a boy to play him, every one has a part already.


Wife. Husband, husband, for Gods sake let Rafe play him, beshrew me if I do
not think he will go beyond them all.


Cit. Well remembered wife, come up Rafe: I Will tell you Gentlemen, let them but
lend him a suit of reparrell, and necessaries, and by Gad, if any of them all
blow wind in the tail on him, I Will be hanged.


Wife. I pray you youth let him have a suit of reparrell, I Will be sworn
Gentlemen, my husband tells you true, he will act you sometimes at our house,
that all the neighbors cry out on him: he will fetch you up a couraging part
so in the garret, that we are all as feared I warrant you, that we quake
again: we will fear our chlidren with him if they be never so vn-ruly, do but
cry, Rafe comes, Rafe comes to them, and they will be as quiet as Lambs. Hold up
thy head Rafe, show the Gentlemen what thou can do, speak a huffing part, I
warrant you the Gentlemen will accept of it.


Cit. Do Rafe, do.


Rafe. By heaven me thinks it were an easy leap
To pluck bright honor from the pale-faced Moon,
Or diue into the bottom of the sea,
Where never fathame line touched any ground,
And pluck up drowned honor from the lake of hell.

Cit. How say you Gentlemen, is it not as I told you?


Wife. Nay Gentlemen, he has played before, my husband says, Musidorus before
the Wardens of our Company.


Cit. I, and he should have played Ieronimo with a Shooemaker for a wager.


Pro. He shall have a suite of apparel if he will go in.


Cit. In Rafe, in Rafe, and set out the Grocery in their kind, if thou love
me.


Wife. I warrant our Rafe will look finely when he is dressed.


Pro. But what will you have it called?


Cit. The Grocers honor.


Pro. Me thinks The Knight of the burning Pestle were better.


Wif. I Will be sworn husband, that's as good a name as can be.


Cit. Let it be so, begin, begin, my wife and I will sit down.


Pro. I pray you do.


Cit. What stately mucsike have you? you have shawmes.


Pro. Shawnes? no.


Cit. No? Im'e a thief if my mind did not give me so. Rafe plays a stately
part, and he must needs have shawnes: I Will be at the charge of them my self,
rather then we will be without them.


Pro. So you are like to be.


Cit. Why and so I will be: there is two shillings, let us have the waits of
South-warke, they are as rare fellows as any are in England; and that will
fetch them all over the water with a vengeance, as if they were mad.


Pro. You shall have them: will you sit down then?


Cit. I, come wife.


Wife. Sit you merry all Gentlemen, Im'e bold to sit amongst you for my ease.


Pro. From all that is near the Court, from all that is great.
Within the compass of the Citty-walles,
We now have brought our Scene: fly far from hence
All private taxes, immodest phrases,
What ere may but show like vicious:
For wicked mirth never true pleasure brings,
But honest minds are pleased with honest things.
Thus much for that we do: but for Rafes part
You must answer for your self.

Cit. Take you no care for Rafe, he will discharge himself I warrant you.


Wife. I faith Gentlemen I Will give my word for Rafe.


Actus primi,
Scoena prima.
Enter Merchant, and Jasper his Prentice. March. Sirrah, I Will make you know you
are my Prentice,
And whom my charitable love redeemed
Even from the fall of fortune, gave thee heat
And growth, to be what now thou art, new cast thee,
Adding the trust of all I have at home,
In foreign Staples, or upon the Sea
To thy direction, ti'de the good opinions
Both of my self and friends to thy endeauours,
So fair were thy beginnings, but with these,
As I remember, you had never charge,
To love your Masters daughter, and even then,
When I had found a wealthy husband for her,
I take it, sir, you had not; but how ever,
I Will break the neck of that commission,
And make you know you are but a Merchants Factor.

Iasp. Sir, I do liberally confess I am yours,
Bound, both by love and duty, to your service;
In which, my labor has been all my profit;
I have not lost in bargain, nor delighted
To wear your honest gains upon my back,
Nor have I given a pencion to my blood,
Or lauishly in play consumed your stock.
These, and the miseries that do attend them,
I dare, with innocence, proclaim are strangers
To all my temperate actions; for your daughter,
If there be any love, to my deseruings,
Borne by her virtuous self, I cannot stop it?
Nor, am I able to refrain her wishes.
She Is private to her self and best of knowledge,
Whom she will make so happy as to sigh for.
Besides, I cannot think you mean to match her,
Unto a fellow of so lame a presence,
One that has little left of Nature in him.

Mar. It Is very well sir, I can tell your wisdom
How all this shall be cured.

Iasp. Your care becomes you.

March. And thus it must be sir, I here discharge you
My house and service, take your liberty,
And when I want a son I Will send for you.
Exit:
Iasp. These be the fair rewards of them that love.
O you that live in freedom never prove
The travel of a mind led by desire.

Enter Luce. Luce. Why, how now friend, struck with my fathers thunder?

Iasp. Struck and struck dead unless the remedy
Be full of speed and virtue; I am now,
What I expected long, no more your fathers.

Luce. But mine.

Iasp. But yours, and only yours I am,
That Is all I have to keep me from the Statute,
You dare be constant still.

Luce. O fear me not,
In this I dare be better then a woman.
Nor shall his anger, nor his offers move me,
Were they both equal to a Princes power.

Iasp. You know my rival?

Luce. Yes and love him deerly
Even as I love an ague, or foul weather,
I prithee Jasper fear him not.

Iasp. O no,
I do not mean to do him so much kindness,
But to our own desires, you know the plot
We both agreed on.

Luce. Yes, and will perform
My part exactly.

Iasp. I desire no more,
Farewell, and keep my heart, it is yours.

Luce. I take it,
He must do miracles makes me forsake it.

Exeunt. Cittiz. Fie upon am little infidels, what a matters here now? well,
I Will be hanged for a halfe-penny, if there be not some abomination knavery in
this Play, well, let them look toot, Rafe must come, and if there be any tricks
a brewing, --


Wife. Let Them brew and bake too husband, a Gods name, Rafe will find all out I
warrant you, and they were older then they are, I pray my pretty youth is Rafe
ready.


Boy. He will be presently.


Wife. Now I pray you make my commendations unto him, and withal carry him
this stick of Licoras, tell him his Mistress sent it him, and bid him bite a
piece, 'twill open his pipes the better, say.


Enter Merchant, and Master Humfery. Mar. Come sir, she is yours, upon my
faith she is yours
You have my hand, for other idle lets
Between your hopes and her, thus, with a wind
They are scattered and no more: my wanton Prentice,
That like a bladder, blew himself with love,
I have let out, and sent him to discover
New Masters yet unknown.

Humf. I thank you sir,
Indeed I thank you sir, and ere I stir
It shall be known, how ever you do deem,
I am of gentle blood and gentle seem.

March. O sir, I know it certain.

Humf. Sir my friend,
Although, as Writers say, all things have end,
And that we call a pudding, has his two
O let it not seem strange I pray to you,
If in this bloody simile, I put
My love, more endless, then frail things or gut.

Wife. Husband, I prithee sweet lamb tell me one thing, But tell me truly:
stay youths I beseech you, till I question my husband.


Citiz. What is it mouse?


Wife. Sirrah, did thou ever see a prettier child? how it behaues it self, I
warrant ye, and speaks, and looks, and pearts up the head? I pray you
brother, with your favor, were you never none of M. Monkesters scholars?


Cit. Chicken, I prithee heartely contain thy self, the childer are pretty
childer, but when Rafe comes, Lamb.


Wife. I when Rafe comes conny; well my youth, you may proceed


Mar. Well sir, you know my love, and rest, I hope,
Assured of my consent, get but my daughters,
And wed her when you please; you must be bold,
And clap in close unto her, come, I know
You have language good enough to win a wench.

Wife. A whoreson tyrant has been an old stringer in's days I warrant him.


Humf. I take your gentle offer and withal
Yield love again for love reciprocal.

Enter Luce. Mar. What Luce within there.

Lu. Called you sir?

Mar. I did.
Give entertainment to this Gentleman
And see you be not froward: to her sir,
My presence will but be an eye-soare to you.
Exit.
Humf. Fair Mistress Luce, how do you, are you well?
Give me your hand and then I pray you tell,
How does your little sister, and your brother?
And whether you love me or any other.

Luce. Sir, these are quickly answered.

Humf. So they are.
Where women are not cruel: but how far
Is it now distant from this place we are in,
Unto that blessed place your fathers warren.

Luce. What makes you think of that sir?

Humf. Even that face
For stealing Rabbets whilome in that place,
God Cupid, or the Keeper, I know not whether
Unto my cost and charges brought you thither,
And there began.

Luce. Your game sir.

Humf. Let no game,
Or any thing that tends to the same.
Be evermore remembered, thou fair killer
For whom I sat me down and brake my Tiller.

Wife. There Is a kind Gentleman, I warrant you, when will you do as much for me
George?


Luce. Beshrew me sir, I am sorry for your losses,
But as the proverb says, I cannot cry,
I would you had not seen me.

Humf. So would I.
Unless you had more maw to do me good.

Luce. Why, cannot this strange passion be withstood,
Send for a Constable and raise the Town.

Humf. O no, my valiant love will batter down
Millions of Constables, and put to flight,
Even that great watch of Mid-summer day at night.

Luce. Beshrew me sir, 'twere good I yielded then,
Weak women cannot hope, where valiant men
Have no resistance.

Humf. Yield then, I am full
Of pity, though I say it, and can pull
Out of my pocket, thus, a pair of gloves,
Look Lucy, look, the dogs tooth, nor the Doves
Are not so white as these; and sweet they be,
And whipped about with silk, as you may see.
If you desire the price, suit from your eye,
A beam to this place, and you shall epsy
F. S. which is to say, my sweetest honey,
They cost me three and two pence, or no money.

Luce. Well sir, I take them kindly, and I thank you,
What would you more?

Hum. Nothing.

Luce. Why then farewell.

Humf. Nor so, nor so, for Lady I must tell,
Before we part, for what we met together,
God grant me time, and patience, and fair weather.

Luce. Speak and declare your mind in terms so brief.

Humf. I shall, then first and foremost for relief
I call to you, I if that you can afford it,
I care not at what price, for on my word, it
Shall be repaid again, although it cost me
More then I Will speak of now, for love has tossed me,
In furious blanket like a Tennis ball,
And now I rise aloft, and now I fall.

Luce. Alas good Gentleman, alas the day.

Humf. I thank you heartily, and as I say,
Thus do I still continue without rest,
In The morning like a man, at night a beast,
Roaring and bellowing mine own disquiet,
That much I fear, forsaking of my diet,
Will bring me presently to that quandary,
I shall bid all adeiw:

Luce. Now by S. Mary
That were great pity.

Hum. So it were beshrew me,
Then ease me lusty Luce, and pity show me.

Luce. Why sir, you know my will is nothing worth
Without my fathers grant, get his consent,
And then you may with assurance try me.

Humf. The Worshipful your sire will not deny me.
For I have asked him, and he has replied,
Sweet Master Humfrey, Luce shall be thy Bride.

Luce. Sweet Master Humfrey then I am content.

Humf. And so am I intruth.

Luce. Yet take me with you,
There is another clause must be annexed,
And this it is, I swore and will perform it;
No man shall ever joy me as his wife
But he that stole me hence, if you dare venture
I am yours; you need not fear, my father loves you,
If not farewell for ever.

Humf. Stay Nymph, stay,
I have a double Gelding culored bay,
Sprung by his father from Barbarian kind,
Another for my self, though somewhat blind,
Yet true as trusty tree.

Luce. I am satisfied,
And so I give my hand, our course must lie
Through Waltham Forest, where I have a friend
Will entertain us, so farewell sir Humfrey,
Exit Luce. And think upon your business.

Humf. Though I die,
I am resolved to venture life and lim,
For one so young, so fair, so kind, so trim.
Exit Humfrey.
Wife. By my faith and troth George, and as I am virtuous, it is e'ne the
kindest young man that ever trod on shoe leather, well, go thy ways if thou
have her not, it is not thy fault 'faith.


Cit. I prithee mouse be patient, a shall have her, or i will make some'em smoke
for it.


Wife. That Is my good lamb George, fie, this stinking Tobacco kills men, would
there were none in England, now I pray Gentlemen, what good does this stinking
Tobacco? do you nothing, I warrant you make chimnies a your faces: o husband,
husband, now, now, there is Rafe, there is Rafe.


Enter Rafe like a Grocerin's shop, with two Prentices Reading Palmerin of
England. Cit. Peace fool, let Rafe alone, hark you Rafe; do not strain your
self too much at the first, peace, begin Rafe.


Rafe. Then Palmerin and Trineus snatching their Lances from their Dwarses,
and clasping their Helmets gallopt amain after the Giant, and Palmerin having
gotten a sight of him, came posting amain, saying: Stay traiterous thief, for
thou may not so carry away her, that is worth the greatest Lord in the world,
and with these words gave him a blow on the shoulder, that he stroke him
besides his Elephant, and Trineus coming to the Knight that had Agricola
behind him, set him soon besides his horse, with his neck broken in the fall,
so that the Princess getting out of the thronge, between joy and grief said;
all happy Knight, the mirrout of all such as follow Arms, now may I be well
assured of the love thou bear me, I wonder why the Kings do not raise an
army of fourteen or fifteen hundred thousand men, as big as the Army that
the Prince of Portigo brought against Rocicler, and destroy these Giants, they
do much hurt to wandering Damsels, that go in quest of their Knights.


Wife. Faith husband and Rafe says true, for they say the King of Portugal
cannot sit at his meat, but the Giants and the Ettins will come and snatch it
from him,


Cit. Hold thy tongue, on Rafe.


Rafe. And certainly those Knights are much to be commended, who neglecting
their possessions, wander with a Squire and a Dwarf through the Deserts to
relieve poor Ladies.


Wife. I by my faith are they Rafe, let 'em say what they will, they are
indeed, our Knights neglect their possessions well enough, but they do not the
rest.


Rafe. There are no such courteous and fair well spoken Knights in this age,
they will call one the son of a whore, that Palmerin of England, would have
called fair sir; and one that Rosicler would have called right beauteous
Damsel, they will call damned bitch.


Wife. I Will besworne will they Rafe, they have called me so an hundred times
about a scuruy pipe of Tobacco.


Rafe. But what brave spirit could be content to sit in his shop with a flappet
of wood and a blew apron before him selling Methridatum and Dragons water to
visited houses, that might pursue feats of Arms, and through his noble
atchieuments procure such a famous history to be written of his heroicke
prowess.


Cit. Well said Rafe, some more of those words Rafe.


Wife. They go finely by my troth.


Rafe. Why should not I then pursue this course, both for the credit of my
self and our Company, for amongst all the worthy books of Atchieuements I do
not call to mind that I yet read of a Grocer Errant, I will be the said
Knight, have you heard of any, that has wandered unfurnished of his Squire and
Dwarf, my elder Prentice Tim shall be my trusty Squire, and little George my
Dwarf, Hence my blew Aporne, yet in remembrance of my former Trade, upon my
shiled shall be purtraide, a burning Pestle, and I will be called the Knight oath
burning Pestle.


Wife. Nay, I dare swear thou will not forget thy old Trade, thou were ever
meek.


Rafe. Tim. Tim. Anon.


Rafe. My beloved Squire, and George my Dwarf, I charge you that from
henceforth you never call me by any other name, but the Right Courteous and
Valiant Knight of the burning Pestle, and that you never call any female by the
name of a woman or wench, but fair Lady, if she have her desires, if not
distressed Damsel, that you call all Forests and Heaths Deserts, and all
horses Palfries.


Wife. This is very fine, faith, do the Gentlemen like Rafe, think you,
husband?


Cittiz. I, I warrant thee, the Plaiers would give all the shoes in their shop
for him.


Rafe. My beloved Squire Tim, stand out, admit this were a Desert, and over it
a Knight errant pricking, and I should bid you inquire of his intents, what
would you say?


Tim. Sir, my Master sent me, to know whether your are riding?


Rafe. No, thus; fair sir, the Right Courteous and Valiant Knight of the
burning Pestle, commanded me to enquire, upon what adventure your are bound,
whether to relieve some distressed Damsels, or otherwise.


Cit. Whoresome blocke-head cannot remember.


Wife. In Faith, and Rafe told him on it before, all the Gentlemen heard him, did
he not Gentlemen, did not Rafe tell him on it?


George. Right Courteous and Valiant Knight of the burning Pestle, here is a
distressed Damsel, to have a half pennyworth of pepper.


Wife. That Is a good boy, see, the little boy can hit it, by my troth it is a
fine child.


Rafe. Relieve her with all courteous language, now shut up shop, no more my
Prentice, but my trusty Squire and Dwarf, I must be speak my shield and
arming-pestle.


Cit. Go thy ways Rafe, as Im'e a true man, thou art the best on 'em all.


Wife. Rafe, Rafe.


Rafe. What say you mistress?


Wife. I prithee come again quickly sweet Rafe.


Rafe. By and by.

Exit Rafe.
Enter Jasper, and his mother mistress Merri-thought. Mist. merri. Give thee
my blessing? No, I Will never give thee my blessing, I Will see thee hanged first;
it shall never be said I gave thee my blessing, thou art thy fathers own son,
of the right blood of the Merri-thoughts, I may curse the time that er'e I knew
thy father, he has spent all his own, and mine too, and when I tell him of
it, he laughes and dances, and sings, and cries, A merry heart lives long-a.
And thou art a wast-thrift, and art run away from thy master, that loved thee
well, and art come to me, and I have laid up a little for my younger son
Michael, and thou think to bezell that, but thou shall never be able to do
it. Come hither Michael, come Michael, down on thy knees, thou shall have my
blessing.

Enter Michael.
Mich. I pray you mother pray to God to bless me.


Mist. merri. God bless thee: but Jasper shall never have my blessing, he shall
be hanged first, shall he not Michael? how say thou?


Mich. Yes forsooth mother and grace of God.


Mist. merri. That Is a good boy.


Wife. I faith it is a fine spoken child.


Iasp. Mother, though you forget a parents love,
I must preserve the duty of a child.
I ran not from my master, nor return
To have your stock maintain my Idleness.

Wife. Ungracious child I warrant him, hark how he chops logic with his
mother: thou had best tell her she lies, do tell her she lies.


Cit. If he were my son, I would hang him up by the heels, and flea him,
and salt him, whoore-sonne haltersacke.


Iasp. My coming only is to beg your love,
Which I must ever, though I never gain it,
And howsoever you esteem of me,
There is no drop of blood hid in these veins,
But I remember well belongs to you
That brought me forth, and would be glad for you
To rip them all again, and let it out.

Mist. merri. I faith I had sorrow enough for thee (God knows) but I Will hamper
thee well enough: get thee in thou vagabond, get thee in, and learn of thy
brother Michael.


Old merri. within. Nose, nose, jolly red nose, and who gave thee this jolly
red nose?


Mist. merri. Hark, my husband he is singing and hoiting,
And Im'e feign to carke and care, and all little enough.
Husband, Charles, Charles Merithought.

Enter old Merithought. Old merri. Nutmegs and Ginger, Cinnamon and Cloves,
And they gave me this jolly red Nose.

Mist. merri. If you would consider your state, you would have little lust to
sing, I-wisse.


Old merri. It should never be considered while it were an estate, if I
thought it would spoil my singing.


Mist. merri. But how will thou do Charles, thou art an old man, and thou can
not work, and thou have not forty shillings left, and thou eatest good meat,
and drinkest good drink, and laughest?


Old merri. And will do.


Mist. merri. But how wilt thou'come by it Charles?


Old merri. How? why how have I done hitherto this forty years? I never came
into my dining room, but at eleven and six a clock, I found excellent meat
and drink a'th table, my clothes were never worn out, but next morning a
Tailor brought me a new suit; and without question it will be so ever: use
makes perfectness. If all should fail, it is but a little straining my self
extraordinary, and laugh my self to death.


Wife. It Is a foolish old man this: is not he George?


Cit. Yes Cunny.


Wife. Give me a penny in the purse while I live George.


Cit. I by Lady cunnie, hold thee there.


Mist. merri. Well Charles, you promised to provide for Jasper, and I have laid
up for Michael, I pray you pay Jasper his portion, he is come home, and he
shall not consume Michaels stock: he says his master turned him away, but I
promise you truly, I think he ran away.


Wife. No indeed mistress Merrithought, though he be a notable gallows, yet
I Will assure you his master did turn him away, even in this place 'twas
In Faith within this half hour, about his daughter, my husband was by.


Cit. Hang him rougue, he served him well enough: love his masters daughter!
by my troth Cunnie if there were a thousand boys, thou would spoil them all
with taking their parts, let his mother alone with him.


Wife. I George, but yet truth is truth.


Old merri. Where is Jasper, he is welcome how ever, call him in, he shall
have his portion, is he merry?


Enter Jasper and Michael. Mist. merri. I foul chiue him, he is too merry.
Jasper, Michael.


Old merri. Welcome Jasper, though thou runst away, welcome, God bless thee:
it is thy mothers mind thou should receive thy portion; thou have been
abroad, and I hope have learned experience enough to govern it, thou art of
sufficient years, hold thy hand: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, there is ten shillings for thee, thrust thy self into the world
with that, and take some settled course, if fortune cross thee, thou have a
retiring place, come home to me, I have twenty shillings left, be a good
husband, that is, wear ordinary clothes, eat the best meat, and drink the
best drink, be merry, and give to the poor, and believe me, thou have no
end of thy goods.


Iasp. Long may you live free from all thought of ill,
And long have cause to be thus merry still.
But father?

Old merri. No more words Jasper, get thee gone, thou have my blessing, thy
fathers spirit upon thee. Farewell Jasper, but yet or ere you part (oh cruel!)
kiss me, kiss me sweeting, mine own dear jewel: So, now begone; no words.


Exit Jasper. Mis. mer. So Michael, now get thee gone too.


Mich. Yes forsooth mother, but I Will have my fathers blessing first.


Mis. mer. No Michael, it is now matter for his blessing, thou have my blessing,
begone; I Will fetch my money and jewels, and follow thee: I Will stay no longer
with him I warrant thee, truly Charles I Will begone too.


Old merri. What you will not.


Mis. merri. Yes indeed will I.


Old merri. Hey ho, farewell Nan, I Will never trust wench more again, if I can.


Mis. merri. You shall not think (when all your own is gone) to spend that I
have been scraping up for Michael.


Old merri. Farewell good wife, I expect it not; all I have to do in this
world, is to be merry: which I shall, if the ground be not taken from me: and
if it be, When earth and seas from me are rest,
The skies aloft for me are left.



Exeunt. Boy danceth. Music. Finis Actus primi. Wife. I Will be sworn he is a
merry old Gentleman for all that. Hark, hark husband, hark, fiddles,
fiddles; now surely they go finely. They say, it is present death for these
fiddlers to tune their Rebeckes before the great Turks grace, is it not George?
But look, look, here is a youth dances: now good youth do a turnea'th toe,
sweet heart, In Faith I Will have Rafe come and do some of his Gambols; he will ride
the wild mare Gentlemen, 'twould do your hearts good to see him. I thank you
kind youth, pray bid Rafe come.


Cit. Peace Cunnie. Sirrah, you scuruie boy, bid the plaiers send Rafe, or by
Gods -- and they do not, I Will tear some of their periwigs beside their heads:
this is all Riffe Raffe.


Actus secundi
Scoena prima.
Enter Merchant and Humphrey. March. And how faith? how goes it now son
Humphrey?


Humph. Right worshipful, and my beloved friend
And father dear, this matters at an end.

March. It Is well, it should be so, Im'e glad the girl
Is found so tractable.

Humph. Nay she must whirle
From hence, and you must wink: for so I say,
The storietels, to morrow before day.

Wife. George, do thou think in thy conscience now'twil be a match? tell me
but what thou think sweet rogue, thou see the poor Gentleman (dear heart)
how it labors and throbs I warrant you, to be at rest: I Will go move the
father fort.


Cit. No, no, I prithee sit still hony-suckle, thou wilt spoil all, if he deny
him, I Will bring half a doze^ good fellows my self, and in the shutting of an
evening knocked up, and there is an end.


Wife. I Will busse thee for that in faith boy; well George, well, you have been
a wag in your days I warrant you: but God forgive you, and I do with all my
heart.


March. How was it son? you told me that to morrow
Before day break, you must convey her hence.

Humph. I must, I must, and thus it is agreed,
Your daughter rides upon a browne-bay steed,
I on a sorrel, which I bought of Brian,
The honest Host of the red roaring Lion
In Waltham situate: then if you may
Consent in seemly sort, lest by delay,
The fatal sisters come and do the office,
And then you will sing another song.

March. Alas
Why should you be thus full of grief to me?
That do as willing as your self agree
To any thing so it be good and fair,
Then steal her when you will, if such a pleasure
Content you both, I Will sleep and never see it,
To make your joys more full, but tell me why
You may not here perform your marriage?

Wife. Gods blessing a thy soul old man, in faith thou art loath to part true
hearts, I see, a has her Georg, and I Am as glad on it, well, go thy ways
Humphrey, for a fair spoken man, I believe thou have not thy fellow within the
walls of London, and I should say the Suburbs too, I should not lie, why do
not rejoice with me George?


Cit. If I could but see Raph again, I were as merry as mine Host in faith.

Hum. The cause you seem to ask, I thus declare,
Help me o Muses nine, your daughter swear
A foolish oath, the more it was the pity,
Yet none but my self within this City,
Shall dare to say so, but a bold defiance
Shall meet him, were he of the noble Science.
And yet she swear, and yet why did she swear?
Truly I cannot tell, unless it were
For her own ease, for sure sometimes an oath,
Being sworn thereafter is like cordial broth.
And this it was she swore, never to marry,
But such a one, whose mighty arm could carry
(As meaning me, for I am such a one)
Her bodily away through stick and stone,
Till both of us arrive, at her request,
Some ten miles off, in the wild Waltham Forest.

March. If this be all, you shall not need to fear
Any denial in your love, proceed,
I Will neither follow, nor repent the deed.

Hum. Goodnight, twenty good-nights, and twenty more.
And 20 more good-nights, that makes threescore.

Exeu^t. Enter mistress Mery-thought, and her son Michael. Mist. mer. Come
Michael, art thou not weary boy?


Mich. No for-sooth mother not I.


Mist. mer. Where be we now child?


Mich. Indeed for-sooth mother I cannot tell, unless we be at Mile-end, is not
all the world Mile-end, Mother?


Mist. mer. No Michael, not all the world boy, but I can assure thee Michael,
Mile-end is a goodly matter, there has been a pitch-field my child between the
naughty Spaniels and the Englishmen, and the Spaniels ran away Michael, and
the Englishmen followed, my neighbor Coxstone was there boy, and killed them
all with a birding piece.


Mich. Mother forsooth.


Mist. mer. What says my white boy?


Mich. Shall not my father go with us too?


Mist. mer. No Michael, let thy father go snicke-vp, he shall never come
between a pair of sheets with me again, while he lives, let him stay at home
and sing for his supper boy, come child sit down, and I Will show my boy fine
knacks indeed, look here Michael, here is a Ring, and here is Bruch, and here is a
Bracelet, and here is two Rings more, and here is money and gold bi'th eye my boy.


Mich. Shall I have all this mother?


Mist. mer. I Michael thou shall have all Michael.


Cit. How like thou this wench?


Wife. I cannot tell, I would have Raph, George; I Will see no more
elseindeed-law, and I pray you let the youths understand so much by word of
mouth, for I tell you truly, I Am afraid a my boy, come, come George, let us be
merry and wise, the child's a father-lesse child, and say they should put him
into a straight pair of Gaskins, 'twere worse then knot-grasse, he would never
grow after it.


Enter Raph, Squire, and Dwarf. Cit: Here Is Raph, here is Raph.


Wife. How do you Raph? you are welcome Raph, as I may say, it is a good boy,
hold up thy head, and be not afraid, we are thy friends Raph, the Gentlemen
will praise thee Raph, if thou plaist thy part with audacity, begin Raph a Gods
name.


Raph. My trusty Squire unlace my Helm, give me my hat, where are we, or what
Desert may this be?


Dwarf. Mirror of Knighthood, this is, as I take it, the perrilous Waltham
down, In whose bottom stands the enchanted Valley.


Mist. mer. O Michael, we are betrayed, we are betrayed here be Giants, fly
boy, fly boy, fly.

Exeu^t mother and Michael.
Rafe. Lace on my helm again: what noise is this?
A gentle Lady flying? the embrace
Of some discourteous knight, I will releive her.
Go squire, and say, the Knight that wears this pestle,
In honor of all Ladies, swears revenge
Upon that recreant coward that pursues her.
Go comfort her, and that same gentle squire
That bears her company.

Squire. I go brave Knight.

Rafe. My trusty Dwarf and friend, reach me my shield,
And hold it while I swear: First by my knighthood,
Then by the soul of Amadis de Gaul,
My famous Ancestor, then by my sword,
The beauteous Brionella girt about me,
By this bright burning pestle of mine honor,
The living Trophie, and by all respect
Due to distressed Damsels, here I vow
Never to end the quest of this fair Lady,
And that forsaken squire, till by my valor
I gain their liberty.

Dwarf. Heaven bless the Knight
That thus relieues poor errant Gentlewomen.
Exit.
Wife. I marry Rafe, this has some savor in it, I would see the proudest of
them all offer to carry his books after him. But George, I will not have him
go away so soon, I shall be sick if he go away, that I shall; Call Rafe
again George, call Rafe again, I prithee sweet heart let him come fight
before me, and let us ha some drums, and some trumpets, and let him kill all
that comes near him, and thou love me George.


Cit. Peace a little bird, he shall kill them all and they were twenty more
on 'em then there are.

Enter Jasper.
Iasp. Now Fortune, if thou be not only ill,
Show me thy better face, and bring about
Thy desperate wheel, that I may clime at length
And stand, this is our place of meeting,
If love have any constancy. Oh age!
Where only wealthy men are counted happy:
How shall I please thee? how deserve thy smiles?
When I am only rich in misery?
My fathers blessing, and this little coin
Is my inheritance, a strong reuenew,
From earth thou art, and to the earth I give thee,
There grow and multiply, whilst fresher air,
spies the casket. Breeds me a fresher fortune, how, illusion!
What has the Devil coined himself before me?
It Is mettle good, it rings well, I am waking,
And taking too I hope, now Gods dear blessing
Upon his heart that left it here, it is mine,
These pearls, I take it, were not left for swine.
Exit.
Wife. I do not like that this unthrifty youth should embecill away the money;
the poor Gentlewoman his mother will have a heavy heart for it God knows.


Cittiz. And reason good, sweet heart.


Wife. But let him go, I Will tell Raph a tale in's ear shall fetch him again
with a Wanion I warrant him, if he be above ground, and besides George, here
are a number of sufficient Gentlemen can witness, and my self, and your
self, and the Musicians, if we be called in question, but here comes Raph,
George, thou shall here him speak, an he were an Emperall.


Enter Rafe and Dwarf. Raph. Comes not sir Squire again?

Dwar. Right courteous Knight,
Your Squire does come and with him comes the Lady,
Enter mistress Merr: and Michael, and Squire. For and the Squire of Damsels
as I take it.

Rafe. Madam if any service or deuoire
Of a poor errant Knight may right your wrongs,
Command it, I am pressed to give you succor,
For to that holy end I bear my Armor,

Mist. mer. Alas sir, I am a poor Gentlewoman, and I have lost my money in
this forest.


Rafe. Desert, you would say Lady, and not lost
Whilst I have sword and lance, dry up your tears
Which ill befits the beauty of that face:
And tell the story, if I may request it,
Of your disasterous fortune.

Mist. mer. Out alas, I left a thousand pound, a thousand pound, e'ne all the
money I had laid up for this youth, upon the sight of your Maistership, you
looked so grim, and as I may say it, saving your presence, more like a Giant
then a mortal man.


Rafe. I am as you are Lady, so are they
All mortal, but why weeps this gentle Squire.

Mist. mer. Has he not cause to weep do you think, when he has lost his
inheritance?


Rafe. Young hope of valor, weep not, I am here
That will confound thy foe and pay it dear
Upon his coward head, that dares deny,
Distressed Squires and Ladies equity.
I have but one horse, on which shall ride
This Lady fair behind me, and before
This courteous Squire, fortune will give us more
Upon our next adventure; fairelie speed
Beside us Squire and Dwarf to do us need.

Exeunt. Cit. Did not I tell you Nel what your man would do? by the says of
my body wench, for clean action and good delivery they may all cast their
caps at him.


Wife. And so they may in faith, for I dare speak it boldly, the twelve
Companies of London cannot match him, timber for timber, well George, and he
be not inueigled by some of these paltrie Plaiers, I ha much marvel, but
George we ha done our parts if the boy have any grace to be thankful.


Cittiz. Yes I warrant thee duckling.


Enter Humphrey and Luce. Hum. Good Mistress Luce how ever I in fault am
For your lame horse; you're welcome unto Waltham.
But which way now to go or what to say
I know not truly till it be broad day.

Luce. O fear not Master Humphrey, I am guide
For this place good enough.

Hum. Then up and ride,
Or if it please you walk for your repose,
Or sit, or if you will go pluck a rose:
Either of which shall be indifferent,
To your good friend and Humphrey, whose consent
Is so entangled ever to your will,
As the poor harmless horse is to the Mill.

Luce. Faith and you say the word we will e'ne sit down
And take a nap.

Hum. It Is better in the Town,
Where we may nap together, for believe me
To sleep without a snatch would mickle grieve me.

Luce. You're merry Master Humphrey.

Hum, So I am,
And have been ever merry from my Dam.

Luce. Your nurce had the less labor.

Hum. Faith it may be,
Unless it were by chance I did beray me.

Enter Jasper. Iasp. Luce dear friend Luce.

Luce. Here Jasper.

Iasp. You are mine.

Hum. If it be so, my friend, you use me fine,
What do you think I am?

Iasp. An arrant noddie

Hum. A word of obloquie, now by Gods body,
I Will tell thy master for I know thee well.

Iasp. Nay, and you be so forward for to tell,
Take that, and that, and tell him sir I gave it,
And say I paid you well.

Hum. O sir I have it,
And do confess the paiement, pray be quiet.

Iasp. Go, get to your nightcap and the diet,
To cure your beaten bones.

Luce. Alas poor Humphrie
Get thee some wholesome broth with sage and comfrie:
A little oil of Roses and a feather,
To anoint thy back withal.

Hum. When I came hither,
Would I had gone to Paris with John Dorrie.

Luce. Farewell my pretty Nump, I am very sorry
I cannot bear thee company.

Hum. Farewell,
The Devils Dam was never so banged in hell.

Exeunt. manet Humphrey. Wife. This young Jasper will prove me another Things,
a my conscience and he may be suffered; George, do not see George how a
swaggers, and flies at the very heads a fokes as he were a Dragon; well if I do
not do his lesson for wronging the poor Gentleman, I am no true woman, his
friends that brought him up might have been better occupied, I wis, then ha
taught him these fegaries, he is e'ne in the highway to the gallows, God
bless him.


Cit. You're too bitter, conny, the young man may do well enough for all this.


Wife. Come hither Master Humfrey, has he hurt you? now beshrew his fingers
for it, here sweet heart, here is some green ginger for thee, now beshrew my
heart but a has pepper-nel in's head, as big as a pullets egg, alas sweet
lamb, how thy Tempels beat; take the peace on him sweet heart, take the peace
on him.


Enter a boy. Cit. No, no, you talk like a foolish woman, I Will ha Raph fight
with him, and swing him up welfauourdlie, sirrah boie come hither, let Raph
come in and fight with Jasper.


Wife. I, and beat him well, he is an unhappy boy.


Boy. Sir you must pardon us, the plot of our Play lies contrary, and 'twill
hazard the spoiling of our Play.


Cit. Plot me no plots, I Will ha Raph come out, I Will make your house too hot
for you else.


Boy. Why sir he shall, but if any thing fall out of order, the Gentlemen must
pardon us.


Cit. Go your ways good man boie, I Will hold him a penny he shall have his
bellie-full of fighting now, ho here comes Raph, no more.


Enter Raph, mistress Merri: Michael, Squire, and Dwarf. Raph. What Knight is
that Squire, ask him if he keep
The passage, bound by love of Lady fair,
Or else but prickant.

Hum. Sir I am no Knight,
But a poor Gentleman, that this same night,
Had stolen from me on yonder Green,
My lovely wife, and suffered to be seen
Yet extant on my shoulders such a greeting,
That whilst I live, I shall think of that meeting.

Wife. I Raph he beat him unmercifully, Raph, and thou spar'st him Raph I
would thou were hanged.


Cit. No more, wife no more.

Rafe. Where is the caitife wretch has done this deed.
Lady your pardon, that I may proceed
Upon the quest of this injurious Knight.
And thou fair Squire repute me not the worse,
In leaving the great venture of the purse,
And the rich casket till some better leisure,

Enter Jasper and Luce. Hum. Here comes the Broker has purloin'd my treasure.

Raph. Go, Squire, and tell him I am here,
An Errant Knight at Arms, to crave delivery
Of that fair Lady to her own Knights arms.
If he deny, bid him take choice of ground,
And so defye him.

Squire. From the Knight that bears
The golden Pestle, I defy thee Knight.
Unless thou make fair restitution.
Of that bright Lady.

Iasp. Tell the Knight that sent thee
He is an Ass, and I will keep the wench
And knock his Head-peece.

Raph. Knight, thou art but dead,
If thou thou recall not thy discourteous terms.

Wife. Breake's pate Raph, breake's pate Raph, soundly.

Jasper. Come Knight, I am ready for you, now your Pestel
Snatches away his Pestle. Shall try what temper, sir, your Morters off
With that he stood upright in his stirrops,
And gave the Knight of the Calue-skinne such a knock,
That he forsook his horse and down he fell,
And then he leaped upon him and plucking of his Helmet.

Hum. Nay, and my noble Knight be down so soon,
Though I can scarely go I needs must run.

Exit Humphery and Raph. Wife. Run Raph, run Raph, run for thy life boy,
Jasper comes, Jasper comes.


Jasper. Come Luce, we must have other Arms for you, Humphery and Golden
Pestle both adieu.


Exeunt. Wife. Sure the devil, God bless us, is in this Springald, why
George, did ever see such a fire-drake, I am afraid my boie's miscarried, if
he be, though he were Master Mery-thoughts son a thousand times, if there
be any Law in England I Will make some of them smart for it.


Cit. No, no, I have found out the matter sweete-heart, Jasper is enchanted, as
sure as we are here, he is enchanted, he could no more have stood in Raph's
hands, then I can stand in my Lord Majors, I Will have a ring to discover all
enchantments, and Raph shall beat him yet: be no more vexed for it shall be so.


Enter Raph, Squire, Dwarf, mistress Mery-thought and Michaell. Wife. O
husband here is Raph again, stay Raph let me speak with thee, how do thou
Raph? art thou not shrodly hurt? the soul great Lungeis laid unmercifully on
thee, there is some suger-candy for thee, proceed, thou shall have another bout
with him.


Cit. If Raph had him at the Fencing-schoole, if he did not make a puppy of
him, and drive him up and down the school he should nere come in my shop more.


Mist. mer. Truly Master Knight of the Burning Pestle I am weary.


Mich. Indeed law mother and I am very hungry.


Raph. Take comfort gentle Dame, and you fair Squire,
For in this Desert there must needs be placed,
Many strong Castles, held by courteous Knights,
And till I bring you safe to one of those,
Is wear by this my Order nere to leave you.

Wife. Well said Raph, George, Raph was ever comfortable, was he not?


Cit. Yes Ducke.


Wife. I shall nere forget him, when we had lost our child, you know, it was
straid almost, alone, to Puddle-wharfe and the Criers were abroad for it, and
there it had drowned it self but for a Sculler, Raph was the most
comfortablest to me: peace Mistress, says he, let it go, I Will get you another
as good, did he not George? did he not say so?


Cit. Yes indeed did he mouse.


Dwarf. I would we had a mess of Pottage, and a pot of drink, Squire, and
were going to bed.


Squire. Why we are at Waltham Towns end, and that is the Bell Inn.


Dwarf. Take courage valiant Knight, Damsel, and Squire
I have discovered, not a stones cast off,
An ancient Castle held by the old Knight
Of the most holy order of the Bell,
Who gives to all Knights errant entertain:
There plenty is of food, and all prepared,
By the white hands of his own Lady dear.
He has three Squires that welcome all his Guests.
The first high Chamberlino, who will see
Our beds prepared, and bring us snowy sheets,
Where never foote-man stretched his buttered Hams.
The second hight Tastero, who will see
Our pots full filled and no froth therein.
The third a gentle Squire Ostlero hight,
Who will our Palfries slicke with wisps of straw,
And in the Maunger put them Oats enough,
And never grease their teeth with candle snuff.

Wife. That same Dwarfe's a pretty boy, but the Squire's a grout-nole.

Raph. Knock at the Gates my Squire with stately lance.

Enter Tapster. Tap. Who Is there, you're welcome Gentlemen, will you see a
room?

Dwarf. Right courteous and valiant Knight of the burning Pestle,
This is the Squire Tapstero.

Raph. Fair Squire Tapstero, I a wandering Knight,
Hight of the burning Pestle, in the quest
Of this fair Ladies Casket, and wrought purse,
Loosing my self in this vast Wilderness
Am to this Castle well by fortune brought,
Where hearing of the goodly entertain
Your Knight of holy Order of the Bell
Gives to all Damsels, and all errant Knights,
I thought to knock, and now am bold to enter.

Tapster. An't please you see a chamber, you are very welcome.


Exeunt. Wife. George I would have something done, and I cannot tell what it
is.


Cit. What is it Nel?


Wife. Why George, shall Raph beat no body again? prithee sweete-heart let
him.


Cit. So he shall Nel, and if I join with him, we will knock them all.


Enter Humphery and Merchant. Wife. O George here is master Humphery again
now, that lost Mistress Luce, and Mistress Lucies father, Master Humphery
will do some-bodies errant I warrant him.


Humf. Father, it is true, in arms I nere shall claspe her,
For she is stolen away by your man Jasper.

Wife. I thought he would tell him.

March. Unhappy that I am to loose my child,
Now I begin to think on Iaspers words,
Who often has urged to me thy foolishness,
Why did thou let her go? thou loust her not,
That would bring home thy life, and not bring her.

Hum. Father forgive me, shall I tell you true,
Look on my shoulders they are black and blew.
Whilst too and fro fair Luce and I were winding,
He came and basted me with a hedge binding.

March. Get men and horses straight, we will be there
Within this hour, you know the place again.

Hum. I know the place, where he my loins did swaddle,
I Will get six horses, and to each a saddle.

Mar. Mean time I Will go talk with Iaspers father.

Exeunt. Wife. George, what will thou lay with me now, that Master Humphery
has not Mistress Luce yet, speak George, what will thou lay with me?


Cit. No Nel, I warrant thee Jasper is at Puckeridge with her, by this.


Wife. Nay George, you must consider Mistress Lucies feet are tender, and,
besides, it is dark, and I promise you tuely, I do not see how he should get
out of Wa^^^im forest with her yet.


Cit. Nay Cunny, what will thou lay with me that Raph has her not yet.


Wife. I will not lay against Raph hunny, because I have not spoken with him,
but look George, peace, here comes the merry old Gentleman again.


Enter old Merrie-thought. Old mer. When it was grown to dark midnight,
And all were fast asleep,
In came Margarets grimely Ghost,
And stood at Williams feet.
I have money, and meat and drink before hand, till to morrow at noone, why
should I be sad? me thinks I have half a dozen Iouiall spirits within me, I
am three merry men, and three merry men, To what end should any man be sad in
this world? give me a man that when he goes to hanging cries, troule the
black bowl to me: and a woeman that will sing a cath in her Travel. I have
seen a man come by my door, with a serious face, in a black cloak, without a
hat-band, carrying his head as if he looked for pinnes in the street, I have
looked out of my window half a year after, and have spide that man's head upon
London Bridge: it is vile, never trust a Tailor that does not sing at his work,
his mind is of nothing but filching.


Wife. Mark this George, it is worth noting: Godfrry my Tailor, you know, never
sings, and he had fourteen yards to make this Gown, and I Will be sworn
Mistress Pennistone the Drapers wife had one made with twelve.


Old mer: It Is mirth that fills the veins with blood,
More then wine, or sleep, or food.
Let each man keep his heart at ease,
No man dies of that disease.
He that would his body keep
From diseases, must not weep,
But who ever laughes and sings,
Never he his body brings
Into fevers, gouts, or rhumes,
Or lingringly his longs consumes:
Or meets with aches in the bone,
Or Catharhes, or griping stone:
But contented lives for aye,
The more he laughes, the more he may.

Wife. Look George, how say thou by this George? is it not a fine old man?
Now Gods blessing a'thy sweet lips. When will thou be so merry George? Faith
thou art the frowningst little thing when thou art angry, in a Country.


Enter Merchant. Cit. Peace Coney, thou shall see him taken down too I warrant
thee; here is Luces father come now.


Old mer. As you came from Walsingham, from that holy land, there met you not
with my tru-loue by the way as you came


March. Oh Master Merri-thought! my daughter's gone.
This mirth becomes you not, my daughters gone.

Old merri. Why an if she be, what care I?
Or let her come or go, or tarry.

March. Mock not my misery, it is your son,
Whom I have made my own, when all forsook him,
Has stolen my only joy, my child away.

Old mer. He set her on a milk-white steed, and himself upon a gray,
He never turned his face again, but he bore her quite away.

March. Unworthy of the kindness I have shown
To thee, and thine: too late I well perceive
Thou art consenting to my daughters loss.

Old mer. Your daughter, what a stur's here we yer daughter? Let her go,
think no more on her, but sing loud. If both my sons were on the gallows, I
would sing, down, down, down: they fall down, and arise they never shall.


March. Oh might I behold her once again,
And she once more embrace her aged sire.

Old merri. Fie, how scuruily this goes: and she once more embrace her aged
sire? you will make a dog on her, will ye? she cares much for her aged sire I
warrant you.

She cares cares not for her daddy, nor she cares not for her mammie,
For she is, she is, she is, she is my Lord of Low-gaues Lassie.

March. For this thy scorn, I will pursue
That son of thine to death.

Old merri. Do, and when you ha killed him,
Give him flowers i'now Palmer: give him flowers i'now,
Give him red, and white, and blew, green, and yellow.

March. I Will fetch my daughter.

Old merri. I Will hear no more a your daughter, it spoils my mirth.


March. I say I Will fetch my daughter.

Old merri. Was never man for Ladies sake, down, down,
Tormented as I poor sir Guy? de derry down,
For Lucies sake, that Lady bright, down, down,
As ever men beheld with eye? de derry down.

March. I Will be revenged by heaven.

Exeunt. Music. Finis Actus secundi. Wife. How do thou like this George?


Cit. Why this is well coney: but if Raph were hot once, thou should see more.


Wife. The Fiddlers go again husband.


Cit. I Nell, but this is scuruy music: I gave the whoreson gallows money,
and I think he has not got me the waits of South-warke, if I hear him not
anan, I Will twinge him by the ears. You Musicians, play Baloo.


Wife. No good George, lets ha Lachrimae.


Cit. Why this is it cony.


Wife. It Is all the better George: now sweet lamb, what story is that painted
upon the cloth? the confutation of Saint Paul?


Cit. No lamb, that is Raph and Lucrece.


Wife. Raph and Lucrece? which Raph? our Raph?


Cit. No mouse, that was a Tartarian.


Wife. A Tartarian? well, I'wood the fiddlers had done, that we might see our
Raph again.


Actus tertius,
Scoena prima.
Enter Jasper and Luce. Iasp. Come my dear dear, though we have lost our way,
We have not lost our selves: are you not weary
With this nights wandering, broken from your rest?
And frighted with the terror that attends
The darkness of these wild vn-peopled place?

Luce. No my best friend, I cannot either fear,
Or entertain a weary thought, whilst you
(The end of all my full desires) stand by me.
Let them that loose their hopes, and live to languish
Amongst the number of forsaken lovers,
Tell the long weary steps, and number time,
Start at a shadow, and shrink up their blood,
Whilst I (possessed with all content and quiet)
Thus take my pretty love, and thus embrace him.

Iasp. You have caught me Luce, so fast, that whilst I live
I shall become your faithful prisoner,
And were these chains for ever. Come sit down,
And rest your body, too too delicate
For these disturbances; so, will you sleep?
Come, do not be more able then you are,
I know you are not skillful in these watches:
For women are no soldiers; be not nice,
But take it, sleep I say.

Luce. I cannot sleep,
Indeed I cannot friend.

Iasp. Why then we will sing,
And try how that will work upon our senses.

Luce. I Will sing, or say, or any thing but sleep.

Ias. Come little Mer-maid, rob me of my heart
With that enchanting voice.

Luce. You mock me Jasper.

Sung. Iasp. Tell me (dearest) what is love?

Luce. It Is a lightning from above,
It Is an arrow, it is a fire,
It Is a boy they call desire.
It Is a smile
Does beguile

Ias. The poor hearts of men that prove.
Tell me more, are women true?

Luce. Some love change, and so do you.

Ias. Are they fair, and never kind?

Luce. Yes, when men turn with the wind.

Ias. Are they froward?

Luce. Ever toward,
Those that love, to love a new.

Ias. Dissemble it no more, I see the God
Of heavy sleep, lay on his heavy mace
Upon your eyelids.

Luce. I am very heavy.

Iasp. Sleep, sleep, and quiet rest crown thy sweet thoughts:
Keep from her fair blood, distempers, startings,
Horrors, and fearful shapes: let all her dreams
Be joys, and chaste delights, embraces, wishes,
And such new pleasures, as the ravished soul
Gives to the senses. So, my charms have took.
Keep her you powers divine, whilst I contemplate
Upon the wealth and beauty of her mind.
She is only fair, and constant: only kind,
And only to thee Jasper. Oh my joys!
Whither will you transport me? let not fullness
Of my poor buried hopes, come up together,
And ouer-charge my spirits: I am weak
Some say (how ever ill) the sea and women
Are governed by the Moon, both ebb and flow,
Both full of changes: yet to them that know,
And truly judge, these but opinions are,
And heresies to bring on pleasing war
Between our tempers, that without these were
Both void of ater-loue, and present fear.
Which are the best of Cupid. Oh thou child!
Bred from despair, I dare not entertain thee,
Having a love without the faults of women,
And greater in her perfect goods then men:
Which to make good, and please my self the stronger,
Though certainly I am certain of her love,
I Will try her, that the world and memory
May sing to after times, her constancy.
Luce, Luce, awake.

Luce. Why do you fright me, friend,
With those distempered looks? what makes your sword
Drawn in your hand? who has offended you?
I pre'chee Jasper sleep, thou art wild with watching.

Iasp. Come make your way to heaven, and bid the world
(With all the villainies that stick upon it)
Farewell; you are for another life.

Luce. Oh Jasper!
How have my tender years committed evil,
(Especially against the man I love)
Thus to be cropped untimely?

Iasp. Foolish girl,
Can thou imagine I could love his daughter,
That flung me from my fortune into nothing?
Discharged me his service, shut the doors
Upon my poverty, and scorned my prayers,
Sending me, like a boat without a mast,
To sink or swin? Come, by this hand you dye,
I must have life and blood to satisfy
Your fathers wrongs.

Wife. Away George, away, raise the watch at Ludgate, and bring a Mittimus from
the Justice for this desperate villain. Now I charge you Gentlemen, see the
Kings peace kept. O my heart what a varlet's this to offer manslaughter upon
the harmless Gntlewoman?


Cit. I warrant thee (sweet heart) we will have him hampered.


Luce. Oh Jasper! be not cruel,
If thou will kill me, mile and do it quickly.
And let not many deaths appear before me.
I am a woman made of fear and love,
A weak, weak woman, kill not with thy eyes,
They shoot me through and through. Strike I am ready,
And dying still I love thee.

Enter Merchant, Humphrey, and his men. March. Where abouts.

Iasp. No more of this, now to my self again.

Hum. There, there he stands with sword like martial knight
Drawn in his hand, therefore beware the fight
You that be wise: for were I good sir Beuis,
I would not stay his coming, by your leaves.

March. Sirrah, restore my daughter.

Iasp. Sirrah, no.

March. Upon him then.

Wife. So, down with him, down with him, down with him: cut him in the leg
boys, cut him in the leg.


March. Come your ways Minion, I Will provide a Cage
For you, your grown so tame. Horse her away.

Humph. Truly I Am glad your forces have the day.

exeunt. manet Jasper. Iasp. They are gone, and I am hurt, my love is lost,
Never to get again. Oh me unhappy!
Bleed, bleed, and dye, I cannot: Oh my folly!
Thou have betrayed me. Hope where art thou fled?
Tell me if thou be any where remaining.
Shall I but see my love again? Oh no!
She will not daine to look upon her butcher,
Nor is it fit she should; yet I must venture.
Oh chance, or fortune, or what ere thou art
That men adore for powerful, hear my cry,
And let me loving, live; or loosing, die.
Exit.
Wife. Is a gone George?


Cit. I conie.


Wife. Marie and let him go (sweet heart,) by the faith a my body a has put me
into such a fright, that I tremble (as they say) as 'twere an Aspine leaf:
look a my little singer George, how it shakes: now i truth every member of my
body is the worse for it.


Cit. Come, hug in mine arms sweet mouse, he shall not fright thee any
more: alas mine own dear heart, how it quiuers.


Enter Mistress Merrithought, Rafe, Michall, Squire Dwarf, Host, and a
Tapster. Wife. O Rafe, how do thou Rafe? how have thou slept to night? has
the knight used thee well?


Cit. Peace Nell, let Rafe alone.

Tapst. Master, the reckoning is not paid.

Rafe. Right courteous knight, who for the orders sake
Which thou have taken, hang'st out the holy bell,
As I this flaming pestle bear about,
We render thanks to your puissant self,
Your beauteous Lady, and your gentle Squires,
For thus refreshing of our wearied limbs,
Stiffned with hard atchieuements in wild desert.

Tapst. Sir, there is twelve shillings to pay.

Rafe. Thou merry Squire Tapstero, thanks to thee,
For comforting our souls with double Iug,
And if aduentrous fortune prick thee forth,
Thou Iouiall Squire, to follow feats of arms,
Take heed thou tender every Ladies cause,
Every truery true Knight, and every damsel fair fair;
But spill the blood of treacherous Sarazens,
And false inchanters, that with magic spells,
Have done to death full many a noble Knight.

Host. Thou valiant Knight of the burning Pestle, give ear to me, there is
twelve shillings to pay, and as I am a true Knight, I will not bate a penny.


Wife. George, I pray thee tell me, must Rafe pay twelve shillings now?


Cit. No Nell, no, nothing but the old Knight is merry with Rafe.


Wife. O is it nothing else? Rafe will be as merry as he.


Rafe. Sir Knight, this mirth of yours becomes you well,
But to requite this liberal courtesy,
If any of your Squires will follow arms,
He shall receive from my heroicke hand
A Knighthood, by the virtue of this Pestle.

Host. Fair Knight I thank you for noble offer,
Therefore gentle Knight,
Twelve shillings you must pay, or I must cap you.

Wife. Look George, did not I tell thee as much, the Knight of the Bell is in
earnest, Raph shall not be beholding to him, give him his money George, and
let him go snickvp.


Ci. Cap Raph? no; holdy our hand sir Knight of the Bell, there is your money, have
you any thing to say to Raph now? Cap Raph?


Wife. I would you should know it, Raph has friends that will not suffer him to
be capt for ten times so much, and tea times to the end of that, now take thy
course Raph.


M. mer. Come Michael, thou and I will go home to thy father, he has enough
left to keep us a day or two, and we will set fellows abrod to cry our Purse and
our Casket, Shalwe Michael?


Mich. I, I pray Mother, intruth my feet are full of chilblaines with
traveling.


Wife. Faith and those chilblanes are a foul trouble, Mistress Merie-thought
when your youth comes home let him rub all the soles of his feet, and the
heels, and his ancles, with a mouse skin, or if none of your people can
catch a mouse, when he goes to bed, let him roll his feet in the warm
embers, and I warrant you he shall be well, and you may make him put his
fingers between his toes and smell to them, it is very sovereign for his head
if he be costiue.


Mist. mer. Master Knight of the burning Pestle, my son Michael and I, bid you
farewell, I thank your Worship heartily for your kindness.


Raph. Farewell fair Lady and your tender Squire,
If, pricking through these Deserts, I do hear
Of any traitorous Knight who through his guile,
Has light upon your Casket and your Purse,
I will despoile him of them and restore them.

Mist. mer. I thank your Worship.

Exit with Michael. Raph. Dwarf bear my shield, Squire eleuate my lance,
And now farewell you Knight of holy Bell.

Cit. I, I Raph, all is paid.

Raph. But yet before I go, speak worthy Knight,
If ought you do of sad adventures know,
Where errant Knights may through his prowess win,
Eternal fame and free some gentle souls,
From endless bonds of steel and lingering pain.

Host. Sirrah go to Nicke the Barbor, and bid him prepare himself, as I told
you before, quickly.


Tap. I am gone sir.

Exit Tapster.
Host. Sir Knight, this wilderness affoordeth none
But the great venture, where full many a Knight
Has tried his prowess and come off with shame,
And where I would not have you loose your life,
Against no man, but furious fiend of hell.

Raph. Speak on sir Knight, tell what he is, and where,
For here I vow upon my blazing badge,
Never to blaze a day in quietness;
But bread and water will I only eat,
And the green herb and rock shall be my couch,
Till I have queld that man, or beast, or fiend,
That works such damage to all Errant Knights.

Host. Not far from hence, near to a craggy cliffe,
At the North end of this distressed Town,
There does stand a lowly house
Ruggedly builded, and in it a Cave,
In which an ougly Giant now does won,
Yeleped Barbaroso: in his hand
He shakes a naked lance of purest steel,
With sleeves turned up, and him before he wears,
A motley garment, to preserve his clothes
From blood of those Knights which he massacres,
And Ladies Gent: without his door does hang
A copper balon, on a piickant spear:
At which, no sooner gentle Knights can knock,
But the shrill sound, fierce Barbaroso hears,
And rushing forth, bings in the errant Knight,
And sets him down in an enchanted chair.
Then with an Engine which he has prepared,
With forty teeth, he claws his courtly crown,
Next makes him wink, and underneath his chinne,
He plants a brazen piece of mighty board,
And knocks his bullets round about his cheeks,
Whilst with his fingers, and an instrument
With which he snaps his hair off, he does fill
The wretches ears with a most hideous noise.
Thus every Knight Aduenturer he does trim,
And now no creature dares encounter him.

Raph. In Gods name, I will fight him, kind sir,
Go but before me to this dismal Cave,
Where this huge Giant Barbaroso dwells,
And by that virtue that brave Rosicleere,
That damned brood of ougly Giants slew,
And Palmerin Frannarco overthrew:
I doubt not but to curb this Traitor foul,
And to the Devil send his guilty soul.

Host. Brave sprighted Knight, thus far I will perform.
This your request, I Will bring you with in sight
Of this most loathsome place, inhabited
By a more loathsome man: but dare not stay,
For his maine force soopes all he sees away.

Raph. Saint George set on before, march Squire and page.

Exeunt. Wife. George, do think Raph will confound the Giant?


Cit. I hold my cap to a farthing he does: why Nel I saw him wrestle with the
great Dutchman and hurl him.


Wife. Faith and that Ducth-man was a goodly man, if all things were
answerable to his bigness, and yet they say there was a Scotsh-man higher then
he, and that they two and a Knight met, and saw one another for nothing, but
of all the sights that ever were in London, since I was married, me thinks
the little child that was so fair grown about the members was the prettiest,
that, and the Hermophrodite.


Cit. Nay by your leave Nel, Niniuy was better.


Wife. Niniuie, O that was the story of Ione and the Wall, was it not George?


Cit. Yes lam.


Enter mistress Merry-thought. Wife. Look George, here comes Mistress
Merry-thought again, and I would have Raph come and fight with the Giant, I
tell you true, I long to see it.


Cit. Good Mistress Merry-thought be gone, I pray you for my sake, I pray you
forbear a little, you shall have audience presently, I have a little business.


Wife. Mastresse Merry-thought if it please you to refrain your passion a
little, til Raph have dispatch the Giant out of the way we shalthink our selves
much bound to you, I thank you good Mistress Merry-thought.


Exit mist. Merry-thou: Enter a boy. Cit. Boy, come hither, send away Raph and
this whore-sonne Giant quickly.


Boy. In good faith sir we cannot, you will utterly spoil our Play, and make it
to be hist, and it cost money, you will not suffer us to go on with our plot, I
pray Gentlemen rule him.


Cit. Let him come now and dispatch this, and I Will trouble you no more.


Boy. Will you give me your hand of that?


Wife. Give him thy hand George, do, and I Will kiss him, I warrant thee the
youth means plainly.


Boy. I Will send him to you presently.

Exit Boy.
Wife. I thank you little youth, feth the child has a sweet breath George,
but I think it be troubled with the worms, Carduus Benedictus and Mares
milk were the only thing in the world for it, O Raph's here George, God send
thee good luck Raph.


Enter Raph, Host, Squire, and Dwarf. Host. Puissant Knight yonder his Mansion
is,
Lo where the spear and Copper Basin are,
Behold that string on which hangs many a tooth,
Drawn from the gentle iaw of wandering Knights,
I dare not stay to sound, he will appear.
Exit Host.
Raph. O faint not heart, Susan my Lady dear,
The Cobblers Maid in Milke-streete, for whose sake,
I take these Arms, O let the thought of thee,
Carry thy Knight through all aduenterous deeds,
And in the honor of thy beauteous self,
May I destroy this monster Barbaroso,
Knock Squire upon the Basin till it break.
Enter Barbor. With the shrill strokes, or till the Giant speak.

Wife. O George, the Giant, the Giant, now Raph for thy life.

Barber. What fond unknowing wight is this? that dares
So rudely knock at Barbarossa's Cell,
Where no man comes but leaves his fleece behind?

Raph. I, traitorous Caitiffe, who am sent by fate
To punish all the sad enormities
Thou have committed against Ladies Gent
And errant Knights, traitor to God and men:
Prepare thy self, this is the dismal hour
Appointed for thee, to give strickt account
Of all thy beastly treacherous villainies.

Barber. Foole-hardy Knight, full soon thou shall aby
This fond reproach, thy body will I bang,
He takes down his pole. And lo upon that string thy teeth shall hang:
Prepare thy self, for dead soon shall thou be,

Raph. Saint George for me.


They fight. Barber. Gargantua for me.


Wife. To him, Raph to him, hold up the Giant, set out thy leg before Raph.


Cit. Falsify a blow Raph, falsify a blow, the Giant lies open on the left
side.


Wife. Beare't off, beare't of still; there boy, O Raphe's almost down, Raph's
almost down.


Raph. Susan inspire me, now have up again.


Wife. Up, up, up, up, up, so Raph, down with him, down with him Raph.


Cit. Fetch him ore the hip boy.


Wife. There boy, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, Raph.


Cit. No Raph get all out of him first.


Raph. Presumptuous man, see to what desperate end
Thy treatchery has brought thee, the just Gods,
Who never prosper those that do despise them,
For all the villainies which thou have done
To Knights and Ladies, now have paid thee home
By my stiff arm, a Knight aduenturous,
But say vile wretch, before I send thy soul
To sad Auernus whether it must go,
What captives holdst thou in thy sable cave.

Barber. Go in and free them all, thou have the day.

Raph. Go Squire and Dwarf, search in this dreadful Cave
And free the wretched prisoners from their bonds.

Exit Squire and Dwarf. Barber. I crave for mercy, as thou art a Knight,
And scornst to spill the blood of those that beg.

Raph. Thou showdst no mercy, nor shall thou have any,
Prepare thy self for thou shall surely die.

Enter Squire leading one winking, with a Basin under his chin. Squire. Behold
brave Knight here is one prisoner,
Whom this wild man has used as you see.

Wife. This is the first wise word I heard the Squire speak.

Raph. Speak what thou art, and how thou have been used,
That that I may give condign punishment,

1. Kni. I am a Knight that took my journey post
Northward from London, and in courteous wise,
This Giant trained me to his loathsome den,
Under pretense of killing of the itch,
And all my body with a powder strewn,
That smarts and stings, and cut away my beard,
And my curled locks wherein were ribands ti'de,
And with a water washed my tender eyes,
Whilst up and down about me still he skipt,
Whose virtue is, that till mine eyes be wiped
With a dry cloth, for this my foul disgrace,
I shall not dare to look a dog in the face.

Wife. Alas poor Knight, relieve him Raph, releive poor
Knights whilst you live.

Raph. My trusty Squire convey him to the Town,
Where he may find releife, adieu fair Knight,

Exit knight. Enter Dwarf leading one with a patch ore his Nose. Dwar. Puisant
Knight of the burning Pestle hight,
See here another wretch, whom this foul beast
Has scorcht and scor'd in this inhumaine wise.

Raph. Speak me thy name and eke thy place of birth,
And what has been thy usage in this Cave.

2. Knight. I am a Knight, Sir Pocke-hole is my name,
And by my birth I am a Londoner
Free by my Copy, but my Ancestors
Were Frenchmen all, and riding hard this way,
Upon a trotting horse, my bones did ache,
And I faint Knight to ease my weary limbs,
Light at this Cave, when straight this furious fiend,
With sharpest instrument of purest steel,
Did cut the gristle of my Nose away,
And in the place this velvet plaster stands,
Relieve me gentle Knight out of his hands.

Wife. Good Raph releive sir Pocke-hole and send him away, for, intruth, his
breath stinkes,


Raph. Convey him straight after the other Knight,
Sir Pocke-hole fare you well.

2. Kni. Kind sir goodnight.
Exit.
Cries within. Man. Deliver us.


VVoeman. Deliver us.


Wife. Hark George, what a woeful cry there is, I think some woman lies in
there.


Man. Deliver us.


VVoeman. Deliver us.


Raph. What ghastly noise is this? speak Barbarose,
Or by this blasing steel thy head goes off.

Barber. Prisoners of mine whom I in diet keep,
Send lower down into the Cave,
And in a Tub that is heated smoking hot,
There may they find them and deliver them,

Raph. Run Squire and Dwarf, deliver them with speed.

Exeunt Squire and Dwarf. Wife. But will not Raph kill this Giant, surely I am
afeard if he let him go he will do as much hurt, as ever he did.


Cittiz. Not so mouse neither, if he could convert him.


Wife. I George if he could convert him, but a Giant is not so soon converted
as one of us ordinary people: there is a pretty tale of a Witch, that had the
devils mark about her, God bless us, that had a Giant to her son, that was
called Lob-lie-by-the-fire, did never here it George?


Enter Squire leading a man with a glass of Lotion in his hand, and the Dwarf
leading a woman, with diet-bread and drink. Cit. Peace Nel, here comes the
prisoners.

Dwar. Here be these pined wretches, manfull Knight,
That for these six weeks have not seen a wight.

Raph. Deliver what you are, and how you came
To this sad Cave, and what your usage was?

Man. I am an Errant Knight that followed Arms,
With spear and shield, and in my tender years
I stricken was with Cupids fiery shaft,
And fell in love with this my Lady dear,
And stole her from her friends in Turne-bull-streete,
And bore her up and down from Town to Town,
Where we did eat and drink and Music hear,
Till at the length, at this unhappy Town
We did arrive, and coming to this Cave
This beast us caught and put us in a Tub,
Where we this two months sweat, and should have done
Another Month if you had not relieved us.

VVom. This bread and water has our diet been,
Together with a rib cut from a neck
Of burned Mutton, hard has been our fare,
Release us from this ougly Giants snare.

Man. This has been all the food we have received,
But only twice a day for nouelty,
He gave a spoonefull of this hearty broth,
Pulls out a sirringe To each of us, through this same slender quill.

Raph. From this infernal monster you shall go,
That uses Knights and gentle Ladies so,
Convey them hence.

Exeunt man and woman. Cit. Cony, I can tell thee the Gentlemen like Rafe.


Wife. I George, I see it well enough. Gentlemen I thank you all heartily for
gracing my man Rafe, and I promise you you shall see him oftener.


Barber. Mercy great knight, I do recant my ill,
And henceforth never gentle blood will spill.

Rafe. I give thee mercy, but yet shall thou swear
Upon my burning pestle, to perform
Thy promise vtterd.

Barber. I swear and kiss.

Rafe. Depart then, and amend.
Come squire and dwarf, the Sun grows toward his set, and we have many
more adventures yet.


Exeunt. Cit. Now Rafe is in this humor, I know he would ha beaten all the
boys in the house if they had been set on him.


Wife. I George, but it is well as it is, I warrant you the Gentlemen do
consider what it is to overthrow a giant: but look George, here comes
mistress Merri-thought and her son Michael; now you are welcome mistress
Merri- thought, now Rafe has done you may go on.


Enter mistress Merri-thought, and Michael. Mist. mer. Micke my boy?


Mich. I forsooth mother.


Mist. mer. Be merry Micke we are at home now; where I warrant you, you shall
find the house flung out at the windows: Hark, hey dogs, hey, this is the
old world In Faith with my husband, if I get in among 'em, I Will play em such a
lesson, that they shall have little list to come scraping hither, again. Why
master Merri-thought, husband, Charles Merri-thought.


Old merri. within. If you will sing and dance, and laugh, and hollow, and
laugh again, and then cry there boys, there: why then One, two, three, and
four,
We shall be merry within this hour.



Mist. merri. Why Charles, do you not know your own natural wife? I say,
open the door, and turn me out those mangy companions; it is more then time
that they were fellow and fellow like with you: you are a Gentleman Charles,
and an old man, and father of two children; and I my self (though I say it) by
my mothers side, Niece to a worshipful Gentleman, and a Conductor, ha has
been three times in his Majesty's service at Chester, and is now the fourth
time, God bless him, and his charge upon his journey.


Old Mer. Go from my window, love, go;
Go from my window my dear,
The wind and the rain will drive you back again,
You cannot he lodged here.
Hark you Mistress Merrithought, you that walk upon adventures, and forsake
your husband, because he sings with never a penny in his purse; What shall I
think my self the worse? Faith no, I Will be merry.

You come not here, here is none but lads of mettle, lives of a hundred years,
and upwards, care never drunk their bloods, nor want made 'em warble.

Hey-ho, my heart is heavy.


Mist mer. Why Mr. Merrithought, what am I that you should laugh me to scorn
thus abruptly? am I not your fellow-feeler (as we may say) in all our miseries?
your comforter in health and sickness? have I not brought you Children? are
they not like you Charles? look upon thine own Image hard-hearted man; and
yet for all this --


Old mer. within. Begone, begone, my Iuggy, my puggy, begone my love, my dear.

The weather is warm, twill do thee no harm, thou can not be lodged here.

Be merry boys, some light music, and more wine.


Wife. He Is not in earnest, I hope George, is he?


Cit. What if he be, sweet heart?


Wife. Marie if he be George, I Will make bold to tell him he is an Ingrant old
man, to use his bedfellow so scuruily.


Cit. What how does he use her hunny?


Wife. Marie come up sir sauce-box, I think you will take his part, will you not?
Lord how hot you are grown: you are a fine man an you had a fine dog, it
becomes you sweetly.


Cit. Nay prithee Nell chide not: for as I am an honest man, and a true
Christian Grocer, I do not like his doings.


Wife. I cry you mercy then George; you know we are all frail, and full of
infirmities. Dee hear Mr. Merri-thought, may I crave a word with you?


Old mer within. Strike up lively lads.


Wife. I had not thought in truth, Mr. Merrithought, that a man of your age and
discretion (as I may say) being a Gentleman, and therefore known by your
gentle conditions, could have used so little respect to the weakness of his
wife: for your wife is your own flesh, the staff of your age, your
yoke fellow, with whose help you draw through the mire of this transitory
world: Nay, she is your own ribbe. And again --


Old mer. I come not hither for thee to teach,
I have no pulpit for thee to preach,
I would thou had kissed me under the breech,
As thou art a Lady gay.

Wife. Marie with a vengeance.
I am heartily sorry for the poor gentlewoman: but if I were thy wife, In Faith
gray-beard, In Faith --


Cit. I prithee sweet hunny-suckle, be content.


Wife. Give me such words that am a gentlewoman borne, hang him hoary rascal.
Get me some drink George, I am almost molten with fretting: now beshrew his
knaves heart for it.


Old mer. Play me a light Laualto: come, be frolic, fill the good fellows
wine.


Mist. mer. Why Mr. Merrithought, are you disposed to make me wait here: you will
open I hope, I Will fetch them that shall open else.


Old mer. Good woman if you will sing I Will give you something, if not-


Song.
You are no love for me Margret, I am no love for you.
Come aloft Boys, aloft.
Mist. mer. Now a Churles fart in your teeth sir: Come Micke, we will not trouble
him, a shall not ding us in the teeth with his bread and his broth: that he shall
not: come boy, I Will provide for thee, I warrant thee: we will go to master
Venterwels the Merchant, I Will get his letter to mine Host of the Bell in
Waltham, there I Will place thee with the Tapster; will not that do well for
thee Micke? and let me alone for that old Cuckoldly knave your father, I Will use
him in his kind, I warrant ye.


Wife. Come George, where is the beer?


Cit. Here love.


Wife. This old fornicating fellow will not out of my mind yet; Gentlemen, I Will
begin to you all, and I desire more of your acquaintance, with all my heart.
Fill the Gentlemen some beer George.


Finis Actus tertij. Music.
Actus quartus,
Scoena prima.
Boy daunceth. Wife. Look George, the little boy's come again, me thinks he
looks something like the prince of Orange in his long stocking, if he had a
little harness about his neck. George I will have him dance Fading; Fading is
a fine Iigge I Will assure you Gentlemen: begin brother, now a capers sweet
heart, now a turn a'th toe, and then tumble: cannot you tumble youth?


Boy. No indeed forsooth:


Wife. Nor eat fire?


Boy. Neither.


Wife. Why then I thank you heartily, there is two pence to buy you points
withal.


Enter Jasper and Boy. Iasp. There boy, deliver this: but do it well. Have thou
provided me four lusty fellows?

Able to carry me? and art thou perfect
In all thy business?

Boy. Sir, you need not fear,
I have my lesson here, and cannot miss it:
The men are ready for you, and what else
Pertaines to this employment.

Iasp. There my boy,
Take it, but buy no land.

Boy. Faith sir 'twere rare
To see so young a purchaser: I fly,
And on my wings carry your destiny.
Exit.
Iasp. Go, and be happy. Now my latest hope
Forsake me not, but fling thy Anchor out,
And let it hold: stand fixed thou rolling stone,
Till I enjoy my dearest: hear me all
You powers that rule in men celestial.
Exit.
Wife. Go thy ways, thou art as crooked a sprigge as ever grew in London; I
warrant him he will come to some naughty end or other: for his looks say no
less: Besides, his father (you know George) is none of the best, you heard him
take me up like a flirt Gill, and sing baudy songs upon me: but I faith if I
live George --


Cit. Let me alone sweetheart, I have a trick in my head shall lodge him in
the Arches for one year, and make him sing Peocani, er'e I leave him, and yet
he shall never know who hurt him neither.


Wife. Do my good George, do.


Cit. What shall we have Rafe do now boy?


Boy. You shall have what you will sir.


Cit. Why so sir, go and fetch me him then, and let the Sophy of Persia come
and christen him a child.


Boy. Believe me sir, that will not do so well, it is stale, it has been had
before at the red Bull.


Wife. George let Rafe travel over great hills, and let him be very weary, and
come to the King of Cracouia's house, covered with velvet, and there let the
Kings daughter stand in her window all in beaten gold, combing her golden locks
with a comb of Iuory, and let her spy Rafe, and fall in love with him, and
come down to him, and carry him into her fathers house, and then let Rafe
talk with her.


Cit. Well said Nell, it shall be so: boy let us have it done quickly.


Boy. Sir, if you will imagine all this to be done already, you shall hear
them talk together: but we cannot present a house covered with black velvet,
and a Lady in beaten gold.


Cit. Sir boy, lets have it as you can then.


Boy. Besides it will show ill-fauouredly to haue'a Grocers prentice to court a
kings daughter.


Cit. Will it so sir? you are well read in Histories: I pray you what was sir
Dagonet? was not he prentice to a Grocer in London? read the play of the Four
Prentices of London, where they toss their pikes so: I pray you fetch him in
sir, fetch him in.


Boy. It shall be done, it is not our fault gentlemen.

Exit.
Wife. Now we shall see fine doings I warrant tee George. O here they come; how
pretily the king of Cracuioa's daughter is dressed.


Enter Rafe and the Lady, Squire and dwarf. Cit. I Nell, it is the fashion of
that country, I warrant tee.


Lady. Welcome sir Knight unto my fathers Court.
King of Moldauia, unto me Pompiona
His daughter dear: but sure you do not like
Your entertainment, that will stay with us
No longer but a night.

Rafe. Damsel right fair,
I am on many sad adventures bound,
That call me forth into the wilderness:
Besides, my horses back is something gal'd,
Which will enforce me ride a sober pace.
But many thanks (fair Lady) be to you,
For using errant Knight with courtesy.

Lady. But say (brave knight) what is your name and birth?

Rafe. My name is Rafe, I am an English man,
As true as steel, a hearty Englishman,
And prentice to a Grocer in the strond,
By deed Indent, of which I have one part:
But Fortune calling me to follow Arms,
On me this holy order I did take,
Of Burning pestle, which in all men's eyes,
I bear, confounding Ladies enemies.

Lady. Often have I heard of your brave countrymen,
And fertile soil, and store of wholesome food:
My Father often will tell me of a drink
In England found, and Nipitato called.
Which drives all the sorrow from your hearts.

Rafe. Lady it is true, you need not lay your lips
To better Nipitato then there is.

Lady. And of a wild-fowle he will often speak,
Which poudred beef and mustard called is:
For there have been great wars 'twixt us and you,
But truly Rafe, it was not long of me.
Tell me then Rafe, could you contented be,
To wear a Ladies favor in your shield?

Rafe. I am a knight of religious order,
And will not wear a favor of a Ladies
That trusts in Antichrist, and false traditions.

Cit. Well said Rafe, convert her if thou can.

Rafe. Besides, I have a Lady of my own
In merry England, for whose virtuous sake
I took these Arms, and Susan is her name,
A Cobblers maid in Milke-street, whom I vow
Nere to forsake, whilst life and Pestle last.

Lady. Happy that Cobling dame, who ere she be,
That for her own (dear Rafe) has gotten thee.
Unhappy I, that nere shall see the day
To see thee more, that bearst my heart away.

Rafe. Lady farewell, I needs must take my leave.

Lady. Hard-harted Rafe, that Ladies do deceive.

Cit. Hark thee Rafe, there is money for thee; give something in the King of
Cracouia's house, be not beholding to him.


Rafe. Lady before I go, I must remember
Your fathers Officers, who truth to tell,
Have been about me very diligent.
Hold up thy snowy hand thou princely maid,
There Is twelve pence for your fathers Chamberlain,
And another shilling for his Cook,
For by my troth the Goose was roasted well.
And twelue-pence for your fathers horse-keeper,
For nointing my horse back; and for his butter
There is another shilling. To the maid
That washed my boot-hose, there is an English groat;
And two pence to the boy that wiped my boots:
And last, fair Lady, there is for your self
Three pence to buy you pins at Bumbo fair.

Lady. Full many thanks, and I will keep them safe
Till all the heads be off, for thy sake Rafe.

Rafe. Advance my Squire and Dwarf, I cannot stay.

Lady. Thou kilst my heart in parting thus away.

Exeu^t. Wife. I commend Rafe yet that he will not stoop to a Craconian,
there is properer women in London then any are there I-wis. But here comes
Master Humphrey and his love again now George.


Cit. I cony, peace.


Enter Merchant, Humphrey, Luce and a Boy. March. Go get you up, I will not be
entreated.
And gossip mine, I Will keep you sure hereafter
From gadding out again with boys and unthrifts,
Come, they are women's tears, I know your fashion.
Go sirrah, lock her in, and keep the key,
Exit Luce and Boy. Safe as you love your life. Now my son Humfrey,
You may both rest assured of my love
In this, and reap your own desire.

Hum. I see this love you speak of, through your daughter,
Although the hole be little; and hereafter
Will yield the like in all I may, or can,
Fitting a Christian, and a gentleman.

March. I do believe you (my good son) and thank you:
For 'twere an impudence to think you flattered.

Humph. It were indeed, but shall I tell you why,
I have been beaten twice about the lie.

March. Well son, no more of complement, my daughter
Is yours again; appoint the time, and take her,
We Will have no stealing for it, I my self
And some few of our friends will see you married.

Hum. I would you would i'saith, for be it known
I ever was afraid to lie alone.

March. Some three days hence then.

Hum. Three days, let me see,
It Is somewhat of the most, yet I agree,
Because I mean against the appointed day,
To visit all my friends in new array.

Enter servant. Ser. Sir, there is a Gentlewoman without would speak with your
Worship.


Merch. What is she?


Seru. Sir I asked her not.


Merch. Bid her come in.


Enter mistress Merry-thought and Michael. Mist. mer. Peace be to your
Worship, I come as a poor Suter to you sir, in the behalf of this child.


Merch. Are you not wife to Merrie-thought?


Mist. mer. Yes truly, would I had nere seen his eles, ha has undone me and
himself and his children, and there he lives at home and sings, and hoights,
and Revels among his drunken companions, but, I warrant you, where to get a
penny to put bread in his mouth, he knows not: and therefore if it like your
Worship, I would entreat your letter, to the honest Host of the Bell in
Waltham, that I may place my child under the protection of his Tapster, in
some settled course of life.


Merch. I Am glad the heavens have heard my prayers: thy husband
When I was ripe in sorrows laughed at me,
Thy son like an unthankful wretch, I having
Redeemed him from his fall and made him mine,
To show his love again, first stole my daughter,
Then wronged this Gentleman, and last of all,
Gave me that grief, had almost brought me down
Unto my grave, had not a stronger hand
Releiu'd my sorrows, go, and weep, as I did
And be vnpittied, for I here profess
An everlasting hate to all thy name.

Mist. mer. Will you so sir, how say you by that? come Micke, let him keep
his wind to cool his Porrage, we will go to thy Nurces Micke, she knits silk
stockings boy, and we will knit too boy, and be beholding to none of them all.


Exeunt Michael and mother. Enter a boy with a letter. Boy. Sir, I take it you
are the Master of this house.

Merch. How then boy?

Boy. Then to your self sir comes this letter.

Merch. From whom my pretty Boy?

Boy. From him that was your servant, but no more
Shall that name ever be, for he is dead,
Grief of your purchased anger broke his heart,
I saw him die, and from his hand received
This paper, with a charge to bring it hither,
Read it, and satisfy your self in all.

Letter. March. Sir, that I have wronged your love, I must confess, in which I
have purchased to my self, besides mine own undoing, the ill opinion of my
friends, let not your anger, good sir, out live me, but suffer me to rest in
peace with your forgiveness; let my body (if a dying man may so much preuails
with you) be brought to your daughter, that she may truly know my hate
flames are now buried, and, withal, receive a testimony of the zeal I bore
her virtue: farewell for ever, and be ever happy. Jasper.

Gods hand is great in this, I do for give him,
Yet I am glad he is quiet, where I hope
He will not bite again: boy bring the body
And let him have his will, if that be all.

Boy. It Is here without sir.

March. So sir, if you please
You may conduct it in, I do not fear it.

Hump. I Will be your Usher boy, for though I say it,
He owed me something once, and well did pay it.

Exeunt. Enter Luce alone. Luce. If there be any punishment inflicted
Upon the miserable, more then yet I feel,
Let it together ceaze me, and at once
Press down my soul, I cannot bear the pain
Of these delaying tortures: thou than art
The end of all, and the sweet rest of all;
Come, come o death, bring me to thy peace,
And blot out all the memory I nourish
Both of my father and my cruel friend.
O wretched maid still living to be wretched,
To be a say to fortune in her changes,
And grow to number times and woes together,
How happy had I been, if being borne
My grave had been my cradle?

Enter servant. Ser. By your leave
Young Mistress, here is a boy has brought a coffin,
What a would say I know not, but your father
Charged me to give you notice, here they come.

Enter two bearing a Coffin, Jasper in it. Luce. For me I hoped it is come, and
it is most welcome.

Boy. Fair Mistress let me not add greater grief
To that great store you have already; Jasper
That whilst he lived was yours, now dead,
And here enclosed, commanded me to bring
His body hither, and to crave a tear
From those fair eyes, though he deserved not pity,
To deck his funeral, for so he bid me
Tell her for whom he di'de.

Luce. He shall have many:
Good friends depart a little, whilst I take
Exeunt Coffin carrier and boy. My leave of this dead man, that once I loved:
Hold, yet a little, life and then I give thee
To thy first heavenly being; O my friend!
Have thou deceived me thus, and got before me?
I shall not long be after, but believe me,
Thou were too cruel Jasper against thy self,
In punishing the fault, I could have pardoned,
With so untimely death; thou did not wrong me,
But ever were most kind, most true, most loving;
And I the most unkind, most false, most cruel.
Did thou but ask a tear? I Will give thee all,
Even all my eyes can power down, all my sigh's
And all my self, before thou go from me
There are but sparing rites: But if thy soul
Be yet about this place, and can behold
And see what I prepare to deck thee with,
It shall go up, borne on the wings of peace
And satisfied: first will I sing thy dirge,
Then kiss thy pale lips, and then die my self,
And fill one Coffin and one grave together.
Song.
Come you whose loves are dead,
And whiles I sing
Weep and wring
Every hand and every head,
Bind with Cipres and sad Ewe,
Ribands black, and candles blew,
For him that was of men most true.
Come with heavy mourning,
And on his grave
Let him have
Sacrifice of sighs and groaning,
Let him have fair flowers enough,
White and purple, green and yellow,
For him that was of men most true.
Thou sable cloth, sed cover of my ioies
I lift thee up, and thus I meet with death.

Iasp. And thus you meet the living

Luce. Save me heaven.

Ias. Nay do not fly me fair, I am no spirit,
Look better on me, do you know me yet?

Luce. O thou dear shadow of my friend.


Iasp. Dear substance,
I swear I am no shadow, feel my hand,
It is the same it was, I am your Jasper,
Your Jasper that is yet living, and yet loving,
Pardon my rash attempt, my foolish proof
I put in practice of your constancy,
For sooner should my sword have drunk my blood,
And set my soul at liberty, then drawn
The least drop from that body; for which boldness
Doom me to any thing: if death I take it
And willingly.

Luce. This death I Will give you for it,
So, now I am satisfied: you are no spirit,
But my own truest, truest, truest friend,
Why do you come thus to me.

Jasper. First to see you,
Then to convey you hence.

Luce. It cannot be,
For I am locked up here and watched at all hours,
That it is impossible for me to escape.

Iasp. Nothing more possible, within this coffin
Do you convey your self, let me alone,
I have the wits of twenty men about me,
Only I crave the shelter of your Closet
A little, and then fear me not; creep in
That they may presently convey you hence:
Fear nothing dearest love, I Will be your second,
Lie close, so, all goes well yet; Boy.

Boy. At hand sir.

Iasp. Convey away the Coffin, and be wary.

Boy. It Is done already.

Iasp. Now must I go conjure.
Exit.
Enter Merchant. Merch. Boy, Boy.


Boy. Your servant sir.


March. Do me this kindness Boy, hold here is a crown: Before thou bury the
body of this fellow, carry it to his old merry father, and salute him from me,
and bid him sing, he has cause.


Boy. I will sir.


Merch. And then bring me word what tune he is in, and have another crown: but
do it truly.

I have fitted him a bargain, now, will vex him.

Boy. God bless your Worships health sir.


March. Farewell boy.


Exeunt. Enter Master Merrie-thought. Wife. Ah old Merry-thought, art thou
there again, let us here some of thy songs.


Old Mer. Who can sing a merrier noate,
Then he that cannot change a groat?
Not a Denier left, and yet my heart leapes, I do wonder yet, as old as I am,
that any man will follow a Trade, or serve, that may sing and laugh, and walk
the streets, my wife and both my sons are I know not where, I have nothing
left, nor know I how to come by meat to supper, yet am I merry still; for I
know I shall find it upon the Table at six a clock, therefore hang Thought.

I would not be a Scruigman to carry the cloke-bag still,
Nor would I be a Fawleconer the greedy Hawlkes to fill.
But I would be in a good house, and have a good Master too.
But I would eat and drink of the best, and no work would I do.
This is it that keeps life and soul together, mirth, this is the
Philosophers stone that they write so much on, that keeps a man ever young.


Enter a Boy. Boy. Sir, they say they know all your money is gone, and they will
trust you for no more drink.


Old mer. Will they not? let am choose, the best is I have mirth at home, and
need not send abroad for that, let them keep their drink to themselves.

For Iillian of Berry she dwells on a Hill,
And she has good Beer and Ale to sell.
And of good fellows she thinks no ill,
And thither will we go now, now, now, now, and thither
Will we go now.
And when you have made a little stay,
You need not ask what is to pay,
But kiss your Hostess and go your way, And thither, etc.

Enter another Boy. 2. Boy. Sir, I can get no bread for supper.


Old mer. Hang bread and supper, let us preserve our mirth, and we shall never
feel hunger, I Will warrant you, let us have a Catch, boy follow me, come sing
this Catch.

Ho, ho, no body at home, meat, nor drink, nor money ha we none, fill the
pot Eedy, never more need I.


Old mer. So boys enough, follow me, let us change our place and we shall
laugh afresh.


Exeunt. Wife. Let him go George, a shall not have any countenance from us,
nor a good word from any in the Company, if I may strike stroke in it.


Cit. No more a shannot love; but Nel I will have Raph do a very notable
matter now, to the eternal honor and glory of all Grocers, sirrah you there
boy, can none of you hear?


Boy. Sir, your pleasure.


Cit. Let Raph come out on May Day in the morning and speak upon a Conduit
with all his Scarfes about him, and his feathers and his rings and his knacks.


Boy. Why sir you do not think of our plot, what will become of that then?


Cit. Why sir, I care not what become on it, I Will have him come out, or I Will
fetch him out my self, I Will have something done in honor of the City,
besides, he has been long enough upon Adventures, bring him out quickly, or
if I come in amongst you --


Boy. Well sir he shall come out, but if our play miscarry, sir you are like
to pay for it.

Exit Boy.
Cit. Bring him away then.


Wife. This will bebraue in faith, George shall not he dance the morris too for
the credit of the Strand.


Cittiz. No sweet heart it will be too much for the boy, o there he is Nel,
he is reasonable well in reparell, but he has not rings enough.


Enter Raph. Raph. London, to thee I do present the merry Month of May
Let each true Subject be content to hear me what I say:
For from the top of Conduit head, as plainly may appear,
I will both tell my name to you and wherefore I came here.
My name is Raph, by due descent, though not ignoble I,
Yet far inferior to the Flock of gracious Grocery.
And by the Common Council, of my fellows in the Strand,
With gilded Staff, and crossed Skarfe, the May-lord here I stand.
Rejoice, o English hearts, rejoice, rejoice o Lovers dear,
Rejoice o City, Town, and Country, rejoice eke every Shire;
For now the fragrant Flowers do spring and sprout in seemly sort,
The little Birds do sit and sing, the Lambs do make fine sport.
And now the Burchin Tree does bud that maks the School boy cry
The Morris rings while Hobbyhorse does foot it feateously:
The Lords and Ladies now abroad for their disport and play,
Do kiss sometimes upon the Grass, and sometimes in the Hey.
Now Butter with a leaf of Sage is good to Purge the blood,
Fly Venus and Phlebotomy for they are neither good.
Now little fish on tender stone, begin to cast their bellies,
And sluggish snails, that erst were mute, do creep out of their shelies
The rumbling Rivers now do warm for little boys to padle,
The sturdy Steed, now goes to grass, and up they hang his saddle.
The heavy Heart, the bellowing Bucke, the Rascal and the Pricket,
Are now among the Yeomans Pease, and leave the fearful thicket.
And be like them, o you, I say, of this same noble Town,
And lift aloft your velvet heads, and slipping of your gown:
With bells on legs, and napkins clean unto your shoulders tide,
With Scarfes and Garters as you please, and Hey for our Town cried
March out and show your willing minds by twenty and by twenty,
To Hogsdon or to Newington, where Ale and Cakes are plenty:
And let it nere be said, for shame, that we the youths of London,
Lay thrumming of our Caps at home, and left our custom undone.
Up then, I say, both young and old, both man and maid a Maying
With Drums and Guns that bounce alowd, and merry Taber playing.
Which to prolong, God save our King, and send his Country peace
And root out Treason from the Land, and so, my friends I cease.

Finis Act. 4.
Actus 5.
Scoena prima.
Enter Merchant, solus. March. I will have no great store of company at the
wedding, a cupple of neighbors and their wives, and we will have a Capon in
stewed broth, with marrow, and a good piece of beef, stuck with rose-mary.


Enter Jasper, his face mealed. Iasp. Forbear thy pains fond man, it is too
late.

March. Heaven bless me: Jasper?

Iasp. I, I am his Ghost
Whom thou have injured for his constant love:
Fond worldly wretch, who do not understand
In death that true hearts cannot parted be.
First know thy daughter is quite borne away,
On wings of Angels, through the liquid air,
To far out of thy reach, and never more
Shall thou behold her face: But she and I
Will in another world enjoy our loves,
Where neither fathers anger, poverty,
Nor any cross that troubles earthly men
Shall make us sever our united hearts.
And never shall thou sit, or be alone
In any place, but I will visit thee
With ghastly looks, and put into thy mind
The great offenses which thou did to me.
When thou art at thy Table with thy friends
Merry in heart, and filled with swelling wine,
I Will come in midst of all thy pride and mirth,
Invisible to all men but thy self,
And whisper such a sad tale in thine ear,
Shall make thee let the Cup fall from thy hand,
And stand as mute and pale as Death it self.

March. Forgive me Jasper; Oh! what might I do?
Tell me, to satisfy thy trobled Ghost?

Iasp. There is no means, too late thou think of this.

March. But tell me what were best for me to do?

Iasp. Repent thy deed, and satisfy my father,
And beat fond Humphrey out of thy doors,
Exit Jasper.
Enter Humphrey. Wife. Look George, his very Ghost would have folks beaten.

Humph. Father, my bride is gone, fair mistress Luce,
My soul's the fount of vengeance, mischiefs sluice.

March. Hence fool out of my sight, with thy fond passion
Thou have undone me.

Humph. Hold my father dear,
For Luce thy daughters sake, that had no peer.

Mar. Thy father fool? there is some blows more, begone.
Jasper, I hope thy Ghost be well appeased,
To see thy will performd, now will I go
To satisfy thy father for thy wrongs.
Exit.
Humph. What shall I do? I have been beaten twice,
And mistress Luce is gone? help me device:
Since my true-loue is gone, I never more,
Whilst I do live, upon the sky will pore;
But in the dark will wear out my shooe-soles
In passion, in Saint Faiths Church under Paul's.
Exit.
Wife. George call Rafe hither, if you love me call Rafe hither, I have the
brauest thing for him to do George; prithee call him quickly.


Cit. Rafe, Why Rafe boy.


Enter Rafe. Rafe. Here sir.


Cit. Come hither Rafe, come to thy mistress boy.


Wife. Rafe I would have thee call all the youths together in battle-ray, with
drums, and guns, and flags, and march to Mile end in pompous fashion, and there
exhort your Soldiers to be merry and wise, and to keep their beards from
burning Rafe, and then skirmish, and let your flagges fly, and cry kill, kill,
kill: my husband shall lend you his Ierkin Rafe, and there is a scarf; for the
rest, the house shall furnish you, and we will pay for it: do it bravely Rafe,
and think before whom you perform, and what person you represent.


Rafe. I warrant you mistress if I do it not for the honor of the City, and
the credit of my master, let me never hope for freedom.


Wife. It Is well spoken I faith; go thy ways, thou art a spark indeed.


Cit. Rafe, Rafe, double your files bravely Rafe.


Rafe. I warrant you sir.

Exit Rafe.
Cit. Let him look narrowly to his service, I shall take him else, I was there
my self a pike-man once in the hottest of the day, wench; had my feather shot
sheere away, the fringe of my pike burnt off with powder, my pate broken with a
scouring-sticke, and yet I thank God I am here.


Drum within. Wife. Hark George the drums.


Cit. Ran, tan, tan, tan; ran, tan: O wench an thou had but seen little Ned
of Algate, drum Ned, how he made it rore again, and laid on like a tyrant:
and then stroke softly till the ward came up, and then thundered again, and
together we go: sa, sa, sa, bounce quoth the guns: courage my hearts, quoth the
Captains: Saint George, quoth the pikemen; and withal here they lay, and
there they lay: And yet for all this I am here wench.


Wife. Be thankful for it George, for indeed it is wonderful.


Enter Rafe and his company with Drums and colors. Rafe. March fair my
hearts, Lieuetenant beat the rear up: Ancient, let your colors fly; but
have a great care of the Butchers hooks at white-Chappell, they have been the
death of many a fair Ancient. Open your files that I may take a view both of
your persons and munition: Sergeant call a muster.


Serg. A stand, William Hamerton peuterer.


Ham. Here Captain.


Rafe. A Corslet, and a spanish pike; it is well, can you shake it with a terror?


Ham. I hope so Captain.


Rafe. Charge upon me, it is with the weakest: put more strength William
Hammerton, more strength: as you were again. Proceed Sergeant.


Serge. George Greene-goose, Poulterer?


Green. Here.


Rafe. Let me see your piece neighbor Greene-goose, when was she shot in?


Green. And like you master Captain, I made a shot even now, partly to
scour her, and partly for audacity.


Rafe. It should seem so certainly, for her breath is yet inflamed: besides,
there is a maine fault in the touchhole, it runs, and stinketh; and I tell
you moreover, and believe it: Ten such touch-holes would breed the pox in the
Army. Get you a feather, neighbor, get you a feather, sweet oil, and paper,
and your piece may do well enough yet. Where Is your powder?


Green. Here.


Rafe. What in a paper? As I am a Soldier, and Gentleman, it craves a Martial
Court: you ought to dye for it. Where Is your horn? answer me to that.


Green. An't like you sir, I was obliuious.


Rafe. It likes me not you should be so; it is a shame for you, and a scandal
to all our neighbors, being a man of worth and estimation, to leave your
horn behind you: I am afraid 'twill breed example. But let me tell you no
more on it; stand, till I view you all. What Is become o'th nose of your flaske?


1. Soldier. Indeed law Captain, 'twas blown away with powder.


Rafe. Put on a new one at the Cities charge. Where Is the stone of this piece?


2. Soldier. The Drummer took it out to light Tobacco.


Rafe. It Is a fault my friend, put it in again: You want a Nose, and you a
Stone; Sergeant, take a note on it, for I mean to stop it in the pay. Remove
and march, soft and fair Gentlemen, soft and fair: double your files, as you
were, faces about. Now you with the sodden face, keep in there: look to your
match sirrah, it will be in your fellows flaske anon. So, make a crescent
now, advance your pikes, stand and give ear. Gentlemen, Contrymen, Friends,
and my Fellow Soldiers, I have brought you this day from the Shops of
Security, and the Counters of Content, to measure out in these furious fields,
Honor by the ell; and prowess by the pound: Let it not, o let it not, I say,
be told hereafter, the noble issue of this City fainted: but bear your
selves in this fair action, like men, valiant men, and freemen; Fear not the
face of the enemy, nor the noise of the guns: for believe me brethren, the rude
rumbling of a Brewers Carre is far more terrible, of which you have a daily
experience: Neither let the stink of powder offend you, since a more valiant
stink is nightly with you. To a resolved mind, his home is every where: I
speak not this to take away the hope of your return; for you shall see (I do
not doubt it) and that very shortly, your loving wives again, and your sweet
children, whose care does bear you company in baskets. Remember then whose
cause you have in hand, and like a sort of true-borne Scauingers, scour me
this famous Realm of enemies. I have no more to say but this: Stand to your
tacklings lads, and show to the world you can as well brandish a sword, as
shake an apron. Saint George and on my hearts.


Omnes. St. George, St. George. Exeunt Wife. 'Twas well done Rafe, I Will send
thee a cold Capon a field, and a bottle of March-beere; and it may be, come my
self to see thee.


Cit. Nell, the boy has deceived me much, I did not think it had been in him:
he has performed such a matter wench, that if I live, next year I Will have him
Captain of the Gallyfoist, or I Will want my will.


Enter old Merri-thought. Old mer. Yet I thank God, I break not a rinkle more
then I had, not a stoop boyce: Care live with Cats, I defy thee, my heart is
as sound as an Oak; and though I want drink to wet my whistle, I can sing:
Come no more there boys, come no more there:
For we shall never whilst we live, come any more there.



Enter a boy with a Coffin. Boy. God save you sir.


Oldmer. It Is a brave boy: can thou sing?


Boy. Yes sir, I can sing, but it is not so necessary at this time.


Old merri. Sing we, and chaunt it, whilst love does grant it.


Boy. Sir, sir, if you knew what I have brought you, you would have little list
to sing.


Old mer. O the Mimon round, full long long I have thee sought,
And now I have thee found, and what have thou here brought?

Boy. A Coffin sir, and your dead son Jasper in it.

Old mer. Dead? why farewell he:
Thou wast a bonny boy, and I did love thee.

Enter Jasper. Iasp. Then I pray you sir do so still.

Old mer. Iaspers ghost? thou art welcome from Stygian lake so soon,
Declare to me what wondrous things in Pluto's court are done.

Ias. By my troth sir, I nere came there, it is too hot for me sir.

Old mer. A merry ghost, a very merry ghost.
And where is your true-loue? o where is yours?

Ias. Marie look you sir.

Heaues up the Coffin. Old mer. Ah ha! Art thou good at that I faith?
With hey trixie terlery-whiskin, the world it runs on wheels,
When the young man's -- up goes the maidens heels.

Mistress Merri-thought, and Michael within. Mist. mer. What Mr.
Merri-thought, will you not let us in? what do you think shall become of us?


Old mer. What voice is that that calls at our door?


Mist. mer. You know me well enough, I am sure I have not been such a stranger
to you.


Old mer. And some they whistled, and some they sung, Hey down, down: and
some did lowdly say, ever as the Lord Barnets horn blew, away Musgraue, away.


Mist. mer. You will not have us starve here, will you Mr. Merri-thought?


Iasp. Nay good sir be persuaded, she is my mother: if her offenses have been
great against you, let your own love remember she is yours, and so forgive her.


Luce Good Mr. Merri-thought let me entreat you, I will not be denied.


Mist. mer. Why Mr. Merri-thought, will you be a vexed thing still?


Old. mer. Woman I take you to my love again, but you shall sing before you
enter: therefore dispatch your song, and so come in.


Mist. mer. Well, you must have your will when all is done.
Micke what song can thou sing boy?

Mich. I can sing none forsooth, but a Ladies daughter of Paris properly.


Mist. mer. Song. It was, a Ladies daaghter, etc.


Old. mer. Come, you are welcome home again.
If such danger be in playing, and jest must to earnest turn,
You shall go no more a maying.

March. within. Are you within sir, Master Merri-thought?

Iasp. It is my masters voice, good sir go hold him in talk whilst we convey
our selves into some inward room.


Old mer. What are you? are you merry? you must be very merry if you enter.


March. I am sir.


Old mer. Sing then.


March. Nay good sir open to me.


Old mer. Sing, I say, or by the merry heart you come not in.


March. Well sir, I Will sing.
Fortune my Fee, etc.

Old mer. You are welcome sir, you are welcome, you see your entertainment,
pray you be merry.


March. O Mr. Merri-thought, I am come to ask you
Forgiveness for the wrongs I offered you,
And your most virtuous son, they are infinite,
Yet my contrition shall be more then they.
I do confess my hardness broke his heart,
For which, just heaven has given me punishment
More then my age can carry, his wandering spirit
Not yet at rest, pursues me every where,
Crying, I Will haunt thee for thy cruelty.
My daughter she is gone, I know not how,
Taken invisible, and whether living,
Or in grave, it is yet uncertain to me.
O Master Merry-thought, these are the weights,
Will sink me to my grave, forgive me sir.

Old mer. Why sir, I do forgive you, and be merry,
And if the wag, in's life time, played the knave,
Can you forgive him too?

Merch. Withal my heart sir.

Old mer. Speak it again, and heartily.

Merch. I do sir,
Now by my soul I do.

Old mer. With that came out his Paramoure,
She was as white as the Lilly flower,
Hey troule trollie lolly.
Enter Luce and Jasper. With that came out her own dear Knight,
He was as true as ever did fight. etc.
Sir, if you will forgive ham, clap their hands together, there is no more to be
sad in the matter.


Merch. I do, I do.


Cit. I do not like this, peace boys, hear me one of you, every bodies part
is come to an end but Raphes, and he is left out.


Boy. It Is long of your self sir, we have nothing to do with his part.


Cit. Raph come away, make on him as you have done of the rest, boys come.


Wife. Now good husband let him come out and die.


Cit. He shall Nel, Raph come away quickly and die boy.


Boy. 'Twill be very unfit he should die sir, upon no occasion, and in a Comedy
too.


Cit. Take you no care of that sir boy, is not his part at an end, think you,
when he is dead? come away Raph.


Enter Raph, with a forked arrow through his head. Raph. When I was mortal,
this my costiue corpse
Did lap up Figs and Raisons in the Strand,
Where sitting I espied a lovely Dame,
Whose Master wrought with Lingell and with All,
And under ground he vampied many a boot,
Straight did her love prick forth me, tender sprig
To follow feats of Arms in warlike wise,
Through Waltham Desert, where I did perform
Many atchieuements, and did lay on ground
Huge Barbaroso that insulting Giant,
And all his Captives soon set at liberty.
Then honor pricked me from my native soil,
Into Meldauia, where I gained the love
Of Pompiana his beloved daughter:
But yet proved constant to the black thum'd maid
Susan, and skorn'd Pompianaes love:
Yet liberal I was and gave her pinnes,
And money for her fathers Officers.
I then returned home, and thrust my self
In action, and by all men chosen was
Lord of the May, where I did flourish it,
With Skarfes and Rings, and Posie in my hand,
After this action, I preferred was,
And chosen City Captain at Mile-end,
With hat and feather and with leading staff,
And trained my men and brought them all off clear,
Save one man that berai'd him with the noise.
But all these things I Raph did undertake,
Only for my beloved Susans sake.
Then coming home, and sitting in my Shop
With Apron blew, death came unto my Stall
To cheapen Aqua-vitae, but ere I
Could take the bottle down, and fill a taste,
Death caught a pound of Pepper in his hand,
And sprinkled all my face and body ore,
And in an instant vanished away.

Cit. It Is a pretty fiction in faith.

Raph. Then took I up my Bow and Shaft in hand,
And walked into Moore-fields to cool my self,
But there grim cruel death met me again,
And shot this forked arrow through my head,
And now I faint, therefore be warned by me,
My fellows every one of forked heads.
Farewell all you good boys in merry London,
Nere shall we more upon Shroue-tuesday meet
And pluck down houses of iniquity.
My pain increases, I shall never more
Hold open, whilst another pumpes both legs,
Nor daube a Satin gown with rotten eggs:
Set up a stake, o never more I shall,
I die, fly, fly my soul to Grocers Hall. oh, oh, oh, etc.

Wife. Well said Raph, do your obeisance to the Gentlemen and go your ways,
well said Raph.


Exit Raph. Old mer. Me thinks all we, thus kindly and unexpectedly reconciled
should not depart without a song.


Merch. A good motion.


Old mer. Strike up then.


Song.
Better Music nere was known,
Then a quire of hearts in one.
Let each other that has been,
Troubled with the gall or spleen:
Learn of us to keep his brow,
Smoth and plain as ours are now.
Sing though before the hour of dying
He shall rise and then be crying.
Hey ho, it is naught but mirth.
That keeps the body from the earth.
Exeunt Omnes. Epilogus.
Cittiz. Come Nel, shall we go, the Plays done.


Wife. Nay by my faith George, I have more manners then so, I Will speak to
these Gentlemen first: I thank you all Gentlemen, for your patience and
countenane to Raph, a poor fatherless child, and if I might see you at my
house, it should go hard, but I would have a pottle of wine and a pipe of
Tobacco for you, for truly I hope you do like the youth, but I would be glad
to know the truth: I refer it to your own discretions, whether you will
applaud him or no, for I will wink, and whilst you shall do what you will, I
thank you with all my heart, God give you good night; come George.


FINIS.

