THE Laws of the Markette,

Anno 1. 5. 62.

The Laws of the Markette.
FIRST in all

No man shall forstall any Vyctuall

No man shall regrate any Victual,

No Butter shall be sold but according

No Poulters shall deceiuably strange clothyng so to do, under pain of forty
shyllynges, and the forfeyture of such vyctuall. xl. s.

No Huxsters shall stand or sytte

No unwholesome or stale victual

The Statutes of the Streates of this City, against Noisaunces.
FIRST, no

No man shall cast or ley in the

No Brewer shall cast wylfully

No man shall encomber the

Every Bylder of howses ought

No man shall set any Carts in

No bugeman shall lead but. ii.

No man shall ride or drive his

No man shall gallope his horse

No man shall shote in the streat

No man shall Bowl or cast any

No man shall dygge any hole in

No man shall berry any doung

No Goungfermor shall carry any

No Goungfermor shall spil any

No man shall bait Bull, bear.

No man shall have any kine, gotes, Hogs, Pigges, Hens, Cocks, Capons,
Duckes, in the open streate, under pain of forfayture of the same.

No man shall maintain any

No Carts that shall be shodde

No Carts using daily carryage

No man shall burn any straw,

No man shall blow any horn

No man shall use to go with visoures,

Made that night walkers and

No Hammar man as a smyth,

No man shall cast into the Diches into the Walls, Grates; or Gullyttes of
this City, any manner of carryn, stynkyng flesh, rotten fish, or any rubbishe,
dounge, sand, gravel, wedes, stones, or any other thing, to stop the
course of the same, under pain of clensyng of, at his own cost and charge.
under pain of imprysonment.

No man shall make any wyded

No man shall build nigh the and needful for increase and enter, out going,
and clear recourse.

No man shall goo in the streates

No man shall after the hour

No man shall make any affray

Memorandum that every offense Primus Inventor, has half the penalty by the
grace of the court.

Also every freman may find

No man has power to arest.

No Butcher or his servant be let go when he is prepared to slaughter, the
Butcher shall forfayt two shyllynges, besides recompense, if any person be hurt
thereby.

No Butcher shall skaulde no

No Butcher shall sell any Mesyll

No Butcher shall sell any old

None unseasonable Victual for all manner Vyctualls.

No Victualler of this City language, or make any clamor upon any man or
woman, in the open markytte, for chepyng of Victual, under pain of. iii. s.
iiii. d.

No Butcher shall cast the inwardes

The Poding Carte of the shambelles,

No man shall cast any Vryne he do cast it upon any persons head, the party
to have a lawefull recompense, if he have hurt thereby.

No man shall hurt, cut, or

No man within this City may

Casting any corrupt thing,

Whosoever destroy or peryshe

Old Laws and Customs of this City.
NO man shall set

No man shall set over his apprentyce

No man which is a forreyne forteine vnde^r pain of forfayture of the goods
so forteyne boughte and sold.

No Freman shall be disobedient

Master Chamberlen has power

Master Chamberlen has authority for to send or command any apprentice to
the counter, for there offenses, and if there offenses be great, as in
defyiinge their Mystris houses, by vicious living, or offending his master by
theft, or disslaunder, or such like, then to command him to newegate.

Apprentyce enrowleth* his master pays. ii. s. vi. d. Apprentice set over
he that receives. ii. s. Apprentyce made free, him paieth. iiii. s. Apprentyce
never enrollid, and made fre his Master pays. xiii. s. ii. d. A man made fre
by his fathers Copy, pays. xviii. d.
A Proclamation made in the time of the Mayorraltie of Sir Myhell Dormer knight.

An Act of Common Council, made in the even of Saint Mychaell. Anno Regis,
Henrici Octa xii. xxxi. that no person should ley any Mares in the Streat, or
beyond the edge of their stall, upon pain of forfayture, the first time. vi.
s. viii. d. the second time. xiii. s. iiii. d. and the third time the ware so
laid.

Finis.
Imprynted at London in Povvles Churchyard by John Cawoode, Prynter to the
Queen's Majesty.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


