The Maids Tragedy.

AS IT HAS BEEN diverse times Acted at the Blacke-friers by the KINGS
Majesty's Servants.



LONDON Printed for Richard Higgenbotham and are to be sold at the Angel in
PAVLS Churchyard. 1619.

SPEAKERS.
KING. LYSIPPVS brother to the King. AMINTOR. EVADNE, wife to AMINTOR.
MELANTIVS brothers to EVADNE. DIPHILVS brothers to EVADNE. ASPATIA troth-plight
wife to AMINTOR. CALLIANAX an old humorous Lord, and father to ASPATIA. CA^ON
Gentlemen. STRATO Gentlemen. DIAGOR As a servant. ANTIPHILA waiting Gentlewomen
to ASPATIA. OLIMPIAS waiting Gentlewomen to ASPATIA. DVLA a Lady. NIGHT
Maskers. CINTHIA Maskers. NEPTVNE Maskers. EOLVS Maskers.
The Maids Tragedy.
Actus. I. Scaen. I.
Enter CLEON, STRATO, LISIPPVS, DIPHILVS. CLEON. The rest are making ready sir,

LYS. So let them, there is time enough.


DIPH. You are brother to the King my Lord, we will take your word.


LIS. Strato thou have some skill in poetry,
What think thou of a mask, will it be well?

STR. As well as masks can be.


LIS. As masks can be.


STRA. Yes, they must commend, and speak in praise of the assembly, bless the
Bride and groom, in person of some god, there tied to rules of flattery.


CLE. See good my Lord who is returned.


LIS. Noble Melantius, Enter Melantius the land by me welcomes thy virtues
home, thou that with blows abroad bringst us our peace at home, the breath of
Kings is like the breath of gods, my brother wished thee here, and thou art
here, he will be kind; and weary thee with often welcome, but the time does
give thee a welcome, above his, or all the world.


MEL. My Lord, my thanks, but these scratcht limbs of mine, have spoke my
love and truth unto my friends, more then my tongue ere could, my mind's the
same it ever was to you; where I find worth

I love the keeper, till he let it go,
And then I follow it.

DIPH. Hail worthy brother,
He that reioyces not at your return
In saferie, is mine enemy for ever.

MEL. I thank thee Diphilus: but thou art faul^ie,
I sent for thee to exercise thine arms
With me at Patria, thou camst not Diphilus:
It Was ill.

DIPH. My noble brother my excuse
Is my Kings straight command, which you my Lord
Can witness with me.

LIS. It Is most true Mel^ntius,
He might not come till the solemnities
Of this great match were past.

DIPH. Have you heard of it.


MEL. Yes, and have given cause to those, that here
Envy my deeds abroad, to call me gamesome,
I have no other business here at Rhodes.

LIS. We have a mask to night,
And you must tread a soldiers measure.

MEL. These soft and silken wars are not for me,
The music must be shrill and all confused
That stirs my blood, and then I dance,
But is Amintor wed?

DIPH. This day?


MEL. All joys upon him, for he is my friend,
Wonder not that I call a man so young;
His worth is great, valiant he is,
And one that never thinks his life his own,
If his friend need it, when he was a boy,
As often as I returned (as without boast)
I brought home conquest, he would gaze upon me,
And view me round, to ^iude in what one limb
The virtue lay to do those things he heard,
Then would he wish to see my sword, and feel
The quickness of the edge, and in his hand
Weighes it, he often would make me smile at this;
His youth did promise much, and his ripe years
Will see it all performed. Enter Aspatia passing with attendance.
Hail Maid and Wife.
Thou fair Aspatia, may the holy knot,
That thou have tied to day, last till the hand
Of age vndoe't, may thou bring a race
Unto Amintor, that may fill the world
Successively with soldiers.

ASP. My hard fortunes
Deserve not scorn, for I was never proud
When they were good. Exit Aspatia.

MEL. Howes this.


LIS. You are mistaken sir, she is not married.


MEL. You said Amintor was.


DIPH. It Is true, but


MEL. Pardon me, I did receive
Letters at Patria from my Amintor
That he should marie her.

DIPH. And so it stood,
In all opinion long, but your arrival
Made me imagine you had heard the change.

MEL. Who has he taken then?


LIS. A Lady sir,
That bears the light above her, and strikes dead
With flashes of her eye, the fair Euadne
Your virtuous sister.

MEL. Peace of heart betwixt them,
But this is strange.

LIS. The King my brother did it
To honor you, and these solemnities
Are at his charge.

MEL. It Is royal like himself,
But I am sad, my speech bears so unfortunate a sound
To beautiful Aspatia, there is rage
Hid in her fathers breast Calianax,
Bent long against me and 'a should not think,
Could I but call it back, that I would take
Such base reuenges as to scorn the state
Of his neglected daughter.

LIS. O it were pity, for this Lady sir,
Sits discontented with her watrie eyes bent on the ear
In unfrequented woods are her delight,
Where when she sees a bancke stuck full of flowers,
Then she will sit, and sigh, and tell
Her servants, what a prittie place it were
To bury lovers in, and make her maids
Pluck'em, and strew them over her like a corse,
She carries with her an infectious grief,
That strikes all her beholders, she will sing
The mourn^ulst things that ever ear has heard,
And swound, and sing again, and when the r^st
Of your young Ladies in their wanton blood,
Tell mirthfull tales in course that fills the room
With laughter, she will with so sad a look
Bring forth a story of the silent death
Of some forsaken virgin, which her grief
Will put in such a phrase, that ere she end
She Will send them weeping one by one away.

MEL. She has a brother under my command
Like her, a face as womanish as hers,
But with a spirit that has much outgrowne
The number of his years. Enter Amintor.

CLE. My Lord the Bridegroom.


MEL. I might run fiercely, not more ha^tily,
Upon my foe, I love thee well Amintor,
My mouth is much too narrow for my heart,
I joy to look upon those eyes of thine,
Thou art my friend, but my disordred speech
Cuts off my love.

AMIN. Thou art Melantius,
All love is spoke in that, a sacrifice
To thank the gods, Melantius is returned
In safty, victory sits on his sword
As she was wont, may she build there, and dwell,
And may thy armor be as it has been,
Only thy valor and thine innocence,
What endless treasures would our enemies give,
That I might hold thee ^till thus.

MEL. I am poor in words, but credit me young man
Thy mother could do no more but weep, for joy to see thee
After long absence, all the wound^ I have,
Fetched not so much away, nor all the cries
Of widdowed mothers: But this is peace
And that was war.

AMINT. Pardon thon holy god
Of marriage bed, and frown not, I am for'st
In answer of such noble tears as these,
To weep upon my weding day.

MEL. I fear thou art grown^ too ^ruell, for I hear
A Lady mournes for thee, men say to death,
^orsaken of thee, on what terms I know not.

AMINT. She had my promise, but the King fo^bad it,
And made me make this worthy change, thy sister
Accompanied with graces about her,
With whom I long to loose my lusty youth,
And grow old in her arms.

MEL. Be prosperous.


AMINT. My Lord the maske^s rage for you.


LIS. We are gone,
Cleon, Strato, Diphilus.

Exeunt Lysippus, Cleon, Steat, Diphilus. AMINT. We Will all attend you, we shall
trouble you
With our solemnities.

MEL. Not so Amintor.
But if you laugh at my rude carriage
In sports, i will do as much for you in war
When you come thither, but I have a mistress
To bring to your delights, rough though I am,
I have a mistress and she has a heart
She says, but trust me, it is stone, no better,
There is no place that I can challenge gentlemen,
But you stand still, and here my way lies. Exeunt.

Enter Calianax, and Diagoras. CALL. Diagoras look to the doors better for
shame, you let in all the world, and anon the King will be angry with me, why
very well said, by Jove the King will have the show ^'th the Court;


DIAG. Why do you swear so my Lord,
You know heel have it here.

CALL. By this light if he be wise, he will not.


DIAG. And if he will not be wise, you are forsworn.


CALL. One must sweat out his heart with swearing, and get
Thanks on no side, i will be gone, look to it who will.

DIAG. My Lord I shall never keep them out,
Your looks will terrify them.

CALL. My looks terrify them, you coxcomely ass, ^le be judge by all the
company, whether thou have not a worse face then I.


DIAG. I mean because they know you, and your office.


CALL. Office, I would I could put it off, I am sure I sweat quite through in my
office, I might have made room at my daughters wedding, they ha near killed her
amongst them. But now I must do service for him that has forsaken her, serve
that will. Exit Calianax,


DIAG. He Is so humerous since his daughter was forsaken? hark, hark, whose
there, codes, codes, What now? within Knock within


MEL. Open the door.


DIAG. Who is it.


MEL. Melantius.


DIAG. I hope your Lord-ship brings no troop, for i^ you do, I must return
them. Enter Melantius and a Lady.


MEL. None but this Lady sir.


DIAG. The Ladies are all placed above, save those that come in the Kings
troop, the best of Rhodes sit there, ^^ere is no room.


MEL. I thank you sir, when I have seen you placed madam, I must attend the
King, but the mask done, i will wait on you again. Exit Melantius Lady other
door.


DIAG. Stand back there, room for my Lord Melantius, pray bear back, ^his is
no place for such youths and their truls, let the doors shut again, no; do your
heads itch, i will scratch them, so now thrust and hang, again, who is it now, I
cannot blame my Lord Calianax for giving way, would he were here, he would run
raging amongst them, and break a dozen heads in the twinkling of an eye,
what is the news now? within I pray you can you help me to the speech of the
master Cook?


DIAG. If I open the door i will cook some of your calves heads. Peace rogues? --
again, -- who is it?


MEL. Melantius? within Enter Calianax.


CALL. Let him not in.


DIAG. O my Lord a must, make room there for my Lord, is your Lady plast.
Enter Melantius.


MEL. Yes sir, I thank you, my Lord Calianax, well met,
Your causeless hate to me I hope is buried.

CALL. Yes I do service for your sister here,
That brings mine own poor child to timelesse death,
She loves your friend Amintor, such another false hearted
Lord as you.

MEL. You do me wrong,
A most unmanly one, and I am slow
In taking vengeance, be well advised.

CALL. It may be so, who placed the Lady there.


MEL I did.


CALL. My Lord she must not sit there.


MEL. Why?


CALL. The place is kept for women of more worth.


MEL. More worth then she, it misbecomes your age,
And place to be so womanish, forbear,
What you have spoke I am content to think
The palsy ^hooke your tongue to.

CALL. It Is well if I stand here to place men's wenches.


MEL. I shall quite forget this place, thy age, my safety, and through all cut
that poor sickly week thou have to live, away from thee.


CALL. Nay I know you can fight for your whore.


MEL. Bate me the King, and be of flesh and blood
A lies that says it, thy mother at fifteen
Was black and sinful to her.

DIAG. Good my Lord.


MEL. Some god pluck threescore years from that fond man,
That I may kill him, and not stain mine honor,
It is the curse of soldiers that in peace,
They shall be braued by such ignoble men,
As (if the land were troubled,) would with tears
And knees beg succor from 'em, would the blood
(That sea of blood) that I have lost in fight,
Were running in thy veins, that it might make thee
Apt to say less, and able to maintain,
Should thou say more, -- This Rhodes I see is naught
But a place priuiledg'd to do men wrong.

CALL. I, you may talk your pleasure. Enter Amintor.


AMINT. What vilde wrong
Has sturd my worthy friend, who is as slow
To sight with words as he is quick of hands,

CALL. That heap of age, which I should reverence,
If it were temperate, but testie years
Are most contemptible.

AMINT. Good sir forbear.


CALL. There is just such another as your self.


AMINT. He will wrong you, or me, or any man,
And talk as if he had no life to loose
Since this our match: the King is come in,
I would not for more wealth then I enjoy
He should perceive you raging, he did hear
You were at difference now, which hastened him.

CALL. Make room there.

Hoboyes play within Enter King Euadne, Aspatia, Lords and Ladies. Melantius
thou art welcome, and thy love
Is with me still; but this is not a place
To brable in, Calianax, join hands.

CALL. He shall not have mine hand.


KING. This is no time
To force you to it I do love you both,
Calianax you look well to your office,
And you Melantius are welcome home,
Begin the mask.

MEL. Sister I joy to see you, and your choice,
You looked with my eyes when you took that man,
Be happy in him. Recorders

EVAD. O my dearest brother,
Your presence is more joyful then this day,

Mask.
Night rises in mists. NIG. Our reign is now, for in the quenching sea
The Sun is drowned, and with him fell the day,
Bright Cinthia hear my voice, I am the night
For whom thou bearst about, thy borrowed light,
Appear, no longer thy pale visage shrowde,
But strike thy silver horns quite through a cloud,
And send a beam upon my swarthie face,
By which I may discover all the place
And persons that have many longing eyes,
Are come to wait on our solemnities. Enter Cinthia.
How dull and black am I, can I not find
This beauty without thee, am I so blind,
Me thinks they show like to those eastern streaks,
That warn us hence before the morning breaks,
Back my pale servant, for these eyes know how,
To shoot far more and quicker rays then thou.

CINTH. Great Queen they be a troop for whom alone,
One of my clearest moons I have put on,
A troop that looks as if thy self and I,
Had plucked our reins in, and our whips laid by
To gaze upon those, that appear
Brighter then we.

NIGH. Then let us keep 'em here,
And never more our chariots drive away,
But hold our places and outshine the day.

CINTH. Great Queen of shadows you are pleased to speak,
Of more then may be done, we may not break
The gods decrees, but when our time is come,
Must drive away and give the day our room.

NIGH. Then shine at full pale Queen, and by that power,
Produce a birth to fill this happy hour,
Of Nymphs and shepherds, and let their songs discover,
Easy and sweet who is a happy lover,
Or if thou w'oot thine own Endimion
From the sweet ^lowrie banck he lies upon,
On La^mus brow thy pale beams drawn away^
And of his long night let him make thy day.

CIN. Thou dreamst dark power, that fair boy was not mine,
Not went I down to kiss him, ease and wind,
Have bred these bold tales, poets when they rage
Turns gods to men, and make an hour an age,
But I will give a greater state and glory,
And raise to time a nobler memory
Of what these lovers are, rise, rise, I say,
Thou power of deepes, thy surges laid away,
Neptune great King of waters, and by me
Be proud to be commanded. Nep^une rises.

NEP. Cinthia see,
Thy word has force me hither, let me know
Why I ascend.

CINTH. Does this maiestick show
Give thee no knowledge ye^.

NEP. Yes, now I see,
Something en^^nded Cinthia worthy thee,
Go on, i will be a helper.

CINTH. Hie thee then,
And charge the wind go from his rockie den,
Let loose his subjects, only Boreas
Too foul for our intensions as he was,
Still keep him fast chained, we must have none here
But vera^ll blasts and gentle winds appear,
Such as blow flowers, and through the glad bows sing,
Many soft welcome to the lusty spring.
Bid them draw near to have thy wa^^ie race
Led on in couples, we are pleased to grace
This noble night each in their richest things,
Your own deepes or the broken vessels brings,
Be prodigal and I shall be as kind,
And shine at full upon you.

NEP. See the wind Enter Eolus out of a Rock.
Commanding Eolus.

EOL. Great Neptune.


NEPT. He.


EOL. What is thy will.


NEPT. We do command thee free,
Fanonius and thy milder winds to wait
Upon our Cinthia, but tie Boreas straight,
He Is rebellious.

EOL. I shall do it.


NEPT. Do master of the flould, and all below
Thy full command has taken

EOL. O! the Maine
Neptune.

NEPT. Here.


EOL. Boreas has broke his chain,
And struggling with the rest has got away.

NEPT. Let him alone i will take him up at sea,
I will not be long thence, go hence again
And bid the other call out of the Maine,
Bl^w Prot^us, and the rest, charge them put on
Their greate^t pearls and the most sparkling stone
The beaten rock breeds, till this night is done,
By me a solemn honor to the Moon,
Fly like a full sail.

EOL. I am gone.


CINTH. Dark night
S^ike a full s^ilence, do a through right
To this great Chorus, that our music may
Touch high as heaven, and make the East break day
At midnight. Music

Song.
Cinthia to thy power and thee
we obey,
Joy to this great company
and no day,
Come to steal this night away
Till the rights of love are ended,
And the lusty Bridegroom say,
Welcome light of all befriended.
Pace out you waterie powers below,
let your feet
Like the galleys when they row
even beat.
Let your unknown measures set
To the still winds, tell to all,
That gods are come immortal great,
To honor this great Nuptuall.
The Measure. Second Song.
Hold back thy hours old night till we have done,
The day will come too soon,
Young Maids will curse thee if thou steal'st away,
And leau'st their losses open to the day,
Stay, Stay, and hide
the blushes of the Bride.
Stay gentle night and with thy darkness couer^
the kisses of her lover.
Stay and confound her tears and her loud cryings,
Her weak denials vows and often dyings,
Stay and hide all,
but help not if she call.
Maskers dance, Neptune leads it EOL. Ho Neptune.


NEP. Eolus.


EOL. The sea goes hie,
Boreas has raised a storm, go and apply
Thy trident, else I prophecy ^re day,
Many a tall ship will be cast away,
desend with all the gods, and all their power
To strike a calm.

CINTH. We thank you for this hour,
My favor to you all to gratulate
So great a service done at my desire,
Ye shall have many floods fuller and higher
Then you have wished for, and no eb shall dare,
To let the day see where your dwellings are.
Now back unto your governments in have,
Least your proud waters should swell above the want,
And win upon the Island. Exeunt Maskers Descend.

NEPT. We obey.


CIN. Hold up thy head dead night see thou not day,
The East begins to lighten I must do^ne
And give my brother place.

NIGHT. Oh I could frown
To see the day, the day that flings his light
Upon my kingdom, and contemnes old night,
Let him go on, and ^lame, I hope to see
Another wild fire in his ax^l^ree,
And all fall drencht, but I forget, speak Queen,
The day grows on, I dare no more be seen.

CIN. Once heave thy drowsy head again and ^ee
A greater light a greater Maie^tie
Between our sect and us, lash up thy teame
The day breaks here, and yon sun flaring stream
Shot from the south, say which way will thou go.

NIGHT. I Will vanish into mists. Exeunt.


CINTH. Adieu.


KING. Take light their Ladies, get the Bride to bed,
We will not see you laid, good night Amintor,
We Will ease you of that tedious ceremony,
Were it my case I should think time run slow
If thou be noble youth, get me a boy
That may defend my Kingdoms from my foes.

AMINT. All happiness to you.


KING. Good night Melantius. Exeunt.


Actus Secundus.
Enter EVADNE, ASPATIA, DVLA, and other Ladies. DVL. Madame shall we undress
you for this fight,
The wars are nak't that you must make to night.

EVAD. You are merry Dula.


DVL. I should be far merrier Madame, if it were with me
As it is with you.

EVAD. Howes that^


DVL. That I might go to bed with him with credit that you do.


EVAD. Why how now wench.


DVL. Come Ladies, will you help.


EVAD. I am soon undone.


DVL. And as soon done,
Good store of clothes will trouble you at both.

EVAD. Art thou drunk Dula.


DVL. Why here is none but we.


EVAD. Thou think belike there is no modesty
When we'are alone.

DVL. I by my troth, you hit my thoughts right.


EVAD. You prick me Madame.


1. LAD. It Is against my will.


DVL. Anon you must endure more and lie still,
It Is best to practice.

EVAD. Sure this wench is mad.


DVL. No faith, this is a trick that I have had
Since I was fourteen.

EVAD. It Is time to leave it.


DVL. Nay now i will keep it till the trick leave me,
A dozen wanton words put in your head,
Will make you liuelier in your husbands bed.

EVAD. Nay faith then take it.


DVL. Take it Madame, where,
We all will take it I hope that are here.

EVAD. Nay then i will give you ore.


DVL. So will I make
The ablest man in Rhodes or his heart ache.

EVAD. Wilt lie in my place to night.


DVL. I Will hold your cards against any two I know.


EVAD. What will thou do.


DVL. Madame we will do it and make'm leave play too.


EVAD. Aspatia take her part.


DVL. I will refuse it,
She will pluck down aside, she does not use it.

EVAD. Do^ I prithee.


DVL. You will find the play
Quickly, because your head lies well that way.

EVAD. I thank thee Dula, would thou coulst instill
Some of thy mirth into Aspatia,
Nothing but sad thoughts in her breast do dwell,
Me thinks a mean betwixt you would do well.

DVL. She is in love, hang me if I were so,
But I could run my Country I love too,
To do those things that people in love do.

ASP. It were a timelesse smile should prove my cheek,
It were a fitter hour for me to laugh,
When at the Alter the religious Priest,
Were passifying the offended powers,
With sacrifice, then now, this should have been
My right, and all your hands have bin imployd,
In giving me a spotless offering
To young Amintors bed, as we are now,
For you pardon Euadne, would my worth
Were great as yours, or that the King or he
Or both thought so, perhaps he found me worthless,
But till he did so, in these ears of mine,
These credulons ears, he powered the sweetest words
That art or love could frame, if he were false
Pardon it heaven, and if I did want
Virtue, you safely may forgive that too,
For I have lost none that I had from you.

EVAD. Nay leave this sad talk Madame.


ASP. Would I could, then I should leave the cause.


EVAD. Lo if you have not spoild all Dulas mirth.


ASP. Thou think thy heart hard, but if thou be caught remember me; thou
shall perceive a fire shot suddenly unto thee.


DVL. That's not so good, let them shoot any thing but sire, and I feare'm not.


ASP. Well wench thou must be taken.


EVAD. Ladies good night, I Will do the rest my self.


DVL. Nay let your Lord d^e some.


ASP. Madame good night, may all the marriage joys
That longing maids imagine in their beds
Prove so unto you, may not discontent
Grow twixt your love and you, but if there do,
Enquire of me and I will guide your moan,
And teach you an artificial way to grieve,
To keep your sorrow waking, love your Lord
No worse then I, but if you love so well,
Alas you may displease him, so did I,
This is the last time you shall look on me:
Ladies farewell, as soon as I am dead,
Come all and watch one night about my hearse.
Bring each a mournful sto^ie and a tear,
To offer at it when I go to earth;
With flattering Iuy claspe my coffin round,
Write on my brow my fortune, let my beer
Be borne by Virgins that shall sing by course,
The truth of maids, and periuries of men.

EVAD. Alas I pity thee. Exit Euadne.


OMNES. Madame good night.


1. LAD. Come we will let in the Bridegroom.


DVL. Where Is my Lord?


1. LAD. Here take this light, Enter Amintor.

DVL. Heel find her in the dark.


1. LAD. Your Ladye's scarce a bed, you must help her.


ASP. Go and be happy in your Ladies love,
May all the wrongs that you have done to me,
Be utterly forgotten in my death,
I Will trouble you no more, yet I will take
A parting kiss, and will not be denied,
You Will come my Lord and see the virgins weep,
When I am laid in earth; though you your self
Can know no pity, thus I wind my self
Into this willow garland, and am prouder
That I was once your love, (though now refused)
Then to have had another true to me.
So with prayers I leave you, and must try
Some yet vnpractis'd way to grieve and die,

DVL. Come Ladies will you go. Exit Aspatia.


1. LAD. Good night my Lord.


AMIN. Much happiness unto you all. Exe: Ladies.
I did that Lady wrong, me thinks I feel
A grief shoot suddenly through all my veins,
Mine eyes rain, this is strange at such a time,
It was the King first moved me to it, but he
Has not my will in keeping, -- why did I
perplex my self thus; something whispers me,
Go not to bed, my guilt is not so great
as mine own conscience, too sencible
Would make me think, I only break a promise,
And it was the King inforst me, timorous flesh,
Why shakst thou so, away my idle fears, Enter Euadne
Yonder is she, the l^ster of whose eye,
Can blot away the sad remembrance
Of all these things: -- oh my Euadne spare
That tender body, let it not take cold,
The vapors of the night shall not fall here,
To bed my love, Hymen will punish us,
For being slack performers of his rights,
Camst thou to call me.

EVAD. No?


AMINT. Come, come, my love,
And let us loose our selves to one another,
Why art thou up so long.

EVAD. I am not well.


AMINT. To bed, then let me wind thee in these arms,
Till I have banished sickness.

EVAD. Good my Lord I cannot sleep.


AMIN. Euadne we will watch, I mean no sleeping.


EVAD. I Will not go to bed.


AMIN. I prithee do.


EVAD. I will not for the world.


AMIN. Why my dear love.


EVAD. Why? I have sworn I will not.


AMIN. Sworn!


EVAD. I?


AMIN. How? Sworn Euadne.


EVAD. Yes, sworn Amintor, and will swear again.
If you will wish to hear me.

AMIN. To whom have you sworn this.


EVAD. If I should name him the matter were not great.


AMIN. Come, this is but the coyness of a bride.


EVAD. The coyness of a bride.


AMIN. How prettily that frown becomes thee.


EVAD. Do you like it so.


AMIN. Thou can not dress thy face in such a look,
But I shall like it.

EVAD. What look will like you best.


AMIN. Why do you ask.


EVAD. That I may show you one less pleasing to you,


AMIN. Howes that.


EVAD. That I may show you one less pleasing to you.


AMIN. I prithee put thy lests in milder looks,
It shows as thou were angry.

EVAD. So perhaps I am indeed.


AMIN. Why, who has done thee wrong,
Name me the man, and by thy self sweet love,
Thy yet unconquered self, I will revenge it.

EVAD. Now I shall try thy truth, if thou do love me.
Thou waighst not any thing compared to me,
Life, hono^r, joys eternal, all delights
The world can yield, are light as air
To a true lover when his Lady frowns,
And bids him do this, will thou kill this man,
Swear my Amintor, and i will kiss the sun
Of thy lips.

AMIN. I wonnot swear sweet love, till I know the cause.


EVAD. I wood thou would,
Why, it is thou that wrongst me, I hate thee,
Thou should have killed thy self.

AMIN. If I should know that, I should quickly kill
The man you hated.

EVAD. Know it, and do it.


AMIN. Oh no, what look so ere thou should put on,
To try my faith, I cannot think thee false,
I cannot find one blemish in thy face
Where falsehood should abide, leave, and to bed,
If you have sworn to any of the virgins
That were your old companio^s to preserve
Your maidenhead a night, it may be done
Without this means.

EVAD, A maidenhead Amintor at my years.


AMIN. Sure she raues, this cannot be,
Her natural temper, shall I call thy maids,
Either thy healthful fleepe has left thee long,
Or else some fever rages in thy blood.

EVAD. Neither of these, what think you I am mad,
Because I speak the truth.

AMIN. Is this the truth, will you not lie with me to night.


EVAD. You talk as if you thought I would hereafter.


AMIN. Hereafter, yes I do.


EVD. You are deceived, put off amazement and with patience mark,
What I shall utter, for the Oracle
Knows nothing truer^ it is not for a night
Or two that I forbear your bed, but ever.

AMIN. I dream, -- awake Amintor.


EVAD. You hear right,
I sooner would find out the beds of Snakes,
And with my youthful blood warm their cold flesh,
Letting them curle themselves about my limbs,
then sleep one night with thee; this is not faind,
Nor sounds it like the kisses of a bride.

AMIN. Is flesh so earthly to endure all this,
Are these the joys of marriage, Hymen keep
This story (that will make succeeding youth
Neglect thy ceremonies) from all ears.
Let it not rise up for thy shame and mine
To after ages, we will scorn thy laws,
If thou no better bless them, touch the heart
Of her whom thou have sent me, or the world
Shall know this, not an altar then will smoke
In praise of thee, we will adopt us sons,
Then virtue shall inherit and not blood,
If we do lust, we will take the next we meet;
Serving our selves as other creatures do^,
And never take note of the female more,
Nor of her issue: I do rage in vain,
She cannot jest; Oh pardon me my love,
So dear the thoughts are which I hold of thee,
That I must break forth; satisfy my fear,
It is a pain beyond the pain of death,
To be in doubt; confirm it with an oath,
If this be true.

EVAD. Do you invent the form,
Let there be in it all the binding words
Devils and coniurers can put together,
And I will take it, I have sworn before,
And here by all things holy do again,
Never to be acquainted with thy bed,
Is your doubt over now.

AMIN. I know too much, would I had doubted still,
Was ever such a marriage night as this:
You powers above, if you did ever mean
Man should be used thus, you have thought a way
How he may bear himself, and save his honor:
Instant me with it, for to my dull eyes
There is no mean, no moderate course to run,
I must live scorned or be a murderer:
Is there a third, why is this night so calm,
Why does not heaven speak in thundet to us,
And drown their voice.

EVAD. This rage will do no good.


AMIN. Euadne, hear me, thou have taken an oath,
But such a rash one, that to keep it were
Worse then to swear it, call it back to thee,
Such vows as that never ascend the heaven,
A tear or two will wash it quite away,
Have mercy on my youth, my hopeful youth,
If thou be pitiful, for without boast
This land was proud of me, what Lady was there
That men eald fair, and virtuous in this I^le
That would have shund my love, it is in thee
To make me hold this worth -- Oh we vain men
That trust all our reputation
To rest upon the weak and yielding hand
Of feeble woman, but thou art not stone,
Thy flesh is soft, and in thine eyes do dwell
The spirit of love, thy heart cannot be hard,
Come lead me from the bottom of despair,
To a^^ the joys thou have, I know thou will.
An^ make me careful least the sudden change
Ore-come my spirits.

EVAD. When I call back this oath, the pains of hell inuiron me.


AMIN. I sleep and am to temporate, come to bed,
Or by those hairs which if thou have a soul; like to thy locks,
Were threads for Kings to wear
About their arms.

EVAD. Why so perhaps they are.


AMIN. I Will dragge thee to my bed, and make thy tongue^
Undo this wicked oath, or on thy flesh
I Will print a thousand wounds to let out life.

EVAD. I fear thee not, do what thou dare to me,
Every ill sounding word, or threatening look
Thou show to me, will be revenged at full.

AMIN. It will not sure Euadne.


EVAD. Do not you hazard that.


AMIN. Ha ye your Champions.


EVAD. Alas Amintor think thou I forbear
To sleep with thee, because I have put on
A maidens strictness, look upon these cheeks,
And thou shall find the hot and rising blood
Unapt for such a vow, no, in this heart
There dwells as much desire, and as much will,
To put that wished act, as ever yet
Was known to woman, and they have been shown
Both, but it was the folly of thy youth,
To think this beauty, to what land soever
It shall be called, shall stoop to any second,
I do enjoy the best, and in that height
Have sworn to stand or die, you guess the man.

AMIN. No, let me know the man that wrongs me so^
That I may cut his body into motes,
And scatter it before the Northen wind.

EVAD. You dare not strike him.


AMIN. Do not wrong me so,
Yes, if his body were a poisonous plant,
That it were death to touch, I have a soul
Will throw me on him.

EVAD. Why it is the King.


AMIN. The King.


EVAD. What will you do now?


AMIN. It is not the King.


EVAD. What did he make this match for dull Amintor.


AMIN. Oh thou have named a word that wipes away
All thoughts reuengefull, in that sacred word,
The King, there lies a terror, what frail man
Dares lift his hand against it, let the Gods
Speak to him when they please, till when let us
Suffer, and wai^e.

EVAD. Why should you fill your self so full of heat,
And haste so to my bed, I am no virgin.

AMIN. What Devil has put it in thy fancy then
To mary me.

EVAD. Alas, I must have one
To father children, and to bea^e the name
Of husband to me, that my sin may be
More honorable.

AMIN. What strange thing am I?
A miserable one, one that my self
Am sorry for.

AMIN. Why show it then in this,
If thou have pity, though thy love be none,
Kill me, and all true lovers that shall love
In after ages crossed in their desires,
Shall bless thy memory, and call thee good,
Because such mercy in thy breast was found,
To rid a lingering wretch.

EVAD. I must have one
To fill thy room again if thou were dead,
Else by this night I could, I pi^^y thee.

AMIN. These strange and sudden injuries have falen
So thick upon me, that I lose all sense
Of what they are, me thinks I am not wronged,
Nor is it ought, if from the censuring world
I can but hide it -- reputation
Thou art a word, no more, but thou have shown
An impudence so high, that to the world
I fear thou will betray or shame thy self.

EVAD. To cover shame, I took thee never fear,
That I would blaze my self.

AMIN. Nor let the King
Know I conceive he wrongs me, then mine honor
Will thrust me into action, that my flesh
Could bear with patience, and it is some ease
To me in these extremes, that I know this
Before I touched thee, else had all the sins
Of mankind stood betwixt me and the King,
I had gone through, e'ne to his heart and thine
I have left one desire, it is not his crown
Shall buy me to thy bed, now I resolve
He has dishonored thee, give me thy hand,
Be careful of thy credit, and sin close
It Is all I wish, upon thy chamber flower
I Will rest to night, that morning visiters
May think we did as married people use,
And prithee smile upon me when they come,
And seem to toy as if thou had been pleased
With what I did.

EVAD. Fear not, I will do this.


AMIN. Come let us practice, and as wantonly
As ever longing bride and bridegroom met,
Lets laugh and enter here.

EVAD. I am content.
Down all the swellings of my troubled heart,
When we walk thus intwind let all eyes see,
If ever lovers better did agree. Exit.

Enter Aspatia, Antiphila, Olimpias. ASP. Away you are not, force it no further,
Good, good, how well you look, such a full color
Young bashful brides put on, sure you are new married.

ANT. Yes Madame to your grief.


ASP. Alas poor wentches
Go learn to love first, learn to lose your selves,
Learn to be flattered, and believe and bless
The double tongue that did it,
Did you ere love yet wenches, speak Olimpas,
Thou have a metled temper, fit for stamp.

OLM. Never.


ASP. Nor you Antiphila.


ANT. Nere I.


ASP. Then my good girls be more then women wi^e^
At least, be more then I was, come le^s be sad my girls,
That down cast of thine eye Olimpias,
Shows a faind sorrow; mark Antiphila,
Just such another was the Nymph Oenes,
When Paris brought home Hellen, now a tear,
And then thou art a piece expressing fu^ie,
The Carthage Queen when from a cold Sea rock,
Full with her sorrow, she tied fast her eyes,
To the fair Trojan ships, having lost them,
Just as thine does, down stole a tear! Antiphila,
What would this wench do if she were Aspatia,
Here she would stand, till some more, pitying god
Turned her to Marble, it is enough my wench,
Show me the piece of needl^ work you wrought.

ANT. Of Ariadne Madame?


ASP. Yes that piece,
This should be Theseus, has a cousening face,
You meant him for a man.

ANT. He was so Madame.


ASP. Why then it is well enough, never look black,
You have a full wind, and a false heart Theseus,
Does not the story say, his Keele was split,
Or his masts spent, or some kind rock or other
Met with his vessel.

ANT. Not as I remember.


ASP. It should ha been so, could the Gods know this,
And none of all their number raise a storm,
But they are all as ill, this false smile was expressed well,
Just such another caught me, you shall not go so
Antiphila, in this place work a quick-sand,
And over it a shallow smiling water,
And over it a shallow smiling water,
And his ship plowing it, and then a fear,
Do that fear bravely wench.

OLIM. Twill wrong the story.


ASP. Twill make the story, wronged by wanton Poets,
Live long and be believed, but where is the Lady.

ANT. There Madame.


ASP. Fie, you have mist it there Antipila,
You are much mistaken wench:
These colors are not dull and pale enough,
To show a soul so full of misery
As this poor Ladies was, do it by me,
Do it again, by me the lost Aspatia,
And you will find all true but the wild Island,
Suppose I stand upon the Sea, breach now
Mine arms thus, and mine hair blown with the wind,
Wild as the place she was in, let all about me
Be tears of my story, do my face,
If thou had ever feeling of a sorrow,
Thus, thus, Antiphila make me look good gi^le
Like sorrows mount, and the trees about me
Let them be dry and leauelesse, let the rocks
Groan with contiunall ^urges, and behind me
Make all a desolation, see, see wenches,
A miserable life of this poor picture.

OLIM. Dear Madame.


ASP. I have done, sit down, and let v^
Upon that point fix all our eyes, that point there^
Make a dumb silence till you feel a sudden sadness
Give us new souls. Enter Calaina^.

CALL. The King may do this, and he may not do it,
My child is wronged, disgraced, well, how now huswiues,
What at your ease, is this a time to sit still, up you young
Lazy whores, up or i will swenge you.

OLIM. Nay good my Lord.


CALL. You Will lie down shortly, in and whine there,
What are you grown so ru^tie you want hea^e^,
We shall have some of the Court boys heat you shortly.

ANT. Good my Lord be not angry, we do nothing
But what my Ladies pleasure is, we are thus in grief,
She is forsaken.^

CALL. There Is a rogue too,
A sly dissembling slave, well? get you in,
I Will have about with that boy, it is hie time
Now to be valiant, I confess my youth
Was never prone that way,
A Court stale, well I must be valiant,
And beat some dozen of these whelps, and there is
Another of them, a trim cheating soldier,
I Will maule that raschall, has out-brau'd me twice,
But now I thank the Gods I am valiant,
Go, get you in, i will take a course with all. Exeunt o^^.

Actus Tertius.
Enter CLEON, STRATO, DIPHILVS. CLE. Your sister is not up yet.


DIPH. Our brides must take their mornings rest,
The night is troublesome.

STRA. But not tedious,


DIPH. What ods, he has not my sisters maidenhead to night.


STRA. None, its ods against any bridegroom living, he nere gets it while he
lives.


DIPH. You Are merry with my sister, you will please to allow me the same freedom
with your mother.


STRA. She Is at your service.


DIPH. Then she is merry enough of herself, she needs no tickling, knock at
the door.


STRA. We shall interrupt them.


DIPH. No matter they have the year before them, good morrow sister, spare
your self to day, the night will come again. Enter Amintor.


AMIN. Whose there my brother, I am no readier yet, your sister is but now up.


DIPH. You look as you had lost your eyes to night, I think you ha not slept.


AMIN. I faith I did not.


DIPH. You have done better then.


AMIN. We have ventured for a boy, when he is twelve, a shall command against
the foes of Rhodes, shall we be merry.


STRA. You cannot, you want sleep,

AMIN. It Is true, but she
As if she had drunk Lethe, or had made
Even with heaven, did fetch so still a sleep, aside.
So sweet and sound.

DIP. What Is that?


AMIN. Your sister frets this morning, and does turn her eyes upon me, as
people on the headsman, she does chafe, and kiss and chafe, and clap my
cheeks, she is in another world.


DIP. Then I had lost, I was about to lay, you had not got^ her maiden head to
night.


AMIN. Ha, does he not mock me, y'ad lost indeed I do not bungle.


CLEO. You do deserve her.


AMIN. I ^a^d my lips to hers, and that wild breach
That was so rude and rough to me, last night
Was sweet as April, i will be guilty too,
If these be the effects. Enter Melanti^^.

MEL. Good day Amintor, for to me the name
Of brother is too distant, we are friends,
And that is nearer.

AMIN. Dear Melantius,
Let me behold thee, is it possible.

MEL. What sudden gaze is this.


AMIN. It Is wondrous strange.


MEL. Why does thine eye desire so strict a view
Of that it knows so well? there is nothing here
That is not thine.

AMIN. I wonder much Melantius.
To see those noble looks that make mo think,
How virtuous thou art, and on this sudden
It Is strange to me, thou should have worth and honor,
Or not be base and false, and treacherous,
And every ill.

MEL. Say, stay my friend,
I fear this sound will not become our loves, no more embrace me.

AMIN. Oh mistake me not,
I know thee to be full of all those deeds,
That we frail men call good, but by the course
Of nature thou should be as quickly changed,
As are the winds dissembling, as the Sea,
That now wears brows as smooth as virgins be,
Tempting the Merchant to invade his face.
And in an hour call his billows up,
And shoot em at the Sun, destroying all
A carries on him, Oh how near am I
To utter my sick thoughts. aside.

MEL. Why, my friend, should I be so by nature?


AMIN. I have wed thy sister, who has virtuous thoughts ^now for one whole
family, and it is strange,

That you should feel no want.


MEL. Believe me this is co^plement too cunning for me.


DIP. What should I be then by the course of nature,
They having both robbed me of so much virtue.

STRA. Oh call the bride my Lord Amintor, that we may see her blush, and turn
her eyes down, it is the pr^itie^t sport.


AMIN. Euadne.


EVAD. My Lord. Within.


AMIN. Come forth my love,
Your brothers do attend to wish you joy.

EVAD. I am not ready yet.


AMIN. Enough, enough,

EVAD. They Will mock me.


AMIN. Faith thou shall come in. Enter Euadne.


MEL. Good morrow sister, he that understands
Whom you have wed, need not to wish you joy,
You have enough, take heed you be not proud.

DIPH. O sister what have you done.


EVAD. Why what have I done?


STRA. My Lord Amintor swears you are no maid now.


EVAD. Push.


STRA. I faith he does.


EVAD. I knew I should be mocked.


DIPH. With a truth.


EVAD. If twere to do again, in faith I would not mary.


AMIN. Nor I by heaven.


DIP. Sister, Dula swears she heard you cry two rooms off.


EVAD. Fi^ how you talk.


DIPH. Lets see you walk.


EVAD. By my troth you are spoild.


MEL. Amintor.


AMIN. H^.


MEL. Thou art sad.


AMIN. Who I, I thank you for that, shall Diphilus thou and I sing a catch.


MEL. How?


AMIN. Prithee l^t^.


MEL. Nay that^ too much the other way^


AMIN. I am so heighned with my happiness, how do thou love, kiss me.


EVAD. I connot love you, you tell tales of me.


AMIN. Nothing but what becomes us, Gentlemen
Would you had all such wives, and all the world,
That I might be no wonder, you are all sad,
What do you envy me, I walk me thinks
On water, and nere sink I am so light.

MEL. It Is well you are so.


AMIN. Well? can you be other when she looks thus,
Is there no music there, lets dance.

MEL. Why? this is strange.


AMIN. I do not know my self, yet I could wish my joy were le^se.


DIPH. I Will marry if it will make one thus


EVAD. Amintor, hark. Aside


AMIN. What says my love I must obey.


EVAD. You do it scuru^ly, ^will be perceived.


CLE. My Lord the King is here. Enter King and Lisi^:


AMIN. Where.


STRA. And his brother.


KING. Good morrow all.
Amintor joy on joy fall thick upon thee,
But Madame you are alterd since I saw you,
I must salute you, you are now another,
How liked you your nights rest.

EVAD. Ill sir.


AMIN. Indeed she took but little.


LIS. You Will let her take more, etc thank her too shortly.


KING. Amintor were thou truly honost till thou were married.


AMIN. Yes sir.


KING. Tell me how then shows the sport to you.


AMIN. Why well?


KING. What did you do.


AMIN. no more nor less then other couples use,
You know what it is, it has but a course name^

KING. But prithee I should think by her black eye
And her red cheek, she should be quick and stirring
In this same business; ha?

AMIN. I cannot tell I nere tried other sir, but I perceive
She is as quick as you delivered.

KING. Well you will trust me then Amintor,
To choose a wife for you again.

AMIN. No never sir.


KING. Why? like you this so ill.


AMIN. So well I like her,
For this I bow my knee in thanks to you,
And unto heaven will pay my grateful tribute
Hourly, and do hope we shall draw out,
A long contented life together here,
And die both full of gray hairs in one day,
for which the thanks is yours, but if the powers
That rule us, please to call her first away,
Without pride spoke, this world holds not a wife
Worthy to take her room. Asid^

KING. I do not like this; all forbear the room
But you Amintor and your Lady, I have some speech that may
Concern your after living well^

AMIN. A will not tell me that he lies with her, if he do,
For it is apt to thrust this arm of mine to acts unlawful.

KING. You will suffer me to talk with her Amintor,
And not have jealous pangs.

AMIN, Sir, I dare trust my wife,
When she dares to talk, and not be iealous^

KING. How do you like Amintor.


EVAD. As I did sir.


KING. Howes that?


EVAD. As one that to fulfill your pleasure,
I have given leave to call me wife and love.

KING. I see there is no lasting faith in sin,
They that break word with heaven, will break again
With all the world, and so do thou with me.

EVAD. How sir.


KING. This subtle woman's ignorance
Will not excuse you, thou have taken oaths
So great, that me thought they did misbecome
A woman's mouth, that thou would nere enjoy
A man but me.

EVAD. I never did swear so, you do me wrong.


KING. Day and night have heard it.


EVAD. I swore indeed that I would never love
A man of lower place, but if your fortune
Should throw you from this hight, I bad you trust
I would forsake you, and would bend to him
That won your throne, I love with my ambition,
Not with my eyes, but if I ever yet
Touched any other, Leprosy light here
Upon my face, which for your rioyaltie
I would not stain.

KING. Why thou dissemblest, and it is in me
To punish thee.

EVAD. Why, it is in me then, not to love you, which will
More afflict your body, then your punishment can mine.

KING. But thou have let Amintor lie with thee.


EVAD. I hannot.


KING. Impudence, he says himself so.


EVAD. A lies.


KING. A does not.


EVAD. By this light he does, strangely and basely, and
I Will prove it so, I did not only shun him for a night,
But told him I would never close with him.

KING. Speak lower, it is false.


EVAD. I am no man to answer with a blow,
Or if I were, you are the King, but urge not, it is most true.

KING. Do not I know the uncontrolled thoughts,
That youth brings with him, when his blood is high,
With expectation and desire of that
He long has waited for, is not his spirit
Though he be temperate, of a valiant ^traine
As this our age has known, what could he do
If such a sudden speech had met his blood,
But ruin thee for ever, if he had not killed thee
He could not bear it thus, he is as we
Or any other wronged man.

EVAD. This is dissembling,
Amintor, thou have an ingenious look,
And should be virtuous, it amazeth me
That thou should make such base malicious lies.

AMIN. What my dear wife.


EVAD. Dear wife, I do despise thee,
Why nothing can be baser then to sow
Discention amongst lovers,

AMIN. Lovers? who.


EVAD. The King and I.


AMIN. Oh God.


EVAD. Who should live long and love without distaste,
Were it not for such pickthanks as thy self,
Did you lie with me, swear now, and be punished in hell
For this.

AMIN. The faithless sin I made
To fair Aspati^, is not yet revenged,
It follows me, I will not loose a word
To this wild woman, but to you my King,
The anguish of my soul thrusts out this truth,
You Are a tirant, and not so much to wrong
An honest man thus, as to take a pride
In talking with him of it.

EVAD. Now sir, see how loud this fellow lies.


A^IN. You that can know to wrong, should know how
Men must right themselves, what punishment is due,
From me to him that shall abuse my bed,
It is not death, nor can that satisfy,
Unless I show how nobly I have freed my self.

KING. Draw not thy sword, thou know I cannot fear
A subjects hand, but thou shall feel the weight
Of this if thou do rage.

AMIN. The wait of that,
If you have any worth, for heavens sake think
I fear not swords, for as you are mere man,
I dare as easily kill you for this deed,
As you dare think to do it, but there is.
Divinity about you, that strikes dead
My rising passions, as you are my King,
I fall before you and present my sword,
To cut mine own ^lesh if it be your will,
Alas! I am nothing but a multitude of
walking griefs, yet should I murder you,
I might before the world take the excuse
Of madness, for compare my iniuri^s,
And they will well appear too sad a weight
For reason to endure, but fall I first
Amongst my sorrows, ere my treacherous sword
Touch holy things, but why? I know not what
I have to say, why did you choose out me
To make thus wretched, there are thousands
Easy to work on, and of state enough
Within the Land.

EVAD. I would not have a fool, it were no credit for me^


AMINT. Worse and worse,
Thou that dare talk unto thy husband thus,
Profess thy self a whore, and more then so,
Resoule to be so still, is it my fault,
To bear and bow beneath a thousand griefs,
To keep that little credit with the world,
But there were wise ones to, you might have taken another.

KIN. No, for I believe thee honest, as thou were valiant.


AMIN. All the happiness
Bestowd upon me turns into disgrace,
Gods take your honesty again, for I
Am laden with it, good my Lord the King
Be private in it.

KING. Thou may live Amintor,
Free as thy King, if thou will wink at this,
And be a means that we may meet in secret,

AMIN. A baud, hold, hold my breast, a bitter curse
Ceaze me, if I forget not all respects
That are religious, on an other word
Seconded like that, and through a Sea of sins
Will wade to my revenge, though I should call
Plagues here, and after life, upon my soul.

KING. Well, I am resolute, you lay with her,
And so I leave you. Exit King.

EVAD. You must needs be prating, and see what follows.


AMIN. Prithee vex me not,
Leave me, I am afraid some sudden start
Will pull a murder on me.

EVAD. I am gone, I love my life well. Exit Euadne.


AMIN. I hate mine as much,
This it is to break a troth, I should be glad,
If all this tide of grief would make me mad. Exit.

Enter Melantius. MEL. I Will know the cause of all Amintors griefs,
Or friendship shall be idle. Enter Calianax.

CALL. O Melantius, my daughter will die.


MEL. Trust me I am sorry, would thou had taken her part.


CALL. Thou art a slave, a cutthroat slave, a bloody --


MEL. Take heed old man, thou will be heard to rave,
And lose thine office.

CALL. I am valiant grown,
At all these years, and thou art but a slave.

MEL. Some company will come, and I respect
Thy years, not thee so much, that I could wish
To laugh at thee alone.

CALL. I Will spoil your mirth, I mean to fight with thee,
There lie my cloak, this was my fathers sword,
And he durst fight, are you prepared?

MEL. Why? will thou doat thy self out of thy life, hence get thee to bed,
have careful looking to, and eat warm things, and trouble not me, my head
is full of thoughts, more weighty then thy life or death can be.


CALL. You have a name in war, where you stand safe^
Amongst a multitude, but I will try,
What you dare do unto a weak old man^
In single fight you will give ground I fear,
Come draw.

MEL. I will not draw, unless thou pulst thy death
Upon thee with a stroke, ther^s no on^ blow
That thou can give have ^^rength enough can kill me,
Tempt me not so far then, the power of earth
Shall not redeem thee.

CALL. I must let him alone,
He Is stout, and able, and to say the truth,
How ever I may set a face and talk,
I am not valiant, when I was a youth
I kept my credit with a testie trick,
I had among cowards, but durst never fight.

MEL. I will not promise to preserve your life if you do stay.


CALL. I would give half my land that I durst fight with that proud man a
little, if I had men to hold^ him, I would beat him, till he asked me^ m^rcie.


MEL. Sir will you begone?


CALL. I dare not stay, but I will beat my servants all over ^or this. Exit
Calianax^


MEL. This old fellow haunts me,
But the distracted carriage of mine Amintor,
Takes deeply on me, I will find the cause,
I fear his conscience cries, he wronged Aspatia.

Enter Amintor. AMIN. Man's eyes are not subtle to perceive
My inward misery, I bear my grief
Hid from the world, how art thou wretched then,
For ought I know all husbands are like me,
And every one I talk with of his wife,
Is but a well dissembler of his woes
As I am, would I knew it for the rareness
Afflicts me now.

MEL. Amintor, we have not enjoyed our friendship of late, for we were wont to
charge our souls in talk.


AMIN. Melantius, I can tell the a good ^est of Strato, and a Lady the last day.


MEL. How wast;


AMIN. Why such an odd one.


MEL. I have longd to speak with you, not of an idle i^st that's forced, but of
matter you are bound to utter to me.


AMIN. What is that my friend?


MEL. I have observed your words fall from your tongue
Wildely, and all your carriage
Like one that strives to show his merry mood,
When he were ill disposed, you were not wont
To put such scorue into your speech -- you wear
Upon your face ridiculous iollity,
Some sadness sits here, which your tongue would
Cover ore with smiles, and twill not be,
What is it?

AMIN. A sadness here, what cause
Can Fate provide for me to make me so,
Am I not loved through all this Isle, the King
Raines greatness on me, have I not received
A Lady to my bed, that in her eye
Keeps mounting fire, and on her tender cheeks
Immutable color, in her heart
A prison for all virtue, are not you,
Which is above all joys, my constant friend:
What sadness can I have, no, I am light,
And feel the courses of my blood more warm
And stirring then they were; faith marry too,
And you will feel so vnexprest a joy
In chaste embraces, that you will indeed
Appear another.

MEL. You may shape Amintor
Causes to cozen the whole world withal,
And yourselfe too, and it is not like a friend,
To hide your soul from me, it is not your nature
To be thus idle, I have seen you stand,
As you were blasted midst of all your mirth,
Call thrice aloud, and then start, fayning joy
So coldly, world? what do I here, a friend
Is nothing, heaven I would ha told that man
My secret ^innes, i will search an unknown ^and,
And there plant friendship, all is withered here,
Come with a complement, I would have fought,
Or told my friends a lied, ere soothd him so;
Out of my bosom.

AMIN. But there is nothing.


MEL. Worse and worse, farewell;
From this time have acquaintance, but no friend.

AMIN. Melantius, stay, you shall know what that is.


MEL. See how you plead with friendship, be advised
How you give cause unto your self to say,
You ha lost a friend.

AMIN. Forgive what I ha done,
For I am so ore-gon with miseries,
Unheard of, that I lose consideration
Of what I ought to do, -- oh -- oh.

MEL. Do not weep, what is it?
May I once but know the man
Has turned my friend thus.

AMIN. I had spoke at first, but that,

MEL. But what?


AMIN. I held it most unfit
For you to know, faith do not know it yet.

MEL. Thou see my love, that will keep company
With thee in tears, hide nothing then from me,
For when I know the cause of thy distemper,
With mine old armor i will adorn my self,
My resolution, and cut through thy foes
Unto thy quiet, till I place thy heart
As peaceable as spotless innocence.
What is it?

AMIN. Why it is this, -- it is too big
To get out, let my tears make way awhile.

MEL. Punish me strangly heaven, if he escape
Of life or fame, that brought this youth to this.

AMIN. Your sister.


MEL. Well said.


AMIN. You Will wished unknown when you have heard it.


MEL. No.


AMIN. Is much to blame,
And to the King has given her honor up,
And lives in whoredom with him.

MEL. How Is this?
Thou art run mad with injury indeed,
Thou could not utter this, else speak again,
For I forgive it freely, tell thy griefs.

AMIN. she is wanton, I am loath to say a whore,
Though it be true.

MEL. Speak yet again, before mine anger grow
Up beyond throwing down, what are thy griefs?

AMIN. By all our friendship, these.


MEL. What, am I ^ane,
After mine actions, shall the name of friend
Blot all our family, and stick the brand
Of whore upon my sister vnreueng'd^
My shaking flesh be thou a witness for me,
With what unwillingness I go to scourge
This rayler, whom my folly has called friend,
I will not take thee basely, thy sword
Hangs near thy hand, draw it, that I may whip
Thy rashness to repentance, draw thy sword.

AMIN. Not on thee, did thine anger go as high
As troubled waters, thou should^ do me ease,
Here, and eternally, if thy noble hand,
Would cut me from my sorrows.

MEL. This is base,
And fearful, they that use to utter lies,
Provide not blows, but words to qualify
The men they wronged, thou have a guilty cause.

AMIN. Thou please me, for so much more like this,
Will raise my anger up above my griefs,
Which is a passion easier to be known,
And I shall then be blessed.

MEL. Take then more, to raise thine anger, it is mere
Cowardice makes thee not draw, and I will leave thee dead
How ever, but if thou art so much pressed,
With guilt and fear, as not to dare to fight,
I Will make thy memory loathed, and fix a farewell
Upon thy name for ever.

AMIN. Then I draw,
As justly as our Magistrates their swords,
To cut offenders off; I knew before,
Twould grate your ears, but it was base in you
To urge a weighty secret from your friend,
And then rage at it, I shall be at ease
If I be killed, and if you fall by me,
I shall not long out live you.

MEL. Stay a while,
The name of friend, is more then family,
Or all the world besides; I was a fool,
Thou searching humane nature, that did make
To do me wrong thou art inquisitiue,
And thrusts me upon questions that will take
My sleep away, would I had died ere known
This sad dishonor, pardon me my friend,
If thou will strike, here is a faithful heart,
Pearce it, for I will never heave my hand
To thine, behold the power thou have in me,
I do believe my sister is a whore,
A leprous one, put up thy sword young man.

AMINT. How should I bear it then she being so,
I fear my friend that you will loose me shortly,
And I shall do a foul act on my self
Through these disgraces.

MEL. Better half the la^d
Were buried quick together, no Amintor,
Thou shall have ease of this adulterous King
That drew her to it, where got he the spirit
To wrong me so.

AMIN. What is it then to me?
If it be wrong to you.

MEL. Why not so much, the credit of our house
Is thrown away,
But from his iron den i will waken death,
And hurl him on this King, my honesty
shall steel my sword, and on my horrid point
I Will wear my cause, that shall amaze the eyes
Of this proud man, and be to glittring
For him to look on.

AMIN. I have quite undone my fame.


MEL. D^ie up thy watrie eyes,
And cast a manly look upon my face,
For nothing is so wild as I thy friend
Till I have freed thee, still this swelling breast,
I go thus from thee, and will never cease
My vengeance till I find thy heart at peace.

AMIN. It must not be so, stay, mine eyes would tell
How loath I am to this, but love and tears
Leave me a while, for I have hazarded
All that this world calls happy, thou have wrought
A secret from me under name of friend,
Which art could nere have found, nor torture wrong
From out this bosom, give it me again,
For I will find it where so ere it lies
Hid in the mortal'st part, invent a way
To give it back.

MEL. Why? would you have it back,
I will to death pursue him with revenge.

AMIN. Therefore I call it from thee, for I know
Thy blood so high, that thou will stir in this, take to thy weapon

MEL. Hear thy friend that bears more years then thou.


AMIN. I will not hear, but draw, or I --


MEL. Amintor?


AMIN. Draw then, for I am full as resolute
As fame, and honor can enforce me,
I cannot linger, draw?

MEL. I do, -- but is not
My share of credit equal with thine
If I do stir.

AMIN. No? for it will be called
Honor in thee to spill thy sisters blood,
If she her birth abuse, and on the King
A brave revenge, but on me that have walked
With patience in it, it will fix the name
Of fearful cuckold, -- O that word,
Be quick.

MEL. Then join with me.


AMIN. I dare not do a sin, or else I would be speedy.


MEL. Then dare not fight with me, for that is a sin,
His grief distracts him, call thy thoughts again,
And to thy self pronounce the name of friend,
And see what that will work, I will not fight.

AMIN. You must?


MEL. I will be killed first, though my passions
Offered the like to you, it is not this earth
Shall by my reason to it, think awhile
For you are, (I must weep when I speak it,)
All most besides your self.

AMIN. Oh my soft temper,
So many sweet words from thy sisters mouth,
I am afraid would make me take her,
To embrace and pardon her, I am mad indeed,
And know not what I do, but have a care
Of me in what thou do.

MEL. Why thinks my friend I will forget his honor, or to save
The bravery of your house, will loose his fame
And fear to touch the throne of Majesty.

AMIN. A curse will follow that, but rather live
And suffer with me.

MEL. I will do what worth shall bid me.


AMIN. Faith I am sick, and desperately I hope,
Yet leaning thus I feel a kind of ease.

MEL. Come take again your mirth about you.


AMIN. I shall never do it.


MEL. I warrant you, look up, we will walk together,
Put thine arm here, all shall be well again.

AMIN. Thy love, o wretched, I thy love Melantius, why I
Have nothing else. Exeunt.

MEL. Be merry then. Enter Melantius again.


MEL. This worthy young man may do violence
Upon himself, but I have cherisht him
As well as I could, and sent him s^iling from me
To counterfeit again, sword hold thine edge,
My heart will never fail me? Diphilus,
Thou comst as sent. Enter Diphilus.

DIPH. Yonder has bin such laughing.


MEL. Betwixt whom?


DIPH. Why our sister and the King,
I thought their spleenes would break,
They laughed us all out of the room.

MEL. They must weep Diphilus.


DIPH. Must they?


MEL. They must? thou art my brother, and if I did believe,
Thou had a base thought, I would ^ip it out,
Lie where it durst.

DIPH. You should not, I would first mangle my self and find it.


MEL. That was spoke according to our strain, come join thy hands,
And swear a fiermenesse to what project ^
Shall lay before thee.

DIPH. You do wrong us both,
People hereafter shall not say there past
A bond more then our loves to tie our lives
And deaths together.

MEL. It is as nobly said as I would wish,
Anon i will tell you wonders, we are wronged.

DIPH. But I will tell you now, we will right our selves.


MEL. Stay not, prepare the armor in my house,
And what friends you can draw unto our side,
Not knowing of the cause, make ready too,
Have Diph: the time requires it, have. Exit Diphilus.
I hope my cause is just, I know my blood
Tells me it is, and I will credit it,
To take revenge and loose my self withal,
Were idle, and to escape, impossible,
Without I had the ^ort, which misery
Remaining in the hands of my old enemy
Calianax, but I must have it, see Enter Calianax.
Where he comes shaking by me, good my Lord
Forget your spleen to me, I never wronged you,
But would have peac^ with every man.

CALL. It Is well?
If I durst ^ight, your tongue would lie at quiet.

MEL. You Are touchie without all cause.


CALL. Do? mock me.


MEL. By mine honor I speak truth.


CALL. Honor? where is it.


MEL. See what starts you make into your idle hatred.
I am come with resolution to obtain a suit
Of you.

CALL. A suit of me, it is very like it should be granted sir.


MEL. Nay, go not hence,
It Is this, you have the keeping of the fort,
And I would wish you by the love you ought
To bear unto me to deliver it
Into my hands.

CALL. I am in hope thou art mad, to talk to me thus.


MEL. But there is a reason to move you to it, I would
Kill the King, that wronged you and your daughter.

CALL. Out traitor.


MEL. Nay but stay, I cannot escape the deed once done
Without I have this fort.

CALL. And should I help thee, now thy treacherous mind betraies it self.


MEL. Come delay me not,
Give me a sudden answer, already,
The last is spoke, refuse my offered love,
When it comes clad in secrets.

CALL. If I say I will not, he will kill me, I do see it writ
In his looks, and should I say I will, heel run and tell the
King: I do not shun your friendship dear Melantius,
But this cause is weighty, give me but an hour to think.

MEL. Take it, -- I know this goes unto the King,
But I am armed. Exit Melantius.

CALL. Me thinks I feel my self
But twenty now again, this fighting fool
Wants policy, I shall revenge my girl,
And make her red again, I pray, my legs
Will last that pace that I will carry them,
I shall want breath before I find the King,

Actus Quartus.
Enter MELANTIVS, EVADNE, and a Lady. MEL. God save you.


EVAD. Save you sweet brother,

MEL. In my blunt eye me thinks you look Euadn^.


EVAD. Come, you would make, me blush.


MEL. I would Euadne, I shall displease my ends else.


EVAD. You shall if you command me, I am bashful,
Come sir, how do I look.

MEL. I would not have your women hear me
Break into a commendations of you, it is not seemly.

EVAD. Go wait me in the gallerie, -- now speak.


MEL. I Will lock your doors first. Exit Ladies


EVAD. Why?


MEL. I will not have your gilded things that dance
In visitation with their millan skins
Choke up my business.

EVAD. You are strangely disposed sir.


MEL. Good Madame, not to make you merry.


EVAD. No, if you praise me twill make me sad.


MEL. Such a sad commendations I have for you.


EVAD. Brother, the Court has made you witty,
And learn to riddle.

MEL. I praise the Court for it, has learnd you nothing.


EVAD. Me?


MEL. I Euadne, thou art young and hansome,
A Lady of a sweet complexion,
And such a flowing carriage, that it cannot
Choose but inflame a Kingdom.

EVAD. Gentle brother.


MEL. It Is yet in thy repentance, foolish woman,
To make me gentle.

EVAD. How is this.


MEL. It Is base,
And I could blush at these years, through all
My honored scars: to come to such a parlie.

EVAD. I understand ye not.


MEL. You dare not fool,
They that commit thy faults fly the remembrance.

EVAD. My faults sir, I would have you know I care not
If they were written here, here in my forehead.

MEL. Thy body is to little for the story,
The lusts of which would fill another woman,
Though she had twins within her.

EVAD. This is saucie,
Look you intrude no more, there is your way.

MEL. Thou art my way, and I will tread upon thee,
Till I find truth out.

EVAD. What truth is that you look for?


MEL. Thy long lost honor, would the gods had set me
Rather to grapple with the plague, or stand
One of their loudest bolts, come tell me quickly,
Do^ it without inforcement, and take heed
You swell me not above my temper.

EVAD. How sir? where got you this report.


MEL. Where there was people in every place.


EVAD. They and the seconds of it are base people,
Believe them not, they will lie.

MEL. Do not play with mine anger, do not wretch,
I come to know that desperate fool, that drew thee
From thy fair life, be wise and lay him open.

EVAD. Vnhand me and learn manners, such another
Forgetfulness for fits your life.

MEL. Quench me this mighty humor, and then tell me
Whose whore you are, for you are one, I know it,
Let all mine honors perish but i will find him,
Though he lie locked up in thy blood, come tell me,
There is no facing it, and be not flattered,
The burnt air when the dog raines, is not fouler
Then thy contagious name, till thy repentance,
If the gods grant thee any, purge thy sickness.

EVAD. Begone, you are my brother that's your safty.


MEL. I Will be a woulfe first, it is to be thy brother
An infamy below the sin of coward,
I am as far from being part of thee,
As thou art from thy virtue, seek a kindred
Among sensual beasts, and make a goat thy father,
A goat is cooler, will you tell me yet.

EVAD. If you stay here and rail thus, I shall tell you,
I Will ha you whipped, get you to your command,
And there preach to your Sentinels,
And tell the^ what a brave man you are, I shall laugh at you.

MEL. You Are grown a glorious whore, where be your
Fighters, what mortal fool durst raise thee to this daring,
And I alive, by my just sword, ^'ad Safer
Bestride a billow when the angry North
Plowes up the sea, or made heavens fire his foe,
Work me no hier, will you discovery yet.

EVAD. The fellows mad, sleep and speak sense.


MEL. Force my swollen heart no further, I would save thee, your great
maintaine^s are not here, they dare not, would they were al, and armed, I would
speak loud, here is one should thunder to'em, will you tell me.


EVAD. Let me consider.


MEL. Do, whose child thou were,
Whose honor thou have murdered, whose grave opened,
And so pulled on the god^, that in their justice
They must restore him flesh again and life,
And raise his dry bones to revenge this scandal.

EVAD. The gods are not of my mind, they had better
Let Them lie sweet still in the earth, they will stink here.

MEL. Do you raise mirth out of my easiness,
Forsake me then all weaknesses of nature,
That make men women, speak you whore, speak truth,
Or by the dear soul of thy sleeping father,
This sword shall be thy lover, tell or i will kill thee,
And when thou have told all, thou will deserve it.

EVAD. You will not murder me.


MEL. No, it is a justice and a noble one,
To put the light out of such base offenders.

EVAD. Help?


MEL. By thy foul self, no human help shall help thee,
If thou criest, when I have killed thee, as I have
Vowed to do, if thou confess not, naked as thou have left
Thine honor, will I leave thee,
That on thy branded flesh the world may read
Thy black shame and my justice, will thou bend yet?

Euad. Yes.


Mel. Up and begin your story.


Euad. Oh I am miserable.


Mel. It Is true, thou art, speak truth still.


Euad. I have offended, noble Sir forgive me.


Mel. With what secure slave?


Euad. Do not ask me Sir,
Mine own remembrance is a misery
Too mighty for me.

Mel. Do not fall back agen^ my sword's unsheathed yet.


Euad. What shall I do?


Mel. Be true, and make your fault less.


Euad. I dare not tell.


Mel. Tell, or i will be this day a killing thee.


Euad. Will you forgive me then?


Mel. Stay I must ask mine honor first, I have too much foolish nature in me,
speak.


Euad. Is there no more here?


Mel. None but a fearful conscience, that is too many.
Who is it?

Euad. The King.


Mel. My worthy fathers and my services
Are liberally rewarded, King I thank thee:
For all my dangers and my wounds thou have paid me
In my own metal, these are soldiers thanks.
How long have you lived thus Euadne?

Euad. Too long, too late I find it.


Mel. Can you be very sorry?


Euad. Would I were half as blameless.


Mel. Woman thou will not to thy trade again.


Euad. First to my grave.


Mel. Would gods thou had been so blessed.
Do thou not hate this King now? prithee hate him.
Has sunk thy fair soul, I command thee curse him,
Curse till the gods hear and deliver him
To thy just wishes, yet I fear Euadne
You had rather play your game out.

Euad. No I feel
Too many sad confusions here to let in
Any loose flame hereafter.

Mel. Do thou not feel amongst al those one brave anger
That breaks out nobly, and directs thin^ arm
To kill this base King?

Euad. All the gods forbid it.


Mel. No all the gods require it, they are dishonored in him.


Euad. It Is too fearful.


Mel. You Are valiant in his bed, and bold enough
To be a stale whore, and have your Madams name,
Discourse for grooms and pages, and hereafter
When his cool Majesty has laid you by
To be at pension with some needy Sir
For meat and courser clothes, thus far you had no fear.
Come you shall kill him.

Euad. Good Sir.


Mel. And twere to kiss him dead, thoudst smother him.
Be wise and kill him, can thou live and know
What noble minds shall make thee see thy self,
Found out with every finger, made the shame
Of all successions, and in this thy ruin
Thy brother and thy noble husband broken?
Thou shall not live thus, kneel and swear to help me
When I shall call thee to it, or by all
Holy in heaven and earth thou shall not live
To breathe a foul hour longer, not a thought.
Come it is a righteous oath, give me thy hand,
And both to heaven held up, swear by that wealth
This lustful thief stole from thee, when I say it,
To let his foul soul out.

Euad. Here I swear it,
And all you spirits of abused Ladies,
Help me in this performance.

Mel. Enough, this must be known to none
But you and I Euadne, not to your Lord,
Though he be wise and noble, and a fellow
Dare step as far into a worthy action,
As the most daring, I as far as justice.
Ask me not why. Farewell. Exit Mel.

Euad. Would I could say so to my black disgrace,
Gods where have I been all this time; how friended,
That I should lose my self thus desperately,
And none for pit^ie show me how I wandered.
There is not in the compass of the light
A more unhappy creature, sure I am monstrous,
For I have done those follies those mad mischiefs
Would dare a woman. O my laden soul,
Be not so cruel to me, choke not up Enter Amintor.
The way to my repentance. O my Lord.

Amint. How now?


Euad. My much abused Lord. Kneel.


Amint. This cannot be.


Euad. I do not kneel to live, I dare not hope it,
The wrongs I did are greater, look upon me
Though I appear with all my faults.

Amint. Stand up.
This is a new way to beget more sorrows,
Heaven knows I have too many, do not mock me,
Though I am tame and bred up with my wrongs^
Which are my foster-brothers, I may leap
Like a hand-wolfe into my natural wildness,
And do an outrage, prithee do not mock me.

Euad. My whole life is so leaprous it infects
All my repentance, I would buy your pardon^
Though at the highest set, even with my life,
That slight contrition, that; no sacrifice
For what I have committed.

Amint^ Sure I dazzle.
There cannot be A faith in that foul woman
That known no God more mighty then her mischiefs,
Thou do still worse, s^i^l number on thy faults,
To press my poor heart thus. Can I believe
There Is any seed of virtue in that woman
Left to shoot up, that dares go in sin
Known and so known as thine is, O Euadne,
Would there were any safety in thy sex,
That I might put a thousand sorrows off,
And credit thy repentance, but I must not,
Thou have brought me to that dull calamity,
To that strange misbeleefe of all the world,
And all things that are in it, that I fear
I shall fall like a tree, and find my grave,
Only remembering that I grieve.

Euad. My Lord,
Give me your griefs, you are an innocent,
A soul as white as heaven, let not my sins
Perish your noble youth, I do not fall here
To shadow by dissembling with my tears
As all say women can, or to make less
What my hot will has done, which heaven and you
Knows to be tougher then the hand of time
Shall cut from man's remembrance, no I do not,
I do appear the same, the same Euadne,
Dressed in the shames I lived in, the same monster.
But these are names of honor to what I am,
I do present my self the foulest creature,
Most poisonous, dangerous, and despisde of men
Lerna ere bred or Nilus, I am hell,
Till you my dear Lord shoot your light into me,
The beams of your forgiveness, I am soul sick,
And wither with the fear of one condemnd,
Till I have got your pardon.

Amint. Rise Euadne.
Those heavenly powers that put this good into thee
Grant a continuance of it, I forgive thee
Make thyselfe worthy of it, and take heed
Take heed Euadne this be serious
Mock not the powers above that can, and dare
Give thee a great example of their justice
To all ensuing e^es, if thou plai'st
With thy repentance, the best sacrifice.

Euad. I have done nothing good to get belief,
My life has been so faithless, all the Creatures
Made for heavens honors have their ends, and good ones
Al but the cousening Crocodiles false women.
They reign here like those plagues, those killing soars
Men pray against, and when they die; like tales
Ill told, and vnbeleiu'd they pass away,
And go to dust forgotten: But my Lord
Those short days I shall number to my rest,
(As many must not see me,) shall though too late,
Though in my evening, yet perceive a will
Since I can do no good because a woman,
Reach constantly at something that is near it,
I will redeem one minute of my age,
Or like another Niobe i will weep^
Till I am water.

Amint. I am dissolved.
My frozen soul melts, may each sin thou have,
Find a new mercy, rise, I am at peace:
Had thou been thus, thus excellently good
Before that devil King tempted thy frailty
Sure thou had made a Star, give me thy hand
From this time I will know thee, and as far
As honor gives me leave, be thy Amintor,
When we meet next I will salute thee fairly,
And pray the gods to give thee happy days,
My Charity shall go along with thee
Though my embraces must be far from thee,
I should ha'kild thee, but this sweet repentance
Locks up my vengeance, for which, thus I kiss thee
The last kiss we must take, and would to heaven
The holy Priest that gave our hands together,
Had given us equal virtues, go Euadne
The gods thus part our bodies, have a care
My honor falls no further, I am well then.

Euad. All the dear joys here, and above hereafter
Crown thy fair soul, thus I take leave my Lord,
And never shall you see the foul Euadne
Till she have tried all honored means that may
Set her in rest, and wash her slaines away. Exeunt.

Hoboies play within. Banquet. Enter King, Calianax. K. I cannot tell how I
should credit this
From you that are his enemy.

Call. I am sure he said it to me, and i will justify it
What way he dares oppose, but with my sword.

King. But did he break without all circumstance
To you his Foe, that he would have the fort
To kill me, and then escape.

Call. If he deny it, i will make him blush.


King. It sounds incredibly.


Call. I so does every thing I say of late.


King. Not so Callian^x.


Call. Yes I should sit
Mute whilst a Rogue with strong arms cuts your throat.

King. Well I will try him, and if this be true
I Will pawn my life i will find it, ift be false
And that you cloth your hate in such a lie
You shall hereafter doat, in your own house,
Not in the Court.

Call. Why if it be a lie
Mine ears are false, for I besworne I heard it,
Old men are good for nothing, you were best
Put me to death for hearing, and free him
For meaning it, you would a trusted me
Once, but the time is altered.

King. And will still where I may do with justice to the world, you have no
witness.


Call. Yes my self.


King. No more I mean there were that heard it.


Call. How no more? would you have more? why am not
I enough to hang a thousand Rogues.

King. But so you may hang honest men too if you please.


Call. I may, it is like I will do so, there are a hundred will swear it for a
need too, if I say it.


King. Such witnesses we need not.


Call. And it is hard if my word cannot hang a boisterous knave.


King. Enough, where is Strato.


Strat. Sir Enter Strat.

King. Why where is all the Company? call Amintor in
Euadne, where is my brother, and Melantius,
Bid him come too, and Diphilus, call all Exit Strat.
That are without there, if he should desire
The combat of you, it is not in the power
Of all our laws to hinder it, unless
We mean to quit 'em.

Call. Why if you do think
It Is fit an old man, and a Counselor
To fight for what he says, then you may grant it.

Enter Amintor, Euadne, Melant. Diph. Lysip. Cle. Stra. King. Come sirs,
Amintor thou art yet a Bridegroom,
And I will use thee so, thou shall sit down,
Euadne sit, and you Amint^r too
This banquet is for you sir, who has brought
A merry tale about him, to raise laughter
Amongst our wine, why Strato where art thou
Thou will chopped out with them unseasonably
When I desire 'em not.

Strat. It Is my ill luck Sir, so to spend them then.


King. Reach me a boule of wine, Melantius thou art sad.


Mel. I should be Sir the merriest here,
But I ha nere a story of mine own
worth telling at this time.

King. Give me the wine.
Melantius I am now considering
How easy twere for any man we trust
To poison one of us in such a boule.

Mel. I think it were not hand Sir, for a Knave.


Call. Such as you are.


King. I faith twere easy, it becomes us well
To get plain dealing men about our selves,
Such as you all are here, Amintor to thee
And to thy fair Euadne.

Mel. Have you thought of this Callianax.


Call. Yes marry have I.


Mel. And what is your resolution?


Call. Ye shall have it soundly I warrant you.


King. Reach to Amintor, Strato.


Amint. Here my love,
This wine will do thee wrong, for it will set
Blushes upon thy cheeks, and till thou do
A fault twere pity.

King. Yet I wonder much
Of the strange desperation of these men
That dare attempt such acts here in our state,
He could not escape that did it.

Mel. Were he known, impossible.


King. It would be known Melantius.


Mel. It ought to be, if he got then away
He must wear all our lives upon his sword,
He need not fly the Island, he must leave
No one alive.

King. No I should think no man
Could kill me and escape clear but that old man.

Call. But I? heaven bless me, I, should I my liege?


King. I do not think thou would but yet thou might,
For thou have in thy hands the means to escape,
By keeping of the fort, he has Melantius,
And he has kept it well.

Mel. From Cobwebs Sir,
It Is clean swept, I can find no other Art
In keeping of it now, it was nere beseidge
Since he commanded.

Call. I shall be sure of your good word,
But I have kept it safe from such as you.

Mel. Keep your ill temper in,
I speak no malice, had my brother kept it
I should ha sed as much.

King. You are not merry, brother drink wine,
Sit you all still, Callianax Aside
I cannot trust thus, I have thrown out words,
That would have fetched warm blood upon the cheeks
Of guilty men, and he is never moved,
He knows no such thing.

Call. Impudence may escape, when feeble virtue is accus^d.


King. A must if he were guilty feel an alteration
At this our whisper, whilst we point at him,
You see he does not.

Call. Let him hang himself,
What care I what he does, this he did say^

King. Melant. you can easily conceive
What I have meant, for men that are in faults
Can subtly apprehend when others aim
At what they do amiss, but I forgive
Freely before this man, heaven do so too;
I will not touch thee so much as with shame
Of telling it, let it be so no more.

Call. Why this is very fine.


Mel. I cannot tell
What it is you mean, but I am apt enough
Rudely to thrust into ignorant fault,
But let me know it, happily it is naught
But misconstruction, and where I am clear
I will not take forgiveness of the gods,
Much less of you.

King. Nay if you stand so stiff, I shall call back my mercy.


Mel. I want smoothnes
To thank a man for pardoning of a crime
I never knew.

King. Not to instruct your knowledge, but to show you my ears are every
where, you meant to kill me, and get the fort to escape.


Mel. Pardon me Sir, my bluntness will be pardoned, you preserve
A race of idle people here about you,
Facers, and talkers to defame the world
Of those that do things worthy, the man that uttered this
Had perished without food, be it who it will,
But for this arm that fenst him from the Foe.
And if I thought you gave a faith to this,
The plainenes^e of my nature would speak more,
Give me a pardon, for you ought to do it
To kill him that spoke this.

Call. I that will be the end of all,
Then I am fairly paid for all my care and service.

Mel. That old man, who calls my enemy, and of whom I
(Though I will never match my hate so low,)
Have no good thought, would yet I think excuse me,
And swear he thought me wronged in this.

Call. Who I, thou shameless Fellow that have spoke to me
Of it thy self.

Mel. O then it came from him.


Call. From me, who should it come from but from me?


Mel. Nay I believe your malice is enough,
But I ha lost my anger, Sir I hope
You are well satisfied.

King. Licip: cheer Amintor and his Lady, there is no sound
Comes from you, I will come and do it my self.

Amint. You have done all ready Sir for me I thank you.


King. Melantius I do credit this from him,
How slight so ere you mak't.

Mel. It Is strange you should.


Call. It Is strange a should believe an old man's word,
That never lied ins life.

Mel. I talk not to thee.
Shall the wild word^ of this distempered man;
Frantique with age and sorrow make a breach
Betwixt your Majesty and me, it was wrong
To harken to him, but to credit him
As much, at least, as I have power to bear.
But pardon me, whilst I speak only truth,
I may commend my self -- I have bestowd
My careless blood with you, and should be loath
To think a^ action that would make me loose
That, and my thanks too: when I was a boy
I thrust my self into my Countries cause,
And did a deed, that plucked five years from time
And styled me man then, and for you my king
Your Subjects all have fed by virtue of my arm,
And you your self have lived at home in ease,
So terrible I grew that without swords
My name has fetched you conquest, and my heart
And limbs are still the same, my will as great
To do you service: let me not be paid
With such a strange distrust.

King. Melantius I held it great injustice to believe
Thine enemy, and did, if I did,
I do not, let that satisfy, what struck
With sadness all^ more wine.

Call. A few fine words have overthrown my truth, a thou art a Villain.


Mel. Why, thou were better let me have the fort,
Dotard, I will disgrace thee thus for ever,
There shall no credit lie upon thy words,
Think better and deliver it.

Call. My liege, he is at me now again to do it, speak
Deny it if thou can, examine him
Whilst he is hot, for if he cool again,
He will forswear it.

King. This is lunacie I hope, Melantius.


Mel. He has lost himself
Much since his daughter mist the happiness
My sister gaind, and though he call me Foe,
I pity him.

Call. A pity a pox upon you.


Mel. Mark his disordered words, and at the Mask


Mel. Diagoras knows he raged, and raild at me,
And called a Lady Whore so innocent
She understood him not, but it becomes
Both you and me to forgive distraction,
Pardon him as I do.

Call. I Will not speak for thee, for all thy cunning, if you will be safe chop
off his head, for there was never known so impudent a Rascal.


King. Some that love him get him to bed, why? pity should not let age make
it self contemptible, we must be all old, have him away.


Mel. Callianax the King believes you, come, you shall go home, and rest, you
ha done well, you will give it up When I have vsd you thus a month, I hope.


Call. Now, now, it is plain Sir, he does move me still,
He says he knows i will give him up the fort
When he has vsd me thus a month, I am mad
Am I not still?

Omnes. Ha ha ha.


Call. I shall be mad indeed if you do thus,
Why should you tru^t a sturdie fellow there,
(That has no virtue in him, alls in his sword)
before me; do but take his weapons from him
And he is an Ass, and I am a very fool
Both with him, and without him, as you use me.

Omnes. Ha ha ha.


King. Too well, Call: but if you use
This once again I shall entreat some other
To see your offices be well dischargd.
Be merry Gentlemen it grows somewhat late,
Amintor thou would be a bed again.

Amint. Yes Sir.


King. And you Euadne let me take thee in my arm, Melantius thou art as thou
deseruest to be, my friend,
Still, and for ever good Call:
Sleep soundly, it will bring thee to thy self.

Exeunt omnes. Manent Mel. and Call. Call. Sleep soundly! I sleep soundly now
I hope,
I could not be thus else. How dare thou stay
Alone with me, knowing how thou have used me?

Mel. You cannot blast me with your tongue, and that's the strongest
Part you have about ye.

Call. Do not thou look for some great punishment for this? I feel
My self begin to forget all my hate,
And take it unkindly that mine enemy
Should use me so extremely scuruily.

Mel. I shall meet too, if you begin to take
Unkindness, I never meant you hurt.

Call. Thoult anger me again; thou wretched rogue,
Meant me no wrong! disgrace me with the King,
Lose all my offices, this is no hurt
Is it, I prithee what do thou call hurt?

Mel. To poison men because they love me not,
To call the credit of men's wives in question,
To murder children, betwixt me and Land,
This I call hurt.

Call. All this thou think st is sport,
For mine is worse, but use thy will with me,
For betwixt grief and anger I could cry.

Mel. Be wise then and be safe, thou may revenge.


Call. I oth' the King, I would revenge of thee.


Mel. That you must plot your self.


Call. I am a ^ine plotter.


Mel. The short is, I will hold thee with the King
In this perplexity till peevishness
And his disgrace have laid thee in thy grave.
But if thou will deliver up the fort,
I Will take thy trembling body in my arms,
And bear thee over dangers, thou shall hold
Thy wonted state.

Call. If I should tell the King, can thou deni't again?


Mel. Try and believe.


Call. Nay then thou can bring any thing about,
Melantius, thou shall have the fort.

Mel. Why well, here let our hate be buried, and
This hand shall right us both, give me thy aged breast
To compass.

Call. Nay I do not love thee yet,
I cannot well endure to look on thee,
And if I thought it were a courtesy,
Thou should not have it, but I am disgraced,
My offices are to be taken away,
And if I did but hold this fort a day,
I do believe the King would take it from me,
And give it thee, things are so strangely carried,
Nere thank me fort, but yet the King shall know
There was some such thing int I told him of,
And that I was an honest man.

Mel. Heel buy that knowledge very dearly: Diph.
What news with thee? Ent. Diphilus.

Diph. This were a night indeed to do it in,
The King has sent for her.

Mel. She shall perform it then, go Diph.
And take from this good man my worthy friend
The fort, heel give it thee.

Diph. Ha you got that?


Call. Art thou of the same breed? can thou deny
This to the King too?

Diph. With a confidence as great as his.


Call. Faith like enough.


Mel. Away and use him kindly.


Call. Touch not me, I hate the whole strain, if thou follow me a great way
off, I Will give thee up the fort, and hang your selves.


Mel. Be gone.


Diph. He Is finely wrought. Exeunt Call. Diph.


Mel. This is a night spite of Astronomers
To do the deed in, I will wash the stain
That rests upon our house, off with his blood. Ent. Amint.

Amint. Melantius now assist me if thou be
That which thou say, assist me, I have lost
All my distempers, and have found a rage
So pleasing, help me.

Mel. Who can see him thus,
And not swear vengeance? what is the matter friend?

Amint. Out with thy sword, and hand in hand with me
Rush to the chamber of this hated King,
And sink him with the weight of all his sins
To hell for ever.

Mel. Twere a rash attempt,
Not to be done with safety, let your reason
Plot your revenge, and not your passion.

Amint. If thou refusest me in these extremes,
Thou art no friend, he sent for her to me,
By heaven to me, my self, and I must tell ye
I love her as a stranger, there is worth
In that vild woman, wor^hy things Melantius,
And she repents, I Will do it my self alone,
Though I be slain, farewell.

Mel. Heel overthrow my whole design with madne^, Amintor.
Think what thou do, I dare as much as valor,
But it is the King, the King, the King, Amintor,
With whom thou fightest, I know he is honest. Aside.
And this will work with him.

Amint. I cannot tell
What thou have said, but thou have charmd my sword
Out of my hand, and left me shaking here
Defencelesse.

Mel. I will take it up for thee.


Amint. What a wild beast is vncollected man!
The thing that we call honor bears us all
Headlong unto sin, and yet it self is nothing.

Mel. Alas how variable are thy thoughts?


Amint. Just like my fortunes, I was run to that,
I purposd to have ^hid thee for some plot
I did distrust thou had against the King
By that old fellows carriage, but take heed,
There Is not the least limb growing to a King
But carries thunder in it.

Mel. I have none against him.


Amint. Why come then, and still remember we may not think revenge.


Mel. I will remember. Exeunt.


Actus 5.
Enter Euadne and a Gentleman. EVad. Sir is the King abed?


Gent. Madam an hour ago.


Euad. Give me the key then, and Sir let none be near.
It Is the Kings pleasure.

Gent. I understand you Madam, would twere mine,
I must not wish good rest unto your Ladyship.

Euad. You talk, you talk.


Gent. It Is all I dare do Madam, but the King will wake, and then me thinks.


Euad. Saving your imagination, pray good night Sir.


Gent. A good night be it then, and a long one Madam, I am gone. Exit.


Euad. The night grows horrible, and all about me
Like my black purpose, O the conscience K. a bed.
Of a lost virtue, whither will thou pull me?
To what things dismal, as the depth of hell,
Will thou provoke me? Let no woman dare
From this hour be disloyal, if her heart
Be flesh; if she have blood and can fear, it is a madness
Above that desperate man's that left his peace,
And went to sea to fight, it is so many sins,
An age cannot repent 'em, and so great,
The gods want mercy for, yet I must through 'em,
I have begun a slaughter on my honor,
And I must end it there, a sleeps, oh God,
Why give you peace to this intemperate beast,
That has so far transgrest you? I must kill him,
And I will do it bravely: the mere joy
Confirms me that I merit, yet I must not
Thus tamely do it as he sleeps, that were
To rake him to another world, my vengeance
Shall seize him waking, and then ^ay before him
The number of his wrongs and punishments.
I Will shape his sins like furies till I waken
His evil Angel, his sick conscience,
And then I strike him dead. King by your leave, Ties his arms to the bed.
I dare not trust your strength, your Grace and I
M^st grapple upon even terms no more.
So, if he rail me not from my resolution,
As I believe I shall not, I shall fit him.
My Lord the King, my Lord, a sleeps
As if he meant to wake no more, my Lord,
Is he not dead already? Sir, my Lord.

King. Whose that?


Euad. O you sleep soundly Sir.


King. My dear Euadne,
I have been dreaming of thee, come to bed.

Euad. I am come at length Sir, but how welcome?


King. What pretty new device is this Euadne?
What, do you tie me to you by my love?
This is a queint one: come my dear and kiss me,
I Will be thy Mars, to bed my Queen of love,
Let us be caught together, that the gods may look,
And envy our embraces.

Euad. Stay Sir, stay,
You are too hot, and I have brought you physic,
To temper your high veins.

King. Prithee to bed then, let me take it warm,
Here thou shall know the state of my body better.

Euad. I know you have a surfeited foul body,
And you must bleed.

King. Bleed!


Euad. I you shall bleed, lie still, and if the devil
Your lust will give you leave, repent, this steel
Comes to redeem the honor that you stole
King, my fair name, which nothing but thy death
Can answer to the world.

King. How Euadne?


Euad. I am not she, nor bear I in this breast
So much cold spirit to be called a woman,
I am a Tiger, I am any thing
That knows not pity, stir not, if thou do,
I Will take thee vnprepar'd, thy fears upon thee,
That make thy sins look double, and so s^nd thee
(By my revenge I will) to look those torments
Prepared for such black souls.

King. Thou do not mean this, it is impossible,
Thou art too sweet and gentle.

Euad. No I am not,
I am as foul as thou art, and can number
As many such hels here: I was once faire^
Once I was lovely, not a blowing rose
More chastely sweet, till thou, thou, thou foul canker,
(Stir not) did poison me, I was a world of virtue,
Till your cursed Court and you (hell bless you for'^)
With your temptations on temptations
Made me give up mine honor, for which (King)
I am come to kill thee.

King. No.


Euad. I am.


King. Thou art not.
I prithee speak not these things, thou art gentle,
And w^rt not meant thus rugged.

Euad. Peace and hear me.
Stir nothing but your tongue, and that for mercy,
To those above us, by whose lights I vow,
Those blessed fires, that shot to see our sin,
If thy hot soul had substance with thy blood,
I would kill that too, which being past my steel,
My tongue shall reach: Thou art a shameless villain,
A thing out of the ouercharge of nature,
Sent like a thick cloud to disperse a plague
Upon weak catching women, such a tyrant,
That for his lust would sell away his subjects,
I all his heaven hereafter.

King. Hear Euadne,
Thou soul of sweetness, hear, I am thy King.

Euad. Thou art my shame, lie still, there is none about you
Within your cries, all promises of safety
Are but deluding dreams, thus, thus thou foul man,
Thus I begin my vengeance.

King. Hold Euadne,
I do command thee, hold.

Euad. I do not mean Sir
To part so fairly with you, we must change
More of these loue-trickes yet.

King. What bloody villainy
Prouok't thee to this murder?

Euad. Thou, thou monster. Stabs him.


King. Oh.


Euad. Thou keptst me brave at Court, and whorde me, King,
Then married me to a young noble Gentleman,
And whorde me still.

King. Euadne, pity me.


Euad. Hell take me then, this for my Lord Amintor,
This for my noble brother, and this stroke
For the most wronged of women. Kills him.

King. Oh I die.


Euad. Die all our faults together, I forgive thee. Exeunt.


Enter two of the Bedchamber. 1. Come now she is gone, lets enter, the King
expects it, and will be angry.


2. It Is a fine wench, we will have a snap at her one of these nights as she goes
from him.


1. Content: how quickly he had done with her, I see Kings can do no more that
way then other mortal people.


2. How fast he is! I cannot hear him breathe.


1. Either the tapers give a feeble light, or he looks very pale.


2. Lets look: Alas, he is stiff, wounded and dead.
Treason.

1. Run forth and call. Exit Gent.


2. Treason, treason.


1. This will be laid on us: who can believe
A woman could do this?

Enter Cleon and Lysippus. Cle. How now? where is the traitor?


1. Fled, fled away, but there her woeful act
Lies still.

Cle. Her act! a woman!


Lys. Where Is the body?


1. There.


Lys. Farewell thou worthy man, there were two bonds
That tied our loves, a brother and a King,
The least of which might fetch a flood of tears:
But such the misery of greatness is,
They have no time to mourn, then pardon me.
Sirs, which way went she? Enter Strato.

Strat. Never follow her,
For she alas was but the instrument.
News is now brought in that Melantius
Has got the Fort, and stands upon the wall,
And with a loud voice calls to those few that pass
At this dead time of night, delivering
The innocence of this act.

Lys Gentlemen^ I am your King.


Strat. We do acknowledge it.


Lys. I would I were not: follow all, for this must have a sudden stop. Exeunt.


Ent. Melant. Diph. Calli^ on the walls. Mel. If the dull people can believe I
am armed,
Be constant Diph. now we have time,
Either to bring our banished honors home,
Or to create new ones in our ends.

Diph. I fear not,
My spirit lies not that way. Courage Callianax.

Call. Would I had any, you should quickly know it.


Mel. Speak to the people, thou art eloquent.


Call. It Is a fine eloquence to come to the gallows,
You were borne to be my end, the devil take you,
Now must I hang for company, it is strange
I should be old, and neither wise, nor valiant.

Enter Lysip. Diag. Cleon. Strato. Guard. Lys. See where he stands as boldly
confident,
As if he had his full command about him.

Strat. He looks as if he had the better cause, Sir,
Under your gracious pardon let me speak it,
Though he be mighty spirited and forward
To all great things, to all things of that danger
Wo^se men shake at the telling of, yet certain
I do believe him noble, and this action
Rather pulled on then sought, his mind was ever
As worthy as his hand.

Lys. It Is my fear too,
Heaven forgive all: summon him Lord Cleon.

Cle. Ho from the walls there.


Mel. Worthy Cleon welcome,
We could a wished you here Lord, you are honest.

Call. Well thou art as flattering a knave, though I dare not tell thee so.
Aside.


Lys. Melantius.


Mel. Sir.


Lys. I am sorry that we meet thus, our old love
Never required such distance, pray to heaven
You have not left your self, and sought this safety
More out of fear then honor, you have lost
A noble master, which your faith, Melantius,
I Am sure might have preserved.

Melant. Royal young man, those tears look lovely on thee,
Had they been shed for a deserving one,
They had been lasting monuments: Thy brother,
Whilst he was good, I called him King, and served him,
With that strong faith, that most unwearied valor,
Pulled people from the farthest sun to seek him,
And beg his friendship, I was then his soldier,
But since his hot pride drew him to disgrace me,
And brand my noble actions with his lust,
(That neuer-cur'd dishonor of my sister,
Base stain of whore, and which is worse,
The joy to make it still so, like my self)
Thus I have flung him off with my allegiance,
And stand here mine own justice for revenge,
What I have suffered in him, and this old man
Wronged almost to lunacie.

Call. Who I? You wud draw me in, I have had no wrong,
I do disclaim ye all.

Mel. The short is this,
It Is no ambition to lift up my self
Urges me thus, I do desire again
To be a subject, so I may be free;
If not, I know my strength, and will vnbuild
This goodly town, be speedy, and be wise, in a reply.

Strat. Be sudden Sir to tie
All up again, what is done is past recall,
And past you to revenge, and there are thousands
That wait for such a troubled hour as this.
Throw him the blanke.

Lys. Melantius, write in that thy choice,
My seal is at it.

Mel. It was our honors drew us to this act,
No gain, and we will only work our pardons.

Call. Put my name in too.


Diph. You disclaimed us all but now Callianax.


Call. That's all one,
I Will not be hanged hereafter by a trick,
I Will have it in.

Mel. You shall, you shall:
Come to the back gate, and we will call the King,
An^ give you up the Fort.

Lys. Away, away. Exeunt omnes.


Enter A^pat. in man's apparel. Aspat. This is my fatal hour, heaven may
forgive
My rash attempt that causelessly has laid
Griefs on me that will never let me rest,
And put a woman's heart into my breast,
It is more honor for you that I do,
For she that can endure the misery
That I have on me, and be patient too,
May live and laugh at all that you can do.
God save you Sir. Enter Servant.

Ser. And you Sir, what is your business?


Aspat. With you Sir now, to do me the fair office
To help me to your Lord.

Ser. What would you serve him?


Aspat. I Will do him any service, but to haste,
For my affairs are earnest, I desire
To speak with him.

Ser. Sir because you are in such haste, I would be loath to delay you longer:
you cannot.


Aspat. It shall become you though to tell your Lord.


Ser. S^r he will speak with no body, but in particular, I have in charge
about no weighty matters.


Aspat. This is most strange: art thou gold proof? there is for thee^ help me
to him.


Ser. Pray be not angry Sir, I Will do my best. Exit.


Aspat. How stubbornly this fellow answered me!
There is a vild dishonest trick in man,
More then in women: all the men I meet
Appear thus to me, are harsh and rude,
And have a subtletie in every thing,
Which love could never know; but we fond women
Harbor the easiest and the smoothest thoughts,
And think all shall go so, it is unjust
That men and women should be matched together.

Amint. Where is he? Enter Amintor and his man.


Ser. There my Lord.


Amint. What would you Sir?


Aspat. Please it your Lordship to command your man
Out of the room, I shall deliver things
Worthy your hearing.

Amint. Leave us.


Aspat. O that that shape should bury falsehood in it. Aside.


Amint. Now your will Sir.


Aspat. When you know me, my Lord, you needs must guess
My business, and I am not hard to know.
For till the chance of war marked this smooth face
With these few blemishes, people would call me
My sisters picture, and her mine: in short,
I am the brother to the wronged Aspatia.

Amint. The wronged A^patia, would thou were so too
Unto the wronged Amintor, let me kiss
That hand of thine in honor that I bear
Unto the wronged Aspatia, here I stand
That did it, would he could not, gentle youth
Leave me, for there is something in thy looks
That calls my sins in a most odious form
Into my mind, and I have grief enough
Without thy help.

Aspat. I would I could with credit.
Since I was twelve years old I had not seen
My sister till this hour, I now arrived,
She sent for me to see her marriage,
A woeful one, but they that are above
Have ends in every thing, she vsd few words,
But yet enough to make me understand
The baseness of the injuries you did her,
That little trayning I have had, is war,
I may behave my self rudely in peace,
I would not though, I shall not need to tell you
I am but young, and would be loath to loose
Honor that is not easily gaind again,
Fairly I mean to deal, the age is strict
For single combats, and we shall be stopped
If it be published, if you like your sword
Use it, if mine appear a better to you,
Change, for the ground is this, and this the time
To end our difference.

Amint. Charitable youth,
If thou be such, think not I will maintain
So strange a wrong, and for thy sisters sake,
Know, that I could not think that desperate thing
I durst not do, yet to enjoy this world
I would not see her, for beholding thee,
I am I know not what, if I have ought
That may content thee, take it, and be gone,
For death is not so terrible as thou,
Thine eyes shoot guilt into me.

Aspat. Thus she swore,
Thou would behave thy self and give me words
That would fetch tears into my eyes, and so
Thou do indeed, but yet she bad me watch,
Least I were cossend, and be sure to fight
Ere I returned.

Amint. That must not be with me,
For her i will die directly, but against her
Will never hazard it.

Aspat. You must be vrgd, I do not deal uncivilly with those that dare to
fight, but such a one as you

M^st be vsd thus. She strikes him.


Amint. I prithee youth take heed,
Thy sister is a thing to me so much
Above mine honor, that I can endure
All this, good gods -- a blow I can endure,
But stay not, least thou draw a timelesse death
Upon thy self.

Aspat. Thou art some prating Fellow,
One that has studied out a trick to talk
And move soft hearted people; to be kicked She kickes him aside.
Thus to be kicked -- why should he be so slow
In giving me my death.

Amint. A man can bear
No more and keep his flesh, forgive me then,
I would endure yet if I could, now show
The spirit thou pretendest, and understand
Thou have no hour to live, what do thou mean, they figh^
Thou can not fight, the blows thou makst at me
Are quite besides, and those I offer at thee
Thou spreadst thine arms, and takst upon thine breast
Alas defencele^^e.

Aspat. I have got enough,
And my desire, there is no place so fit
For me to die as here. Ent. Euadne.

Euad. Amintor I am laden with events
That fly to make thee happy, I have joys
That in a moment can call back thy wrongs
And settle thee in thy free state again,
It is Euadne still that follows thee
But not her mischiefs.

Amint. Thou can not fool me to believe again,
But thou have books and things so full of news
That I am stald.

Euad. Noble Amint^r put off thy amaze,
Let thine eyes loose, and speak, am I not fair,
Looks not Euad: beatious with these rites now
Were those hours half so lovely in thine eyes
When our hands met before the holy man,
I was too foul within, to look fair then^
Since I knew ill I was not free till now.

Amint. There is presage of some important thing
About thee which it seems thy tongue has lost,
Thy hands are bloody, and thou have a knife.

Euad. In this consists thy happiness and mine,
Joy to Amintor for the King is dead.

Amint. Those have most power to hurt us, that we love
We lay our sleeping lives within their arms,
Why thou have raisd up mischief to his height
And found one, to out-name thy other faults,
Thou have no intermission of thy sins,
But all thy life is a continued ill,
Black is thy coulor now, disease thy nature
Joy to Amintor, thou have touched a life
The very name of which had power to chain
Up all my rage, and tame my wildest wrongs.

Euad. It Is done, and since I could not find away
To meet thy love so clear, as through his life
I cannot now repent it.

Amint. Cudst thou procure the gods to speak to me,
To bid me love this woman, and forgive,
I think I should fall out with them, behold
Here lies a youth whose wounds bleed in my breast,
Sent by his violent Fate to fetch his death
From my slow hand, this keeps night here
And throws an unknown Wilderness about me.

Aspat. Oh oh oh.


Amint. No more pursue me not.


Euad. Forgive me then and take me to thy bed,
We may not part.

Amint. Forbear be wise, and let my rage go this way.


Euad. It Is you that I would stay, not it.


Amint. Take heed it will return with me.


Euad. If it must be I shall not fear to meet it,
Take me home.

Amint. Thou Monster of cruelty, forbear.


Euad. For heavens sake look more calm,
Thine eyes are crueller, then thou can make thy sword.

Amint. Away, away thy knees are more to me then violence,
I am worse then sick to see knees follow me,
For that I must not grant, for Gods sake stand,

Euad. Receive me then.


Amint. I dare not stay, thy language,
In midst of all my anger, and my grief,
Thou do awake some thing that troubles me,
And says I loved thee once, I dare not stay,
There is no end of woman's reasoning. leaves her.

Euad. Amintor thou shall love me now again,
Go I am calm, farewell, And peace for ever.
Euadne whom thou hatst will die for thee. Kills herself.

Amint. I have a little humane nature yet
That's lest for thee, that bids me stay thy hand. Returns.

Euad. Thy hand was welcome but it came too late,
Oh I am lost the heavy sleep makes have.

Aspat. Oh oh oh.


Amint. This earth of mine does tremble, and I feel
A ^tarke affrighted motion in my blood,
My soul grows weary of her house, and I
All over am a trouble to my self,
There is some hidden power in these dead things
That calls myself vnto'em, I am cold,
Be resolute, and beare'em company,
There Is something yet which I am loath to leave,
There Is man enough in me to meet the fears
That death can bring, and yet would it were done,
I can find nothing in the whole discourse
Of death I durst not meet the bouldest way,
Yet still betwixt the reason and the act
The wrong I to Aspatia did stands up,
I have not such another fault to answer,
Though she may justly arm her self with scorn
And hate of me, my soul will part less troubled,
When I have paid to her in tears my sorrow,
I will not leave this act unsatisfied,
If all that's left in me can answer it.

Aspat. Was it a dream? There stands Amintor still,
Or I dream still.

Amint. How do thou? speak, receive my love and help:
Thy blood climbes up to his old place again,
There Is hope of thy recovery.

Aspat. Did you not name A^patia?


Amint. I did.


Aspat. And talked of tears and sorrow unto her.


Amint. It Is true, and till these happy signs in thee
Staid my course, it was thither I was going.

Aspat. Thou art there already, and these wounds are her^:
Those threats I brought with me, sought not revenge,
But came to fetch this blessing from thy hand.
I am Aspatia yet.

Amint. Dare my soul ever look abroad again?


Aspat. ^I shall sure live Amintor, I am well,
A kind of healthful joy wanders within me.

Amint. The world wants lines to excuse thy loss,
Come let me bear thee to some place of help.

Aspat. Amintor thou must stay, I must rest here,
My strength begins to disobey my will.
How do thou my best soul? I would feign live,
Now if I could, would thou have loved me then?

Amint. Alas, all that I ams not worth a hair
From thee.

Aspat. Give me thine hand, mine eyes grow up and down,
And cannot find thee, I am wondrous sick.
Have I thy hand, Amintor?

Amint. Thou greatest blessing of the world, thou have.


Aspat. I do believe thee better then my sense,
Oh I must go, farewell.

Amint. She sounds: Aspatia. Help, for Gods sake: water,
Such as may chain life ever to this frame.
Aspatia, speak: what no help? yet I fool,
I Will chafe her temples, yet there nothing stirs.
Some hidden power tell her Amintor calls,
And let her answer me: Aspatia speak.
I have heard, if there be any life, but bow
The body thus, and it will show it self.
Oh she is gone, I will not leave her yet.
Since out of justice we must challenge nothing,
I Will call it mercy if you will pity me,
You heavenly powers, and lend forth some few years
The blessed soul to this fair seat again.
No comfort comes, the gods deuie me too.
I Will bow the body once again: Aspatia.
The soul is fled for ever, and I wrong
My self, so long to loose her company.
Must I talk now? Here Is to be with thee love, Kills himself.

Enter Servant. Ser. This is a great grace to my Lord to have the new King come
to him, I must tell him he is entering. Oh God, help, help.


Enter Lysip. Melant. Call. Diph. Strat^. Lys. Where Is Amintor?


Strat. O there, there.

Lys. How strange is this?


Call. What should we do here?


Mel. These deaths are such acquainted things with me,
That yet my heart dissolues not. May I stand
Stiff here for ever: eyes call up your tears,
This is Amintor: heart, he was my friend,
Melt, now it flows, Amintor give a word
To call me to thee.

Amint. Oh.


Mel. Melantius calls his friend Amintor, oh thy arms
Are kinder to me then thy tongue,
Speak, speak.

Amint. What?


Mel. That little word was worth all the sounds
That ever I shall hear again.

Diph. Oh brother here lies your sister slain,
You loose your self in sorrow there.

Mel. Why Dip. it is
A thing to laugh at in respect of this,
Here was my Sister, Father, Brother, Son,
All that I had, speak once again
What youth lies slain there by thee.

Amint. It Is Aspatia,
My last is said, let me give up my soul
Into thy bosom.

Call. What Is that, what is that Aspatia?


Mel. I never did repent the greatness of heart till now,
It will not burst at need.

Call. My daughter, dead here too, and you have all fine new tric^es to greiue,
but I nere knew any but direct crying.


Mel. I am a Pratler, but no more.


Diph. Hold Brother.


Lisip. Stop him.


Diph. Fie how unmanly was this offer in you,
Does this become our strain.

Call. I know not what the matter is, but I am
Grown very kind, and am friends with you all now
You have given me that among you will kill me
Quickly, but I Will go home and live as long as I can. Exit.

Mel. His spirit is but poor, that can be kept.
From death for want of weapons,
Is not my hands a weapon sha^pe enough
To stop my breath, or if you tie down those,
I vow Amintor I will never eat
Or drink, or sl^epe, or have to do with that
That may prese^ue life, this I swear to keep.

Lisip. Look to him tho, and bear those bodies in
May this a fair example be ^^ me.
To rule with temper, for on lu^^f^ll Kings
Unlooked for sudden deaths from God are sent,
But cursed is he that is their instrument.

FINIS.

