A Treaty of the Church, containing a true discourse, to know the true
Church by, and to discern it from the Romish Church, and all other false
assemblies, or counterfeit congregations.

Written by M. Bertrande de Loque of Dolphinee, and dedicated unto my Lord the
Vicount of Turenne.

And faithfully translated out of French into English, by T. W.

Imprinted at London, for Richard Langton, dwelling in Swythins Lane: and there
they are to be sold. 1581.

The Sum of the Chapters contained in this present Treatise.
TOuching the diverse significations, and Church, and how the Church is
commonly distinguished. Page 1. Of the Catholic and universal Church, which 7.
Of the visible Church, and of the true marks 14. Whether the true marks of
the Church are 19. Of the calling and succession of pastors. Page 24. That the
Church has always been from the That Jesus Christ alone is the head of the
68. Whether the Church of Rome be the true and Catholic Church, and whether
we do well to withdraw and separate our selves from it. Page 102 128. 160.
184. 197. 213. 234. 258 274.
To the most noble Lord, my Lord Henry de la Tour, Vicount of Turenne,
County of Monfort, Baron of Mongacon, Oliergues, Bonsolz, Fey, Seruissac,
Croc, etc. Captain of five hundred men at arms of the kings armies.
MY Lord, Lactan. lib. 4. de vera sapient. Cap. 30.
Lactantius has very properly and fitly called the Church, the fountain of
truth, the house and dwelling place of faith, and the temple of God, adjoining
withal, that if there be any which enters not into this Temple: or if there
be any that go out thereof, he is shut out from the hope of life, and from
eternal salvation. For even as in the time of the universal flood, none
could be saved, which were out of Noe his Arc: Genesis. 7.20 23.
so without the Church, there is neither hope, nor faith, nor grace, nor
salvation. Which thing also, the Apostle Saint Paul did very well declare
and mean, when being purposed to excommunicate some, and to cast them out of
the Church, 2. Cor. 5. 3.5. 1. Tim. 1. 20
he said, he must deliver them unto Satan. For as Jesus Christ reigns in
the Church: so Satan reigns without the same: and as they which are in the
Church, having Jesus Christ for their head are in very good state and blessed:
so they which are out of the Church, having the Devil for thejr head, cannot
but be wicked and accursed. And therefore it is said, both in Isaiah and in
Joel, That in Sion and in Jerusalem there shall be salvation. Isaiah. 46.13 Joel.
2.32.
There being meant by Syon and Jerusalem the Church of God: as also by the
word heaven there is meant the same thing in the Apocalips, when S. John
says, I heard a great and loud voice, Reave. 12.10.
saying, Now is salvation in heaven. On the other side we read, that when
God declares, that he will utterly root out some, from the heavenly life,
he denounces against them and threatens: Ezech. 13. 9
That they shall not be in the council and assembly of his people, neither
written in the role of his servants. And David very well knew and felt this,
when sometimes being in exile, all griefs and adversities, were unto him
tolerable, and as a man would say easy to bear, excepting this, that he was
deprived of, and wanted the solemn assemblies, wherein men made public
declaration and protestation, of Gods religion and service. Wherefore bewailing
his condition, because he was excluded from the visible Church, he being
also shut out from access or coming to the Tabernacle, by the cruelty and
tyranny of his enemies, he cried out earnestly, and said, Psalm. 84.1.2.4.10.
O Lord of hosts how amiable are thy Tabernacles? My soul longs yea and
faints, for the Courts of the Lord, for my heart and my flesh leap for joy
in the living God. And a little after, Blessed are they which dwell in thy
house, they will ever praise thee. For a day in thy courts is better, then a
thousand other where, I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God,
then to dwell in the Tabernacles of the wicked: For thereby he has declared
that the condition of those men, which bestow their life (yea although it were
but a day long) in the service of God, in the midst of the Church, and among
faithful people, is far more blessed then theirs, who live (though it were
never so long) out of Gods house, and in the midst of those, out of whose
company, their religion is banished. To which purpose also belongs that,
Psalm. 27.4.
which the same Prophet sings an other Psalm. One thing have I desired of
the Lord, that I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of Lord all
the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his
Temple. Psalm. 106.45
And again when he says, Remember, or have mercy on me O Lord, with the
favor and good will of the people, and visit me with thy salvation. That I
may see the good things of thy chosen ones; and rejoice in the joy of thy
people, and glory with thine inheritance. And for this very cause and occasion,
Heb. 11.24.25.
the Apostle to the Hebrews commends and praises Moses. when he says: That
by faith, he being com to age, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh his
daughter: chosing rather to suffer adversity with the people of GOD, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin, for a short season.

Wherefore if we would, that GOD should govern us by his holy spirit, (to
the end to make us enjoy and possess his spiritual and heavenly good things,
which he gives not but unto his children alone, the members of Jesus Christ
his son) and by consequent, if we would be saved and made blessed, we
ought to hold and keep our selves, firm, sure, and well stayed in the
Church, so that there be no force of tyrants, no violence of storms and
tempests, no persecution of enemies, no promises, no threatenings, nor (to be
short) any thing else, which may turn us away, or cause us to separate our
selves from it.

But in the mean while we see, what controversy and disputation, there is at
this day amongst men, touching the point or matter of the Church, that being
true which Lactantius says: to wit, That every company of Heretics
supposes, Lact. de verae sapient, ca. 10.
that they are true Christians, and their Church is the Catholic Church: as
we know that Parmenianus the Donatist said: That there was not a Church,
but amongst his sort and company: insomuch that sundry in this age suffer
them selves too drop away and be deceived by the feigned name and visardlyke
title of the Church, abidyng hardened in their superstitions, and blinded in
their errors, making no accounte, August. ad Catecuin, cap. 20.
of Saint Augustine his aduertisemente and counsel, who speaks thus.

This Catholic Church is our true mother, yea she is our faithful and
chaste mother, decked within, with the dignity and worthiness of her
husband, and not colored or painted without, with lying and falshoode: and
afterward he adds: Let us look well to our selves, that the strange and
false name of the Church turn us not away from this mother of ours, and that
the outward show, or borrowed bare title of the Church do not deceive us.

There are some others, who remain astonished as it were, and doubtful, not
knowing to which part to turn, neither on which side to set themselves in
order, seeing the Romish Church armed with great force and authority,
maintained and vpholden by great personages, clothed with diverse ornaments,
outward apparel, and followed of the greatest number: On the otherside,
beholding the reformed Church feeble and weak in outward show, made and
standing for the most part, of the smalest and basest according to the world,
simple in deckinges and ceremonies, and followed of very few people.

But the doctrine of the truth (which is our principal light, and chief
guide) gives us a good remedy and aid in this difficulty, showing us that
the true Church, ought to be discerned from the false, by her own right and
true marks. which are the pure preaching of the word, and the true and right
use of the Sacraments, and not the great number of people, nor pompes, nor
outward ceremonies, invented and devised by men themselves.

You (my Lord) have sometimes seen what trouble and combats the very visard,
bare name, and shining show, of the Romish Church has brought, to some men's
consciences and spirits, and that not only amongst the rudest and ignorant
sort, but even in the rank and order of those, which made profession and
took upon them to teach others: yea so far it has carried them, that by
reason there was not in them a full resolutenesse, they knew not of what
company they should be.

Notwithstanding as touching your self after that God had honored you with
his knoweledge, and called you into his Church, that you might be
comprehended within the sheepefolde of Jesus Christ his son, having almost
made open profession of his Gospel, and cast away the beasts mark,
whatsoever shaking and staggering you perceived in diverse others, you
notwithstanding have always continued, through Gods grace, grounding and
settling your self upon his assured and invincible word. And in deed, by what
force and strength could the back slydinges of some, and the Sophistical
disputations of other some, astonishe your faith, or beat down your
constancy, so well maintained and vpholden by the holy Ghost? How could
these assaults crack your courage, or change and make cold your zeal, so
hot in the service of God? Certainly, this is a great matter that all the
world has an eye upon you, wondering at, and loving, the great and singular
affection which you bear, to the advancement of Gods true religion and
service.

But the question is now, to continue in well doing, and to proceed daily from
good to better. For this is nothing to begin well, except a man persevere and
continue even to the end. And we know what Jesus Christ says, to wit, That
he which puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is not apt to the
kingdom of God. Luke. 9.62. 2. Tim. 2.5.
And Saint Paul. If any man) says he) strive for a maisterie, he is not
crowned, except he strive as he ought to do.

There are some which say, that this is enough, for a man to have some
testimony in his conscience, that he belongs to God, albeit he make not,
any declaration or profession of his religion. But by the testimonies here
above marked, and put down, it is easy for us to gather what need we have,
to range and bring our selves into the true Church, that we may therein live
Christianlie in the service of God, seeing that any where else there is neither
life nor light. And also what assurance can they have of their salvation,
which live in this world as dogs and swine, following the train and steps of
Sardanapalus, or of Epicurus, to eat and drink, to laugh and rejoice, to play
and to give themselves to pleasure without thinking any whit at all of God, or
remembering any religion? Wherefore my Lord, even as you have well and
blessedly begun, having had right knowledge to discern, between the true and
false Church: so it yet rests, that you persevere and continue, yea that yet
you proceed and pass some what further, to range and bring into order all
your house in the fear of God, that it may be unto him a holy and chaste
Church: in the midst whereof he may take pleasure to dwell, that thereby
he may bless you, and make you to prosper.

You know with what ardencie and zeal, the Prophet Haggai reproved the Jews
of his time, Haggai. 1.4.
lately returned out of Babylon, because they builded many houses, for
themselves, and did diligently seele and carue them, but they had no regard to
build up the Lords Temple.

Hag. 2.3.22.
And we must note, that the Prophet, directs not his speech only to the
people and Priests, to move them to do their duty, for the furtheraunce
and setting up of this building, but also unto Zerubbabel, the governor of
Judah,. Which serves well to declare, that great Lords and Magistrates, as
well as ministers, and the rest of the people, ought withal their might and
power to employ them selves, for the edification and aduauncemente of the
Church of God.

Romans 13.4 Psalm. 82.1.
And thereupon comes it too pass, that Saint Paul calls Magistrates, the
Ministers and Servants of God, and that in another place, They are called
even Gods: to wit, not only in respect of civil judgments, and because
they are the tutors, mainteiners and defendours, of public good things and
the common wealth, but also because the principal part, of their charge and
office is, to serve God in nourishing and mainteining his service, as well
outward as inward, in causing pure doctrine and religion to florishe, and in
keeping the state of the Church, safe and sound and whole in every part. for
which effect and cause, they are also named in Isaiah, Isaiah. 49.23
Nurcing fathers, and Nurces of the Church. The Apostle writing unto Timothy,
1. Timo. 2.2.
shows us the self same matter, when after he had exhorted them to pray for
the kings, and for all those which are placed in authority, he adds as a
fit reason and very strong for that purpose: That under them we may lead,
a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: For thereby he
evidently declares that the Magistrates office is, to have care that the
people which are committed too them, should live not only in honesty and in
peace one of them with another, but also in all godliness, and fear of God.

But if the holy Scripture did not teach us this, yet we might in some sort
learn it out of profane authors, that is to say, Philosophers and Heathen
law makers. For among the Philosophers, Aristot. in Politicis.
Aristotle in his Politikes has said: That godliness and religion are the
matters which Magistrates ought to esteem most necessary, for the
establishement of commonweals.

Plato in Epi. nom.
And Plato in his Epinomis says also: That Princes should not at any time be
persuaded, that there is any thing more profitable and necessary for
mankind, then that virtue is, which men call piety and godliness, that is to
say, religion and the service of God.

And as concerning law makers, we know, that they having to provide, for
necessary things, and to make ordinances and decrees therefore, have always
given the first and most honorable place, to piety, or godliness, and the
service of God. And in deed because they would that their Laws should be of
greater authority, and better received of their people, as well agreeing with
piety and godliness, they have made them believe that their Gods were
authors thereof. Minos.
Minos the Lawemaker of the Cretenses, gave them to understand, that he was
Jupiters familiar friend, and that he spoke often to him, to the end the
people might believe that he received from him the laws which he established
amongst them. Zoroastes.
Zoroastes, gyuing laws to the Bactrians and Persians, said that he received
them from Oromason, whom they accounted for God and author of all goodness.
Trismegistus said also, Trismegistus
that he had received from Mercurius, the laws which he gave to the
Egyptians. Carondas.
Carondas the lawmaker amongst the Cathaginenses, referred and ascribed his
laws to Saturnus. Lycurgus.
Lycurgus the lawemaker of the Lacedaemonians referred the laws which he gave
to Apollo. Solon and Draco the lawemakers among the Athenians, Solon and Draco.
Xamolxis, Numa,
referred their laws to Minerua. Xamolxis the lawemaker among the Scithians,
ascribed his laws to Vesta. Numa too the end he might get authority to his
laws amongst the Romans, feigned, that in the night season, he had great
acquaintance, or lay with the goddess Aegeria.

Wherefore this remains resolute, and stands sure: that Princes and
Magistrates, to the end, that they may in good policy and order govern their
Lordships, and frame the manners of their subjects, ought always to beginnne
with piety and the service of God, as with the most necessary matter, and as
without the which there is no regiment or government in the world, which can
long subsist or stand.

And therefore for this cause specially is it, that good kings, princes, and
lords are praised in the scripture, as David, Josiah, Hezekiah, amongst
kings: Joseph and Daniell, amongst the rulers and governors of provinces for
kings: Moses, Iehoshua, and the judges amongst those, who had the guiding and
leading of people which were free.

Wherefore the flatterers of the court do uilanously abuse and mock the very
Lords and Princes, when they blow this into their ears, that the cause of
religion concerns them nothing at all, and that they ought to be content with
this that they have some care of politic matters committed unto them, and
charge of their domestical and household affairs, and namely of their Horses,
Dogs, Hawks, Fowls. etc, forwarre, for hunting, hauking, and for their
other particular pleasures, without traveling and taking any more pain, for
all that, or any part thereof, which concerns the good estate and affairs of
Gods Church.

Thanks be to GOD (my Lord) that you be far otherwise instructed in that
which belongs to the duty of Christian lords and magistrates, tha^ that
which the courtiers brabble and prate, not to suffer your self to be
distracted, neither to go astray from that, which the truth has once taught
you. And I hope, yea, I hope it very steadfastly, that that great God who has
put and placed in you so good seed, will give it so good an increase, that he
will be thereby for ever glorified, and that that true, and not counterfeite
profession of the religion which you have, will bring to pass that you shall be
more and more loved and honored of good and honest people, and feared and
reverenced of the wicked and persecutors.

On mine own part, that I might bring some aid and succor to the faithful
people, to the end that they might learn by your example to put a difference
between the true and false Church, and by the same mean to resolve to keep
and stay them selves upon the true Church: and that I might also give some
familiar and plain order to all, to know on which side the true Church is, I
have as diligently builded, framed and prepared this present discourse as it
was possible for me, wherein I entreat of the Church, and all the points and
parts thereof, that I thought meet and purposed to touch, or could think
upon. And therein I have followed the most apt and convenient order that I
could choose, without confounding the matters, therein declaring all that,
which we ought to behold and believe of the Church, touching her estate,
form, guiding, and government. For I show therein, what is the true Church:
which are her true and infallible marks, which is the true succession and
calling of Pastors therein, what is her spreading abroad, increase and
continuance, who is the head thereof: how she is holy: whether she may err:
what is her power and authority: amongst whom it is: what be the degrees and
orders of her guiders: what is her discipline: whether the ministry be
necessary in her: And lastly I speak, of her persecutions and afflictions, in
which point I am somewhat more large then in the rest, because I knew that the
present need and occasion required it, to the end I might confirm and
strengthen the faithful peoples consciences at this time, in which it seems
that the Devil, the enemy of Gods glory and our salvation, is vnchayned and
untied, and that all the world is kindled with rage and set on fire with
fury, and conspired with him furiously to rush upon the poor Church, setting
out and making a show against it, of all that that cruelty can devise.
Weerefore I show what is the state and condition of the Church on earth, and
that she has always had, such a virtue of patience and so great constancy
and courage in the midst of the cross that tyrants have rather left of to
persecute her, then that she has failed and fallen away by their torments:
insomuch that she has abode invincible and unconquered, against the vehemency
and violence, of so many horrible co^bats, as she was to sustain and endure,
and out of all them has brought a famous victory, and most glorious crown.
In sum: that the son of God has always found place and passage in the
midst of the world, notwithstanding the fires, swords, torments, furies,
outcries, and horrible scatterings abroad which were made against him.

As touching the fruit and profit which may come of this little labor, I
dare not affirm any thing thereof, except it be in respect of you my Lord,
For I doubt not but you take as much pleasure to hear me discourse in
writing upon this matter of the church, as you commonly do, when you hear me
speak, either particulerly to your self, or publikelie in the execution of my
charge and office. And yet if you regard that which is mine, without doubt the
fruit will be none: but if you consider the argument, and the large laying out
of the matters contained in this present treaty, I assure my self, that it
will not be altogether unprofitable, and that they which shall read the same,
will not repent themselves thereof.

Furthermore, I staying my self (my Lord) upon your accustomed goodness,
through which you disdain not, or dislike any thing, which comes from your
servants, offer and dedicate unto you this little book, most humbly beseeching
you to accept it, and to take it well that it comes out into light, under the
inscription of your name, and to receive it with such gentleness and courtesy,
as you have been accustomed to love virtue, and favor Christian religion, and
those that make profession thereof. For I hope that (if you receive and take it
well, that your name shall procure it more grace and liking, and shall get it
more authority, and purchase it more favor, amongst all, because that
things dedicated to great personages, are better received of the lower sort,
although the things of them selves are oftentimes very base and of small
account and value. And also as touching my self, I was gladly minded, to
declare and show by this slender mean, a testimony of the obedience which I
owe you, and for the singular and earnest desire which I have, to do you the
most humble and acceptable service that I can in the Lord: whom I beseech with
all my heart, to maintein you (my Lord) and my Lady the Countess your sister,
in his most holy and most worthy keeping, and to preserve you both in a blessed
and long life, augmenting and increasing in you daily more and more, the gifts
and graces of his holy spirit, wherewith he has so plentifully decked, and
liberally enriched you.

From Turenne this xxv. of March, 1577. Your most humble and most obedient
servant, Bertrand de Loque.

An Admonition to the Reader.
I Was loath gentle Reader, to publish this profitable and necessary treatise,
because it being meant well, may be taken ill, and being a rule and
confirmation to foreign Churches reformed, may perhaps fall into the hands of
indiscreet readers, and trouble the happy and quiet state of the Church of
England. But to prevent this inconvenience, and to help the weakness of many
which carried with a preposterous rash zeal, do judge before they conceive,
and like rather to feed their humor, then foster the peace of the Church. I
thought it necessary to put the reader in remembrance of those things, which
being greedily snatched at, and read without judgment, by curious and
contentious heads may tend to the disturbance of the peace, and tranquillity
of the Church. Whereas therefore in the nienth Chapter entreating of the
degrees of the Ministry, the author seems to detract from Archbishops
Metropolitanes, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other Ministers in this Church of
England and else where, his meaning is not to condemn those titles allowed and
attributed to faithful Pastors in other reformed Churches, according to the
ancient and laudable order of the primitive Church, but to eleuate and
impugn, the tyranny, pomp, and ambition of the popish prelacie: who leaving
their function of preaching and teaching have usurped I know not what
authority and power of commanding and countercommanding what they list, in the
church of God. Who in cruelty succeed not Peter, but Romulus, in pomp and
magnificence, not Peter, but Co^tantine as Bernard faith. They do all for
honor, and nothing for holiness says the same author. Their courts are full of
Symoniacks, their thresholds more trodde^ by ambition, then by devotion, and
their Cannons Ecclesiastical procurers of gain and lucre. The Church is not
governed by names but by offices, which they faithfully perform this day, to
whom for reverence we willingly ascribe the names of honor and dignity.

Moreover, no man will deny, though the same authority be committed to all
Gods faithful Ministers in binding, losing, preaching, or ministering the
Sacraments: yet that this equality in ministration does nothing hinder a
diversity, distinction of degrees, and superiority in government, being very
necessary for the avoiding of confusion and schism. That this pre-eminence is
not lately devised or new begun, may soon appear by these words of the
Apostle. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Whereupon I gather, that if the spirits of all the Prophets, being lightened
by the virtue of the holy Ghost, were not free from the check of other
Prophets, upon whom it had pleased God to bestow his gifts of judgment,
knowledge, and learning: much more ought we to allow and prefer the grave
and learned judgment of the best, and grant them a dignity and pre-eminence
in matters of less importance. The reason by the Apostle is not to be
neglected. Non est Deus author confusionis, sed pacis, as who should say: if
some were not appointed to decide such doubts as arise either of ignorance or
of malice, all would go to wrack in haste, and Christian education to
mortal hatred. The^ would the frost of private quarrel, either sterue the
buddes of the Gospel, or rage of spiritual ambition disturb the policy of
every congregation. Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration entitled, Apologeticus,
says: There must of necessity be two sorts of me^, (...) some that must rule
and guide, others that must be guided and governed. In man there are two
things, the soul which governs by reason, the body which submits it
self and obeys, otherwise if in an army all were soldiers, or all
Captains, what hope were there of victory and good success? If in a ship all
should be alike, all mariners, who should stand at the Helm, who should
guide the compass? If in a City all were equal, who should make decrees,
prescribe laws, and execute the same? If the whole body were a head, what
disorder? Or if the members were without a head, what confusion? The learned
therefore send us to learn order to the heavens and to the earth: to the
angels amongst whom there are degrees Angels, Archangels, virtues, potestates,
principatus, dominationes, throni, Cherubin, Seraphin, to the Sun, to the
moon, to the stars, which in glory and brightness excel one another. To the
Bees which have their grau^d captains at whose buzzing they go forth, they
follow and cluster together, to the trees, where you see of a great stock many
branches arise and spring. Our natural appetite and affection acknowledges,
the government of reason and vndersta^ds: And so in the Church of God there has
been always governors, and they governed chiefly and souerainly, as in the
civil estate. Seth, Enos, Sem, ruled the Church in their time, and the Church
acknowledged and obeyed their government. The best writers affirm that the
first borne had the rule of the whole family. Noah alone ruled in making and
ordering the Arc, in which there were clean and unclean beasts, tame and
savage of all kinds, to signify the church gathered together of both Jews
and Gentiles, and governed by Jesus Christ only, as by a second Noah. The
Church under the law had diversity of orders as may appear in sundry places.
In the third of Numbers, where the Tribes are mustered, the three families of
the Gersonites, Kohathites, Merarites, had their Prince or head which they
called Nescha. In the first of Kings, and the 4. Azaria is called the Prince of
the Levites. Obadiah that worthy Counceller, meeting with old Heli,
disdaineth not to call him lord. Gregory Nazianzen writes to Gregory Nissien,
which supposed him to be angry, because they had ordained one without his
consent said. (...). Let no man belly us, nor any of my lords the brethren.
Good Gregory, an humble and simple man weighed not titles, nor cared for any
worldly honor, but was careful that order should be prescribed in the
Church, and that one should go before an other in honor. S. James says: Be
not ye many masters. And Chrysostom says, that equality of dignity and
place brings forth schism. Likewise Jerome writing to Euagrius says: that
from Mark to Dionisius and Heraclas, there was one always set in higher place
of dignity above the rest, and this he says was to avoid schisms, which
seeing they lack skill and be in the Church, and shall be to the end, since the
disease remains still, what great folly is it to condemn or refuse the
remedy. In the Counsel called Gangrensse, the holy fathers assembled there,
writing to the Bishops of Armenia, use these words. Honoratissimis dominis. To
our most honorable Lords. The late writers most of them allow and affirm a
primacie of order, though not in degree of ministration. M. Calvin, writing
upon the 2. Cor. and 10. Etsi omne commune sit, etc. Although one and the same
office be common to all, yet be there degrees of honor. And the same Author
writing upon these words out of the 2. to the Philipp. Sicut patri filius ita
mihi Timotheus seruiuit in Eua^gelio. As a father his son, so has Timothy
served me in the Gospel. We learn says he in this place, that no such
equality was among the Ministers, but one did rule and govern the rest by
counsel and authority. Again in his 4. book, 8. Chapter sect. 54. He says
that every province had among their Bishops an Archb. and that the Council of
Nice did appointe 4. Patriarchs which should be in order and dignity above
Archb. it was for the preservation of discipline. Wherefore it is apparent by
testimonies of holy scripture, by light of reason, and by practice of the
Church, by the necessity of the thing that distinction of degrees and
superiority is necessary in the church, as without the which, law would soon
grow to liberty, faith would soon be divided, and the coat of christ Jesus,
which is his church, rent and torn in sunder, so many fancies, so many faithes
would follow.

Now whereas many make much ado, about the titles of Bishops, Metropolitans,
and Archb. and the scripture is still alleged, as an adversary in this
quarrel: and containing expressly no such names. Thus may they make our Savior
Christ inferior to his father, concerning his divinity, because the title
(...) is no where literally expressed, although the same by su^drie places may
be well and justly gathered. Therefore to conclude, to them that list to be
contentious. Vbi de re constat, puerile est de verbolitigare. And to the
discreet Reader, that he peruse this book, to profit his conscience, and
not to please his affection. Seek peace, and the God of peace shall bless
you, and increase his grace amongst you, to the terror of your enemies, and
comfort of your souls, Amen.

A TREATY OF the Church, containing a true discourse, in which a man may
clearly behold and see, what is the nature, form, government, and guiding of
the true Church, together with the infallible marks and tokens, by which a
man may know it and discern the same, from the Romish Church, and all other
false and counterfeited congregations.
CAP. I. Of the diverse significations, and acceptions of this word CHVRCH, and
how the Church is commonly distinguished.
MEN are accustomed to say, that every word, which may be taken in many
senses, and in diverse significatio^s, should rather be distinguished then
defined. For a man can not otherwise rightly declare, the nature, virtue, and
disposition of any thing, unless he be first resolved of the sense and
meaning, in which it ought to be taken. For as much therefore, as this word,
Church, is of that sort (being a Greek word, which signifies an assembly or
congregation, and is taken or derived from a word which in that tongue
signifies to call, or to cause to come) it is meet and necessary, that
before we give the definition thereof, we declare after how many sorts men
use to take it.

1 Now men sometimes take it, for a company or assembly of wicked persons,
as Psalm 22.16. Psalm. 22.16.
The Church, or the Synagogue of the wicked have enclosed me: and in Psalm
26.5. Psalm. 26.5.
I have hated the Church of the wicked, that is to say, the company. For
there is in the Hebrew text two words, which the Greeks have turned Synagogue
and Church, which do signify as much, as a company, troop, or assembly.

2 Sometimes, it is put for the assembly of citizens, and burgesses of a
town, in which meeting they entreat of the common and ordinary affairs of
the common wealth: and so does Saint Luke use it, Act. 19.32.39.
Acts 19.32.39.

3 It is also taken for the place, whether the assembly is called together, as
Iudeth 6. Iudeth 6.16.
verse 16. And they called together all ancients of the city, and all their
youth ran together, to the Church or assembly, that is to say, to the place
of the congregation or assembly.

4 Also for the Senate, or consistory of the Church, that is to say, for the
Pastors and Elders of the Church, who are indeed the conductours and guiders
thereof: Matt. 19.17.
as when Jesus Christ says: Tell the Church, Chrysostom. Hom. 62. upon Matthew.
that is to say (even as Chrysostom also expounds it) the Pastors, leaders
and governors of the Church, according whereunto we see, that Saint John
making mention of the consistory of the Jews, in which it was sometimes
determined, to thrust out of the Synagogue every one that would confess Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 9.22.
he says generally, that the Jews made this decree, although it was indeed
the Consistory only.

5 But in the question or matter of Christian religion, it is taken for the
company and assembly of faithful people, which make profession of the true
and pure religion of God. Of this Church speaks S. Paul, when he says to the
Pastors thereof, Take heed to your selves, Act. 20.28.
and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you Bishops or
overseers, to feed the Church of GOD, which he has purchased with his own
blood. But here we must observe certain distinctions, for even in this
signification, the Church is commonly distinguished into three sorts.

First it is called triumphant, or else militant. The Church triumphant, is the
company of blessed spirits, who having gotten victory through Jesus Christ,
against their enemies the devil, the world, ye flesh, sin, death, and hell,
triumph at this present, on high in heaven, praising God, and celebrating the
glory of his name, with all ioyfulnesse. We have a goodly description of the
Church in the Revelation. Reu. 7.9.10.
Cap. 7.9.10.

The Church militant, is the assembly of all the faithful people, who as yet
on earth fight, under the banner or standard of Jesus Christ their head,
against the foresaid enemies, whose armours or weapons are set out by S. Paul
in the Ephesians. Ephesians. 6.13.14. etc.
chap. 6. For it is not the Lords will, that so long as we are to walk here
below, we should be without afflictions, but he will have us to be continually
in the battle, and always troubled and tormented through the malice of men,
yea so much the more, by how much we shall earnestly endeavor to serve him in
all godliness and holiness, Act. 14.22.
this matter also being already concluded, that by many tribulations we must
enter into ye kingdom of God. Whereunto do appertain also, Ioh. 15.20.16.2.
2. Tim. 3.12.
the sentences of Jesus Christ and S. Paul. Ioh. 15.20. Ioh. 16.2. 2. Tim.
3.12. But hereafter we will speak more largely of the afflictions of the
Church.

The second distinction is, that ye Church is called either Catholic, that is
to say, universal or general, being dispersed thoroughout the world, and
comprehending universally, all the faithful and elect people of God: or else
particular, which is a part of the universal: for we use to call them
particular Churches or congregations, which are limited within a certain
number, and enclosed in certain places, being, as it is said before, parts
and members of the universal: such in former time were the Churches of
Corinthus, Rome, Ephesus: and such are at this day, the Churches of France,
Germany, England, Switzerland, and other places, of all which together
consists the universal, which notwithstanding is but one, as anon we shall see.

The third distinction is: that the Church is sometimes said to be invisible,
and sometimes visible. The invisible Church is streitly and narrowly
considered, and is the very same, which before we called Catholic or
universal, comprehending only the faithful and elect, in which number they
also are to be accounted, yt be already dead.

The visible Church is considered more largely, and comprehends al them which
are called by the preaching of the Gospel, to be of Christ's flock. August in
Psalm. 64.
S. Augustine uses this distinction in his writings. For writing upon ye 64.
Psalm, he says: that the Church, which is signified by Jerusalem, took
beginning from Abell, and Babylon from Caine: and yet notwithstanding, in his
book of Baptism, against the Donatistes, chap. 16. August. li. 1. cont.
Donatist. cap. 1.6.
taking the Church in a more general signification, he says: that the same
which begat, ingendered, and brought forth Abell, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and
the Prophets, did also begette, engender, and bring forth Caine, Ismael,
Dathan, and others such like. But we must more narrowly and deeply search this
matter, and declare what it is, which does properly belong to the Church, as
well Catholic and invisible, as to other, which I said was visible. But first
of the Catholic and invisible Church.

CHAP. II. Of the Catholic and invisible Church, which indeed is but one,
albeit it have many particular parts and members.
BY that which has been said before, it is an easy matter to gather and make
a good and certain definition of the Church. Wherefore first we say, that the
Catholic and invisible Church, is the company of all faithful people,
scattred throughout the whole world, whom God has chosen to everlasting life.
With this definition agrees that, which may be gathered out of that which
Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, to wit, that the Church is the company
of all those, 1. Cor. 1.2.
that being sanctified through Jesus Christ, and called to be Saints, do
call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place. The Church then
is not an house of wood, or of stone, builded by man's hand, but the
congregation, commonaltie, and fellowship of all those, which follow the
truth of faith. Which matter also we may confirm by these reasons following.

Gal. 1.13. Act. 9.14.
First, S. Paul confesses, That he persecuted the Church of God: and Ananias
says, that he had authority from the high Priests, to bind all those that
called upon the name of the Lord, that is to say, Christians. Here we see,
that Saint Paul calls those the Church, whom Ananias names Christians, or
such as did call upon the name of the Lord.

Ephe. 1.23. 1. Cor. 12.27
Secondarilie, ye Church is called the body of Christ: and the company of
faithful people, is also called the body of Christ: whereupon it follows,
that the Church is no other thing, but the company of the faithful.

Ioh. 10.16.
Thirdly, Jesus Christ him self calls the Church a sheepefolde, whereunto
sheep appertein and belong but by sheep are meant the elect, Matt. 25.32.33.
as appears by that which is said. Math. 25. The Church then is nothing else,
but the sheepefold or congregation of the elect.

Fourthlie the ancient writers have so declared it, and set it out. For behold
how Saint Augustine has spoken thereof: August. in psalm. 122.
All faithful Christians (says he) are the Church. And Chrysostom: The
Church (says he) consists not in Walls, but in the multitude of faithful
people. Homel. 20. de expuls. ipsius. Lib. 7. de stroma.
Clemens Alexa^drinus says also, I call the church, not the place, or the
temple, but the congregation of the elect.

This Church is called Catholic or universal for three reasons. First in
consideration of the place, for it is not tied, to one certain place, as
city, province, or kingdom, but is dispersed and scatered abroad throughout
all the world, even as Jesus Christ has said, that he has received all
power, both in heaven and in earth: and as the second psalm shows: that all
nations and all the ends and coasts of the earth, Math. 28.18.
are by the Father appointed to his son, for his inheritance: and therefore
also did Jesus Christ send forth his disciples through out all the world to
preach the Gospel and to minister the sacraments. Wherefore Donatus erred,
Psalm. 2.8.
Matt. 28.19.
when he went about to tie the Church to a certain corner of Africa only. The
Romish Catholics also do at this day abuse themselves, when they endeavor to
tie it to Rome alone. For though it were so, that ye Church of Rome were a true
Church (whereof we will speak in a whole and plain chapter afterward) yet it
could not be but a particular Church, and at no hand the universal church,
whereof we speak. They also are likewise deceived, who think to chase and
banish this Church out of the world. For seeing that it is universal, it shall
never want place, but it shall always be gathered together, and received in
some quarter or corner of the earth.

Secondly, it is called Catholic, in consideration of the persons, for it
receives and contains all the faithful, of what estate, sex, or condition
soever they be, as S. Paul shows, when he says, That there is neither Jew
nor Greek, Galat. 3.28. Colos. 3.11.
bond nor free, man nor Woman, but that all are one in Christ Jesus: And in
the Apocalipse, this Church is described and set out in this behalf, as a
certain City having twelve Gates, Reuelat. 21.13.
three on the East side, three on the North side, three on the South side, and
three on the West side, And therefore the Jews are deceived, when they suppose
that the Church, ought to be restrained, to the only fleshly race and lineage
of Abraham.

Thirdly in consideration of the time, for it shall endure and continue in ye
world, not as some do imagine, a hundred or two hundred years, a thousand or
two thousand years only, but even as long as the world it self shall last,
as we will declare more at large, when we shall speak, of the perpetuity or
continuance of the Church.

Furthermore we hold that this Church is one, even as it is said, Cantic. 6.8.
John. 10.16. 2. Cor. 11.2. Revel. 21.9. 1. Cor. 12.12
that there is but one only Dove, perfect, and the only Daughter of her
Mother: one sheepefolde: one spouse of Christ: one body. And indeed this
unity or oneness of the Church, does not consist in a common and bodily
dwelling together, nor in certain outward ceremonies, but in a certain very
spiritual unity, and in an assured consent of doctrine and faith. For
amongst all those, which truly believe in Christ, there is one body and one
spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of
all, which is above all, and in all, and through all: and therevppon it is,
that Saint Paul says of the whole church, Ephe. 4.4.5. Gal. 3.28.
That we are all one in Jesus Christ. All the particular churches then, which
consent in true doctrine, ought to be holden and esteemed, for one only
Church, seeing that the Church is but one. Whereupon Saint Cyprian said: There
is no more but one only Church, which is spread abroad or stretched out
far and wide, as there are many beams in the Sun, De simplicit. praelat.
and yet the light thereof but one: and in a tree there are many branches or
bows and yet but one body, which is stayed upon his own root: and from one
only fountain run many rivers, which no whitt at all hinder or let that
the unity or oneness should not abide in the fountain. Now hereupon it
follows, yt al Scismatikes (which by factions, sects, partakinges, do break
the unity of the Church) do sin grievously, 1. Cor. 1.13.3.3.
as also S. Paul declares the same writing unto the Corinthians.

We say also that this church is invisible, and that there is none but God
alone who knows the same: and therefore Jesus Christ says, John. 10.14.
That he knows his sheep: and that he knows them whom he has chosen: And
Saint Paul: John. 13.18.
The Lord (says he) knows those which are his: And as concercerning our
selves we believe it, as we protest and confess, 2. Tim. 2.19.
in ye christian articles of our belief, when yt by outward signs, we cannot
point it forth, or mark it out. For albeit we do not many times see and behold
the same, yet it ceasseth not for all that to be, as it was declared unto
Elijah, when he co^playned that he was alone making profession of the name of
God. 1. Kings. 19 10.18. Romans 11.3.4
No no says the Lord unto him, I have reserved unto my self seven thousand
men which have not bowed the knee to Baal. But let us mark that we speak of
the body of the church generally, and not of the members thereof particularly.
For there is no doubt, but that we may by signs and outward testimonies,
profitably judge of election, even as men judge the tree by the good fruit,
and yet this must be understood singularly and specially when the question
concerns our selves. For according to ye testimony of S. Peter, 2. Peter.
1.10.
We make our calling and election, firm and sure through good works.

Moreover this church contains also many persons, which are not yet called
unto the visible church, even as our Savior Jesus Christ shows in S. John,
Ioh. 10.60.
when he says: Other sheep I have also which are not of this fold, them also
must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one
sheepefolde, and one sheepehearde. And hereof we have an example in Saint
Paul, for when he persecuted the Church it seemed verily, that he did not
appertain to the Church, being not yet called to be a sheep, of the visible
sheepfolde of Christ. Notwithstanding the Lord says unto Ananias: Go thy
way to him, Acts. 9 15.
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and the children of Israel: Which is a matter worthy to be noated, to
the end that we should carefully look unto our selves, that we take not
upon us, to judge of any man rashly, and before the time.

CHAP. III. Of the visible Church, and of the true marks thereof.
THe visible Church is the company of all those, who by the preaching of the
Gospel, are called to be of Christ's flock, as indeed they are supposed to be:
amongst whom notwithstanding, many are not of the number of the elect, as
appears by the parable of the seed, whereof Jesus Christ makes mention, in
the 13. chapter of the Gospel according to S. Matthew: and by that which he
says, that all they which say unto him, Lord, Lord, Math. 13.24 Matthew. 7.21.
Matt. 20.16.
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: Also that many are called, but few
are chosen. Also by that Saint Paul says, Romans 9.6.
that all they which are of Israel, are not therefore Israel: And S. John: They
went out from amongst us, John. 2.19.
but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us. We have an example hereof in Judas, as Jesus Christ himself
witnesses the same in Saint Ioh. Here then we have to mark this, John.
6.70.13.18.
that the outward profession of Christan religion, is not sufficient to
salvation.

Furthermore this Church is known by her own proper marks, which are two,
very principal and substantial. The first is the pure preaching of the
word, with a right and common consent thereto. There was never yet any
religion, which was not vpholden, maintained and pointed out by some doctrine.
So we se, yt the gentiles, have had their services, hymns, songs, and praises
unto their Gods: The Jews have the bark or husk of the law, and their own
Thalmude: The Turks have the Alcoran of their Mahumet, and the heretics also
boast themselves of the doctrine of the Gospel, and yet all these are false
signs or marks. But the true church has for her first and principal mark,
the word of God purely preached, to the which the church consents, and
conformeth her self, as we prove it plainly by these places of scripture.
John. 10.27.
Jesus Christ says: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them and they
follow me. And Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians: Ephe. 2.20.
you are (says he) builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. And indeed if this be
true (as of necessity it must needs be) that by the Scriptures we are
brought to the knowledge of Christ, as Christ himself affirms: John. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures diligently, for they are they which bear witness of
me: ought we not then by the same scriptures to be guided and lead, to the
knowledge of the true and right Church?

This matter the ancient fathers respected, when they taught ye the true
Church ought to show and declare it self, by the holy scriptures, as Saint
Augustine, saying: There is great disputation between us and the Donatistes,
Contra pitilia. cap. 2.
to know where the Church is. What is then that we have to do herein? Shall
we search it out in our own words, or rather in the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the head thereof? verily we ought rather to seek for it in the words
of him that is truth, and knows very well his own body. For the Lord
knows them that be his. And again: 2. Tim. 2.19. Cont. Pitili. cap. 3. Aug.
epist. 166.
I will not show or declare the Church by the doctrine of men, but by the word
of God. Also by the scriptures (says he) we have learned Christ; by the
scriptures likewise we have learned to know the Church. We have these
scriptures common amongst us, wherefore then do we not retain and hold in
them, both Christ and his Church? And Chrysostom says: Supr Matthew. exposit.
2. Homil. 49. cap. 24.
He that will know which is the true Church of Christ, by what mean can he
know it, in such and so great a confusion of outward show, if it be not only
by the scriptures? Lib. 2. de Jacob. cap. 7.
Saint Ambrose says also: The true and Catholic Church is there, where GOD
him self appears, and speaks to his servants, by his own word.

The other mark of the Church is the lawful administration of sacraments.
Cont. Faustu^ Manich. lib. 9. cap. 11.
Saint Augustine has sometimes said, that men can not unite or knit them
selves together, in any religion what so ever, be it true or false, but by the
means of some sacraments or visible signs. So the Gentiles had their
sacraments and sacrifices. The Jews had Circumcision, and some other outward
signs of their religion. But the true Church has, for the second of her
marks, her own sacraments instituted by Jesus Christ the head thereof, that
is to say, baptism, and the holy supper. And thereunto must be referred that
which Saint Augustine says: The Lord has united or knit together the new
people (that is, Ad inquisit. Ianuar. ca. 1.
the people under the new Testament) by the sacraments, which are few in
number, easy in observation, and very great in signification: to wit, by
baptism, consecrated or administered in the name of the blessed Trinity, and
by the communicating or partaking of his body and of his blood.

Besides, Saint Paul does in like sort rightly teach us this, when he says,
first of baptism, 1. Cor. 12.13
that we are all baptized by one spirit into one body: and afterward of the
supper: we that are many, 1. Cor. 10.17
are one bread and one body, because we al are partakers of one and the self
same bread: meaning thereby that these two sacraments, are in such sort the
two common signs of the Church, that by the same we are visibly gathered
together, into the house of God, that we may there be accounted in the number
of his household servants, and contained in the unity of the body of the
Church, withal the faithful, and by consequent drawn, taken and separated
from all other people and profane nations.

CHAP. IIII. Whether these true marks of the Church are to be found amongst
the Romish Catholics.
THese then are the two certain and infallible marks of ye true Church, by
which men must examine all assemblies, that pretend the name and title of the
Church, least otherwise they be seduced and deceived. Wherefore if a man will
know, whether the true Church be among the Romish Catholics or no, we need
not have recourse to any other proof or touchstone then this only. But it
shall behoue us to hold and to keep in memory one foundation or sure ground,
to wit, that these two marks must always be retained and kept in their
purity, without being any manner of way falsified or corrupted: that is to
say, that the preaching of ye doctrine must be pure, and the administration of
the sacraments sound and lawful. For indeed in outward show they would make
men believe, that these two marks are to be found amongst the Romish
Catholics, but when all shall be rightly and duly examined, we shall find
that the true Church, is not for all that on their side.

For as concerning the word, it is not preached by them rightly or purely, but
(as S. Hilarie says) they make a sense upon the scriptures, and take it not
out of the scripture, and make it as were a leaden rule, which men commonly
call Regula Lesbia, applying it to their own intentes and purposes, and not
submitting their own purposes to it.

Touching this matter, it is needful for us to know, that all exposition of
holy scripture, must be referred to two principal heads or ends, that is to
say, that it tend to the glory of God, and that it be conformable or agreeable
to ye analogy and proportion of faith. For touching the first, Jesus Christ
says: Ioh. 7.18.
He that seeks the glory of God, is true. Now without doubt, when the Romish
Catholics extol man's free will, and ascribe unto man some merit for his works,
they snatch, and as it were by violence, pull away from God some part of ye
glory which is due unto him: and so by consequent, when they serve them selves
with certain pieces of the scriptures, to prove that which they pretend, they
can not therein excuse them selves, but that they corrupt and falsify the
scriptures, declaring them selves hereby right heretics indeed. In epist. ad
Galat.
For (as S. Jerome says) Who so ever expounds the scripture otherwise then
the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost requires, although he have not
withdrawn or separated him self from the Church, he cease not for all that
to be an heretic.

Secondly S. Paul declares, that he, Romans 12.6.
who has the gift of prophecy, ought to prophecy (yt is to say) expound the
scriptures according to the proportion of faith. Now if in this behalf, we
would take heed to, and mark the expositions, which the Romish Catholics make
and bring forth upon the scripture, we shall find at the least, for the
greatest part, yt they allege or bring nothing less, than the right and true
sense thereof, not following ye analogy and proportion which is required, and
namely, when the question is, to expound these words of Jesus Christ, This is
my body. Matt. 26.26.
For seeing that they tie Jesus Christ here below on the earth, meaning also
that he should be bodily in the sacrament: (and that nevertheless, the
articles of our faith, which are taken and drawn out of the holy scripture,
Act. 3.21.
do teach us, yt Jesus Christ is above in heaven, and that he must of
necessity, in respect of his body be therein contained, and remain there until
the last day: that he shall come to judge the quick and the dead) it follows
well that in such an exposition, they go far astray, and wander very much
from the analogy and proportion of faith.

As much also may we justly say in that behalf of many other articles which
they have corrupted, Matt. 15.9.
besides yt very often they propound and teach for doctrine men's traditions,
which are not only not drawn or taken from the word of God, but which is more,
are altogether contrary thereto: as concerning abstinence from meats,
forbidding of marriage, invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, adoration or
worshipping of relics and images, and many other such like matters. And as
concerning the sacraments, it is certain, that they are not lawfully
administered by those men, neither yet according to the form and ordinance of
Jesus Christ, but they add and join to them in the ministration thereof
infinite abuses, and superstitions, and do corrupt them, through a certain
kind of idolatry, which is detestable and full of ungodliness, for (yt I may
speak nothing of ye five sacraments which they have added of their own) let us
consider in what purity, baptism and the holy supper is administered amongst
them.

First is this a small abuse, to apply or minister baptism to things without
sense (as to bells) which was not ordained but for reasonable creatures? Is
this a slight profaning thereof, to join to this sacrament, oil, spittle,
salt, and other such things, as though it did not behoue us to be content with
that simplicity, wherein and wherewith Jesus Christ has commanded his
Apostles to administer the same?

And touching the holy supper, when they cause men to worship a morsel of
bread for Jesus Christ: when they deny to the people the sign of wine: when
the Priest eats all by him self, so that there is not any communion or
partaking at all, what is a corruption of the sacrament, and an overthrowing of
the ordinance of Jesus Christ, if this be not?

Now seeing that these matters fall out thus, we are to make this conclusion,
to wit, that seeing it must needs be, that the word of God should be purely
preached and expounded, and the sacraments lawfully administered, to the end
that men may hold and take them, for right and certain marks of the true
Church, and that we are certain, and it manifestly appears, that the
contrary be found amongst the Romish Catholics, it follows very well,
that these are not to be attributed to them, although they would make men
believe, that these marks do agree unto them, and their Church, as well as
unto us. But we will dispute more largely in an other chapter of this matter, to
wit, whether the Romish Church be the true Church or no?

CHAP. V. Of the succession and calling of Pastors.
BUT it may be that some will demand: Is not the succession and ordinary
calling of Pastors, a mark also of the true Church, yea, one of the
principal marks? I answer, that the Romish Catholics do affirm so indeed:
for this is yt which they commonly object unto us, to weaken our calling, by
being not able in ye rest to find any thing to say or set against the doctrine
which we preach, unless they entangle themselves, in infinite contradictions
and manifest absurdities. But in the first place concerning succession, I
demand what this is which they mean there? I suppose that it is not such a
succession, as is from the father to the son, as it has been heretofore in
the line and race of Aaron, as to say that he should be a priest, that is the
son of a priest, for so they might overmuch discover and unfold the vilanie
of their high priests: but that they mean a continual succession of Bishops
and Pastors succeeding one an other, even from ye time of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. But where is this to be showed, that they have found, that such a
succession should simply be necessary and make a vocation or calling
lawful? Does S. Paul, Timoth. 4.1. etc. Titus. 1.7. etc.
describing what qualities and conditions ought to be always in those, which
should be chosen for pastors of the Church, make any mention at all of this
succession? No indeed. And yet notwithstanding it had been very fit, yea
necessary, if the succession whereof we speak, had been wholly required in a
Bishop or Pastor, to make his vocation sure, certain, and lawful.

But that we may not speak confusedly of this point, we must distinguish,
between the succession of persons, or that which is of the chair and place,
and between the succession of doctrine and office.

As concerning the succession of doctrine, we say, that it is altogether on our
side, and no whit at all, on the Romish Catholics side, for we make
profession to teach, the pure word of God alone, following therein the
Prophets and Apostles, whereas they of the Romish Church, staying them selves
upon their inventions, teach for doctrine, Matt. 15.9.
the traditions and commandments of men, which thing Jesus Christ expressly
forbids.

And as touching that succession, which concerns the execution of the office,
or of all the chardge and duty of Pastors (which consists in preaching the
gospel purely, in administering the sacraments lawfully, in caring for the
poor, in visiting the sick, in redressing offenses, in exhorting, comforting,
teaching, reproving, and such like exercises,) truth it self and experience
do sufficiently show, who do indeed and verily succeed the Apostles
therein, whether the priests of the Romish Church or we. Lib. 19. cap. 19. de
Ciuitat. Dei.
Saint Augustine has sometimes said, That the name of a Bishop, is a name of
charge or burden, and not of honor, and that he indeed is a Bishop, which
desires to profit his flock, in teaching them, and not simply to bear rule
over the same. Aug. cont. Cresco. Gra^mat. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Also in an other place: We are not Bishops of our selves, but for them, to
who^ we administer the word and Sacraments. Now here I speak unto all
Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Curates, and other priests, together with
their Pope himself, and will them to examine and judge themselves in their
own conferences, and see, whether they can with good right boast themselves,
to be the Apostles successors, in sound doctrine, and in faithful execution
of their charge and office: and to mark how they observe these canons, which
they attribute to the Apostles, whereof the fifty eight canon, Can. Apost.
can. 58.
excommunicateth the Bishops and Elders, who have not any care either of
their clergy, or of the people, the charge of whom is committed unto them,
and which do not teach them in the doctrine of true religion: which canon also
ordeineth, that if such continue in their negligence and carelessness, they
should be deposed.

There rests the succession of persons or that which is of the Church or
place: touching which, first we say, that the ancient doctors did not always
aid themselves with this argument when they were to fight with heretics: for
having to deal with such, as did receive and allow the word of God, as well
as themselves, the dispute and matter in controversy between them being only
in the true interpretation thereof, they contented themselves to allege
scripture, expounding places one by an other, even as Saint Augustine says:
That that which is dark in one, August.
is clear and manifest in an other. But when they were to reason against them,
that would add to the holy scriptures, as Manichaeus, who would, that men
should receive his Epistle, which he called fundamentable, even as it were
the Gospel it self, there and in that respect, they served their turn with
the argument of succession. And yet when they used it, it was not either their
only or their principal defense. For in the first place they showed by the
word of God, that they were in error, and afterward added as a good bulwark
or mean of resistaunce, the consent of the Church witnessed by a continual
succession of all ages and times. Also, they helped themselves therewith as
with a very likely or probable argument, and good enough in the defense of
truth against error, but yet not so, as though it had a like force and
strength, for the maintenance of error against truth it self. Lastly, when
they demanded of heretics, from whence they came, from whom they descended,
who were their predecessors etc. they meant not to speak of their vocation or
calling, which they never called into doubt or question (for the greatest
number of them were Bishops, as Nestorius was Bishop of Constantinople,
Samosatenus of Antioche, all lawfully called, and having right and authority
to teach in the Church) but they meant to speak of their doctrine, which was
new, and not heard of before. Wherefore when they alleged, or laid succession
for them selves, they did not so much mean the occupying of the chair, or
enjoying of the place, as the continuance, conformity and agreement of the
doctrine: whereas on the otherside, our adversaries do not demand of us, who
were the authors of our doctrine, but inquire of us touching our vocation and
calling, and are contented with this to declare, that their Bishops, are
descended from al antiquity, but not their doctrine: and yet notwithstanding
they deceive them selves. For neither in the primitive Church, neither long
time after such Bishops, as be now in the popedom, had any place, so that a
man may safely say, they are not descended from the Apostles, nor from the true
successors.

To conclude, we say that it is very certain, that such a succession of the
pastors in the primitive Church, was of great weighte and importance, because
the pastors at that time, had not only the name and title of pastors, but did
withal faithfully exercise the Charge and office thereof. But what is at this
day the duty of Bishops and priests of the Church of Rome? Let the most sound
judge thereof. Is the controversy in the Church, touching succession to some
inheritance, to have the possession and enjoying thereof? No, but rather, for
men to set their hands to work and labor, as the Apostles have done, to watch
diligently over Christ's flock, and to minister unto it, the food which is
necessary and meet for it. As S. Paul says: If any man desire the office of
a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.1.
he desires a good or excellent work: And again, speaking unto Bishops: Act.
20.28.
Take heed to your selves (says he) and to the whole flock, whereof the holy
Ghost has made you Bishops or overseers, to feed the Church of God. And S.
Peter: The Elders, 1. Pet. 5.12.
which are among you I beseech, which am also an elder, with them, feed the
flock of Christ, which is committed unto you, caring for it not by consent etc.

The succession then of the Chair or place is nothing without the succession
of doctrine and duty. Cyprian. lib. 1. epl. 4.
For if the Bishop be dead (as says S. Cyprian) when no sound goes forth
of his mouth: If he be dead (as says S. Gregory) when he preaches not,
Greg. epl. 24
by what title may a man say that the Romish Bishops and priests succeeded the
the Apostles, and have the possession of their chair or place, if they be
dead, or altogether dumb, or else not the followers of the Apostles in
doctrine and truth? for let us a little behold how the ancient fathers have
joined and knitte the succession of person or place, with ye succession of
doctrine and office. Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 43.44.


Irenaeus says: We are commanded to yield obedience to the elders which are
in the Church: who have their succession from the Apostles, and together with
the succession of the office of a Bishop, have received according to the good
pleasure of the father, certain grace and knowledge of the truth.

Tertullian says also: If some heresies dare be so bold to intermingle them
selves with the times of the Apostles, thereby to make men believe that they
were delivered from the Apostles them selves, because they were under the
Apostles, or in their days, we may say, let them show then the beginnings of
their Churches, let them unfold or discover the succession of their Bishops,
in such sort running and flowing by continual order from the beginning, that
the first Bishop has had some of the Apostles for his author and
predecessor, or some one of them, who were the folowers of the Apostles, who
also did notwithstanding persevere and continue with the Apostles. And a little
after: The Churches (says he) which were planted after the Apostles time, and
those which are yet planted at this day, although that they bring not any
author for them, from amongst the Apostles themselves, or Apostolical
persons, yet notwithstanding, being found consenting in the same faith, they
are not to be held, taken, or acknowledged for any other then Apostolical,
pro consanguinitate doctrinae (says he) that is to say, for the nighnesse in
blood, or by reason of that doctrine, which they maintain, keep and hold,
with the Churches, which the Apostles them selves ordained and set up.

S. Augustine writing to one Generosus, Aug. epist. 156.
does so extol the succession and continual order of Pastors, that he names
thirty Bishops of Rome, putting Anastasius for the nine and thirtieth: but he
adds even presently or immediately after: In all this rank or band, there
was not to be found one Donatist. Epist. fundament. cap. 4.
And against the Manichees he writes thus: There are very many things, which
hold and keep me in the lap of the Catholic Church: the consent of people
and nations, the authority which was begun by miracles, nourished through
hope, augmented by charity, and confirmed by antiquity: moreover the
succession of Pastors, even from the seat of Saint Peter to him that is at
this day present: And a little after: But on your part (says he to the
Manichees) ye allege or bring forth no such thing, but only ye retain or
stand to a promise of truth, which indeed if it did declare it self so
evidently, that a man could not any more dout thereof, I confess and consent,
that it ought to be preferred before antiquity, succession, and all other
things. Hierom. epist. 1. ad Heliodor. and habetur.
S. Hierome: they are not (says he) the sons and children of holy men that
hold and possess the places of holy men, but they which follow their
doctrine, and practice their works. Distinct. 40. Can.
And Chrysostom in a certain place: There are (says he) many Elders and few
Elders: many in name, and few in deed. Behold, my brethren, how ye are placed
and set in the chair. For it is not the chair or place that makes an Elder,
but the Elder the chair or place. Behold after what manner and sort, ye
ancient writers have spoken. But would we know in one word, by ye word of
God, of what value is the most common and old succession, that a man can
suppose, if the purity of doctrine be wanting? S. Paul teaches it us, Gal.
1.8.
writing to the Galathians, when he says: If we our selves, or an Angel from
heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. Moreover, I would gladly demand of the Romish Catholics,
for what cause they hold not the Churches of the East for true Churches. They
will not say, that it is, because that succession is not on their side, for
they want not yt, but it is on their side, even as old and ancient at the
least, as in the Romish Church. Wherefore they must needs say, that it is by
reason of the doctrine received amongst them, to wit, because they hold not ye
Pope for their head, because they deny Purgatory, because their ministers be
married, because they celebrate and minister the holy supper, with leauened
bread, because they give both kinds to the people, and such like things. Now
if as touching the East Churches, ye Papists judge of the Churches, not by
succession, but by doctrine: wherefore do they, when they dispute with us, stay
themselves rather upon succession, then upon the doctrine, seeing yt the
question in controversy between us, is to examine the marks of the Church.
Secondarily, touching ye matter of succession, we say yt if we shall enter into
the sifting of the succession of Popes and Bishops in the Church of Rome, we
shall easily find, that if men will thereby judge of their vocation or calling,
it shall not serve their turn very much, or stand them in any great stead. For
this we shall be sure to find, that they have oftentimes succeeded tyrants,
schismatikes, excommunicate persons, and Bishops or Popes not lawfully called,

For what was Gregory the seventh, who was named before he came to ye popedom
Hildebrand? Vispergens.
Vispergensis witnesses, that he usurped the Papal seat through tyranny,
and not by a lawful vocation. And the Council holde^ at Worms, Council. Wormat.
in the year 1080. says also of the said Hildebrand, that he was not chosen by
God, but that he did without shame thrust in him self thither, by deceit and
money, and that he overthrew the Ecclesiastical order, that he was an
offensive person, a mouer of debate, and an obseruer of diuinations and
dreams, yea a manifest Necromancer or coniurer.

What was the woman Pope Joan, about the year 854? Platina.
Platina in her life says, yt she was an English woman, who in her youth
followed and accompanied a young scholar in studies, and profited so well
therein, that at Rome she was esteemed amongst the most skillful and learned,
for which cause she was exalted to be Pope, they supposing she had been a man.
But she was found great with child, and at the last delivered in an open
streate, and as they were going in solemn procession upon ye shoulders of
those yt carried her, where also she died. What was Benedict ye ninth? The
story writers declare, that after he was accused of many crimes by the
Romans, he was driven away, and in his place was ordained the Bishop of
Sabina, called Siluester the third, who likewise was deposed, and put down,
because he was an idiot, ignorant and unprofitable: and the said Benedict
recovered the seat again, from whence through covetousness he put him self
down, and ordained in his place John the Archdeacon of Saint John port Latin,
who was named Gregory ye sixth, to whom he sold the Popeship for very much
money paid downeright, Johannes Mayor. Mare Historiarum Nauclerus Platina.
as witnesses Johannes Mayor, The sea of histories, Nauclerus, Platina: and
the same Gregory being Pope, was judged as well by the Clergy as by the
people, to be a murderer and a symoniakal person. What was Siluester the
second? Platina says, yt being a Friar, he gave him self to the devil, upon
condition, that he would aid and help him to obtain yt which he desired, and
so by that means he came to be Pope. What was Eugenius the fourth? He by the
definitive sentence of the Council of Basil, was condemned for a schismatike,
rebel, and stubborn person, and so deposed, and one Aimus Duke of Sauoie
substituted in his place, in the year 1439. the 16. of Nouemb. Notwithstanding
he being supported and vpholden, by the favor of certain princes, abode in
the possession of his Popedom, and Aimus his election, passed into smoke, and
was of no force or value. But without passing to any other examples (for this
can not be done but in long time) may we now affirm, first yt in all the time
of these Popes, there has not been some interruption, or breach of personal
succession in the seat of Rome? verily we must confess it, unless a man
would say, yt heretics and notorious schismatikes were the heads of the
Church. Secondly, yt the Bishops and Priests, which have succeeded these
reverend Popes, and others which were created and established by the^, have had
a good and lawful succession? Let us now come to ye vocation or calling,
whereupon the succession it self depends. We affirm, that our calling is
without comparison more certain and more lawful, then is that of the Bishops
and Priests of ye Romish Church. For the better proof whereof, let us mark
what things are requisite to a right and lawful calling.

First right and authority to choose appertains to the Pastors, and that not
to one alone, but to diverse lawfully assembled, at which election
notwithstanding one ought to bear rule, to guide and govern the action, and
to avoid all confusion and disorder, 1. Tim. 5.22. Titus 1.5.
and so must these places 1. Timoth. 5.22. and Titus 1.5. of necessity be
understood.

Secondly, the election ought not to be made, without the plain and express
consent of the people, Act. 14.23.
as S. Luke shows the same by example, Act. 14.23. and as heretofore the
Church has ordained it even from Leo his time. Leo. epist. 87 and 90. Nicol.
Did. 23. Can. In nomine.
Yea Nicolas the second has written, that it is a manner and fashion, which is
meet, necessary, and needful to keep, in the election and choice of the
Bishops of Rome. Cyprian lib. 3. epist. 3.
Yea Saint Cyprian writing to Anthony, rehearses, that Cornelius was after
such sort and manner ordained Bishop of Rome. For as concerning that which the
decree of the Council of Laodicea ordains, Council. Laodic. Can. 13. Did. 63
can. Non est permittendum.
that the election and choice of the Pastors should not be made by the people,
that must be understood of the people alone, to the end that the election
should not be made confusedly, and without good order.

Thirdly, those yt are to be chosen, should be well and duly examined touching
both manners and doctrine, according to the rule which S. Paul has given
therefore, 1. Tim. 3.1.2 Tit. 1.5.6.7. etc.
writing to Timothy and Titus. For the bishop ought to be of very good life,
and holy conversation, so that the very strangers them selves, and such as are
without, may not justly have any thing to reproach or vpbraid him self withal:
also he must not be a young scholar, but able and sufficient in doctrine and
knowledge, to teach such as are apt to learn, and to convince, yea stop the
mouths of such, as shall speak against the truth. Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 4.
Hereunto accords yt which Cyprian says: we must faithfully keep (says he)
and diligently hold that, which has been left unto us, by divine and
apostolical tradition, yt we may keep it also amongst ourselves, yea and that
in a manner throughout al provinces touching the vocation and calling of
Bishops, to wit, yt all the Bishops of ye province nearest unto the place,
where the election is to be made, do meet together, and that they chose ye
Bishop in the presence of the people, which does fully know ye life and
conversation of every one. And that also agrees hereunto which is spoken by
Saint Augustine, in a certain Dialogue between him and Orosius. Q. Orosij
Dial. Quaest. 65.
Wherein Orosius demands: How may we know them which are sent from God? and
Saint Augustine answers: know that he is sent from God which has not been
chosen by commendation or flattery, of some small number of men, and desires
not to bear rule, and gives not any money, to atchieue or get the bishopp
like dignity and honor, but which is praised and commended, by his holy life
and good manners, and also by the works or deeds belonging to a pastor, and by
the approbation and allowaunce of all the people.

We read also, Council. Laodic. Can. 12.
that it was ordained in the Council of Laodicea, that none should be chosen
Bishops, but they which had a long time been known, to be of a good life,
and of holy conversation, and who had also been well proved and tried in the
word of GOD, and in good works.

And in the first Council of Paris, Council. Parisi. Can. 8.
is was decreed, that no bishop be ordained against the will of the Citizens
of the city, but only he which shall be chosen by the full will and
consent of the people, and of the clergy, and not by the commandment of
any prince, nor by any other condition, against the will of ye Bishops of the
province. He that shall be otherwise ordained, and that shall come to this
honor, by the authority of the king or prince, let him be driven out and
deposed by all the rest.

Conc. quintum Anicl. Can. 10.
In the fifth Council of Orleans: Let not any man pretend to be a Bishop,
neither by buying, purchasing or rewards, but let the election be made
according to the kings will, the cleargies, the peoples, and the bishops of
the province. There is almost an infinite number of like Canons in the
Councels, which if we would put down here, we should be ouertedious and
long.

Now after right examination, and lawful election or choice (which are two
very essential points and commanded by gods law, with which none in the world
may dispense) there comes in the third place, the imposition or laying on of
hands, which is a ceremony, by which the ministers that were lawfully chosen,
were offered and dedicated as it were to the service of God and the Church.

But let us now examine, the Romish priests vocations first I ask, whether
the election which is made amongst them, be deferred, and put over to the
postours and the Church, yea or no? Every man sees what place and authority
they give, to their resignations, as they call them, to their permutations,
collations, presentations, donations etc. and also how the Magistrates and
great men, give Bishopprickes, Abbotshippes, personages, vicarages, and other
benefits as it pleases them selves. If the pastors, or to speak more
rightly, they that usurp the place of true pastors indede, meddle in the
election, then it appertains to the Pope alone, to choose the Cardinals,
the Bishops, and Archbishoppes, and to give the greatest and the fattest
benefices: And it belongs to the Bishops, to choose the simple or fingle
priests, and to bestow or give the other inferior and less benefices. And
where is then the holy consent and agreement amongst the Pastors, which is of
necessity required in the election?

Secondarilie, is the people called to it? or is the people advertised or
forewarned, to bring thither and give their advise and consent thereto? Every
one knows that this is not performed.

Thirdly, as concerning them whom they choose, what serious or earnest
examination, make they, either of their manners or of their doctrine? Sometimes
they chose infantes and children, at no hand fit or meet to exercise, the
least charge of the Church whatsouer it be. Sometimes they chose men altogether
ignorant and very often also of wicked life, and this they do through favor,
money, robberies, spoils, factions and other lewd and naughty practices,
overthrowing all order, and subuerting all good policy and discipline.

And yet notwithstanding, the Canons which they attribute to the Apostles,
ordeyne and determine, Can. Apost. Can. 29. and 30.
that every bishop, Elder or Deacon, that shall have obtained his office, by
money or gifts, or by the favor of the princes and potentates of this world,
should not only be deposed, from their estates and offices, but also
excommunicated and cast out of the Church, and that not only they themselves,
but also they which shall admit and receive the^ into such charges, and which
shall show them favor, and shall communicate with them. Now let men mark,
how these Canons are at this day observed and practiced in the Romish Church,
and by consequent, how right and lawful the vocation is, of the Bishops and
priests of that Church. It is true that they use indeed the imposition or
laying on of hands, but every one knows with how many trifling toys and
supperstitions it is accompanied. And indeed, this is the only point, whereof
they can vaunt themselves, which is not so necessary, but that we may very
well ouerpasse or little regard it, as having no express commandment touching
the use thereof. For touching the two substantial points, they want them
wholly, Titus. 2.7.
contrary to the ordinance of Saint Paul. Titus 2.7.

But touching our vocation, it is an easy matter for every one to judge,
whether it be true and lawefull, even by the proceeding which they that chose
us, keep and hold, in the right examination and diligent inquiry that they
make, as well of our doctrine, sufficiency, mean and manner, of teaching, as
of our life, manners and conversation: also by the allowance and manifest
consent of the people, who do receive us, after that they have a certain space
heard and tried us. For we hold and teach, that none ought of himself, to
teach and have charge in the Church, unless he be lawfully called thereunto.
It apperteineth to the Lord of the harvest, Matt. 9.38.
to send forth workmen into his harvest.

And S. Paul touching this matter asks, How shall they preach except they be
sent? Romans 10.15.
And therefore in the Prophet Jeremiah, they are taxed and reproved as false
Prophets, Iere. 14.14.23.21.
which did run not being sent. And Jesus Christ says also: John. 10.1.
That they which enter not in by the door into the sheepefolde, but climb up
some other way, are thieves and robbers.

But perhaps the Romish Catholics, will not so much examine our calling, as
that of the first reformers and restorers of our Churches, and will demand
of us, from whom it is, that they received imposition of hands: and finding
in their own indgeme^t, as they suppose, that they had not any certain
vocation, thereupon they would infer, that then they could not choose and call
us to our charges, and so by consequent our vocation should be none at all,
whereunto we answer two things.

The first is: that we ought to exercise our calling, according to the visible
state of the Church, which is either altogether, or else abiding safe and
sound. If then the state of ye Church abide in her purity which is then, when
pure doctrine is kept therein, and the lawful administration of sacraments,
with the right use of the discipline, we say, that an ordinary calling, that
is to say, the way and manner of chosing pastors, prescribed by the word of
God, according to which we have been called and placed in our charg, ought to
be observed and followed. But if the state of ye Church, be altogether
corrupted, we say, that then an extraordinary vocation has place, even
accoding as it shall please God to raise up his servants, and to employe
them, to reform the Church, and to bring it to her old purity. For God is
always not bound to ordinary means, which he uses notwithstanding, whe^n it
seems so good unto himself. And this was practiced in former time, eue^ then
when ye ten tribes of Israel, were altogether become bastards and corrupted,
through their idolatries. For God did extraordinarily stir up, 1. King. 18.19.
unto them Elijah, to reform them, and to endeavor to bring them into good
order touching his service: yea I say Elijah, who was not a priest, and had not
in that respect any succession.

So likewise we hold and affirm, that God has dealt in our time, in the
choice and sending of some of our ministers, who were inspired and stirred up
by GOD, to streatch out the hand unto the Church, which in respect of the
outward and visible state, was wholly almost beaten down and overthrown. And
these men neither could nor ought to look, to be sent from, or to be approved
by the pope and his people, whose intolerable abuses and false doctrines, they
had in charge to reprove no more, then they that would take upon them to
reform a company of Women, who had openly fallen, to whordom, fornication
etc. ought to wait, to be stirred up or required thereunto, either by
altogether, or some of them, they pleasing the^ selves, and being desirous to
continue in their former dissolution and leudnes.

Here to allege, that for the making of and extraordinary vocation certain
and approved, some miracles are necessary, or else some certain, plain, and
manifest places of scripture, is to no purpose at all, or they say as much, as
if they said nothing. For as concerning places of scripture, we are not
destitute thereof. Jesus Christ speaking in the Gospel to the Priests, who
did not well and rightly execute their office in their charges, demands of
them, When the Lord of the vineyard shall come, Matthew. 21.40.41.
what will he do to these wicked husbandmen? Unto whom they answer,
condemning them selves: He will cruelly destroy these wicked men, and will let
out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall deliver him the fruits in
their seasons. Now this was indeed justly and faithfully accomplished. For the
Lord took away his vineyard, that is to say, the government of his Church
from the Priests, Scribes, and Elders of the people, who did not yield him the
fruits which did belong unto him, and committed the same unto other husbandmen,
that is, to his Apostles and their successors, which have yielded him fruits in
their seasons. And even in like manner has the Lord done in the Popedom,
beholding evil workmen in his vineyard, that is to say, wicked and naughty
Pastors in his Church, which did not at any hand their duty and office, he
has not destroyed his Church, but has changed the state and condition
thereof, taking away her blind guides, and giving unto her others which see
clearly.

It is also written in the Apocalipse: The holy city shall they tread under
foot two and forty months, Reu. 11.2.3.
but I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand, two hundred, and threescore days. In which place S. John
foretells, the general corruption of the Church, which shall come to pass
in the last times, yet so that withal he gives us to understand, that God
will not suffer his service to continue so corrupted and bastardly, but that he
will reform it, and bring it to her former perfection and soundness, and that
for this purpose he will raise and stir up witnesses of his own, to
prophecy and speak against so grievous a corruption. And how shall this be
done? by using an extraordinary manner.

Luke 9.49.
We may also very well apply to this purpose, the example of him, who cast out
devils in the name of Jesus Christ. For the Apostles would have hindered him,
because he did not follow Jesus Christ as they did. But Jesus Christ says
unto them: Take heed that ye forbid him not, or hinder him for (says he) he
that is not against us, is with us. It is very true indeed, that such an
extraordinary vocation, ought not to be lightly approved, but it is also as
true, that it ought not as lightly be condemned.

But we have a certain and manifest testimony, of this extraordinary
vocation in Phillip. Act. 6.5. and 8.5.
For he being only ordained a Deacon at Jerusalem, was afterward
extraordinarily called by God to preach Jesus Christ.

Beside, the first restorers of the Church of our age or time, who were
extraordinarily called, are not to be reproved or blamed for rashness. For as
in a city besieged by the enemy, or assaulted with fire, when they which were
ordinarily called for the safegarde and defense thereof, and to give order in
the danger of fire, should be them selves the first enemies and putters to of
fire, if it fall out that certain citizens, having other charges or offices in
the city, or else if they were but private and particular persons, would come
and set up them selves, and employ them selves, in running to the breach and
fire, to the end that they might preserve the city, so far off is it, that
they deserve or ought to be reprehended, as traitors and unfaithful persons,
that on the other side, for a fact so courteous and gentle, yea so profitable
to ye country, they were greatly to be praised, as very good citizens, and
true friends and preseruers of the country: so when the ordinary saueguardes
or keepers of Gods own house, have declared them selves to be enemies thereof,
and putters too of fire, to overthrow and mar all, they that are afterward
advanced and set forwards them selves to resist them, and to maintain the
right and estate of the said house, yea although they have had no manner of
ordinary vocation, but in their own consciences, have only felt them selves
extraordinarily called, for to execute such an office or charge, so far off
is it, that either they may or ought to be blamed, that contrariwise they
deserve honor and great praise.

And yet this is here to be noted, that albeit al are not enjoined or commanded
to preach, as well as all are commanded to oppose or set them selves against
false prophets, yet by consequent it follows very well, that if any do
advance or set forward them selves, to oppose or set them selves against false
prophets, they have done nothing against their vocation or calling.

Add also, that even those which in the beginning were extraordinarily called,
having faithfully acquitted and behaved them selves in their charges, in
preaching the truth, and being received and allowed of the people, that
vocation of theirs, which before was extraordinary, has ceased, yea must
cease, and afterward is become ordinary.

And as concerning miracles, we will shortly answer thereto. Let the Romish
Catholics show, what miracles Isaiah, Amos, Obadiah, Nahum, Zechariah, and
many other Prophets did, whom God did extraordinarily stir up, where they
which had the order and government in their own hands, abused the same.
Next, let them consider, Matt. 12.39.
that it appertains to an evil and adulterous generation, to demand and
seek signs, as Jesus Christ says. Thirdly, that miracles may seduce and
deceive. For we read, that false prophets, seducers, Deuteronomy. 13.1. etc. Matt.
24.24.
and deceivers, have sometimes done them, thereby to deceive men, and to make
approved their false doctrines, 2. These. 2.9.
and to increase and strengthen their superstitions and idolatries. And
therefore we ought not by miracles to judge of the vocation and doctrine, but
rather on the other side, by the vocation and doctrine we ought to judge of
miracles and signs.

The other thing which we answer, touching the vocation and calling of our
first ministers, is, that we may very well stop the mouths of the Romish
Catholics, if we would allege, that those ministers them selves for the most
part, had in respect of them selves an ordinary vocation, being indeed called
in their time, by the Pope, and by him established and set in their charges,
and therefore by consequent had authority and right, to go up into the
pulpit, and to teach in the Church, as Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer,
and before them Wicklef and John Hus. Also that in England, Sweden, and
Denmark, the right and lawful succession of the chair or place, is on our
side. For there the ordinary Bishops have received the Gospel, and preach it,
so that we shall not need to dispute of their vocation, no more then for the
calling of the Priests, which are at this present in the Romish Church, called
by the Pope, but even only of their doctrine.

CHAP. VI. That the Church has been always from the beginning, is now, and
shall be even unto the worlds end, but that it ought not to be esteemed or
acknowledged by the great number.
WE must not think, that the Church had her beginning, where the Apostles
began to preach the gospel throughout all the world, at which time the
disciples, were first named Christians in Antiochia, but that she began to be
in the world, eue^ from the very time of our first parents Adam and Heuah. For
in them and by the^ God began to be served on the earth, having blessed them,
and commended unto the^ his service, and after their fall having preached unto
them repentance and assurance of victory against ye serpent, through Jesus
Christ his son. But ye world increasing, ye Church also was augmented,
serving God. For as S. Paul says: God created the world, Act. 17.26.
and has made of one blood al men, that they might seek and serve him. And he
himself says in Isaiah: This people have I formed for my self, Isai. 43.21.
they shall rehearse and show forth my praise. GOD then created in the
world, and that from the beginning a Church, thorough free adoption, to this
end, that his name might be duly praised, by convenient, fit, and meet
witnesses for so excellent a work. For this cause also the Church is called
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. Isai. 61.3.
Isaiah 61.3.

Moreover this Church, notwithstanding the sharp and hard persecutions which
it has suffered, has not yet ceased always to be, as it is at this present,
and shall be unto the worlds end. For as David says: The Lord has chosen
Sion, Psa. 132.13. etc.
(that is to say, ye church) and has desired it for his seat: it has been
(says he) my rest for ever. Matt. 28.20.
Jesus Christ also has promised his disciples, to be with them always, even
unto the end of the world. But chiefly Saint Paul has declared and set out the
perpetuity and continuance of the Church, when he assures us, Ephesians. 3.21.
that GOD shall be glorified in the Church through Jesus Christ, throughout all
generations for ever and ever. They then are overmuch past shame, which limit
the continuance of the Church to a certain time, as those of whom Saint
Augustine speaks, August. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 18. ca. 54
who durst boldly affirm, that the christian religion should not last, but
365. years. They likewise do abuse and deceive themselves, which think that
by the assaults which they give unto the Church, they are able to beat it
down, consume it, and wholly take it away out of the world. for is it possible
that God should be without a Church? Psalm. 100.1. etc.
has not he himself promised that his son shall reign and bear rule for
ever over all his enemies? Verily the Church which is the spouse or wife of
Christ, is become or made so mighty and strong through her husband, that
being even one body with him, she is more forcible and mighty in her
weakness, then all the world in his pride and hautines. But as we have
already said once heretofore, we will hereafter speak more amply and
largely of the Churches force and power in persecutions. To be short: amongst
so many and so diverse chaunges, of the kingdoms of this world, God always
preserves his Church, and brings to pass, that nothing in all the world is
durable and perpetual, but she, not that she is always flourishing, or has a
continuance, which follows al by one threede, that is, comes altogether,
but because that God, not minding that his name should be put out in the
world, does always in his Church raise up some, of whom he is sincerely and
purely served.

Now when the question is, to discern the true Church from the false, some
there are that stay themselves upon the multitude and great number. But they
are very far from their right reckoning or account. For GOD measures not his
Church by the number. Matt. 18.20.
He loves his faithful people, and keeps himself in the midst of them,
although they be a very small number. on the otherside, he hates those that
do despise it, and disdayneth them, though the number of them be never so
great. And indeed, on the side of the multitude and great number, the false
and bastardly Church is rather found, than the true and lawful one. And that
it is so, let us first mark ye places of scripture, which withdraw us from
the multitude, and teach us to stay and cleave to the little flock.

Exodus 23.2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither agree in a
controversy, to decline after many, and to overthrow the truth.

Matthew. 7.13.14.
Enter in at the strait Gate: for it is the wide gate and broad way which
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. because the gate
is strait and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it.

Fear not, little flock, Luke 12.32.
for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom.

We see by these places, that the greatest number is not always the best,
neither the soundest, and that the Church of God is found rather amongst the
small number, then among the multitude.

Secondly, let us note the reasons following, which are taken from examples
that we find in the scripture touching this very matter?

On which side was the Church, Gene. 7.1. Heb. 11.7.
when Noah alone, with his little family (which was not in all, but eight
persons) followed the true religion, God approving him, and by his faith
condemning all the rest of the world?

On which side was the Church, 1. Kin. 19.10.
when Elijah said, O Lord, the children of Israel, have forsaken thy covenant,
they have destroyed thine Altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword, and
I am left altogether alone, and yet they seek my soul to take it away?

On which side was ye Church when the four hundred prophets deceived Ahab, ^.
King. 22.8
and Michaiah, being alone and conte^ned, did yet notwithstanding resist them
and speak the truth.

On which side was the Church, when Jeremiah was sent from God to say: Iere.
4.9.
In that day the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes
and of the priests shall be astonished, Iere. 10.18.
and the Prophets shall wonder: and that therefore the Prophets resisted him,
laid crimes unto his charge, and imagined mischeife against him?

On which side was the Church, when the chief Priests and scribes, Matthew.
26.3.
and Elders of the people, assembled themselves together into the Hall of the
high Priest named Caiaphas, and held a Council, how they might take Jesus
Christ by subtlety, and put him to death?

Certainly by these examples, it is plainly proved, that if it were sufficient
to allege the multitude and the greatest number, for to underprop and
uphold a Church, the false and bastardly Church, should ever prevail in the
matter, and get the better in that respect, because that the number which
cleaves to it, and follows, and maintayneth it, is always the greatest.
August. in Psalm. 128.
Let us add here a sentence of Saint Augustine. From the time (says he) that
the Saints have begun to be, the Church has been and is on the earth.
Sometimes it was in Abel alone, who was slain by his wicked brother Cain.
Sometime it was in Henoch alone, who was rejected of the ungodly. Sometimes it
was in the only house of Noah, and he bare with or suffered all them that
perished in the floude, and the Arc swimming upon the floudes, was saved, and
set upon the dry land. Sometime in one only Abraham, of whom we know thus
much, that he suffered many things by the wicked. Sometimes in Lot alone,
and in his only house, in the midst of the Sodomites, whose iniquities and
ungodliness he endured and suffered so long, till God drew him as it were by
violence from among them. Sometimes in the only Israelites tormented by
Pharaoh, and the Egyptians. By these words that appears very well, to be
true and right which I have said, to wit, that the Church ought not to be
judged or acknowledged by the great number.

The faithful then should not at this day be offended, though they be but a
small number, despised and cast out as the filth and ofscouring of the world,
for because they are not of the world, John. 15.19.
but that God has chosen and drawn them out of the world, therefore behold
does the world hate them. They should not doubt that the Church is not with
them, though that it be assaulted and persecuted of the greatest number of men,
and those the mightiest, of greatest reputation and highest exalted, and namely
of the popes, Cardinals, Bishops, 1 Cor. 1.27.28.29.
parish Priests, Abbots and other of the clergy of Rome, who indeed ought
to maintain and uphold it. For so it is, that GOD has chosen the foolish
things of this world, to confound the wise things; and the weak or feeble
things, to confound the strong; and the vile and despised things, and those
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, to the end that no
flesh should rejoice in his presence. Psalm. 118.22 Matt. 21.42. 1. Pet. 2.7.
And on the otherside, the prophecies must of necessity be wholly accomplished,
touching the stone, which the builders began long ago to reject, and which
even at this day, they do also refuse, although it be the master stone, or
chief stone of the corner in Sion, elect and precious in them which stay them
selves thereon, and be builded upon it.

But some will say, wherefore then is it, that God has heretofore suffered, so
many people in so many ages and times, to be seduced and deceived? Yea,
wherefore does he at this day suffer, the greater part of the world to walk
in the darkenesses of error and ignorance? Verily it is not our part, to take
upon us either to discover or curiously to search the secret causes of Gods
eternal judgment, neither yet to lay or cast upon him the fault of our
naughtiness and ungodliness, for certain it is that he does most justly
govern and guide all things, and therefore cannot do injury or wrong to
any man, what so ever he do, Psalm. 51.5. Ephe. 2.3.
seeing that we are all conceived and borne in iniquity, and are by nature
the children of wrath, guilty of death, and eternal damnation. And therefore
Saint Paul in few words dissoluing this difficulty, contenteth himself to
allege, the only will and good pleasure of god without asce^ding or going up
higher, so much as one step. Act. 14.1^. Act. 17.30.
GOD (says he) in times passed has suffered all the Gentiles to walk in
their own ways: Nevertheless he left not him self without witness, in
that he did good etc. And again, The time of this ignorance God regarded not,
but now he admonishes all men every where to repent.

Notwithstanding also we may rightly say, that God suffers Satan to have so
much power and might in the world, as that he should bear sway and reign
over the greater part, to the end that he might thereby, through his just
judgment, punish men for their unthankfulness and unfaithfulness. For it
is not good reason that those which would not hearken unto God, neither receive
the truth which was offered them, and who also even willingly and of their own
accord, have despised and refused their own salvation, is it not meet I say,
that such should be seduced and deceived through the subtilties and sleightes
of the devil, and at the last cast from God, and through his just judgment
punished, according as their ungodliness and unthankfulness deserves? Saint
Paul writing unto the Thessalonians, shows and puts down this reason,
when he says: 2 Thessalonians. 2.10
That because that they which perish received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed not the truth of
the word, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

This also fell sometimes, and was laid upon the Gentiles. For from the
beginning of the world, Romans 1.20. etc.
GOD made manifest unto them his Godhead and his power, and although this was
not done by ye preaching of men, yet it was by the ministry of the creatures,
in which his glory was in such sort manifested and showed, that a man may well
say, they had in some sense, a tongue, as it were to show, set forth, and
rehearse the great power and the wonderful works of God. But what thereof?
These straglers and strayers having known God, did not glorify him as GOD,
neither yielded him thanks, but became vain in their imaginations and
discourses, and so forth, as Saint Paul shows of them in the first Chapter
to the Romans. Who will then at this day say, that GOD has done them wrong,
when he gives them over to the lusts of their own hearts, to filthiness,
and their own villainous affections through a spirit destitute and unfurnished
of all judgment, to commit things at no hand convenient or seemly, he
punishing them after this manner, according to their deserts, and his own most
just righteousness.

The same fell also in time heretofore upon the poor and miserable Jews. For
behold our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his own free will, presented and
offered him self unto them, being willing and ready to instruct and teach
them, in the doctrine of salvation, confirming his Gospel by excellent
miracles and authentical signs worthy of credit, by which he did evidently
show unto them, that he was the very Messiah promised in the law, and the
true and only redeemer of the world, but how did these miserable people
govern and behave them selves in that behalf? Their obstinacy and rebellion
was so great, that they were not only content, desperately to reject, and
throw from them, the doctrine of the holy Gospel, slaundering it and
accusing it of falsehood, but which is worse, they killed and cruelly murdered
the only son of GOD, and outragiously persecuted the Apostles (as before
that they had put to death also even their own Prophets) and other Christians.
Who is he then which will affirm, that these wicked people did not through
their rebellion and pride justly deserve to be delivered and given over for a
pray unto Satan, and to be deceived through the subtilties and crafts of his
false doctrine?

The same is fallen out in our time, and continues yet, even every day. For
there are diverse which are in such sort blinded, and before hand possessed with
the darknesses of the prince of this world, that they do not only despise all
true religion and doctrine, but also they enforce and strain them selves, to
bring into credit and estimation all the dreams, dotages, raylings, and false
opinions of Antichrist, and his instruments, in so much that for to attain
thereto, they cease not to make war upon the poor faithful people, desiring
with a burning affection, the sheading of their blood. Who is he then which
dare say, that such people are not very worthy and meet to be delivered unto
Satan, that they may be so made drunken with ye deadly poison of his false
doctrine, as they may never after be able to taste or smell, the sweetness and
pleasantnes of ye word of God? To be short, then in that the devil has so
great a sway in the world, it is a very manifest sign (or as a man would say,
a banner displayed) of the just vengeance of GOD, and of his horrible and
fearful fury upon all those, who reject and persecute the Gospel of his
son. For the ungodly perseuering in their unbelief, deserve to be covered
and clothed with so great abomination, seeing that the truth of GOD, can
find no place amongst them.

CHAP. VII. That Jesus Christ alone, is the head of his Church, and not Saint
Peter, neither any Pope what so ever.
EXperience teaches us what evil it brings us, when we turn aside from the
word of God, be it never so little. In old time all the Pastors of the
Church, were commonly called Elders, Ancients, Bishops, and they were all
brethren and fellows, equal also, and of like authority in their
ministeries. And this continued until such time as he, that was chosen in the
assemblies of the Pastors, there for the time to be president, and to gather
the voices, came at the last, to be especially, and as it were only named a
Bishop: Hence the devil began to frame and spinne as it were the tyranny of
Antichrist in the Church, even such as we behold it at this day, so that the
man of sin, 2. These. 2.3.4.
and son of destruction revealed is set down in the temple of God, as God,
showing him self as though he were God. For from Bishops they came to
Metropolitanes, who also are called Archbishops, and that under goodly show and
great pretense. For these Metropolitanes, were not, but as it were Presidents
or rulers, to set the other in order, and to call them together when it was
needful, to have some Synod, for the affairs and businesses of the Churches
of the Province, and in good order, and without confusion to redress and guide
matters, in the assemblies made.

From Metropolitanes they leaped to four Patriarchs, as though the whole
Christian common wealth, ought to be divided into four parts, and be ruled
and governed by four Prelates. These Patriarchs were, one of Antioch, who
bare rule over Syria: one of Alexandria, who governed Egypt and Ethiopia: one
of Constantinople bearing rule over Asia, Grecia, and Illyricum: and one of
Rome, ruling all ye West, yt is to say, Italy, France, Spain, and Germany.
Hereupon afterward there arose contentions and stirs, between these four
Patriarchs, touching their jurisdiction and primacie, in so much that they in
such sort, set them selves one of them against an other, with the hurt and
loss indeed of the poor Church, that at the last two, to wit, that of
Antioche, and that of Alexandria, gave place and yielded their rooms to the
other two, that is, Constantinople and Rome, the controversy between which
endures as yet, even unto this day. For it is not yet well determined nor made
plain, which of these two ought to be head and universal Bishop. In some
sort to quiet them, and to make them contented, and to keep them selves
within their own bounds, men have limited their charges thus, the Patriarch
of Constantinople, to bear rule over all the Churches of the East, and the
Patriarch of Rome to bear rule over all the Churches of the West.

Wherefore the la^ter of these two, is he whom the Romish Catholics make them
selves to believe, yt he is the head of ye universal Church, as being the
Vicar of Jesus Christ on earth, and the lawful or right successor of Saint
Peter. But we have here two points to examine and sift: the one touching Saint
Peter: The other touching the Pope, who says that he is his successor.

Concerning the first, we shall not find in all the scriptures, that S. Peter
was ordained at any time to be head of the whole Church, and to bear rule over
it, neither that he him self did at any time, either pretend or usurp, such a
jurisdiction and primacie, because it did not at any hand belong unto him, but
unto Jesus Christ alone, as we hope to prove, and manifestly to show it by the
reasons following.

The first reason is this. Jesus Christ alone is called the head of the
Church. Ephesians 1. verse 22. Ephesians 5. verse 23. Ephesians. 1.22. Ephesians. 5.23.
Saint Peter then is not, otherwise the Church should be a body with two
heads.

If they will reply, and say, yt Jesus Christ indeed is the only head of the
Church, because that he alone reigns over it, and that by his own only
authority, yet that this nothing hinders, but that there may be an other head
ministerial (as they call it) that is to say, one in respect of the execution
of the charge and office under him, who should be his great Vicar and
liuetenant general, for to govern the Church, I will demand of them to show
me, when and how this ministerial head, was ordained by Jesus Christ: for if
Jesus Christ be God living for ever, Romans 9.5.
what need has he of a successor? If we have all his will in writing, Ioh.
15.15. Act. 20.27. Matt. 18.18.28.20.
and if he be always present in the midst of his Church, to rule and govern
the same, what has he to do for a Vicar or Lieuetenant? And as concerning
charges and offices, we know what executors he has established and left. S.
Paul in the Epistle to the Ephesians: affirms, Ephesians. 4.11. etc.
that Jesus Christ being ascended into heaven, has given some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some teachers, to whom he has
given in charge, and committed his Church to order and guide the same. This is
not spoken only, for two or three, or for some other small number, neither yet
for one age, but for all the Pastors of the Church generally, and for all
times. Now you may see what lieutenantes Jesus Christ has substituted in his
place: but that he should give unto Peter a primacie, to be Pope and head of
the Church, is a mere leasing.

The second reason is this: Jesus Christ only is the foundation of the Church
1. 1. Cor. 3.11.
Corinth. 3.11. Whereupon it follows, that the Church is founded upon Jesus
Christ, and at no hand upon Saint Peter, and by consequent that Jesus Christ
alone is the head of the Church, and not Saint Peter. Touching that which
Jesus Christ speak unto Peter: Thou art Peter, Matt. 16.18.
and upon this rock I will build my Church, we will anon declare the true and
natural sense thereof.

The third reason. S. Peter's charge and office was limited and set within
certain bonds: For S. Paul witnesses of himself and Peter thus, Galat. 2.7.
That he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and Saint Peter of the Jews: And
says, that this division was made, by the revelation and ordinance of GOD. It
follows then that Saint Peter was not an universal Apostle, nor a sovereign
and high bishop over all the Church: Otherwise Saint Paul should have done
ill in so limiting and hedging in as it were, the the charge and office of his
Apostleship, yea and that eighteen years after ye death of Jesus Christ. But
I would wish the Romish Catholics, to take some better view of and heed to
this reason. For if their Pope, snatch and take unto himself the primacie, for
this reason, because he is Saint Peter's successors, he must then exercise his
primacie or popedom over the Jews and preach unto them the Gospel, that he
may gain them and draw them to Jesus Christ, leaving unto him whosoever he
be, that will take upon him to be called the successor of Saint Paul,
primacie over the Gentiles.

The fourth reason: One wife has but only one husband, which is her head. But
the Church is the spouse of Christ. 2. Cor. 11.2. Ephe. 5.22. Reave. 21.9.
2. Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5.22. Reuelat: 21.9. The Church then has none other
but Christ alone for her husband and head.

The fifth reason: It is certain, that Saint Peter used the power and
authority, which Jesus Christ gave him, for otherwise he should have
neglected his charge, and hidden his talent in ye ground, and so by consequent
have disobeyed his Master, not serving him purely and faithfully. But so it is,
he never usurped any primacie over the other Apostles or over the Church, for
he makes himself equal, to the other pastors, 1. Peter. 5.1.21. etc.
naming himself a pastor and an Elder with them, and he has said also, that
it is not lawefull at any hand for any man, to have Lordship over the Lords
inheritaunces. Then it follows that he received not any primacie or
Lordshippe from Jesus Christ, over the Church of God.

The sixth reason: Act. 8.14.
Saint Peter was sent together with John into Samaria by the other Apostles.
Now if he had been the head of the Church, and had had rule and authority
over the Apostles, it had apperteined unto him to send others, and not to
others to send him.

The seventh reason: If Saint Peter had had the right of primacie, to what end
would he have suffered himself, to have been reproved by S. Paul, and that
before the people? In sext. decr. de Con. cap. Licet. and distinct. 19. ca. si
Roman. in Glossa and de conces. prae. tit. 8. ca. pro. posuit and alibi.
for this was done even then when he both might and ought, to have showed his
authority and rule. As at this day, the Pope who says: that he is above
right, neither is held or bound by laws: that he may prefer through his
interpretation equity unwritten, before law written: that we ought to allow
or dissallow all that he allows or disalloweth: that he is not subject to any
censure, having all law and right in the coffer of his breast and stomach.
Now Saint Peter did not allege any whit or part of all these blasphemies, but
took in good worth Saint Paul's censure and reproof, acknowledging himself
his companion and fellow, and one that was joined with him and the other
Apostles in felloweshippe of office, yea inferior to the whole body and
subject to the admonitions and censures of his brethren.

The eight reason: So it was, that among the Apostles, in the time that our
Savior Christ was bodily conversant with them, Luke 22.24. etc.
there was a controversy which of them should be esteemed or judged the
greatest, but Christ laboreth to bring them to humility, and to take from
amongst the^ all ambition, saying thus: The kings of the nations bear rule,
and they which exercise authority over the^, are called Gracious lords, but ye
shall not be so: But let the greatest among you be as the least, and the
chiefest as he that serves: And afterward he sets himself forth for an
example. For who is greater, he that sits at Table or he that serves, is
not he that sits at the table? And I am among you, as he that serves: and
ye are they which have continued with me, in my temptations. Lastly he
concludes: Therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has
appointed to me.

These are our principal reasons, to declare that Saint Peter was not appointed
Lord over the Church, and that he had no more authority or pre-eminence in
it, than the other Apostles, his companions and fellows had. Now let us hear
the contrary reasons, which the Romish Catholics make.

The first is this: Matt. 16.18.
Jesus Christ has said to Saint Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, I
will build my Church. It follows then that Saint Peter, is the foundation of
the Church, and by consequent the head thereof.

I answer, that the holy spirit, is not contrary to it self: but he has
spoken plainly to the Corinthians: That Jesus Christ alone, is the only
foundation of the Church, 1. Cor. 3.11.
and that none can lay any other, than that which is laid already: Therefore
he affirms not in that place of S. Matthewe, the contrary to this. And mark
this deed, Jesus Christ has not said: and upon thee, O Peter, I will build my
Church: but: and upon this rock, I will build. And what means this, upon
this rock? Let us hear S. Augustine. The Church (says he) is founded upon
the rock, August. in Johan. tract. 124. ca. 21.
of which rock Peter has taken his name, for the rock is not so called of
Peter, but Peter is so named of the rock; as Christ has not taken his name of
Christians, but Christians of Christ. Therefore the Lord says, upon this rock
I will build my Church, because that Peter had confessed, thou art Christ the
son of the living God. He says therefore, upon this rock which thou have
confessed I will build my Church. For the rock was Christ, upon which
foundation Peter also himself was builded. Mark what S. Augustine says. S.
Ambrose and S. Chrysostom, understand this to be spoken of ye faith which is
Christ, and not as ye Pope does, of ye person of Peter. S. Ambrose says thus:
Amb. in epl. ad Ephe. ca. 2.20.
Jesus Christ said to Peter: and upon this rock I will build my Church, that is
to say, upon this confession of Catholic faith, I will establishe the
faithful unto eternal life. Chrysostom says also: Chriso. Ser. 21. de
Pentecost.
Jesus Christ says: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church. He says upon this rock, and not upon Peter: For he has founded or
set his Church not upon man, but upon the faith and confession of Peter. And
what was this faith and confession? Thou art Christ the son of the living God.

The second reason is: Matthew. 16.19
Jesus Christ has given the keys unto Peter, he has therefore appointed him
head of the Church.

I deny the consequent. For by the use of the keys is understood not the
rule or oversight of the whole Church, but the power, to bind and loose, or
else to pardon or not pardon sins, as it is declared, Matt. 18.18. John.
20.23.
in the 18. Chapter of the Gospel after S. Mathewe, and Chap. 20. after S.
John. Now seeing that so it is, that power to remitte or to retain sins was
given, not unto Peter only, but equally unto all the Apostles, it follows
well, that the use of the keys was not given to Saint Peter alone, but also to
all his companions and fellows, and by consequent, if he were the head of ye
Church, to who^ the power of ye keys was given, it would follow that the
Church had so many heads, as it had then Apostles.

But some will say, Jesus Christ speaks only to Peter. It is true indeed.
How beit by the name of Peter is understood the whole Church. For even as
Jesus Christ was willing to hear, what judgment not only Peter, but also all
his fellows had of him, when he demanded of them, But what say ye that I am?
Matt. 16.15.16.
And that Peter alone in the name of all answered and made this confession,
Thou art Christ the son of the living God: So on ye other side Jesus Christ,
giving the power of the keys unto the Church, addressed his speech unto Peter
alone, although he meant to speak as well unto all the rest. Augu. in Johan
tract. 50
And so does Saint Augustine understand it: for behold how he speaks.
Peter (says he) signifies the whole Church. For if that in Peter there were
not the figure of the Church, Christ would not have said unto him, I will give
unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And agane, when Jesus Christ
said unto Peter, I will give unto thee the keys etc. He meant without doubt
the whole Church.

And the reason would be marked, why Jesus Christ, in the person of one spoke
unto all: that is, to the end he might commend and set the unity of the
Church, even as also the ancient writers have marked and observed the same.
Cypri. tract. 3. de simpli. praelat.
S. Cyprian says thus. Our Lord in the person of one man, has given the keys
unto all, thereby to denote and set out the unity of all. The other were the
same in deed that Peter was, fellows in equal honor, and in equal power.
But Jesus began with one man, to the end to show, that the Church is one. And
Augustine: August. in Johan. tract. 11.
So it was (says he) that all were asked: Peter alone answered him, thou art
Christ etc. and to him was it said, I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, as though power to bind and lose, had been given unto him
alone. But as he answered for all, so he received the keys together with all,
bearing as it were the person of unity. Wherefore he alone was named for all,
because there was unity among all.

3 The third reason is: Ioh. 21.16.
Jesus Christ commanded Peter above all the rest, yea and ye three times, to
feed his sheep. He then did constitute and make him an universal Bishop, and
head of all Churches.

I answer, that this consequent is false, for there is a very great not only
difference, but contraritie between these two, to have charge to feed the
sheep of Christ, and to have a most high Empire, and universal rule over the
whole Church. Besides, if to feed the sheep of Christ, be no other thing, but
to minister and give unto them, the spiritual food of their souls, by the
preaching of ye Gospel, Matt. 28.19. Mark. 16.15.
as it is indeed: and seeing that it is most evident and plain, that Jesus
Christ has given this commission, to all his Apostles generally, it follows
very well, yt he has not given it to Peter alone. And indeed Peter him self
does well confess the same, 1. Peter. 1.5. etc.
when he exhorts his fellow ministers, to feed the flock of Christ, which
is committed unto them. And Basil confirms ye same saying: Jesus Christ him
self teaches us this, (to wit, that he is the only head of the Church) who
did co^stitute and appoint Peter the pastor of his church, after him. For he
says, Peter, love thou me? feed my sheep: and consequently, he has given
this very same power to all Pastors and teachers, and hereof this is a
certain sign and sure token, that all bind and lose without any difference,
as well as he.

The fourth reason: S. Peter is diverse times in the Scripture named ye first
among the Apostles. Therefore he was chosen to have rule above the other his
fellows, yea above or over the whole Church.

I answer first, that this argument is frivolous and vain, yea worthy to be
mocked and hissed at. For be it that we confess that S. Peter was the first
and chief as it were amongst a few people, that is to say, amongst the twelve
Apostles, yet very far fet is this, that it should therefore follow, that he
was the first or chiefest over all Christians, or that he did bear rule over
all the world.

Secondly, if because that S. Peter is the first named, he is therefore the
first and chiefest among the Apostles, we must then say by the contrary, that
the virgin Marie is ye last and least of all women, because in the first
chapter of the Acts, Act. 1.13.14.
where also S. Peter is set the first in the catalogue or number, she is set
the last after others. Which matter the Romish Catholics will not at any hand
say or affirm: which if they should, it would be found in deed a very
absurd thing.

Thirdly we read in many places, that S. Peter is not named first. And S. Paul
in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Galathians, Gal. 2.9.
places James before him. James then by this reason, should have authority
over Peter, because he is named before him. Besides in the Council of
Jerusalem, the speech and advice of James which was had, after that Peter had
given his, Act. 15.13. etc.
had such weight with it, that all consented and agreed to his judgment.

And thus much concerning the first point. Let us come to the other which
concerns the Pope, who says, that he is Saint Peter's successor, and so by
consequent the head of the Church.

First, if it manifestly appear by that which has been said heretofore, that
Saint Peter was never established head of the Church, and that he never had any
such pre-eminence and authority attributed unto him, by what title or right
can or will the Pope (who says that he is his successor) pretend at this day,
any such Lordship, rule and authority?

Let us also on the other side well mark this. S. Peter died (as they say)
under Nero, and there succeeded him, Lucius, Cletus, and Clemens, in the time
of S. John, who lived under Domitian, and even unto Traian his days. Now if
they of the Church of Rome will say, that the Popes which succeeded S. Peter,
were the heads of the Church, to whom all the rest of the Bishops ought to be
subject, they must of necessity be driven to confess, that S. John was
subject to Lucius, to Cletus, and to Clemens.

Moreover, if S. Peter's successors be the heads of the Church, Clemens who
succeeded him in the third place (as they say) was so likewise. But let us
hear what he him self says in an Epistle, which (as some say) he writ to
James Bishop of Jerusalem. Tom. 1. Council. page 135. col. 2.
The title or inscription is this: Clemens, to James the Lords brother, Bishop
of Bishops, governor of the Church of Jerusalem, and of all other Churches
which by the providence of God, are throughout all the world. If Clemens were
the universal Bishop, why did he spoil him self of his own titles, to
attribute, ascribe, and give the same unto James, to whom they did not belong?

Furthermore, who is he that has lifted up the Pope into this goodly degree of
honor? Is it Jesus Christ or his Apostles? No in deed: for we read, that
Bonifacius the third of that name Bishop of Rome, was by the Emperor Phocas
ordained the first sovereign or chief of all Christendom, and the Chuuch of
Rome, established head of all the Churches in the world? and this was about the
year of Christ six hundred and four.

This Phocas (as the history writers rehearse and record) was a traitor and an
unfaithful murderer of the Emperor Mauritius his master: for as the said
Mauritius at a certain time, showed him self over severe and rigorous against
his soldiers, they being given to debate and contention, chose Phocas for
Emperor, who in Calcedonia immediately caused to be cut off the forenamed
Mauritius his own head, his arms also, and his three sons named Theodorus,
Tiberius, and Constantine. But he received his payment and reward for it
afterward. For having reigned eight years, he was at the last slain by the
common people, in the year of Christ 612. Behold and mark by whom the
primacie of the Romish Church was established, and the Roman Bishop made an
universal Bishop, there being before, not so much as any news of it. For as
concerning a certain Edict or decre which they allege, by which Constantine
the great, a Christian Emperor, gave unto Siluester ye Bishop of Rome (about
the year of Christ 317.) spiritual domination and government, over all the
Churches of the whole world: also the jewels and kingly ornaments, yea the
Empire it self and politic government, over all the West parts, it is a
writing found and forged for and at their pleasure, full of lyings also and
falshoodes, which may be easily proved by these reasons.

There are none of all the approved historiographers, during certain ages,
which make mention thereof after any sort, as Eusebius, Eutropius, Ruffinus,
Socrates, Theodoretus, Beda, Euagrius, Paulus Diaconus, Zonaras, Nicephorus,
Orosius, either other the like, yea they which have written the lives of the
Emperors and Popes, have not any whit at all spoken thereof. No more have the
ancient Doctors, Athanasius, Basilius, Saint Ambrose, Gregory Nissenus,
Gregorius Nazianzenus, Optatus, Milenitanus, Saint Augustine, Chrysostom;
which is more, the Bishops of Rome them selves have not said any thing
thereof, no not in Councels, when they have taken upon them, the care and
charge to maintain their primacie, which would notwithstanding have been a
good buckler and shield of defense for them.

If Constantine gave to the Roman Bishop the primacie over Constantinople,
Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and all other Churches, what reason had he to
suffer in the Council of Nice (whereat he him self was present) that the
contrary should there be determined and concluded? Council. Nic. Can. 6. and
habetur tom. 1. Council. page 342.
For in that Council, it was concluded that the Bishop of Rome should not be
preferred, before the Bishop of Alexandria, or of Antioch, or of Jerusalem.

If the foresaid Emperor ordained, that the Bishop of Rome should be held and
taken, for the head of all the Churches of the world, wherefore then did
Bonifacius demand and seek the same of Phocas, whereas he should rather have
required, to have kept the same to himself and his successors, which was long
before granted by Constantine to his predecessors?

With what conscience would Constantine give unto Siluester lordship and
government over the Churches, and the Empire, he him self being a Christian,
and therefore by co^sequent knowing very well, that there was a distinction and
difference, between the office of the Pastors of the Church, and the charge
and duty of Magistrates: Eusebius.
even as Eusebius witnesses of him that he was accustomed to say: that the
Lord had given and committed the inward charge of the Church to the elders
and ministers, but the outward to him?

If we would consider Siluester, with what conscience, also could he
accept the said donation or gift, the use whereof as he well enough knew,
Jesus Christ had forbidden him? Luke 22.25. Matt. 22.21.
for he was not ignorant of this sentence: The kings of the nations bear
rule etc. but it shall not be so amongst you. Also, Give unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's. Wherefore seeing that Jesus Christ has
distinguished, ye offices of the Magistrates, and the charges of the pastors of
the Church, Siluester did very ill, to confound and iumble them together in
his own person. Yea also, there is a certain Canon to this purpose, Distinct.
96. Can. Quu^. ad Nico. etc.
avouched and alleged under the name of a Pope, and that these offices are
distinguished by Jesus Christ.

If so be that Constantine gave the empire of the west parts to Siluester,
they must say that Siluester possessed the same, and left it to his successors:
and that if his successors do not any longer hold it, they must say, that they
have been thrust and driven out of the possession thereof. But let them show,
if they can, any matter touching this point in the histories. Verily so far
is it, yt Siluester and those which succeeded him even unto Hildebrand (who was
named Gregory the seventh, and was created Pope, about the year of Christ,
one thousand seventy four) did hold the Empire of the West, that indeed
they had not rule or authority over the City of Rome, but did peaceably and
quietly acknowledge ye Emperors for their Lords, and were subject to their
laws, neither was there at any time a Pope chose^ or created without the
authority of ye Emperor. The charge came in, in the time of ye foresaid
Gregory, It is about five hundred years ago since the Pope have by little and
little incroched upon the Empire, and have at the last brought into their
subjection the City of Rome, and since they did accomplish that, there is not
passed about a hundred, threescore and nine years, or there about.

I hold my self contented, to have set down and declared this, as it were by
the way. He that would more fully see, the falshod and subtlety, which is in
the device of this donatio^ or gift, may read the^ which have confuted ye same,
Marsili. etc.
as Marsilius of Padua in his book which he entitled, the defender of peace,
who lived about the year of Christ 1324. Moreover Laurentius Valla, Laur.
Valla.
who lived about the year 1440. Antonius Archiep.
Also Antonius Archbishop of Florence in his history: Cardinal Cusanus,
Cusanus Cardinal.
in his third book and second chapter, who sent his opinion to the Council of
Basil, about the year 1460. Raphael. volater.
Raphael Volateran, who lived about the year 1500.

Moreover it is written in the ecclesiastical history, that Liberius and
Felix, Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 37.
both two together, at one and the same time governed the seat apostolical,
and did in common the duty of a Bishop at Rome, Sozo. lib. 4. cap. 15.
and that by the consent of the Church, yea by the ordinance and decree of the
Council of Syrmia. which of these two then was at that time, the only and
universal head of all the Churches? But let us see, whether the bishop of
Rome, were by the ancient fathers aduouched or acknowledged, for ye high or
chief bishop.

S. Cyprian writing to the Bishops of Rome, as Cornelius, Stephanus, Cypria.
lib. 1 epi. 1. and 2. Cypria. lib. 2. epi. 1. etc.
and some others, does not in any sort call them either Popes, or universal
Bishops, but brethren and fellows.

Cipria. tract. 3. de Simpli. praelat.
He himself says in an other place: that there is no more but one Bishoprike,
whereof every bishop in his own charge, holds a whole and sound portion.

Cypria. in Synod. Carthu. August. recitat. haec verba. lib. 3. de Baptism.
contra Donatist. cap. 3.
And again, none of us (says he) is appointed bishop of bishops to enforce
his fellows by tyrannous terror, upon necessity to obey him.

Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, came to Rome in the time of Anicetus Bishop of
Rome, not to frame some appellation before him, neither yet to kiss his feet,
or to receive his decrees, but to confer with him, touching the feast of
Easter, and he alleged for him self the authority and custom of S. John,
and of other Apostles of Christ. But Anicetus did not allege, either S. Peter's
authority or his own, but only said, that it stood him in hand, to
observe the custom of the Elders, which were his predecessors: neither did he
constrain Polycarpus to do the like, or excommunicate him therefore: and
Polycarpus on his side did not think, he had committed any offense, in not
consenting with ye bishop of Rome, in this matter touching the feast of Easter:
which he would of a surety have done, if he had acknowledged him for the
head, or for the vicar of Jesus Christ, constituted and placed in that office
by the authority of God.

Irenaeus, Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 26.
of whom we have spoken a little before, calls Soter, Anicetus, Higinus
Pius, Telesphorus, Xistus, Elders, as Eusebius in his fifth book and six and
twenty chapter.

Dionysius the Bishop of the Corinthians, writing to the Romans, calls
Soter not Pope of Rome, or high prelate, but Bishop. Mark what he says.
Soter your good Bishop has not only observed this custom, but also has
augmented it. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23.
Eusebius has extracted or taken this, out of the Epistle of the said
Dionysius. Lib. 4. cap. 3. Hierom. ad Euagr.


Saint Jerome in an Epistle to Euagrius says thus: If a man dispute or reason
of authority, the world is greater then a city. In what place soever the
Bishops be, whether at Rome; or at Eugubiu^, or at Constantinople, or at
Alexandria, or else where, they are all of equal ministry and degree.

Chrysostom: Chrysostom. hom. 43. in Saint Matt. ca. 23.
whosoever (says he) shall among the Bishops desire primacie on earth, shall
find confusion in heaven: and he that shall affect or seek to be the first,
shall not be counted amongst the servants of Christ.

Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 16.32.34.36.38.39. Gregor. lib. 6. epist. 24.28.29.30.
S. Gregory in diverse of his Epistles says: That he is an Antichrist, that
will attribute or give unto him, the title of universal Bishop. But above al,
he puts down a notable sentence, in the two hundred and seven and thirty
epistle to Eugenius the Bishop of Rome, Gregor. ad Eugeni. epist. 237.
saying: If Christ have sent thee, thou should judge that thou art come,
not to be served, but to serve. The true successor of Saint Paul, will say with
S. Paul: Not that we have Lordship over your faith, but that we are aided and
comforted with your joy. Saint Peter's heir, ^. Peter. 5.3.
will hear S. Peter saying, Not as though ye were Lords, over the Lords
heritage, but being made ensamples to the flock.

In the third Council of Carthage (which was held about the time of Pope
Syricius) in the 26. Conci. Cart. tertium. Can 26. and habet. Distinct. 99. Ca.
prima. sedis etc.
Canon, which is also alleged, distinct. 99. The fathers ordained, that the
Bishop of Rome should not be called the prince or chief of priests, or the
high priests, or any such other like thing, but only the Bishop of the first
seat, and yt he himself should not be called universal Bishop which
last clause Peter Grabbe the compiler or gatherer of the Tomes of the
Councelles, has left out either by deceit or negligence, I know not whether.

You see testimonies inowe, gathered out of the most approved old Doctors,
and such as be best worthy of credit: by which you may easily perceive, that
this rule or authority over all Churches, was not in their time attributed to
the bishop of Rome, and that the Churches themselves, had not any superiority
or authority, one of them over an other, but that they were all associated and
united together, that some obtained not, neither more or less power then
othersome, yea we read that when the Romish Bishop would sometimes have
usurped more authority, than did appertain unto him, other Bishops did
strongly and steadfastly resist him, which appears by the history following,
that Socrates an ecclesiastical historiographer writes, in his second book
and fifteenth Chapter: and Sozomenus in his third book and eight Chapter.

A certain man named Athanasius, and one Paulinus, being deposed from their
charges, by the Bishops of Asia, assembled and met together with their
Metropolitan, would needs complain to the Bishop of Rome, who easily gave
the^ letters, by which he did place them again in their first offices, and
did grievously reprove and chide them, who had put them therefrom. But the
bishops of Asia took this in such sort, that they obtained of the council of
Antioch, that letters should be written to Julius Bishop of Rome, by which
there should be declared unto him, that he did attribute and take unto
himself, an authority which did not at any hand belong unto him, and that
in so doing, he offered great wrong to other Churches, and other Bishops.
And there was added to the letters, that he should no more meddle with them,
whom they had deposed, the^ they meddled with those which were deposed by ye
Bishop of Rome, and others which were joined with him therein. To which purpose
they alleged the example of Nouatus, which was as yet very fresh and new.
For when this Nouatus was rejected by the bishop of Rome, none of the rest of
the Metropolitanes and Bishops of other provinces, did gainesay the same,
neither any manner of way intermedled therein.

Furthermore, if that which is maintained and practiced at this day amongst the
Romish Catholics, touching the large jurisdiction and sovereignty of their
Pope, were in force by Gods law, as they would persuade the simple people
thereof, should not then all the foresaid Bishops, all others together with
their Councels and Churches, which have not at any time confessed the Bishop of
Rome for their head, be very grievously censured or punished, and worthy of a
very severe and sharp reprehension? It is true yt men may find, yt some
amongst the ancient Fathers, have sometimes called the Bishops of Rome high
Priest and Pope, but they did heretofore call after the same sort all Bishops.
For as touching the name, high Priest, Theodo. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Theodoretus in his second book, and chap. 7. speaks on this manner: that two
hundredth and fifty high priests, were assembled together in Sardis. And
Athanasius in his first Oration against the Arrians, Athanasius oration 1.
co^tra Arrianos
does not only call Julius and Liberius the Bishops of Rome, high Priests, but
also he calls by the very same name the Bishops of Grecia, Dacia, Cappadocia,
Africa, Ruffin. lib. 2 cap. 26.
Italy, Sicilia and Armenia. Ruffinus also, in the second book and six and
twenty Chapter, calls Athanasius, the great high Priest. As concerning the
name Pope, we will speak thereof (by Gods grace and aid) hereafter in the
ninth Chapter.

Moreover, let us consider by what tokens and marks, the Pope of Rome says
that he is Saint Peter's successor. It is (say the Romish Catholics) because
that Saint Peter had his seat and chair in the Church of Rome, being there the
Pastor, and having borne rule there a long time: and that after him there came
in order, his successors the Bishops of Rome, having the same authority which
he had before.

But touching the first, it is uncertain, whether Saint Peter was Bishop of
Rome or no, at the least, whether he bare rule there and held the seat. They
are not able plainly to prove the same, neither to approve it as truth, at
what time it was, neither under what Emperor, neither how long, because that
out of the holy scriptures, they are not able to bring, so much as one only
probable conjecture, Calvin. li. 4. Instit. cap. 6. sect. 14.
but rather the contrary, as Calvin has well and sufficiently declared in
his Institutions.

Secondly, if S. Peter's abode at Rome, has given this authority to ye Romish
Bishops, to the heads of the Church, and universal Bishops, from whence
comes it, Council. Nic. Can. 6. Council. Antioch Can. 13.
that the Councels have limited to all the Patriarchs (who were many and
diverse) yea even after that they were brought to four, their several charges,
making them Metropolitanes, every one in his own province, the Bishop of Rome,
having no more authority over others, than others over him? For at that time
ye Bishop of Rome might very well have alleged S. Peter's seat, and the other
Bishops and Councels, would very well have confessed and allowed ye same, if it
had been true, and if the same could rightly have given the title of primacie
to ye Bishop of Rome. On the other side what an argument is this? S. Peter was
Bishop of Rome, and there suffered martyrdom: therefore it follows, yt this
Church is the mother and mistress of all the rest, and that the Bishop thereof
is the universal and general head of all Christendom. Verily if in this
respect, the question be to establishe and set up a primacie, it ought rather
to be placed at Jerusalem than at Rome. For Saint Peter preached there, Act.
2.14. Act. 2.12.
yea the first after Christ's ascension, where he together with his fellows
and brethren builded up the Church, Act. 4.3.
did great miracles, was imprisoned, Act. 5.18.
and sundry times persecuted. The Prophets likewise preached there, and all
the Apostles, yea which is more, Jesus Christ him self, Ioh. 2.13. and 7.14.
and 8.2. etc. 18.20
died there and rose again, and from thence ascended up into heaven. There
also was the first Synod, that ever was held in the Christian Church,
assembled of all the Apostles. There also Jesus Christ sent down his holy
spirit upon his Apostles and disciples. Act. 15.6. etc. Act. 2.1. etc.
And to be short, from thence it was that the doctrine of salvation, should
come forth, to be spread abroad throughout all the world, Isai. 2.3. Michah.
4.2.
even as the Prophets had before told: which things we cannot after any sort
say or affirm of Rome.

Moreover, if we must respect and regard the Apostles, there is as much, or
rather more reason, to make S. Paul the first Bishop or Pope of Rome, as S.
Peter. For in the first place besides that he was not in any thing less or
inferior to the most excellent or chief Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.5.
we find not that S. Peter did at any time reprove him in his ministry, Gal.
2.11.
as he reproved or blamed S. Peter. And besides we have a certain and an
assured testimony in the holy scripture touching S. Paul, Act. 23.11. Act.
28.30.31.
that he was sent by GOD to Rome, there to bear witness of him, and that he
there preached the kingdom of God, two whole years together: that from thence
he writ diverse Epistles to the Churches, that he was there prisoner, and at the
last beheaded by Nero. And as touching Peter, we have no assured testimony
that he went to Rome, or that he tarried there exercising there the ministry.
If they will reply, that Jesus Christ gave him the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and that by that means, he was preferred before Saint Paul, and made
head of the Church, we have answered that heretofore, which we mind not
hereto repeat.

Besides, though it were so that S. Peter was ordained to bear rule over all
Churches, as an Apostle, yet it can not thereupon follow, that his successors
ought to have any such right or authority as he: because they which succeeded
the Apostles, have not the same charge and the same office, that the Apostles
had. For when Jesus Christ ordained his twelve Apostles, he ordained them for a
time only, and after the^ he has not substituted or ordained others in their
place, to have so ample and large a charge as theirs was: Likewise we read not,
that the Apostles established other Apostles in their stead, but only Elders
and Ancients, that is to say, Pastors and Ministers, who had their callings,
charges, and offices limited. Wherefore albeit Saint Peter might well be an
universal Bishop, yet so it is that those that came after him, can not rightly
attribute unto themselves such an office. But to conclude, by what marks can ye
Pope brag that he is the successor of Peter, whose office he does not any manner
of way execute, and whom he follows not in any thing whatsoever?

CHAP. VIII. Whether the Church of Rome be the true and Catholic Church. And
whether we do well to separate and withdraw our selves from it.
WHen we call the assembly of Papists ye Romish Church, we mean not that we
hold or take ye same for ye true Church. For we take ye word Church in his
general signification, for a company or fellowship, or congregation. And
indeed we hold and affirm, yt among the Papists, ye true church is not, but
only some little tract or path of a Church, to the end that that, which Saint
Paul says, may be accomplished, to wit, that Antechrist does sit as God in
the temple of God. This being true, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
much less can we say: that the assembly which is amongst the Papists, is
ye Catholic Church: which point we prove by these reasons following.

The first reason: The true Church is founded or buided, Ephesians. 2.20.
upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, as S. Paul says: but the
Papacy or Popedom, has not any such foundation, because that it has
overthrown the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, as may plainly appear
by the examination of their traditions. The Popedom therefore is not ye true
Church.

The second reason: In ye true and Catholic church, 1. Tim. 3.7.15.
ye truth should reign and bear sway, for S. Paul says, the church is the
pillar and ground of truth: but in the Papacy truth reigns not, but on ye
contrary side falshod and lying, as appears by ye doctrine of the Mass, of
Purgatory, of invocatio^ or prayer to Saints, of idols, of merits, and other
such matters. Wherefore it follows, yt the papacy or popedom is not the true
Church.

The third reason: The true Church, 2. Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5.22.
is the spouse or wife of Christ: But the Church of Rome is not the spouse of
Christ. For the spouse of Christ contenteth her self with Christ her only
husband, even as an honest woman, does content her self, with her only
husband, without admitting or suffering any other with or besides him: which
the Romish Church does not, because she receives the Pope of Rome for her
husband, and joins him together with Jesus Christ. Wherefore it follows,
that the Romish Church is not the true Church.

The fourth reason: The true Church is the sheepfold of Jesus Christ's sheep.
Ioh. 10.16.
But the Popedom is not the sheepfold of Christ's sheep, for it hears not
the voice of Christ the true Pastor or shepherd, but the voice of a stranger,
that is, of the Pope, whose laws it follows, and keeps more then the laws
of Christ. The papacy then, or popedom is not the true Church.

Ephesians. 1.23.
The fifth reason: The true Church is ye body of Christ: but the Romish Church is
not the body of Christ. For the body of Christ contenteth it self with Christ,
the only head thereof, otherwise it should be a monster with two heads, as we
have declared before in the seventh chapter: which thing the Romish Church does
not, because it receives and holds the Pope for her head. Wherefore it
follows very well, that the Romish Church is not the true Church.

The sixth reason: Though it were that Church of Rome, were the true Church, yet
it could not be but a particular church, eue^ as the Church of Corinthus,
Ephesus, and others, whereupon it follows, that it is not, neither can be
the Catholic and universal Church.

The seventh reason: In the true Church these three marks are found without
failing: that is to say: the lawful calling of pastors, the pure preaching of
the word, and the right administration of sacraments. but in the Romish
Church, these three marks are not to be found, as it is easy to show, by
the examination that a man might make thereof. Whereof it follows, that the
Romish Church is not the true and right Church.

Now seeing that we have sufficiently showed, that the Church of Rome, is not
the Catholic Church, neither yet the true Church, me^ must not deem it
strange, that we can not agree with it, but that we depart and separate our
selves from it: and that in so doing, we ought not at any hand, or any manner
of way to be held and accounted for Schismatiks, because we do not forsake, the
ancient and Catholic Church, no not the ancient Roman Church, but do
altogether agree with the same. For would we knew, what manner of Church, the
church of Rome was in ancient time? Tertullian teaches it us, Tertul. de
praescr. haeretic.
when he speaks thereof, after this manner: A blessed Church, for which the
Apostles have spread abroad all the doctrine with their blood: where Saint
Peter suffered such a death, as the Lord him self did: where Paul was crowned
with martyrdom: where John the Apostle was put into burning or flaming oil,
and yet was taken out of the same, without any hurt or blister, and
afterward sent into exile. Let us look upon that which she learned, and that
which she taught, and what concord and agreement she has had with the
Churches of Africa. She has acknowledged, confessed, and allowed, one only
God the creator of all things, and Jesus Christ the son of God, borne of the
virgin Marie: she has believed also the resurrection of the flesh: she has
received the law and the Prophets, with the writings as well of the
Evangelists as of the Apostles, and from thence she draws or fetches faith:
she marketh hers with the sacrament of baptism, and she clotheth them with
the holy Ghost: she nourishes them with the sacraments of the supper: she
exhorts by martrydome, and she receives not any person against such
instruction. Behold Tertullian his words. wherefore we have not forsaken
this ancient Church of Rome, but the new and particular Romish Church, which
since has lifted up her self, which aduoucheth the Pope for her head, and
allows him for the Vicar of Jesus Christ on earth, which worshippeth him, and
obeys his laws against the laws of GOD. For she has degenerated and gone
out of kind, and has lost all her authority, even as the clergy of the
said Church has sometimes foretold, writting to Saint Cyprian saying:
Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 7. Romans 1.8.
That the praise that Saint Paul gave to that Church, to wit, that their faith
was spread abroad, and published throughout all the world, should be turned
to their shame and dispraise, if they went out of kind, and became bastards,
and if they continued not to be heirs of the same faith. And by this
departure from her, we have declared the obedience which we owe unto God, who
has commanded us to do so saying: Go out of Babylon, my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: And have
received the counsel of Saint Ambrose, who says: If there be any Church,
which refuses the faith, and keeps not the foundation or groundworkes of the
Apostles preaching, we must leave her, least she bring with her the infection
of error and unbelief. This he has written upon the ninth chapter of the
Gospel according to Saint Luke.

But some will say: ye account the reformed Churches of Germany for ye true
church, though ye find there many things to be amended, as concerning the
supper it self, and some other ceremonies, why the^ make you not the like
account of ye Church of Rome? I aunsweare, that it is very true that there is
some controversy between ye Germans and us, touching some points of
religion, but it is not in respect of the essential or substantial points
thereof. I call them essential or substantial points, that are so of the
substance of religion that if men err in one point, the same cannot subsiste
or stand, for even in that which concerns the holy supper, we all believe
that we are partakers of the body and blood of Christ. The difference is
not, but in that Consubstantiation, which they maintain, which is not of such
great importance and weight as transubstantiation, which ye Romish pretends:
which even in that one point overthrows and utterly brings to nothing
godliness, putting an idol of bread in ye place of the son of God: and
making of ye creature, a creator, and a Christ subject to corruption, rasing
from the foundation, and turning topsie turuie, as we say, that which
concerns the propriety, the nature and the glory of Jesus Christ his body.
All which abominations and idolatries, the Germans that are reformed, do
detest and set them selves against, as well as we.

But if some that are willing to make divorce as it were and separation,
between the Germans and us will allege that the foresaid Germans, have not
the like opinion of us, that we have of them, and that they hold and account
us for heretics, as may be seen and proved by certain writings which they
have set abroad and published: we answer, that ye passions, affections, and
heates of some particular persons, who have written somewhat more freely, the^
they should, ought not so to be regarded and esteemed, that thervppon they will
make a general conclusion of all the rest, and so prove that there is a
division between all them and us. For albeit, there be some diversity
between them and us in this point touching the supper, and in some certain
ceremonies, yet unity does not therefore cease, to continue and remain
always amongst us.

Socrat. lib. 5 cap. 22.
Socrates, who writ the Ecclesiastical history, says thus: There is not any
religion, which observes the same ceremonies though it do receive and admit
one and the self doctrine touching ceremonies. And indeed they which have the
same faith, sometimes differ amongst themselves, touching some ceremonies and
observations.

Irenaeus writing to Victor the Bishop of Rome, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26.
rehearses that there was great diversity in ye Churches, touching fasting,
and the celebration of ye feast of Easter: afterward he adds:
Notwithstanding though there were diversity amongst all these touching
ceremonies, yet so it was that they did always agree with us: and the discord
or difference about fasting, did not break the concord or unity of faith.

So then following these places we affirm, that we leave not of to acknowledge
the company of the reformed Germans for the true Church, although that we be
not in every point and thoroughly agreed with them, touching some matter
considered in the supper, and some ceremonies observed amongst them.

And the rule of charity teaches us this, as Saint Paul has given us a good
example thereof, 1. Cor. 1.2. 2. Cor. 1.1. Galat. 1.2.
when he calls the Corinthians and the Galathians, Saints and faithful
ones, and gives unto them in general the name of the Church, although there
were amongst them great and grievous faults, as well in ignorance of the
doctrine, as in their own life and manners. This is that also which he has
set forth in an other place saying: That all they which hold and keep the
foundation, do not always build gold and silver and precious stones, but hay
and stubble.

But some say, why follow you not the same rule, on ye behalf of ye church of
Rome? we answer, that in the ceremonies and service of the Romish Church, the
purity of religion is not there observed and kept, but the whole service of
God, is amongst them corrupted and falsified, and therefore can not with out
offending God apply or frame our selves unto them. And Saint Augustine has
given us this lesson, teaching us how far we may communicate in the
ceremonies and service of other Churches. August. ad Ianuarium.
There is no better rule in this behalf (says he) than a wise and sober
Christian himself, which will frame himself to that custom, which he shall
see used in that Church, wherein he lives. For that which is not established
against faith, or against good manners, must be held for indifferent. But the
Church allows not that, which is against faith and good life, yea she
dissembleth it not, neither does it.

To be short then, for so much as we cannot be present, at the service and
ceremonies of the Romish Church, without defiling our selves in their manifest
idolatries, you may see wherefore we do wholly and altogether renounce and
forsake the same. And in this deed of ours, we follow the example of the
Prophets. For in the kingdom of Israel in the days of Jeroboam, Circumcision
was administered, and there they offered sacrifices: yea the law was esteemed
there amongst them as holy, and which is more, GOD him self was called upon,
and prayed to there: yet notwithstanding, by reason of their superstitions and
ceremonies, which men had devised and set up against the ordinance of God, all
that service was rejected and condemned: neither can any man show, yt Elijah,
or any other, whether he were a prophet or of any other calling, did at any
time worship, or offer up sacrifice in Bethell. But see more largely touching
this matter, in that which M. Calvin has written thereof in the fourth book
of his Institutions Chap. 2. sect. 1.2.3.4.5. Calvin. lib. 4 Instit. ca. 2.
sect. 1.2.3.4.5. etc.
etc.

Moreover, when we do thus separate our selves from the Romish Church, we
break not the unity of the Church, because that in the Romish Church, there
is no true unity. For first of all, it is not at unity in it self, as
appears by the several sects and rules which are amongst them, one saying,
I am of the order of S. Augustine: an other, I am of Saint Dominicke his order:
and other, I am of S. Frauncis: an other, I am a Jesuit, contrary to that
which S. Paul writ to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.11.12.13.
in the first Chapter.

Secondly, that Church is not united with God, which union or unity, is
necessarily joined with the former, 1. Ioh. 1.3.
as S. John declares it. And that this is true, that it has not any vnio^ or
fellowship with God, it is sufficiently plain by this only reason, that he that
has union or fellowship with God, ought by the testimony of the holy spirit
and by faith to be assured hereof, that God dwells in him, and he in God,
even as the scripture teaches us. But the faith of Papists is this, yt we must
always doubt, whether we be in the grace and favor of God: wherefore they can
not have union or fellowship with him. Furthermore, this is to be marked, that
there is no union or agreement, between the doctrine of Papists and the word
of God, whereupon it follows, that they are not at all united with him. Which
being considered, to what end and purpose would they have us to remain and
abide in the unity of ye Romish Church, seeing there is not in it any unity,
I mean holy unity, and such as agrees well to good Christians, and the true
members of Jesus Christ?

They will object further: you hold indeed that baptism ministered in the
Romish Church, is true baptism, why then do you not hold this Church for the
true Church? I answer, that this reason is very weak. For we do not
acknowledge the assembly of heretics for the true Church, although we cease
not to allow the baptism ministered amongst them, for true and profitable,
even as the Council of Carthage decreed the same, because that baptism is
always the baptism of Christ, and not of heretics, although it be ministered
by heretics, who have notwithstanding some vocation and allowance of the
people. Wherein let us hear Saint Augustine. August. lib. 3 cont. Donatist.
cap. 10.
The water (says he) over which the name of God is called upon, is not
bastardly: for neither the creature nor the name is profane or bastardly.
Wherefore the baptism of Christ being sanctified and hallowed by the words of
the Gospel, is holy among the adulterous, and in the adulterous, although
they the^ selves be shameless and unclean.

And in an other place: Aug. cont. Crescent. li. 3. cap. 6.
The baptism is such, as is he by whose virtue it is administered: and not such
as he, by whose hands it is administered.

August. de fide, ad Pet. cap. 36.
Also because it is manifest, that in what so ever place where baptism is
administered, it ought to be but once ministered: this is to be marked, that
though it be administered by heretics, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, it ought to be reverently received, and at no
hand reiterated.

Wherefore we esteem and take the baptism of the Romish Church, for true
baptism, because it is ministered, not in the name of the Pope, but in the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: and confess that the
infants which receive it, are truly baptized, even as they which were
circumcised in the time of Jeroboam and of Caiaphas were held for true
circumcised persons, although at that time the state of the Church was almost
altogether perverted and corrupted. But yet this remains, that albeit we have
received baptism in the Popish assembly, and that we hold the same for true
baptism, yet we are far off from holding or accounting that assembly for
the true Church.

Calvin has sufficiently answered this difficulty or doubt, whose words I
will bring in place here, Calvin. lib. 4 Inst. cap. 2. sect. 11.12.
contenting my self therewith. As in the time of Jeroboam (says he) there
were certain prerogatives belonging to the Church, which remained amongst the
Jews, although at that time the service of God was very much corrupted: so we
deny not, but that the Papists have at this day, some steps and paths, of
the dissipation or scattering of the Church, which through the grace of God
have remained with them. For as Circumcision could not be so defiled, by the
unclean hands of the Jews, but that it was always a sign and a sacrament,
of the covenant of God, for which cause, God called the infants or children,
which were borne of this people his, which could not any manner of way belong
unto him, but by a certain special blessing and privilege. After the same
manner also, because he has once placed his covenant in France, in Italy, in
Germany, and other countries, (although that all that was afterward
oppressed by the tyranny of Antechrist) yet to the end that his covenant might
remain amongst the^ inviolable and unbroken, it has pleased him, that
baptism should there remain for a testimony and witness of that covenant,
which because it is ordained and hallowed by his own mouth, retains and
keeps her own force, notwithstanding the ungodliness of men. Likewise he
has by his providence brought to pass, that there should remain amongst
them other remnants also, as the Lords prayer, the Apostles Creed, the
Commandments of GOD etc. least the Church should utterly perish. And as
sometimes buildings are pulled down in such sort, that the foundations
remain, and some shows of the ruins and destructions: so the Lord has not
suffered, that his Church should be so rased or destroyed by Antichrist, that
nothing of the building should remain: And although (that he might take
vengeance of the unthankfulness of men who despised his word) he has suffered
such a horrible shaking and fall to be made, yet it was his pleasure, that some
part or portion thereof should remain, as a sign, token and mark, that the
whole was not abolished.

Wherefore when we refuse, simply to grant unto the Papists the title of the
Church, we do not therefore utterly deny them, that they have not any
Churches amongst them: but we only reason, of the true and right estate of
the Church: which imports a fellowship, as well in the doctrine, as in all
that which belongs to the profession of our Christianity. Daniel 9.27 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Daniel and S. Paul have foretold, that Antichrist shall sit in the temple of
God. We say, that the Pope is the head, of that execrable, abominable, and
cursed kingdom, at the least he is so in the West Church. Now seeing it is
said, that the seat of Antichrist shall be in the temple of GOD, thereby is
meant, that his kingdom shall be such, as shall not altogether abolish the
name, either of Christ, or of his Church. Hereby therefore it appears, that we
deny not, but that the Churches, over which he bears rule by his tyranny,
remain Churches still: but we say, that he has profaned them by his
ungodliness, and so poisoned them with his false doctrines, that there
appears amongst them a picture or image of Babylon, rather than of the holy
city of God.

To conclude, we say that they be Churches, first, because that the Lord has
miraculously preserved amongst them the remnants of his people, though they be
poorly and thinly scattered abroad. Secondly, because there remain amongst
them some marks and tokens of the Church, specially these tokens, the power
and effectualnesse whereof can not be abolished, neither by the craft of the
devil, neither by the malice of men. But on the other side, because the
marks, which we have principally to regard in this dispute or question, be
blotted out there, we say, that there is not amongst them, a right show, and
lawful form of a Church, neither in any of their particular assemblies,
neither in the whole body. And these are the words of Calvin.

But though we might indeed accord and agree to this, that the Romish Church
were the true church, in respect of the baptism which it has, yet there
should be no reason, to infer thereupon, that we ought also to take and hold
it for the true Church, in respect of the other points of doctrine, for it is
most manifest, that for the most part, they are altogether contrary to the
expressed word of God. And as concerning baptism, albeit they add many vain
and superstitious ceremonies, ministered in a tongue unknown to the people, and
not understood of them, yet so it is, that notwithstanding the substance
remains, and that which is the principal or chief point of the form, as we
have showed.

Now if one would demand: why then suffer we not our infants to be brought to
the Romish Church, there to be baptized, seeing that the baptism which is
there ministered, is good? I answer, that we suffer it not, because God has
given us grace to know the superstition and idolatry, 1. Cor. 10.14 1. John.
5.21.
which is there committed, to which we may not at any hand, stick, cleave or
consent, what soever appearance and show of good we suppose may come thereby
either to us, or to our children. Romans 3.8.
for Saint Paul says, That we ought carefully to look unto our selves, not to
do evil that good may come thereof. And also because that through gods grace
and goodness, we have a mean and way opened, to have our foresaid children
baptized in the reformed Churches, without any abuse, error, supperstition, or
idolatry.

They will say yet further, that Jesus Christ ceased not to approve and allow
the Church of Jerusalem in his time, though it had in it store of errors: which
he well declared, when he was there present at the sacrifices and feasts.
Wherefore then do not we approve also ye Romish Church, although it have errors
in it? For if a Church shall, for some abuses, faults, or errors, loose the
name of the true Church, where shall we then find one alone in the whole
world?

I answer first, that we hold not that a true Church loses the name of a
true Church, for some abuses or errors therein. For S. Paul left not of to name
the faithful people of Corinthus, the Church, although he blamed and reproved
them, for many errors and corruptions, not only in respect of their manners,
but also concerning their doctrine. And we shall see hereafter that particular
Churches, are never so perfect in this world, but that they be oftentimes
subject to error and go astray. But we rightly hold and affirm, that the
Romish Church, ought to leese the name of a true Church, because she has
degenerated, and gone out of kind from the ancient and Catholic Church. For
the true, ancient and Catholic church, cleaves to her only head and
husband Jesus Christ: she believes his word and follows him: she is
faithful to him, without committing adultery with idols, which the Romish
Church does not, which thing we have a little while ago showed.

Secondly, as concerning that that Jesus Christ did approve the Church of
Jerusalem in his time, we say in the first place, yt there is very great
difference, between the estate of that Church then as it was, and the estate
of the Romish Church, such a one as we behold it at this day. For ye abuse
and corruption, as well of doctrine, as of sacraments, and the manifest
idolatry, which bears swaye at this present in the Romish Church, was not
at that time in the Church of Jerusalem. which is easy to prove, because that
Jesus Christ, would not have made much a do, to beat down the idols, and to
reform other abuses, if they had had place there, as he overthrew the tables
of the money chaungers, John. 2.14.
and cast out of the temple those, that there sold openly, sheep, and doves.

Moreover Jesus Christ would not reiecte or disallow the Church of Jerusalem,
because that the time was not yet come, wherein he should put an end unto ye
ceremonies of the law. Leuiti. 17.3 Deuteronomy. 12.13.
Wherefore for as much as the faithful had the commandment of God whereby it
was appointed them not to search or seek new places, to offer their
sacrifices and oblations in, but to come, and to stay them selves within the
Court of the tabernacle, or of the temple, Jesus Christ would not despise this
place. But we know, that whatsoever corruption was there, no faithful man
was enforced to cleave or stick, to any superstitious manner or custom:
which is not practiced at this day in the Church of Rome. For as all there is
of superstition and manifest idolatry, so they will constrain and enforce the
faithful by fire and sword to consent thereto, and to pollute and defile
themselves therewith, against their own consciences, and gods express
forbidding.

Lastly, to what point did Jesus Christ bring the Church of Jerusalem, when the
high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees showed them selves great mad men, not
doing their duties toward it? did he not take his vineyard from these
husbandme^, who did not give him the fruits which belonged unto him, and
committed the same unto others, that is, to his Apostles, and their successors,
to yield him fruit in their seasons? Even so likewise has the Lord done
therewith in the Popedom. He has not destroyed his Church, but has only
changed the estate thereof, taking it out of the hand and guiding of the
Bishops and Popish Priests, and placing it again under the government and
charge of other guiders and leaders, who can see more clearly, and be of better
trust: as it is spoken in Saint Mathewe, Matt. 22.4^.
under the similitude or parable of the vineyarde.

To conclude: if they ask what shall become then of our predecessors, who died
in the faith of the Romish Church: are they condemned? I answer, that we
leave the judgment thereof unto GOD: for it belongs not to us, to determine
and judge of that which is hidden from us, and which indeed passes our
knowledge and calling. It is very true, Ioh. 3.18.36
that the holy scripture pronounces, that they which die without the faith of
Christ, are damned: and we cannot but say amen, and give our consent to this.
Neither serves it to any purpose to allege ignorance, and to say that it
excuses the sinner before GOD: For the scripture is plain and manifest
therein: Luke 12.47.48.
The servant (says Jesus Christ) that knew his masters will, and prepared not
him self, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
strippes. But he that knew it not, and yet did commit things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. Also: Matt. 15.14.
if the blind lead the blind, they shall fall both into the ditch. Saint Paul
says also: As many as have sinned without the law, Romans 2.12. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
shall perish also without the law: and as many as have sinned within the
law, shall be judged by the law. And again, it is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you which are
troubled, rest and deliverance with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance unto them, that do not know God, and which obey not unto the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting
destruction. etc.

These places do openly enough declare, what is the end of those yt die
without faith, although they be ignorant, for their ignorance can not excuse
them, nor serve them for a cloak or covering, to absolve and set the^ free
from the judgment of God. for confirmation and proof whereof we may allege
also and put down that which is written in Leuiticus, Leui. 4.2.
touching the offering commanded by God for the sins which were committed
through ignorance. Lo what we have to say for one point.

But to that which remains, touching our fathers and predecessors. God might
well show mercy upon them, at the end of their days, making himself known
unto them, by the secret virtue and power of his holy spirit, and putting it
into their hearts, to believe in Jesus Christ his son, that so they might be
saved. For God is almighty to save his own people, yea without using any of
these means, which he is accustomed commonly and ordinarily to use, to plant
faith in us, and to ingraue it in our hearts to our own salvation. And this is
S. Cypria^ his answer, touching those yt die in some false opinions. Cypri.
lib. 2. epist. 3.
If some one of our predecessors (says he) either by ignorance, or through
simplicity, has not kept and held that which the Lord has taught us to do,
by his example and authority, the mercy of the Lord may pardon him. But we
cannot help the same, being admonished and instructed by him. Behold what S.
Cyprian pronounces herein. It is true, that he speaks properly, touching
the matter of the holy supper, but nothing lets, but that we may apply his
speech generally, to the matter of all the other articles of the faith.

The IX. CHAP. Of the degrees of ministers in the Church: where mention is
made, of the orders of the popish clergy, and of the offices and duties of
true pastors.
Matt. 9.38.
WE have seen and heard heretofore, that it apperteineth unto the Lord of the
harvest, to send forth workmen into his harvest. For it belongs not to
any, what gifts soever he has received from the Lord, to thrust himself into
the work of the ministry, unless he be lawefully called thereto.

Ephesians. 4.11.
Now the Apostle Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians, shows us what workmen
the Lord has sent into his harvest, that is to say, Apostles, prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and doctors.

Apostles.
Touching the Apostles, they were chosen immediately from Christ, and their
office was, to sow and spread the Gospel abroad throughout all the world:
neither had any one of them any limits or borders set the^, or some certain
Churches appointed to them, Matt. 28.19. Matt. 10.2. Gal. 2.8.
but Christ would that in every part or place where so ever they came, they
should do their message, before all peoples and nations. Such were the twelve
named in the Gospel, to whom Saint Paul was added, who was specially
appointed, to bear the name of Christ among the Gentiles. Now because this
degree of Apostles, was instituted and ordained by God, for the establishing of
Churches, those Churches being planted and established, this name of Apostle,
ought not any more to be used among the ministers, as to be given and
communicated to them. And yet we read, that sometime it is taken generally in
the scripture, for a Pastor and preacher of the Gospel. As Epaphroditus is
called the Apostle of the Philippians, Philip. 2.25. Act. 14.14.
and Barnabas is named an Apostle. Act. 14.

Prophets are distinguished into two sorts or orders. Prophets.
Some were under the old Testament, and in that time, who being instructed and
taught by a special revelation from God, did foretell things to come. ye other
were in the new Testament, who in the first place, had an excellent gift and
singular grace, to interpret the scripture: 1. Cor. 11.4.
also they were such as were endued, 1. Cor. 14.1. etc.
with great wisdom and readiness, well to provide for the necessity of the
Church, and to speak properly, they were as interpreters of the will of God.
In this rank or order were comprehended the Prophets, that had the gift to
understand, foresee, and reveal things to come: Act. 11.28.
such a one was Agabus, who by the holy Ghost foretold, that a great famine
should fall throughout all the world, which also came to pass in the Emperor
Claudius Caesar's days: also that Saint Paul should be bound at Jerusalem. Act.
21.10. etc. Act. 13.1.
There is mention made also in the thirteenth of the Acts, of certain
Prophets of the Church of Antioch, to wit, Barnabas and Simion, who was called
Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manahen, (which had been brought up with
Herod the Tetrarch) and Saul. And in the one and twenty, Act. 21.9.
mention is made of Phillips four daughters which did prophecy. These
degrees, or this office of Prophets, was ordained by GOD to endure but for a
time only, as the Apostles.

Evangelists.
Evangelists generally are those which perform the office of an Evangelist,
that is to say, which preach the Gospel. Sometimes also this name Evangelist,
is referred to those four, who have written the story of the Gospel, that is
to say, S. Matthewe, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. John. But in this order of the
Church, the question is of an other charge or office. These men of whom we
speak, were as it were fellow helpers to the Apostles, whom they did
follow, and were almost continually in company with. And their office came
somewhat nigh to the office of an Apostle: the difference was only in the
degree of dignity. Of this sort were Silas, Timothy, and such like. In the
one and twenty of the Acts, Philip is called an Evangelist: Act. 21.8.
And Saint Paul admonishes Timothy in one of the Epistles, which he wrote
unto him, 2. Tim. 4.5.
to continue to do the work of an Evangelist. These likewise had their time,
and are no more in use at this present.

Pastors are they, Pastors.
that have the charge of some certain flocks, and of some certain Churches,
to rule and govern the same, preaching the Gospel, administering the
sacraments, and exercising discipline in those Churches. This degree and
office, must have his course and continue in the Church, even until the end of
the world.

Doctors.
Doctors are they, which the Church in old time called Catechisers, that is to
say, instructors or teachers, whose charge and office was, plainly and simply
to expound the scriptures, that men might have the right sense and
understanding thereof, and namely to teach the Catechumini, that is to say,
those that were yet to be instructed, in the points and principles of
Christian religion. Of this sort are the Doctors and teachers of our age, which
teach youth in schools, expounding unto them the scripture. And their office
consists herein, carefully to provide that sound doctrine may be kept and
published, to the end that pure religion may continue and remain in the
Church. Some suppose that the office of Pastor and Doctor is all one, as
Chrysostom and S. Augustine: yet there is no dout, but that they are two
distinct offices, which men may not confound and mingle together. For albeit
that this be the charge and office of al Pastors, to teach, yet they go
somewhat further than the Doctors do. For first and foremost, they preach and
exhort, applying the doctrine to the necessities of the Church: next they
administer ye sacraments, and in the third place, they have the charge,
government, and execution of the discipline: to which matters, the Doctors
charge reaches not, they being only ordained to expound the scriptures, to the
end that pure and sound doctrine may always be preserved and maintained in the
Church. And indeed such a one may be very apt to execute the office of the
Doctor, as has not the gift to preach: and such a one on the other side may
very well have the gift to preach, as shall not at any hand be meet or fit, to
exercise the charge and office of the Doctor, although that sometimes he that
shall be the Pastor, may also well be the Doctor: but yet this is to be marked,
that they are diverse and several charges or offices.

And these be ye five degrees or orders of ministers, to whom ye Lord has
committed the government of his Church, to feed the same: of which five the
last two only remain to be always used in his Church. Saint Paul indeed
makes mention in other places of some other names, Bishops and Elders, or
Ancients.
as of Bishops, that is to say, watchmen, or ouerwatchers: and of Elders, that
is to say, Senators or Ancients: but these two names signify one and the self
same thing, as the Apostle him self declares, Titus 1.5.
writing to Titus. For mark what he says: For this cause left I thee in
Creete, that thou should continue to redress the things that remain, and
that thou should ordain Elders, (that is to say, Ancients) in every city
as I appointed thee. And afterward he adds an excellent description of true
Elders and Ancients. For a Bishop (says he) must be unblameable, as the
guider or steward of Gods own house: and so forth. We see that those whom he
named Elders or Ancients, in one verse, he names the same Bishops in an other
verse. Now these two names of Bishop and Elder, and the name also of Pastor,
are taken in the scripture to signify one and the self same estate. For the
charge and office of the Pastor, is to feed the sheep, as appears by that
which the Lord says in the four and thirty chapter of Ezechiel. Ezech. 34.2.
Woe be to the sheepheards of Israel, which feed themselves. Should not the
sheepheards feed the flocks? But the Bishops and Elders, are called to the
same thing, Act. 20.28.
as both Saint Paul and Saint Peter do declare: Saint Paul speaking thus:
Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock, over which the holy Ghost
has made you Bishops or overseers, to feed the Church of GOD, which he
has redeemed with his own blood. And Saint Peter thus: 1. Pet. 5.1.2.
The Elders which are amongst you I beseech, which am also an Elder with you,
Feed the flock of Christ, which is committed unto you, caring for it, not by
constraint etc.

If one would know the reason why the Pastors are called Elders or Ancients:
it is for honors sake: not as though when in old time they chose Pastors,
they were all ancient in age and years, but because that they specially chose
them, from amongst the Ancients, and also because they ought to be men both
ripe, wise, and also very well experienced. Old age commonly has more
wisdom, more experience and gravity: But yet it does not always fall out,
that white or gray hair makes men wise: yea sometimes we shall find young
men, which are far more fit, to exercise and execute the charge and office of
a Pastor, (such a one was Timothy) than those that be of greater years.

It is true, that there are two sorts of Elders, that is to say, Ancients. One
sort have charge and office, to minister the word of GOD and sacraments, and
to watch over the discipline and over the whole Church. The other are joined
unto these, to aid them in the exercising and execution of discipline, without
meddling any whit at all in the preaching etc. Saint Paul sets out this
order when he says to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.17.
The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor, specially they which
labor in the word and doctrine. For in that he makes mention of bearing rule,
he gives us well to understand, that those whom he names Elders or
Ancients, that is to say, the Pastors, and such as are joined unto them, are
chosen to have charge and office in the Church, over the people. And in that he
more commends those, which minister the word and doctrine, than the other, he
evidently declares, yt al have not one and the self same charge. We may
behold this order, even at this day observed in the reformed Churches.

Deacons.
The Apostle makes mention likewise of Deacons, which word is taken in holy
scripture in two senses or sorts. Sometimes generally for every minister, or
seruitour: In which sense S. Paul calls the Magistrate, the Deacon of God,
that is to say, Romans 13.4. Ephe. 3.7. Romans 15.8.
the servant or minister of GOD, and he names himself the Deacon, that is
to say, the minister of the Gospel: as also he calls Jesus Christ, the
deacon of Circumcision, that is to say, the minister thereof. Wherefore being
so taken, and referred to the estate and calling of the pastor, it is commonly
translated and turned by this word, minister or servant, Coloss. 1.7. 1. Cor.
3.5.
as in the first chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, and the third
Chapter of the first Epistle to ye Corinthians. But sometimes it is taken more
straitely, for the^ which have a charge and office, to gather the alms, and to
dispense or bestow the^ among ye poor.

The first occasion that was given to chose these deacons in the Church was
this, because ye Apostles, could not very well provide for our furnishe both
the charge of preaching the word, and of distributing the goods of the poor.
And for this cause were the seven Deacons chosen: Acts. 6.2.
of whom is spoken. Acts 6. And the conditions and qualities, which ought to
be in the Deacons that men will chose, are there described and set out, and
also in the third chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy. 1. Tim. 3.8. etc.


These are the degrees of the Church, or ecclesiastical orders, which Jesus
Christ him self set up, and his Apostles after him established, for the
regiment and government of the Church: which order was afterward in the
Popedom by little and little, not only corrupted, but utterly ouerthrown. For
in that tyrannous king dome, after that corruption had once craftily overtaken
or stolen upon the doctrine of the Church, they divised and forged a
stewardshippe, dispensation and bestowing of ecclesiastical offices and
charges, which was altogether far of and estraunged, from the former
simplicity and plainenes, whereof we have spoken. Wherein first they made a
sacrament (without the warrant of Gods word) of the orders and degrees of
ministers. Afterward they divised a certain kind of cream or oil, to
anoint the^, as they say, but indeed it is to grease or smeare them, fetching
that though a false zeal, from Aaron, and that which was done in old time
under the law. Also shauing or sheering, specially of the crown of the head,
against the custom both of the Apostles, and of the primitive Church. Acts.
18.18
It is true indeed that S. Paul did once cause his head to be shorn in
Cenchrea, after the manner of the Jews, but it was by reason of a vow which he
had made, and not yt he was then ordained into some ministry, but a great
while after his calling. And in that he caused himself to be shorn, he did
it not for any other purpose, but to apply himself thereby to the Jews, who
were as yet very rude, and not well instructed, 1. Cor. 9.20.
as he himself protests in the Epistle to the Corinthians, That of his own
accord and willingly he became under the Law, (although he were delivered
therefrom) to the end he might win the Jews. Orders of the Romish Church.
Next they established or made seven orders of the Church: the first, Porters
or door keepers: the second, Readers: the third, Exorcistes, or in plain
english, Coniurers, who as they feign, had power given them to lay their hands
upon mad men, and men possessed with devils and to heal them: the fourth,
Acoluthes, that is to say followers, who waited upon the Bishop in his household
services, and did continually accompany him, first for honors sake, and then
that no suspicion should arise of them: ye fifth, Subdeacons, or vnderdeacons:
ye sixth, Deacons, and the seventh Priests: of which last sort they have made
many degrees: whereof they call some, simple or single Chaplains: Others
Curates and Vicars, others Bishops, others Archbishops or Metropolitanes, other
some, Cardinals: And afterward they came to the four Patriarchs, and lastly
to the Pope himself. But from whence comes this goodly hierarchy, or order
of Priests? who has established it and set it in nature or being? Did Jesus
Christ or his Apostles? the scripture makes no mention thereof. But let us
discourse a little upon the fountain and beginning of these goodly degres, I
say and mean only of those, which they contain under the name Priest. For
the others keep not the place of true Bishops and pastors of the Church, as
these would seem to do. And yet notwithstanding, he that will hear speech
thereof, Theod. Beza lib. Confe. Punct. 7. cap 11.
let him read the confession of Theodorus Beza.

As concerning Chaplains, Durandus in his book called Rationale diuinorum
offic. alleges two reasons, to show why priests were so called. The one is,
because the kings of France in time heretofore, when they went to war, were
wont to carry with them, Saint Martins capp or hoode, which they kept under a
tent, which of ye cap kept in it was named Capella, that is, Chapel: and the
Clerks or Priests, that had the keeping of this Chapel, were called
Chaplains, and afterward in continuance of time, this name was in some
countries given generally to all Priests. And these little Cabbines, or
corners, or rather high places, which were in the Popish Temples, wherein the
Chaplains said their masses, were called Chapels. The other reason is, that
when in old time they were to set out an army, or to do some exploite by
soldiers, they had in the Camp certain special tents, to say mass in,
which tents were covered over with goats skines. Now a Goat in latin is
called Capra or Capella, that is to say, according to the portuise of the
Priests, which are at this day, Chapel. Wherefore because these tents were
covered with goats skins, they were named Chappelles, and the Priests which
had the keeping of them, and who did therein singe their masses were called
Chaplains. Behold verily two reasons, to show from whence this name
Chaplain is taken, which reasons are very high, and full of great speculation
or insight, containing very great mysteries, and such as are maruellously
deep: but we leave them to be meditate or looked into diligently, to ye
priests which are the Popes Chaplains, to the end that they should advise
and take counsel, to see whether they can be willing, that their reverend
name should be fet and drawn, from the base beginnings.

Curates.
Curates have an other fountain. In old time according to the order
established by Jesus Christ, the pastors were ordained and placed distinctly
and without confusion in several Churches. For to the end that every pastor
might know his own charge, and be able to yield a better account of his
flock, and yt one should not any whit at all incroch upon, or intermeddle with
others, also to the end, that the flock and sheep might know, where they
might seek for and find their own pastors, they divided the people into
certain circuites and countries or rather parishes indeed, whereof some were
committed to the charge of certain pastors, and othersome to the charge of
certain other pastors. From thence came the name Curate, although some would
have it derived from Cura, that is to say, from the care that the pastors ought
to have over their flocks which were given and committed unto the^ in charge.
And the abuse coming on, and growing up more and more, they called ye benefice
or renew, that was assigned the^ to maintain themselves upon for the doing of
their office, by the name of cure. And from thence it comes, that when any
one goes about to get such a benefice, they diligently enquire of the value
thereof, and that whereof they seem to have the greatest regard is to know,
how much the cure is worth.

As concerning Bishops and Elders, Bishops and Elders or according to
Papists. Priests.
or as they call them priests, we have before showed and seen that these two
names signify one and the self same office or charge. Hierom. ad Euagrium.
And Saint Jerome in his Epistle to Euagrius witnesses, that in the time of
the Apostles, there was no distinction or difference between these two degrees:
but afterward whiles schisms were in the Church, one was chosen from among
the Elders, and placed in the highest room, and called Bishop, because he
differed from the Elders only, for the executing of order. Now by these words
we may easily know and gather, that this difference began in the Church
about that time, and in that the office of a Bishop is held and accounted,
for a more high, or more excellent office tha^ ye office of Elder, or as they
term them priests: it was not don by ye institution and ordinance of God, but
rather by man's authority, and yt for the maintenance (as they suppose) of
order and discipline.

Archbishop or Metrapolitanes.
The names of Archbishoppes and Metropolitanes (which were taken for one and the
same estate) were unknown to the Apostles and to the old and ancient
Churches, but mark how they were brought in. Princes having put certain
degrees between their Cities and towns, and making a difference between some
of the^, in respect of dignities and privileges, they called those, which
they would establish above the rest Metropolites, as if you would say,
Council. Calcedon. Canc. 12.
Mother cities, as we may gather out of many histories, and namely and
expressly out of the Council of Calcedonia, where it is said, that they ought
not to account any towns or Cities for Metropolites, but only unto those, to
whom Kings and Princes, have showed and given this honor by their Edictes and
statutes. Now as princes lifted up their Metropolitan cities, to bear rule
over others under their obedience: so the Bishops placed in those cities,
usurped jurisdiction and authority over others, they being favored by their
princes and magistrates, who easily accorded and consented to this, that their
Bishops should be placed in authority above others. For this cause, the
Bishops of those places, Conc. Nice. can. 6. Conc. Calc. can. 8.
were named in the Council of Nice Metropolitanes, and their seats were called
in the Council of Calcedon, the first seats. You see then what was ye fountain
and beginning of Archbishops or Metropolitanes: who at the beginning were
lifted up to such a degree, for a good end and purpose in outward show, for
they were so placed and established, as it were Ecclesiastical presidents and
rulers in their provinces, to ye end they might guide and govern the affairs
of the Churches, and direct and call Synods, in good order and without
confusion, when there was need thereof: and yet none among them had any
authority one over an other. Conc. Nice. can. 6. Conc. Anti. can. 13.
For that effect and purpose the Councels ordained, yt al Metropolitans should
have like power and equal authority, Conc. Sardi. can. 19. Conc.
Constantinopolita. can. 2.
every one in his own province, that the Bishop of Rome (who was also
Metropolitan) had at Rome, and in the Churches, which were under his charge.
Whereby it appears, that ye Bishop of Rome was not then Pope, and universal
Bishop, over all Churches, but that he had his charge limited and bounded,
having no more authority and jurisdiction over other Metropolitanes, than the
other had over him.

Cardinals.
Touching Cardinals, I know not what we may speak of certainty, because there
is not so much as one only author, who lived or writ while the church was in
some purity, that makes any mention thereof at all. Yet we cannot be deceived,
in speaking of that which we find touching it. We read in Nauclerus, Nauclerus.
that in the time of Pontianus Bishop of Rome, who was about the year of
Christ 235. there was at Rome 36. Priests, Cardinals, that is to say,
principal and chief among the rest. Volateran. lib. 22. Antropolo.
For as Volateranus says in his Antropologie, ye name Cardinal was in old
time taken to signify as much as principal, and was (says he) given to ye
Priests, as they call them, and Deacons of the Church of Rome: because that as
the Bishop of Rome was held and taken for the principal and chief of
Bishops, because he was in the principal city of the Empire: so the Priests
(as they call them) and Deacons of that city, were held and taken for
Cardinals, that is to say, for principal and chief among other Priests and
Deacons. Whereupon he adds some examples. There is a certain epistle (says
he) of Gregory the first, to them of Peloponezus, who demanded a Priest to
minister the sacraments unto them, wherein he says, we send unto you our
beloved son, A priest Cardinal. Also: there is amongst the ancient Charters,
in the Church of Aretinum, a donation or gift, of a certain Roman Senator
named Zenobius, which was made unto the said Church, in the time of Damasus
the high Bishop, wherein there is contained this subscription: And I, Io. S. R.
E. Deacon Cardinal, do on the behalf of the high Bishop Damasus, approve
and confirm etc. And of these Priests or Deaco^s Cardinals, Marcellus Bishop
of Rome, ordained fifteen to baptize children, Petr. de Not. lib. 2. cap. 83
Polydor. lib. 4. cap. 9.
and to bury the dead, about the year of Christ 301.

If the Cardinals of these days, would take their beginning from these, let
them mark then, what is their charge and calling, without taking that upon
the^ which belongs not unto them. But we know, what great difference there
is between their estate and these, because at this day we may in every place
behold it to be an estate or calling of honor, and not of office and charge, as
it was then. Beside, when was it, yt they were so lifted up? and by whom? A
thousand years and more were spent, before yt the Church was burdened with
such Cardinals, as we have at this day, having benefices, without exercising or
executing offices. It is affirmed, that Pope Innocentius ye fourth of yt name,
about the year of Christ 1244. did so exalt their estate and calling, that he
commanded by Edict, that from yt time foreward, they should go on horseback,
and should wear a red cap or hat, and a scarlet robe, for a sign and witness
that they ought to be always ready and prepared to suffer and shead their
blood, for the defense of Christian religion. And Paul the second, about the
year 1470. has ratified the same Edict, and in some point augmented and
enlarged it.

But some will set up him self and say, that these Priests and Deacons of
Rome, which were called Cardinals, obtained that name, because at that time
they were such, as the Cardinals at this present are, that is to say, having
authority and jurisdiction, over all other Bishops and Priests: I answer,
that ye case goes not so. For we find this, that the Priests and Deacons of
Rome were in times past much less and inferior to the Bishops, in steed
whereof at this day, they go before them in honor and dignity. And that so
it is, we read that when the Bishop of Rome, sent two Ambassadors or Legates to
ye Council of Carthage, whereof one was a Priest of the Church of Rome, he was
set the last of all. Also that in the Council which S. Gregory held, the
Priests of the Church of Rome, were set last, and made their subscription
apart by them selves, and the Deacons had not so much credit, as to subscribe.

Touching the four Patriarchs, Patriarchs.
we have spoken thereof in the beginning of the 7. Chapter. Now we must
understand, that the names of Patriarch and Metropolitan, were in time
heretofore taken for one charge or office, as appears by this, Socrates lib.
5. cap. 8.
that Socrates the historiographer, speaks of the Counsel of Constantinople,
wherein mention is made of Metropolitanes. These Patriarchs then or
Metropolitanes, being lifted up in degree of honor, above all the rest of the
Bishops, and in process of time thrust on foreward with ambition, have so
incroched one of them upon an other, that at the last they have brought all the
Patriarchs, even to the number of four, as we have named and described them
in the aforesaid seventh Chapter. And this has principally come to pass,
because, that either for the antiquity of the Churches, or for the renoune of
the cities, and excellency also of the Bishops, men have reverenced and
honored Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, above all other cities:
and by consequent the Bishops of those places, as those that were the
principal or chief.

The Pope.
Now these four Patriarchs, have yet in such sort so robbed one an other,
that the Patriarch of Rome, and he of Constantinople, have quite and clean
taken away the room and place of the other two. And as touching the two of
Rome and Constantinople, we know what jar and contention there has been
betwixt them, which is not as yet well compounded or ended. In the time of
Gregory the first of that name, about the year six hundred and two, there
was great controversy and stir for the primacie of the Church. For John
Bishop of Constantinople, was declared and published in a full and solemn
Synod of the Grecians, universal Patriarch, and the Emperor Mauritius
commanded Gregory, to obey the said Patriarch of Constantinople. But Gregory
would not endure or suffer this presumption, that any Bishop should be an
universal Bishop over all the rest: and in his Epistles he yealdeth reasons
thereof. First he says: Greg. lib. 6. epist. 76.
If he fall that is called the universal Bishop, the whole Church falls
from her estate. Secondly: None of my predecessors has ever desired to have or
use this profane word. For if there be one Patriarch that is called
universal, the name of Patriarch shall be taken from all the rest. To consent
to this execrable and accursed name, is no other thing, but to betraye the
faith, and to destroy Christianity. Thirdly: Greg. lib. 7. epist. 196.
I speak freely and boldly, that who so ever calls him self universal
Bishop, or desires to be called by that name, the same is in his pride the
forerunner of Antichrist, because that by his pride he prefers him self
before all.

This controversy being between these two Patriarchs of Rome and of
Constantinople, it fell out and was agreed, that the Patriarch of
Constantinople, was appointed head of the Churches of the East, and the
Patriarch of Rome head of ye Churches of the West: and this latter was
afterward so established, and lifted up by Phocas, about the year 604. (as we
have declared in the seventh Chapter) that he was created Pope and universal
Bishop of all Churches.

And as touching the name Pope, it has been heretofore generally attributed
and given to all Bishops, as may be proved by these testimonies. Aurelius
Bishop of Carthage, is called by this name Pope, in the beginning of the
Council holden at the said Carthage: of which Council he was President. In the
hundredth fifty and one Chapter of the same Council, Innocentius Bishop of
Alexandria, is called Pope. Saint Cyprian in certain Epistles which he writ to
the same Bishop, calls him Pope. The Elders and Deacons of Rome, Cyprian li.
2 Epist. 7.
called Cyprian Pope in their Epistles. Saint Jerome oftentimes calls
Augustine Pope, in his epistles Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria in the third
Epistle to Philemon, calls Heraclas his predecessor, Pope, as we may see in
Eusebius his seventh book, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 7.
and seventh Chapter. There may be many such like testimonies found, which
declare that the name Pope, was in ancient time common to all Bishops. If
the question be, touching the signification of the name, Suidas says, that it
signifies in ye language of Syracuse, as much as father. But we have disputed
and discoursed heretofore, largely enough of this primacie.

Now let us return to our first purpose and speech, who is he ye has ordained
these orders and ecclesiastical degrees? by what door have these pastors
entered, into the Lords sheepefolde? who has called and placed them in their
charges? was Jesus Christ (who is the chief sheepeherde, the Prince of
Prophets, the wisdom of the father) so ill advised, or so careless that he
has not placed so many degrees and offices in his Church, as he saw and
knew to be needful, for the rule and government thereof, seeing he loved
it so much, and esteemed it so dear and precious unto him self, that he
delivered him self unto the most cruel and most shameful death of all others,
to save it? Let these reverend Prelates put down their authors: Let them show
from whence they are come, and from whom it is, that they be as it were
installed, established, and set in the Church. Let them bring forth and
allege the word of GOD if they can, or if they can not, let them leave off
and cease at the least, to strengthen them selves so much with their
succession, and so often to oppose, and set against us, their vocation and
sending.

The end wherefore the lord sent his workme^ into his harvest. Matt, 28.19.
Mark. 16.15. 1. Cor. 11.23.24.
But will we examine the end, for which the Lord of the harvest, has sent forth
his workmen into his harvest? He himself has declared it, when he commanded
them to preach the Gospel, and to minister the sacraments after his example.
Which in an other place is signified by the word of feeding the sheep, Ioh.
12.15.
even as Jesus Christ said unto Peter: Peter love thou me? feed my sheep.
And S. Paul speaking to the Bishops of Ephesus: Act. 20.28.
Take heed to your self (says he) and to all the flock, over which the holy
ghost has made you Bishops or overseers, to feed the Church of God. Also S.
Peter: The elders which are amongst you, I beseech, 1. Pet. 5.1.2.
who am also a fellow elder, feed the flock of Christ, which is committed to
you. Wherefore cursing and woe is by the Lord pronounced, against the pastors
which feed themselves, Ezech. 34.2.
and feed not their flocks or sheep. And Saint Paul having regard thereto,
Romans 1.1.
says in his Epistle to the Romans, That he was called and sent by Jesus
Christ, to preach the Gospel of God. And to the Corinthians: Necessity (says
he) to preach the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.17.
is laid upon me, and woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, because the
dispensation thereof is committed unto me. In ye Epistle to the Hebrews it is
said, Heb. 13.17.
that the Pastors and guiders of the Church, ought to watch for the souls of
them, that are committed unto them, as they that must give account thereof. And
that is it that the word bishop imports, and means, that is to say, a
watch man, or an ouerwatcher, because ye Pastors ought to be as it were
watches, or watch men, Ezech. 3.17.33.2.
according to the Prophecy of Ezechiel, that they may watch over the flock.

S. Paul in other words sets out this end, when he says to the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 4.11.12.
That Jesus Christ has given Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, pastors and
doctors, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, that is to say, the
Church. 1. Cor. 4.1.2
And writing unto the Corinthians he says in one word, That it is required
of the ministers of Christ, who are the disposers of the secrets of God, that
every man be found faithful, behauing himself faithfully, diligently, and
rightly, in the execution of his charge and office.

Now according to this rule, can the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and other
priests of the Romish Church say: that they occupy themselves in their
charges, to feed the flock of Christ, to preach the Gospel, to administer
the sacraments, to assemble the saints, to give over themselves wholly to the
work of the ministry, to edify the Church? How do they satisfy and
answer the ordinance and commandment of Jesus Christ? How can they excurse
themselves, yt they should not be almost all accused, according to the
testimony of Ezechiel and S. Paul, whereof we spoke, not long sithence? what
can they say or allege for themselves, that they should not be excommunicated
and deposed, if the Canons, which they attribute to the Apostles (of which we
spoke in the fifth chapter) were well and rightly observed amongst them, as
they say they should be indeed?

But behold their ungodliness, they say that they exercise and execute their
foresaid offices and charges by their vicars and deputies, whom they have
substituted and appointed under them in their places over their Parishioners.
Yea but when Jesus Christ called and sent forth his Apostles, did he say unto
them, go and be the pastors of my Church, teaching it and feeding, by Vicars
substitutes and Lieutenantes, which ye shall put in your places? It is certain
that he did not so, but he gave unto them in their own persons, the special
charge of his Church, and commanded them in plain and express terms, to
preach the Gospel themselves, and to administer ye sacraments. Moreover what
sufficient vicars or deputies are they wont to have, and how faithful, meet and
able to do the duty of Pastors? Such Bishops and persons, such Vicars and
Liuetenants, that is to say, one of them as ignorant, foolish and unskillful as
the other. But why do they take upon them the name and charge of an office,
which they will not exercise and execute? why take they ye hire wages and
revenue of that labor and work, which at no hand they do, neither indeed will
do? For they have no care to have vicars and Lieutenauntes, but that thereby
they may enjoy prebendes, and the revenues of their benefices, and yet they
will seem to have them, as though it were to do their duties.

Yea which is more then this, they make accursed and more then profane division
of their offices, between them and their Friars, vilanously separating that
which Jesus Christ has joined together: For to whom was it, that Jesus Christ
committed the office to minister the sacraments, but even to them themselves,
and to them alone also, whom he enjoined and commanded to preach the Gospel?
But these men, to wit, the Bishops, parsons, and other Priests, do reserve
unto themselves the administration of the sacraments, such as they have, with
the rentes and revenues of their bishoppricks, parsonages, and other
benefices, and post over the charge and office of preaching the word to the
Friars, leaving them the bag, wallet, and staff, whatsoever by begging they
can get for their hire or wages. But seeing that they leave unto the friars ye
office of preaching, why do they not leave unto them also the office and charge
to administer the sacraments? For these two offices are joined together, and
may not at any hand be separated or sundred one of the^ from an other.
Notwithstanding, there is in the Popedom a plain prohibition and forbidding,
that friars, in as much as they are friars, should meddle with or take upon
them to administer any sacrament, except they be such as have charge, or
unless they be dispensed with all for the doing of it. But why then are they
suffered to preach? For this is to do against the ordinance and institution
of Christ, and to divide and sunder things, which he has joined together. Or
seeing, that they are come so far, as to forbid friars to administer the
sacraments, why do they suffer them to say mass, seeing that they all hold and
affirm, that the mass, is the sacrament of the holy supper, which for this
cause also they call, The sacrament of the alter.

Indeed to speak according to ye truth, making also an end at the length of
this matter, these men can not after any manner whatsoever, vaunt or boast
themselves, to be true Bishops and pastors, seeing they are not called by
Christ to such offices, and that they do not any manner of way exercise duties
and charges, according to the ordinance and commandment of the Lord of the
harvest.

The X. CHAP. Whether the ministry of the word, be always necessary in
the Church: and how much men ought to attribute or give unto it.
AFter that we have spoken of the diverse degrees of ministers in the Church,
and of their charges, and offices, it shall be very meet and requisite that we
declare, whether the ministry of the word be always necessary and
needful in ye Church or no. For there are some which do despise it, and
utterly disallowe the same, as though it were superfluous, unprofitable, and
vain, whose arguments and reasons we must first examine, and afterward we
will allege and bring forth our reasons and warrantes against them.

Their first argument is this: The holy Ghost is our inward doctor, who
teaches us all things, and leads or brings us to the knowledge of all
truth: It follows then, 1. Ioh. 2.20. Ioh. 16.13.
that we have not any need of the outward ministry, neither that any do
teach us with the lively or living voice.

I answer that the consequent is false, and that the argument is captious and
sophistical, by reason of the insufficient numbering or reckoning of causes. For
there are three very right causes, by which we are guided and led to the
knowledge of the truth. The first is the holy Ghost: the second is, the
outward ministry of the word: The third is our will, (but yet regenerated)
agreeing with these two. Now of these three causes or means we are not to
despise any one, seeing that GOD by them, will accomplish and bring to pass,
his own work in us. Wherefore, although it be the proper and peculiar office
of the holy spirit, to lighten us within, and to lead us to the knowledge of
the truth, yet so it is notwithstanding, that the outward ministry of the
word is not unprofitable, because that God uses the same as an inferior or
secondarie mean, for the above named effect and purpose. And indeed the
preaching of the word, and the administration of sacraments, do then show
and bring forth their effect and power, when ye holy Ghost joins his withal,
by the which only the ears are perced, the hearts opened, the affections
touched, and the wills disposed and prepared, thereby to give an entrance to ye
outward ministry: insomuch that if this inward master or teacher do fail
us, ye outward ministry can no more profit our souls, than the light of ye
sun helps blind eyes, or than a voice which sounds loud, profits deaf
ears. In the mean while, the outward ministry is not unprofitable or vain,
when the operation of the holy Ghost is joined therewith, working within, but is
full of virtue, efficacy and power, even as it pleases God to bless it.

The second argument is. Those which know all things, and have not need that
any should teach them, have nothing to do with the outward ministry: but the
faithful know al things (as S. John says, 1. Ioh. 2.20.27.
) and have no need that any should teach them. It follows then, that the
faithful have nothing to do with the outward ministry.

I answer, that the place of S. John, is very ill and peruersly applied. For
when he says, that the faithful (to whom he writ) knew all things, first
that this ought to be referred to that which he had before said, 1. Ioh. 2.14.
in the 14. verse, to wit, that they knew the father, (for he that knows the
father, certainly knows all, because the father is known in his son) in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3.
as says Saint Paul. And therefore also the same Apostle declares to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 2.2.
that he esteemed not to know any thing among them, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified.

Secondly when he says, that they know all things, it is as if he had said,
yt they were not young scholars, rude, and ignorant, but expert and well
skilled in the matters, which he propounded and set forth unto them: and yt
therefore he did not set out these points to them, as though they were
altogether unknown to the^, but that he did only bring these things to their
minds, yt they might remember them. As S. Peter writes unto ye faithful. 2.
Pet. 1.12.
I will not be negligent (says he) to put you always in remembrance of these
things, though that ye have knowledge, and be established in the present truth.

Finally, when he says, that they had no need that any should teach them,
this ought not to be read alone by it self, but ought to be joined with that
which follows, to wit, 1. Ioh. 2.27.
but as the same annoynting teaches you of all things, and it is true, and is
not lying: As if he would say: you have been taught of the holy Ghost, who is
always true, and no manner of way a liar. You then have not need, that any
should teach you some other matter, as they are wont to do which teach for
doctrine man's inventions, but if any do teach you, yt he follow that which ye
holy Ghost has taught you, in whose doctrine it behooves you always to abide.

The third argument: The Lord says thus. And they shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, Iere. 31.34.
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of the^. This promise must be referred
to ye state of the Church under the new Testament: and therefore it follows,
that the ministry of the word, ought not any more to have place now in the
Church. I answer, that the application of the place of Jeremy, is altogether
contrary to the meaning, intent, and purpose of the holy Ghost. For first and
foremost, ye Lord making comparison between the old people and the new, means
not any other thing, but that under the Gospel he would send unto his people so
great a light, by ye means of Jesus Christ his son, that his knowledge should
be common and familiar to all, whereas under the law, he manifested and
declared him self darkly, and that under certain shadows and figures. As
indeed the ancient people, yt is to say, they which were in the time of the
old Testament, were not so familiarly, plainly, and perfectly taught, as we
be at this day, by reason whereof also ye Prophet Malachie calls Jesus
Christ, the son of righteousness, Malach. 4.2.
signifying thereby, yt the fathers under the law, had indeed some light, but yet
not such a light as we, through his goodness have at this day. Furthermore we
must mark, yt the Lord does not say simply: They shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, but he adds, saying: Know the
Lord. By which restriction, or strayning it into a narrow room, he plainly
declares, that he promises to his children such a knowledge, that they shall
not be any more learners of the A.B.C. neither young scholars in the doctrine
of salvation. For these words, Know the Lord, denote and point out the first
rudiments or instructions of faith, and of the heavenly doctrine. And indeed,
if we well weigh and mark, how rude, gross and ignorant, the old fathers were,
we shall find that they were as it were, little children, Gal. 4.1. etc.
even as Saint Paul says, and as yet in their A.B.C. But God has showed unto
us, a far greater grace, because that we have a more manifest, clear, and
shining light, to lead us to the knowledge of God, and of the mysteries of our
salvation. For this cause Jesus Christ said: Matthew. 13.16.17. Luke 20.23.24.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears for they hear. For verily
I say unto you, that many Kings, Prophets, and righteous men, have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those
things which you hear, and have not heard them. In sum the Lord promises
here, that his people shall not be found, gross and ignorant, under the new
covenant or testament, that they shall have need of the principles and
beginnings of Christian doctrine. But if we would not take this place in this
sense, how shall we expound an other of Isaiah, Isai. 2.2.3.
which seems to be contrary to this? He says: It shall be in the last
days, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the
top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations
shall flow unto it, and many people shall go and say, Come, and let us go up
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iaacob, and he will
teach us his ways. It is certain that he prophecieth even as Jeremiah, of the
grace of God, which should be made manifest through Jesus Christ in the time
of the Gospel. Now one of them says: Every one shall not teach his
neighbor, for they shall all know the Lord: The other says: The people shall
run together and say: Come, Let us go up to the mountains of the Lord, and
he shall teach us his ways. How shall we make these two places agree, seeing
that both of them prophecy of one and the self same thing? Verily Jeremiah
means, that the people of God shall be in such sort lightened under ye new
Testament, by the light of ye Gospel, yt they shall have no more need of the
rudime^ts or first instructions of religion, neither to be so taught as ye old
people were, by ye shadows and ceremonies of the law. And as touching Isaiah,
he means that under the same new Testament, the people shall (though they be
well advanced and instructed in the points of christian doctrine)
notwithstanding diligently endeavor, more and more to advance them selves, and
grow forward therein, and yt for yt purpose, they shall continually exhort one
an other, to ye end they may better profit in the knowledge of the law.

Joel. 2.28.49.
The fourth argument. It is written in Joel: At that time, (yt is to say, in ye
time of ye new Testament) I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, says the
Lord, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall
dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions: And also at that time I
will pour out my spirit upon the servants, and upon the maids. Now by this
promise, the charge and office to teach, is without any difference laid upon
al, upon fathers and children, upon sons and upon daughters, upon old folk,
and upon young, upon servants and maids: wherefore it follows, that ye
ministry of the word, is not necessary in the Church.

I answer, that there is nothing in this argument or reason, but a mere
cauil. It is true, that this prophecy ought to be referred to the kingdom and
coming of Jesus Christ, and yt the gift of prophesying should then be common,
both to men and women, to old and young and to be short to all estats. But in
the first place this is to be marked, yt the prophet speaks here by
comparison, using a figure commonly called Hyperbole, that is to say, a manner
of speech very excessive, because of our wearisomnes, slacknes and negligence,
for he does not presently promise, that all under the Gospel, from the first
to the last, shall be partakers of this gift, but in respect of the old
people under the law. For if we compare, the estate and condition of the old
Church, with the singular treasures, which God has powered out, and given unto
his people, after the manifestation and revealing of Jesus Christ, we shall
find, that in this latter time, the Lord has spread abroad, and powered out
the gifts of his spirit upon all flesh, that is to say, almost upon all men,
when as under the law, a very small number was partakers thereof. Wherefore when
he says, That the Lord will power out his spirit upon all flesh, this
particle or word all, is not here taken in his proper signification, as though
it were simply and altogether universal, but is indefinite, and must be
referred to all estates and conditions of people, and not to every singular
person: as in this sentence of S. Paul, where it is said: 1. Tim. 2.4.
that God will have all men to be saved, that is to say, all persons, of what
quality, and condition soever they be. And in that place of Saint Matthewe,
Matt. 4.23.
where he says, that Jesus Christ being in Galilee healed all sickness, and
all disease among the people: That is to say, all sorts of sickenesses and
diseases. And indeed S. Peter, in the second Chapter of the Acts, Act. 2.16.17
makes this sense manifest and plain unto us, when he says, that this
prophecy was then accomplished when Jesus Christ sent his holy spirit, upon
the Apostles. Now we know that all flesh, that is to say all men, were not
at that time indewed, with the gift of prophecy.

Secondly. The Prophet speaks not here, of the public office and charge to
teach, but of the particular duty of every one, calling them generally
Prophets, who in the time of the Gospel should be indewed, with so great
light of doctrine, that they might after a sort be compared with the ancient
prophets. Iere. 31.34.
Whereunto also must be referred the place of Jeremiah, Mala. 4.2. Matt.
13.16.17.
which we have expounded in the former argument, and likewise the place of
Malachie and of Jesus Christ in the 13. of Saint Matthewe. It is not then
without cause, that Joel attributes, this title or name of prophet, to them,
who have no public charge or office to teach, but are only enlightened by the
holy spirit, and the preaching of the Gospel: 1. These. 5.11
because that this light is far more excellent, then the gift of Prophecy it
self was in diverse who lived under ye law. And also though we are bound, to
exhort one an other, and to teach one an other in the doctrine of godliness, and
the fear of God, yet for all that the public ministry of the word, is not
superfluous or vain in the Church. For the self same God, that has commanded
fathers, to instruct their children, and all us to admonish one an other, has
also ordained the public ministry of the word in the Church, that it may be
there practiced and exercised, not for some few years only, but even unto
the end of the world.

And thus much touching the arguments of the adversaries and such as set them
selves against the ministry of the Church. Now let us bring forth our
reasons to prove the contrary.

The first reason is: Jesus Christ has commanded that the Gospel should be
preached, and the sacraments administered in the Church unto the end of the
world. The^ it follows, yt the ministry is always requisite and necessary
in the Church. I prove the Antecedent or former proposition by these words of
Christ, written in the last Chapter of Saint Matthew: Matt. 28.19.20.
Go and teach all nations, baptising the^, in the name of the father, and of
the son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe whatsoever I have
commanded you, and behold I am with you unto the worlds end. For after the
commandment to preach the word and to administer baptism (under which
sacrament, the other also of the holy supper is contained) because the
disciples might doubt or fear their charge, as being great in labor, and
hard to execute, Jesus Christ adds a promise of his assistaunce not for
ten or twenty years only, but for always, even unto the end of the
world. Wherein he manifestly sets out and declares two things. One, that
he wills and ordeineth, that the ministry be exercised in the Church, not
for one age only, but continually unto the consummation and end of all
things. The other is, that he promises, that although Satan subtillie devise
and invent and practice all yt he can, to hinder the ministry and the work
of Gods servants, and yt tyrants by their practices and violences, enforce the^
selves, to the uttermost of their power, to overthrow, and to bring to naught
the Church of God, yet he will by his godly and heavenly power, always
mayntein his truth in the world, and preserve his Church therein by the
ministry and labor of his faithful pastors.

The second reason: Romans 10.17.
The Apostle Saint Paul says to the Romans, That faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. Whereby he declares, that God has accustomed
to plant faith in our hearts by the preaching of his word. It is true, that the
power of God is not tied to this outward mean, but yt he is able to beget
faith in us after some other fashion, and by some other mean (although it be
to us incomprehensible) even as it shall please him self: but notwithstanding
all this, the ministry of his word, is the ordinary mean, which he uses
or serves himself with, to give us faith by, so that they which will have
faith, wirhout the preaching and hearing of the word, do as much as though
they would live, without meats and drinks which GOD has ordained for our
bodily life. Now hereupon we take and frame our argument thus.

Faith is in all times, and always necessary for men.

But faith is given unto men from God, by the ministry of the word.

Therefore it follows, that the ministry of the word, is in all times, and
always necessary for men.

The third reason: It is certain, that for as much as the sacraments are
ordained by God, to be as it were seals of the word, to seal in our hearts
that which is therein contained already, that is to say the union,
fellowshippe, and partaking, which we have in Jesus Christ, it follows, that
where there is not the word of God preached, there we cannot have any
sacrament. For as a seal is altogether unprofitable, yea is not allowed a
seal, unless it be bound or set to some instrument or writing, for the
confirmation thereof: even so the sacrament is altogether unprofitable, yea
indeed is not a sacrament, if it be not joined with the word of God preached,
to confirm the same unto us. Whereupon S. Augustine has sometimes said: Let
the word be joined to the sacrament, Augu. sup. Johan. hom. 13.
and there shall be made a sacrament. Of what word speaks he? verily not of
a word mumbled up, murmured or whispered without understanding over the
elements, but of the word of God preached to the faithful, and received of
the^ through faith, as he himself makes it plain, when speaking of baptism,
he adds, this is the word of faith which we preach, by which baptism is
consecrated and hallowed, 1. Cor. 11.21
to have power to make clean. Now from yt which is above said, we reason
after this manner.

The administration of the holy supper, is always necessary in the Church,
even unto the end of the world, for Jesus Christ has commanded us to
celebrate it, and by that means to preach or show forth his death until his
coming again.

But the administration of ye supper cannot be performed without the ministry
of the word.

Therefore it follows, that the ministry of the word, is always
necessary in the Church.

The fourth reason: Jesus Christ has given and established the ministers of
the word, Ephe. 4.11.
for the work of the ministry, till we all meet together (in the unity of
faith and knowledge of the son of God) unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ, that is to say, till that Christ
be perfect in us, and have in us his full grouth and increase. But we can not
obtain such perfection unto ye end of ye world, 2. Cor. 13.9.10.
at what time God shall be all in all. For as Saint Paul says, We know in
part, and we prophecy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then
that which is in part shall be abolished. Wherefore it follows, that Jesus
Christ has given and placed the ministers of the word, for the work of the
ministry, until the end of the world, and then God shall be all in all.

These reasons are sufficient for this present, to teach and prove that the
holy ministry, is continually requisite and necessary in the Church: as
indeed, the Lord has for our good and salvation established the same, to
abide in all ages, therein applying and framing him self, to our weakness, which
is so great (we being corrupted thorough sin) that without this means meet
and agreeable to our nature, we could not be well instructed in the points of
our salvation. For if God should speak unto us in his majesty, we could not
at any hand away with or abide his presence, as we may see it, by those, that
when he was minded to publish and to give his law, the people themselves being
astonished, Exodus 20.19. Deuteronomy. 5.28.29.
with his greatness and majesty, said unto Moses, Talk thou with us, and we
will hear. But let not the Lord talk with us, lest we die: And God accepting
this their request, said unto Moses, I have heard the words of the voice of
this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said, all that they
have spoken. Oh that there were such a heart in them to fear me, and to keep
al my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever. Go, say unto the^, return into your tents, but stand thou
here with me, and I will tell thee all the commandments, and the ordinances,
Deuteronomy. 5.30.31.
and the laws, which thou shall teach them, that they may do them etc.
Wherefore God yielded unto this people their request, to wit, that they might be
taught, by the ministry of Moses. And sithence that time, it was yet his good
pleasure, to have continued, and that unto the end, this manner of instructing
and teaching his Church, by the ministry of men, which order men them selves
did require and chose: in so much, that when God him self sent Jesus Christ
his son, Mark. 1.38. Heb. 2.16.
to preach the Gospel, he appointed him, to take upon him, not the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, that he might be like unto us in all things,
yet without sin. And Christ him self ascending to heaven, Act. 14.15.
committed unto his Apostles (who were men as we) the office and charge to
teach us. And since that time, this order has continued, and is common and
ordinary in the Church, and can not be separated from the Church, to wit, that
God does teach us, by the ministry of men, as by his instruments, which are
most profitable, Act. 8.27. etc.
familiar and easy to us. The Eunuch of Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, read
in his chariot the holy scriptures: and no doubt, the Lord could very well
have instructed him, in the mysteries of faith, by the secret virtue and power
of his holy spirit, but yet he delighted rather to have it done by ye
ministry of Phillip, and liked better thereof. Act. 10.1.2. etc.
Cornelius ye Centurion, to the end he might be more fully instructed in the
knowledge of the Gospel, was sent back (as it were) from the Angel to Saint
Peter: He shall tell thee (says the Angel) what thou ought to do. Yea
Saint Paul him self, although that the Lord had spoken unto him with his own
mouth, was yet notwithstanding sent back (as it were) to Ananias, Act. 9.3.4.
etc.
that he might be instructed, and receive the holy Ghost, and be baptized.
Wherefore they that do cast from them, or disallowe the ministry of the
Church, hanging upon, and looking for Angelical and divine revelations, to
instruct them, do not only deceive them selves, but also violate and break
the order, which GOD has established in his Church, for our salvation.

Now there remains, to see and know how much we ought to defer and give to
the ministry, for if they be deceived which despise it, and do not their
duty in that behalf which they ought, they are deceived also, which
attribute or give over much unto it. Wherefore we say, that we ought not to
give to it, either more or less, than that which belongs thereto, and that
as it is good reason that the authority and credit thereof, should be
reserved unto it self safe and sound, so we ought to take good heed of this,
that we pull not from God the honor which is due unto him. For this purpose
and point, we must diligently observe and mark this distinction.

Sometimes man is compared with God, when the minister is mentioned or spoken
of, and then it is said, that he is not able to do any thing at all, and that
his labor or work is altogether unprofitable. As when Saint Paul says: 1.
Cor. 3.7.
Neither is he that planteth, any thing, neither is he that waters, but God
that gives the increase. For what can man have in himself, if he would enter
into this, to part or divide a matter between God and him self? we must
therefore take heed of this, not so much as once to think, that the virtue
and power of the holy Ghost, should be tied and bound to the ministry of
men, as though without it God could not work in men's hearts, even as shall
please him self, as we see that they of the Romish church suppose and think,
as appears in this, that they spare not to affirm, yt if a child dye
without baptism administered by man, it can not be saved: and on the other
side, that they which receive ye outward signs from ye ministers hands,
receive by and by the grace of God, which is tied to these signs. But God
says by his Prophets, That it belongs to him, Iere. 31.33. Ezech. 11.19
to write his law in men's hearts, to take away from them their stony hearts,
Iere. 32.40.
and to give them hearts of flesh, to renew within them a new spirit, to put
his fear in their hearts, Isai. 43.25.
that they should not depart from him. Shortly: That it is he alone, to whom
it belongs to pardon sins, Luke 5.21.
and to save. And we hear that which Saint Paul says, That it appertains
to GOD, 1. Cor. 3.7.
to give the increase to that which the ministers plant and water: And Jesus:
Ioh. 6.44.65
That none can come unto him, except his father draw him.

Sometimes also the scripture speaks of man, without comparing God and him
together, and then, in respect that God uses his ministry, to accomplish his
own work by, that is attributed to him, which is proper and peculiar to God.
As when it is said, 1. Cor. 3.6.
that the ministers plant and build Churches, 1. Cor. 3.6. Philemo^ 10. Luke
1.16. Ioh. 20.23. Jude 1.23.
that they beget men, and win them to God, that they turn men's hearts, that
they remit and retain sins, that they save. All this must be understood in
that they are the instruments, and as it were the hand of GOD, to bring all
these things to pass by: for then the question is not, of that which man
does by his own virtue and power, but of that which God works by the hand
and ministry of man. Wherefore God is always the efficient or working cause
of our salvation, and man, together with the word of GOD, which he propounds
and preaches unto us, is nothing else, but the instrument and minister,
wherewith GOD serves him self, or which he uses for the performaunce of so
excellent a work. Whereupon it follows, that they which despise and reject
the ministry which God has ordained, do despise and reject God him self.
Luke 10.16.
For this cause Jesus Christ says: He that hears you hears me, and he that
despises you despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me. And Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians, declares right well, in what
authority, reverence, and account, we ought to have the ministry of the
word, when he says, That GOD has committed unto the Pastors and ministers of
the Church, 2. Cor. 5.18.
the embassage or ministry of reconciliation. And writing to the
Thessalonians: 1 Thessalonians. 2.13
We thank God without ceasing, that when ye received of us the word of the
preaching of God, ye received it, not as the word of man, but (as it is
indeed) the word of God, which also works in you that believe. It is for the
very self same reason, that speaking unto the Romans of the word preached
by the ministers, he says: Romans 1.16.
That the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to all that believe. And to
the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.18.
that Though the word or preaching of the cross be to them that perish
foolishness, yet it cease not to be the power of GOD to us which obtain
salvation. Now the preaching of the word is so called by Saint Paul, because
it is the powerful and effectual instrument, which GOD uses to save us. And
for this cause, it is called also by Isaiah, The arm of the Lord. Isai. 53.1.


In sum, we ought diligently to take heed to, 1. Cor. 3.9.
and to regard that which S. Paul faith unto the Corinthians: We together are
Gods laborers, ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods building: in so much that we
always set before us two things, when the question or dispute shall be,
touching the ministry: that is to say, on the one side, the minister that
shall speak and preach unto us, and minister the sacrament unto us: and on the
other side God, who works inwardly in our hearts, and indeed accomplisheth
and fulfilleth in us, that which the minister speaks unto us, and does
outwardly represent and show unto us. As we have a notable example thereof in
the sixteenth of the Acts, where it is said: that as Saint Paul preached the
word of God to Lydia, Act. 16.14.
a seller of purple, God was he alone which opened her heart, that she attained
unto, and understood the things which S. Paul spoke.

CHAP. XI. Of the holiness of the Church.
WE have seen and heard heretofore, that the Church is the company of
faithful people, which is also called the communion or fellowshippe of the
Saints and holy ones. The Church therefore is holy, because it is compacted
or made of saints or holy ones. but here we must mark four points.

The first is, how and in what sense, we are called Saints or holy ones. It
is not as the idiots or ignorant people under stand it, who by saints, mean
none other, but those which are already dead, and so canonised by the Pope, or
else the priests and Friars, clad in white, or black, and girded with a rope.
But by saints we understand them, who being elected from before all
euerlastingnesse of time, are in their time (that is to say, in the time which
God has appointed the^, before the foundations of the world were laid)
sanctified by God, through Jesus Christ, and clothed with true faith. Now
such are all true Christians and faithful people.

The second: that it is not of our selves that we are Saints, or holy ones,
Psa. 51.5. etc Genesis 8.21.
neither of our own nature, for by our own nature all we are altogether
corrupted, Romans 8.6. etc.
and the children of wrath. But we are saints, because Jesus Christ has
sanctified us, Ephe. 2.3. John. 17.19.
as he him self says in Saint John, For their sakes I sanctify my self,
that they also may be sanctified through the truth. Now he has sanctified us
by ye virtue and power of his holy spirit, which by reason of this effect is
called the spirit of sanctification. Romans 1.4.
And this is that which S. Paul means, when he says, Ephe. 5.25.26.27.
that Jesus Christ has redeemed his Church, and has sanctified it, that he
might make it unto him self, a glorious Church.

Now this sanctification or holiness, is brought to pass, first by the
imputation or account of Christ's righteousness unto us, 1. Cor. 1.
for he was given unto us by the father, to be our sanctification. Secondly by
the purging or cleansing of our filthinesses, that is to say, by the
forgiveness of our sins in the blood of Jesus Christ, as Saint Paul
declarerh it in the Corinthians when he says, Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, 1. Cor. 6.9.10.11.
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkardes, nor railers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
kingdom of God, and such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. And indeed Saint Paul in an other place shows, that
filthiness is opposed and set against sanctification and holiness, when he
says to the Romans: Romans 6.19.
As you have given your members servants to uncleanness and iniquity, to
commit iniquity: so now give your members servants unto righteousness in
holiness. Also to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
GOD has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

The third point is, That the holiness of the Church is not at any time
perfect, so long as she trauelleth and fights in this world: which mayor
I prove thus.

First, if the Church were without spot in this world, in vain has our
Savior Christ taught it always to pray, Matthew. 6.12.
forgive us our trespasses, and sins. But the Lord Jesus has not without
good cause given us such doctrine and instruction, wherefore it follows that
the Church, is not in this world without spotte, yea rather that she has
continual need always for to pray unto GOD, that she may be more and more
sanctified and obtain the forgiveness of all her sins.

Secondly, those which are with out spot and wrinckle, have nothing to do with
any washing, because they have no need thereof. But the faithful although
they be washed, have notwithstanding need yet of washing still, as Jesus
Christ himself declares it unto us, John. 13.10.
when he says, He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet. For
by the washing of the feet, he means a continual sanctification. It
follows then that the faithful are not in this world without spot.

1. Cor. 1.2,
Thirdly, Saint Paul cease not, to adorn and bewtifie the Corinthians, with
the title of the Church, who notwithstanding grievously abused the holy supper
of the Lord, and had amongst them, divisions, and partakinges, which are not
small faults, yea indeed they were in doubt also, touching the resurrection
of the dead. Also he names the assembly of the Galathians, Galat. 1.2.
the Church, although yt poor people were deceived by false Prophets, and
carried away to an other Gospel, contrary unto that, which he had preached
unto them. These places do manifestly declare that the Church is never so pure
and perfect in this world, but that it has always need to be more and more
purged and sanctified. which thing S. Paul shows yet more plainly, and
openly, when he writes unto the Thessalonians. For he calls the^ the Church,
1. These. 1.1. 1. These. 5.23
and yet he prays unto God for them, that he would sanctify the^ through out.

True it is that the Nouatians, Donatistes, and Anabaptists (who do not agree
with us, in this point) are not without their replies. For first, they allege
unto us that which S. Paul writes unto the Ephesians: Ephe. 5.25.26.27.
That Jesus Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify it,
and cleanse it, that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinckle, but that it should be holy and without blame.

But we want not an answer also. Saint Paul considers the Church not in
her self, but in Jesus Christ her head, which she takes hold of by faith:
So she is said to be without wrinckle and unblameable, by reason, not of her
own righteousness, but of Jesus Christ's righteousness, whereof she is made
partaker, because it pleased God to impute and reckon the same unto her: for
which cause also, it is in an other place, 1. Cor. 1.30.
that Jesus Christ is made of God the father unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Moreover we might say, that Saint Paul speaks of sanctification or
holiness promised, and which is not yet fully accomplished, as though he
called and said the Church to be without spot, not that it is so here below
on the earth, but because that one day it shall so be above in heaven. Augu.
lib. de nuptiis and Concupise. cap. 34.
And after this sort Saint Augustine understands it. Jesus Christ (says
he) cleanses his Church by the washing of Christians, to make it unto
himself, without spott or wrinckle, not in this world, but in the world to
come.

They allege moreover that which Saint John says: 1. Ioh. 3.6.9.
whosoever is borne of God sins not.

Whereunto I answer by a distinction. Those that are borne of God, that is to
say the faithful, sin not, that is to say, serve not sin, or rather sin
does not reign in them, because they do withdraw themselves, as much as they
can, or are enabled, from sin, and with all their heart give themselves to
holiness of life, that they may glorify God, And in this sense Saint John
takes it and speaks it. Again they yt are borne of God, sin: that is to
say, can not live so holily, but that oftentimes they stumble and fall into
sins. For although they be sanctified, yet for all that, by reason of the
relics and remnauntes of nature corrupted, which yet rests and remains in
them, every day they turn aside from the right way, and sin. In this sense
S. John meant not that which he says, yt whosoever is borne of God sins not,
for so he should speak against him self, having before said, If we say we
have no sin, 1. Ioh. 1.8.10
we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us, yea we make God a liar, and
his word is not in us. So it is then, that though there seem to be some
contrariety between these two, to say, that we are sinners, and saints both
together, yet all agrees together very well for every man if we consider him
in his own nature, according to which he is called the child of wrath, he is
a sinner worthy of death, and eternal damnation: but if we consider him in
Jesus Christ, as a Christian and faithful man, he is holy, so that he sins
not, that is to say, serves not sin, and his imperfections are hidden and
covered, because that they are not imputed unto him, and moreover the Lord
Jesus makes him partaker of his righteousness. And so being a sinner in
respect of his own nature, he is notwithstanding reputed and accounted holy
and just before God.

But that which we have hitherto spoken, touches or concerns the members of
the Church particularly. We may also well say, touching the Church considered
in her own body, that it shall never here be purged from al filthinesses,
because yt so long as she shall be on earth, there shall be in her wicked
ones mingled with good ones. Which thing Jesus Christ has declared in the
Gospel, by two similitudes.

Matthew. 13.24.25. etc.
In the first he says: that the kingdom of heaven, that is to say, ye Church,
is like unto a man, which sowed good seed in his feeld, but while men slept,
there came his enemy and sowed tares amongst the wheat, and went his way.
And when the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also. Then came the servants of the household, and said unto him,
Master sowedst thou not etc. and would presently have gone and gathered them
up, but the Lord would not suffer them, least while they went about to gather
the tares, they plucked up also with them the wheat. Therefore he willed that
they might both grow together, until the harvest, and in the time of harvest,
the reapers shall gather the tares, and bind them in sheaues to burn them,
but they, shall gather the good corn into the Lords barn. Afterward, he
expounds the said similitude, saying: He that sows the good seed is the
son of man, and the field is the world, Matt. 13.37 etc.
the good seed are the children of the kingdom, the tares are the children of
the wicked, and the enemy that sows them is the devil, the harvest is the
end of the world, and the reapers be the angels. As then (says he) the tares
are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of the world.
The son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth. Then
shall the just men shine as the sun in the kingdom of their father.

In the second similitude he says, Matt. 13.47.48.
That the kingdom of heaven is like unto a draw net cast into the sea, that
gathers of all kind of things: which when it is full the fishers draw to
land on the shore, and put the good by them selves into their vessels, and
cast the bad away. And afterward he gives the exposition thereof: So shall
it be (says he) at the end of the world: Matt. 13.49.50.
The Angels shall go forth, and sever the wicked from amongst the just, and
shall cast them into a furnace of fire, where shall be wayling and gnashing of
teeth.

By these two similitudes Jesus Christ very plainly expresses, what shall
be the visible state and condition of the Church, so long as it shall be on
earth: that is to say, that the wicked shall continually be mingled therein with
the good, and that in such sort, as the tares are amongst the good wheat in
the fields, and as evil fishes are mingled with the good in the sea. whereof
follows that which we have said before in the third Chapter, to wit, that
all they which are in the Church, are not for all that of the Church.

And indeed, experience has in all ages showed the same unto us, and makes
us to behold the same as yet eue^ every day. Cain was the first that defiled
the Church of GOD, Gene. 4.3. etc.
although he offered sacrifices in outward show as his just brother Abel did.
Noah preached unto those of his time. and continuing his exercise a long
season, (some think six score years) hardly would his own household believe
his word, Gene. 7.1. etc.
so that GOD destroying all the world by the flood, only eight persons of the
foresaid Noah's household, were reserved by the mean of the Arc. And even yet
of those eight persons, with whom GOD had made a new covenant, touching the
establishing again of his Church: Ham, Gene. 9.22.
in his time very manifestly declared his hypocrisy: Matt. 27.3. etc. Act.
1.16.17 etc. Reave. 2 6.
Amongst the twelve Apostles, Judas is found a traitor, and unfaithful:
Amongst the seven Deacons, one Nicholas was an heretic, at the least if that
be true that this Nicholas, was one of the seven Deacons, as Clemens, Clemens
strom. lib. 3. Eusebius. hist. eccles. lib. 3. cap. 29.
Alexandrinus and Eusebius certainly affirm it, S. John speaking of
Antichrists, wherewith the Church was in his time troubled and tormented,
says: 1. Ioh. 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they would have continued with us. And what at this day? How many hypocrites
and great mungrell mastifes, are found at this day in the outward Church, and
are suffered therein? Certainly, there are very many which are acknowledged
and allowed for members of the Church, of whom GOD (who beholds all men's
hearts) does in the mean season judge otherwise. Wherefore the Church even in
this respect, is not at any time in the world without wrinkle.

The fourth point, which we must note here, is, that our sanctification, is not
performed or wrought all at one time, but there are three degrees or steps
thereof, to the end that it may be perfect.

The first degree is during this life, when that our Lord Jesus Christ gives
us his holy spirit, thereby to resist and withstand, the world, the devil,
sin, and our own flesh, to the end that we may love good things, and hate
evil. Hereunto may be applied that which Saint Paul speaks of him self,
Romans 7.22.23. etc.
writing unto the Romans, in the seventh Chapter, verse 22.23.

The second is after this life, when the soul enioieth the presence of Jesus
Christ, giving it self unto all holiness, but our other part (that is the
body) resting it self in the dust, without being able to apply it self,
unto any thing, to sanctify the name of God by.

The third shall be after the last judgment, when being perfectly joined with
Jesus Christ our head, we shall behold God, even as he is, who shall all in
all, and that after such manner and sort as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.30,
that Christ is made of God unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption. Therefore when that our Lord Jesus Christ shall so work in us,
that there shall be no spot, Philip. 3.21. 1. Ioh. 3.2.
but that our very bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and
we shall be like unto him, then truly shall our sanctification be
accomplished, and made perfect, which now is but as it were begun in us.

CHAP. XII. Whether the Church may err or no.
THis question, to wit, whether the Church can err, has been diverse times
tossed and handled, for the opening and unfolding whereof, we must first strive
to know, after what manner, or in what sense, the word Church is here to be
taken: I mean, whether we must understand this of the Catholic and universal
Church, or else of the particular Churches. But the controversy is not in my
judgment, of the Catholic Church: for we all agree herein, that she can not
err as touching faith. And indeed how should she err, seeing that following
Jesus Christ her head and her husband, she walks not in darkness, but in
the light of life? On the other side, it is impossible, that all faithful
people universally, even from the first unto the last, should fall into error,
for there have been always some preserved, through the goodness and grace of
GOD, by whom truth it self, through other men's naughtiness, brought as it
were to nothing, or at the least destituted and forsaken, has yet
notwithstanding been restored to her former force, and is yet still maintained
and preserved. Wherefore this question is touching a particular Church.
Touching which it seems good unto us, in the first place to hear the
judgment and reasons, of the Romish Catholics, upon this that they affirm,
that the Church so taken can not err, following herein the Nouatians,
Donatistes, and other heretics. And afterward, we will show forth, and put
down, our advise and reasons, to prove the contrary.

The Romish Catholics think, that the Church can not err, although she do
and appoint any thing without the word of GOD, for being guided by the holy
Ghost, she may go and walk without the order and direction of the word, and
although she go and walk, yet she can not err, or go astray. But they
separate that which ought always to remain and abide joined together, for if
the Church follow not the word of God, it is impossible to keep her from
error, as on the other side, if she follow it, therein she does well, and can
not err. The reasons whereby they would persuade men, that the Church can not
err, are these following.

The first is this: Jesus Christ does not at any time forsake his Church,
which is his spouse or wife. Wherefore it follows, that it can not err.

I answer by a distinction: So far forth, as the Church follows Jesus
Christ, it can not be forsaken of him, and can not err: but in as much, as it
living in the world, does stray from Christ, and goes aside from Gods
commandments, it is forsaken of him and does err.

The second reason: The Church is called The pillar and ground of truth. 1.
Tim. 3.15.
Wherefore it can not err.

I answer, that there is in this argument a double error, the one touching the
word Church. For Saint Paul means the Catholic Church, and not any
particular one. The other is concerning the meaning of the Apostle. For he
calls the Church, the pillar and ground of truth, not that it is so simply
and indeed of it self, but in respect of us, because that the truth of God,
has not place in the world, save only in the Church. For as much therefore as
God maintains his truth amongst men, and makes it always to go it right
course, Chrysostom. in 3. cap. 1. ad Timothae.
by the ministry of the Church, therefore is the Church called the pillar and
ground of the truth. To be short, because that God him self comes not down
from heaven, and does not every day send his Angels, to maintain his truth
among me^, and to publish it to ye world, but uses the ministry of the
Church, for this effect, that is to say, the preaching of the word, for this
cause it is called the column or pillar of truth, because that by the
preachinge of the word, it is retained amongst men, and countergarded, to the
end that it decaie not or perish from the memory or remembrance of men.

The third reason: The Church is governed and guided by the holy ghost: how
then can it err?

I answer: that so far forth, as the Church is governed by the holy ghost,
suffering it self to be guided by him and obeys him, she can not err, but
if she do the contrary, she may err and does err.

The fourth reason. In the kingdom of heaven no error can have any place.
Matthew. 13.24.16.19.
For truth reigns therein, but the Church is the kingdom of heaven: it
follows then, that in the Church no error can have place.

All this is true of the Catholic Church, yea and of particular Churches also,
so far forth as they show themselves to be the kingdom of heaven, and not the
kingdom of this world, and of the flesh: that is to say, so far forth as
they are assemblies subject in all things to Jesus Christ the king of heaven,
But were is that particular Church so obedient to Jesus Christ the king of
heaven, yt it erreth not, and fails not, in any points and particular duties.

The fifth reason: Councelles cannot err, but the Church consists of
Counsels, therefore the Church cannot err.

This Syllogism pretends and labors to prove an uncertain thing, by
another thing, yet more uncertain. For many examples do plainly testify,
that the Councelles may err, as indeed they have oftentimes erred. And
touching the first: the Council that Ahab assembled, of four hundred
prophets, did not it err? It is written that they being come to this wicked
king to flatter him, 1. kings. 22.6. etc.
Satan was sent out, by and from God, to be a lying spirit in their mouths:
so al of them, with one consent, condemned the truth: Michaiah alone
withstanding them, who was reproved as an heretic, beaten and put into prison.

John. 11.47.
The Council which the high priests and Pharisees assembled in Jerusalem
against Jesus Christ, did not it err? we see how they condemned Jesus Christ,
and little regarded: yea much despised his doctrine.

And what shall we say of the Councelles and Synods, which were held and
kept after the death of the Apostles, even unto our age, whereof some have
reproved and undone that, which was established and done by others: for of
necessity either the one or the other have erred, they being repugnant and
contrary one of them to an other. Examples hereof.

The Council of Carthage (in which Saint Cyprian was president) did decree,
Con. Carthag.
that those which were baptized by heretics, should be baptized again.
Which decree was broken and overthrown, Council. Carthag.
by an other Council of Carthage holden after.

The second Synod of Ephesus, Synod. Ephesians.
consented to Eutyches his error, and embraced the same and received it, in
this, that he confessed in Jesus Christ, but one only nature, that is to
say, the divine nature: which error was afterward confuted and cast down
to the ground, Conc. Chalcedo.
by the general Council of Chalcedonia.

The Council of Constantinople, Conci. Constant.
called by the Emperor Leo, about nine hundred years ago, ordained, that men
should throw down and break in pieces, all the images that were in Churches:
which ordinance, the Council assembled at Nice, Con. Nicen.
by the commandment of Irene, the Emperors mother, was immediately after
broken and cracked, and commandment given, that Images should be set up
again.

Con. Neoce. Con. Maien. Con. Carthag. 2.
The Council of Neocesaria, and of Maience, and the second Council of Carthage,
did forbide marriage to the Ministers and Elders of the Church: The Council of
Nice decreed the contrary, Con. Nicen.
permitting ministers to marie.

Con. Braca. Con. Tole. 3 Con. Roman
The Council Bracara, did pronounce curse against those, that abstiened from
eating flesh: and this decree was confirmed by the third council of Toletum,
but the council of Rome ordained the contrary, forbidding the use of the
flesh upon certain days of the year.

August. lib. 2. de Baptis. contra Donatist. cap. 3
To be short, S. Augustine plainly declares, yt which I speak, to wit, that
councils may err, for he expressly says, that the letters and Epistles of
particular Bishops are corrected by provincial Councels, and the provincial
Counsels, by universal: and the former universal Counsels annihilated, and
disanulled by the latter, when by some certain experience of things, that
which before was secret, is opened, and that which was hidden, is made evident
and plain: neither shall it stand the^ in any steed at al, to say, yt any this
place of Augustine ought to be understood of outward and indifferent things,
for Saint Augustine disputes there of a point of doctrine, that is to say, of
the opinion of Saint Cyprian, and of the Council of Africa, touching
rebaptisation or baptising again.

Now then in so great diversity, and gainsaying one of an other, what shall we
say? To which Council shall we give greater faith and credit? for this we
perceive clearly and plainly, that they thus crossing and contrarying one an
other, did not all consent and speak, according to the truth: and that
therefore we must of necessity conclude, that some of them have erred, and
that by their false and erroneous determinations, they have degenerated and
gone astray, from the right way of the word of God.

Certainly it is very meet and requisite, An admonition touching Councils and
Synods.
that we should be wise and very well advised, when the question is, either to
set out, or to receive that, which shall be determined by counsels and
Synods. For it is altogether manifest and plain, that Councels and Synodes
may be deceived. And therefore as touching their decrees and determinations,
this is that we have to say, that we must bring the weight of them, and make
it subject to the balance, that is to say, we must try and examine the^ by the
word of GOD, which is indeed the balance, Gala. 1.8.
whereunto not only men are subject, but also the Angels, as Saint Paul
teaches in his Epistle to the Galathians.

Wherefore whatsoever we shall find in them, conformable, and agreeable, to
the proportion of faith, and agreeing with the authority of the holy
Scriptures, we ought to receive the same without any scruple or doubt. But if
they propound unto us, and set out, things contrary to that, we ought, and we
may without any difficulty or danger, reiecte and refuse them, as suspected
and dangerous doctrines. For as Saint Jerome has sometimes said, Hierom. in 9
cap. Ierem.
we ought not to follow the errors of our fathers and predecessors, but the
authority of the scriptures, and the commandment of God: who teaches us.
Whereupon also Gerson, Gerson. par. 1. de exam. doctrine. Abbas Panormita.
Epist. de electi one and elect. potest. cap. 5
and Panormitan have concluded, that in matters which concern faith, the Pope
and his Bishops, may not determine and decree any thing, against the word of
God: and that if a general Council should come so far, as to decline, and
go aside, either through malice, or through ignorance of the Gospel, a
simple man alleging in that counsel the word of GOD, ought rather to be
heard and yealded unto then all they.

Let us enter or come now to our advise, and let us bring forth and allege
our reasons to prove that the Church may err.

The first reason is this: That great company of the people of Israel, which
was in the wilderness, with whom GOD had made a covenant, and had made them
bound unto him, by an infinite number of benefits and good turns, and had
given unto them sacraments, and ceremonies, which were, as it were visible
signs of his grace, yt great company I say, was a very goodly and a very
excellent Church. But they were vilely deceived and erred fowly, when forsaking
the commandment, they made unto themselves a golden calfe offering and giving
unto it, that honor which was due to God alone, yea and Aaron himself the
high priest, did not so constantly and boldly withstand them as he ought, but
rather consented thereto indeed, wherefore it follows, that the Church may
err and be deceived.

The second reason: The Church in old time did offer and give the holy supper,
to little infants, staying and grounding themselves, upon the place of Saint
John, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of Man, John. 9.53.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And this custom was in use in
ye time of Pope Innocent, Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine, as it appears by
their writings.

But now this is not any more used, for children which can not prove and
examine themselves, are not at this day received to the partaking of the
sacrament. Wherefore the Church in old time has erred, or else it erreth now.
But if we would answer, that the Church has power and authority to change
such customs and manners: I reply to the contrary: for now the question is
not here, of a thing indifferent in the use, but of the word of God, which is
always constant, and not subject to any change, as to say, that to day it has
one sense and understanding, and to morrow an other, wherefore if the place of
S. John, command to give the supper to little infantes of necessity, as the
forenamed ancient fathers, have understood and expounded the same, the Church
has done well in time heretofore, to follow that commandment, and at this
time it erreth, in not following it any longer. Or else if ye said place, be not
to be referred properly unto the holy supper, neither commands to distribute
and give the sacrament to infants: but it is of necessity required, that he to
whom we must administer the said sacrament, 1. Cor. 1.2.
have knowledge to try and examine him self, according to S. Paul's doctrine,
as in deed this is the pure and only truth: it follows then, that the
Church has in former time erred, to admit little infants to the holy supper,
and that at this day it does well to practice the contrary.

The third reason: If the Church could not err, Saint Paul had without cause
feared, 1. Cor. 11.28
least the Corinthians (whom he calls a Church) should through the subtlety
of the serpent be corrupted, 2. Cor. 11.3.
and turned away from the simplicity that is in Christ. And indeed, in vain
should he have called the assemblies of the Corinthians and Galathians, Gala.
1.2.
Churches, which yet notwithstanding erred in doctrine, in faith, in manners,
and in life. But Saint Paul did nothing of all this, without cause, or in
vain, otherwise Saint Paul himself should have been deceived. wherefore it
follows, that the Church may err.

The fourth reason: Those that can not err, have no need of the forgiveness
of sins: but the Church has need of the forgiveness of sins, for Jesus
Christ giving it a form of prayer, has commanded it, to demand and ask of
GOD, forgiveness of their sins. Matt. 6.12.
Wherefore it follows, that the Church may err,

The fifth reason. The Church which was in old time in Jerusalem, was
oftentimes reproved of error, by the Prophets, which thing declares, that the
Church is not in this world, without will and deed to err. But to the end I
may not be ouerlong, in recyting by peecemeale, and as it were one by one, all
the sentences, which make mention of the falls of the Church, let men read
that, which is written thereof in these places.

Touching the corruption of the Church, see Isaiah 1. verse 21. to the 24.
verse. Isaiah.
Isaiah 3. ver. 8.9. Isaiah 5.13. Isaiah. 30. ver. 9. to the 13. ver. Isaiah
59. ver. 2. unto the 17. ver. Isai. 64. ver. 6.7. Iere. 2. ver. 5. Jeremiah.
to the end of the Chap. Iere. 3. ver. 2.3.20. Iere. 4. ver. 22. Jeremiah 5.
ver. 1. unto the 15. ver. and afterward from the 19. ver. to the end of the
Chapter. Iere. 6. ver. 7. unto the 11. ver. Jeremiah 8. ver. 4. unto the 11.
ver. Jeremiah 9. ver. 3. unto the 17. ver. Jeremiah 13. ver. 10. unto the 15.
ver. Jeremiah 22. even unto the end Jeremiah 16. ver. 11.12. Jeremiah 18. ver.
13. unto the 18. ver. Ezechiel 5. ver. 6. unto the 12. Ezechiel.
ver. 22. ver. 3. unto the end of the Chapter. Ezechiel 33. ver. 24. unto the
30. Deuteron.
ver. Deuteronomie 32. ver. 5.6.32.33.

Touching the ingratitude and unthankfulness of the Church, see Isaiah 1. ver.
2.5. Isaiah.
Isaiah 5. ver. 47. Isaiah 43. ver. 21. unto the end of the chapter. Isaiah 17.
ver. 10.11. Isaiah 63. ver. 9.10. Jeremiah 2. ver. 6.9.21.22. Jeremiah.
Jeremiah 12. ver. 7. Ezechiel 16. ver. 15. Ezechiel.
unto the 24. ver. Zechariah 11. ver. 8. Zechariah.
unto the end of the Chapter. Deuteronomie 32. Deuteron.
ver. 15.18.23. Hosea 12. ver. 1.9. Hosea 13. Hosea.
ver. 6. Malachie 1. ver. 2.8.

Touching the obstinacy and rebellion of the Church, Isaiah.
see Isaiah 1. ver. 5. unto the 7. ver. Isaiah 6. ver. 9.10. Isaiah 8. ver.
10.11.13.16. Isaiah 26. ver. 10.11. Isaiah 28. ver. 9.12.13. Isaiah 30. ver.
9.15. Isaiah 42. ver. 19.20. Isaiah 48. ver. 4. Isaiah 65. ver. 11. Jeremiah 2.
Jeremiah.
ver. 24.29. unto the 33. ver. Jeremiah 5. ve. 3. unto the 8. ver. and ver. 20.
of ye same Chap. unto ver. 25. Jeremiah 6. ver. 10. in every verse almost unto
the end of the Chapter. Jeremiah 7. ver. 24. unto the 28. ver. Jeremiah 8. ver.
4. unto ver. 8. Jeremiah 17. ver. 1.23. Jeremiah 10. ver. 11.15. Jeremiah 25.
ver. 4.8. Jeremiah 29. ver. 17.20. Jeremiah 35. ver. 13.16. Jeremiah 43. ver.
2. Jeremiah 44. ver. 7.10.11.16.20. Ezechiel 2. Ezechiel.
ver. 3. unto the end of the Chapter. Ezechiel 3. ver. 5.10.26.27. Ezechiel 4.
ver. 3. Hosea.
Ezechiel 12. ver. 2. Hosea 4 throughout the whole Chapter. Hosea 5. ver. 4.
Amos 4. Amos.
ver. 6. unto the end of the Chapter. Zephaniah 3. Zephaniah. Zechariah.
Proverbs.
ver. 5. Zechariah 7. ver. 11. unto the end. Proverbs 1. ve. 24. unto the end.
Matthew. 11. Matthew.
ver. 16.17.21. and so unto the 25. ver. Matthew. 12. ver. 41.42. Matthew. 23. ver.
37.

Touching the Pastors specially and particularly, see Isaiah 56. ver. 10.11.
Jeremiah 6. ver. 13. Jeremiah 14. ver. 14. Jeremiah 23. ver. 1.2. etc. Ezechiel
22. ver. 25.26.28. Ezechiel 34. ver. 23.4. etc. Hosea 9. ver. 8. 1. Kings 22.
ver. 6. John 7. ver. 47.

CHAP. XIII. Whether the Church be above the holy scripture: that is to say,
whether the holy scripture depend of the judgment and authority of the Church.
THE Church indeed has a very great authority among men, in so much as, it
behooves us to hear the same, if we will not be accounted rebels against God.
Yet notwithstanding, seeing she is the wife and scholar of Jesus Christ, she
ought always to be subject unto him, as unto her husband head and teacher.
And therefore this is an article, which we must hold inviolable and without
breach, to wit, that the Church ought to depend and hang on Christ, and his
word, and to have her authority, from the same word, and not on the other
side, that the word of Christ, should depend and hang upon the credit and
authority thereof from the Church. Notwithstanding many are found which hold
altogether the contrary, setting (as we say) the cart before the horses, and
plowe or waine before the oxen, and utterly overthrowing all order. For they
suppose, that the holy scripture has no more certainty and authority, than
it pleases the Church, that by her allowance and consent, it shall have. And
these be the Romish Catholics, who speak of the Church after this manner,
giving it authority over and above the word of God, to make men to believe,
that what so ever it decrees, determines and concludes, we must hold her
judgment, sentence and resolution, as a certain oracle, coming from heaven,
and to be short, as an article of our belief. And behold their reasons for
this.

The first reason: The Church by her judgment has brought to pass, that the
holy scripture has been acknowledged for the true word of God, and has
distinguished, separated and sundered it, from al all other writings what so
ever, which men have published and brought into ye world. For who is it that in
the beginning has assured us, that the holy scripture is the word of God, but
the Church alone? And who is it, that even to this day, can certify and assure
us, that ye same word of God, is come safe, sound, and whole, even unto our
age, but only the same Church? Wherefore it follows, that the authority and
certainty of the holy scripture, depends upon the authority and judgment
of ye Church.

I answer two things, or two manner of ways. First, that this is a most
wicked opinion to say, that without the Church, the word of God could not have,
a sufficient witness, to commend and set forth the authority and credit
thereof unto us? Let us hear what Saint Augustine says hereof. Aug. de
assumpt. virg. Mar^. cap. 1.
The authority of the truth (says he) is fruitful and plentiful: and if
she be diligently examined, men shall find, that of her self, she makes her
self to be sufficiently known. Alfonsus de Cast. li. 1. ca. 8. cont. haereses.
Wherefore Alfonsus de Castro, has sometimes said: seeing that the holy
scripture is come forth from GOD, it has of it self already deserved, that
we should give trust unto it, and believe it. And when the Church publishes
this, that it is given by God, she does wholly, even as a witness, which
bears witness to some thing. So that the truth of the scriptures is
certain, not because of the witness, but by reason of it self, and the
credit it has, and not because the church receives it, and publishes it,
but because that GOD has given it, and made the same manifest unto us.

Besides, is this a small matter, that we have the testimony of the holy
spirit dwelling in our hearts? Ioh. 16.13. 1. Ioh. 2, 27.
It is said that it is his peculiar office, to guide and lead us into all
truth, and to teach us all things. Whereupon it follows, that he teaches us
this truth: that the holy scripture is of God, and from him. 2. Cor. 2.12.
It is said moreover, that we have received the spirit of God, that we might
know the things that are given to us of God. 2. Cor. 2.14.
Also, that the things of the spirit of God, are spiritually discerned, that
is to say, by the efficacy, moving, and working of the holy spirit.
Wherefore it follows, that the holy spirit teaches us, and makes us to
discern, between these books which we ought to receive without gainesaying,
and the other, which we ought to reject and refuse.

Some perhaps will say, that this article or point is dangerous, because that
heretics oftentimes brag, that they have the spirit of God, which they have
not indeed: and we know how they have always endeavored, to make their
doctrines of authority and credit, through their inward revelations, which
they have imagined to proceed, from the holy Ghost. But we can easily answer
this: to wit, that in this matter, we can easily avoid al danger, if we use
and follow the remedies which S. John does furnish us withal, when he says:
that we ought not to believe every spirit, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
but to try and prove the spirits, whether they are of God or no. And what
shall be the mean and way of this trial and examination? even the word of
God, as we see, that thereby the men of Berea, Act. 17.11.
did prove S. Paul his spirit and doctrine. And to this mean does Chrysostom
send us, when he says thus: Many boast of the spirit, Chrysostom. de sanct. and
adorand. spiritu
but they which bring any thing of their own, do falsely pretend the same. As
Christ witnessed, that he spoke not of him self, because that his doctrine was
taken out of the law and Prophets: in like manner, if any under the title and
name of the spirit, shall bring unto us any thing, which is not contained in
the Gospel, let us not believe it. For as Christ is the accomplishment, and
fulfilling of the law and Prophets: so is the holy Ghost of the Gospel.

But how can we by this way or mean, discern and know the spirits, that is
to say, whether the doctrine which they shall propound and set forth unto us,
be from the holy Ghost or no? After two sorts or by two means, you shall
know this. First, if it tend to this end, to exalt, establish and set up the
glory of God. Ioh. 7.18.
For as Jesus Christ says: He that seeks the glory of God is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. Secondly, if it be conformable and agreeable, Romans
12.6.
to the proportion of faith, that is to say, if it agree and accord well, with
the heads and foundations of Christian religion, whereof we have spoken more
largely heretofore, in the fourth Chapter.

The second thing, that I answer, touching the foresaid reason of the Romish
Catholics, is, that the consequence thereof, is not necessary, neither well
grounded, when they say, that the Church yeldeth testimony to the word of God,
and does commend the same unto us, that therefore the certainty and authority
of the word of God, depends upon the authority and judgment of the Church.
For as we have but a little while ago alleged out of Alfonsus de Castro: The
word of God is certain, not by reason of the Church, which bears witness
thereof, but because of it self, and his own credit. The Apostles yielded
testimony, Ioh. 15.17. Act. 1.8.
and bare witness of Jesus Christ, And who is he that will therefore say, that
Jesus Christ his authority does depend of the authority and judgment of the
Apostles? The Goldsmith tries the gold, and puts a difference between
that which is good and pure, and that which is naughty metal. But does he
therefore by his trial and proof make that the gold is either good or evil?
A parliament receives some edict or law which comes from the King, that it
may be published and proclaimed. Inquiry is diligently made, whether it come
from the King or no: Afterward all know that it comes from the King: what
does the parliament then? It is true, that it allows the edict, that it
acknowledges the same, that it bears witness to it, and commends and
sets out the same, yea, and if need be, interprets it, according to the
Kings intent and meaning: But does the parliament for all this, cause it or make
it to be the Kings law? Does it give authority to it? Has it any authority,
to change any thing in it, or to add any thing to it, or to clippe, or take
any thing what so ever away from it? It is certain, no. Even so stands the
case with the Church. For although it be an excellent testimony to the word of
God, yet it can not at any hand give it authority, as to say, that the
certainty of the word of God, hangs upon the authority and judgment of the
Church. For when the Church acknowledges and allows the word of God, and
does put a difference between it, and the doctrines and inue^tions of men, she
does no other thing, but hear the voice of her pastor, Ioh. 10.5.
and discerns and knows it from the voice of a stranger. Now there is
great difference between discerning the Pastors voice, from astrangers, and
adding authority and credit thereto, bringing to pass, and that according to
truth, that it should be such or such, that is either true or false.

The second reason is: The Church is more ancient, than the scriptures. For in
the time of Adam, Abell, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, there was no
scripture: For Moses was the first penman or writer of matters concerning
religion, and yet notwithstanding there was a Church. Wherefore it follows,
that the authority of the church, is above the authority of the holy
scripture.

First and foremost I answer, that the consequence of this argument is none at
all. For grant it, that one thing be more ancient and old than an other, yet
it follows not for all that, that it should be of greater authority and
credit: otherwise we must infer, that Moses has more authority, than Jesus
Christ, and the law more than the Gospel.

Secondly, as touching the antecedent or former proposition, I say that it is
sophistical, captious, and full of deceit. For albeit, that in these first
times of the world, there was no scripture, which the fathers used, yet for all
that, the word of God ceased not to be, because it was written and engraven in
the fathers hearts, and moreover sounded very clearly in ye Church, which
word, was in good time brought and committed to writing, first by Moses, and
afterward by others, and thereupon called, the holy scripture: wherefore
seeing that the holy scripture and Gods word, is nothing but one and the self
same thing, it follows very well, that if our first fathers have had the
word of God, they have had also in substance, the holy scriptures.

Aug. cont. epist. fundamen. cap. 5.
The third reason: S. Augustine has said: I would not believe the Gospel, if
the authority of the Catholic Church, did not move me thereto. Wherefore it
is certain, that the Gospel takes his authority from the Church,

I answer, that the consequence is stark naught, for that which S. Augustine
speaks to one purpose, or in one respect, is applied to another end. This
holy Doctor speaks so, as having regard to that, he was then, when he took
the part of the Manichees, and as it were disputing against them. Now the
Manichees would, that the Epistles of Manicheus their author, which they called
Fundamental, containing in it all their false opinions, should be of like and
equal authority, which the Apostles Epistles. Beside, they allowed one part
of the Gospel, and disallowed an other, and that not by the advice and
judgment of the Church, but of their own proper and particular authority.
Saint Augustine having taken in hand, to confute the said Epistle in the
beginning speaks thus: The Epistle begins after this manner: Manicheus the
Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the providence and appointment of God the Father: I
ask, who is this Manicheus? you will answer, the Apostle of Jesus Christ: I
believe it not. What will thou say thereto? Perhaps thou will bring forth
the Gospel, and thereby thou will lift up and establish the person of
Manicheus. But what if thou had to do and deal with a man, who does not
yet believe the Gospel? what would thou do, when he should say unto thee,
I believe not the Gospel? For as touching my self, I would not believe the
Gospel, if the authority of Catholic Church did not move me thereto.
Behold Saint Augustines words, by which it is altogether manifest, that he
minds not to infer, that the Gospel hangs upon the allowance and
authority of the Church, but only that the Church has great weight, to induce
and move the miscreants and unbelievers, to believe the Gospel. This holy
Doctor then speaks not, of the foundation of his faith, but of the beginning
thereof, that is to say, of the occasion and outward means, by which he was
provoked and stirred up, to believe the Gospel, when he was a Manichean
heretic, and not as yet a Christian, to wit, because he saw the good accord,
consent, and agreement of the Church in receiving the Gospel. In the fourth
Chapter he confessed, that in former time he maintained the Manichees part, and
that he was very eger and sharp therein, and blinded in the doctrine of their
sect. Now he speaks thus: How will thou prove, that Manicheus is an Apostle
of Christ? shall this be by the Gospel? But if some one that believes not the
Gospel, would say unto thee, I believe not the Gospel, what have thou to
reply? As if he should say, would thou not purpose, put down, and show
unto him the authority and testimony of the Church? For as touching my self,
in the time that I was a Manichean, I had not believed the Gospel, if the
authority and testimony of the Catholic church, had not driven me thereto.
As if again he should say: For as concerning my self, when I was of your
faction and sect, I was so settled and stayed in your opinions, and had heard
them so attentively and diligently, yea I believed them so steadfastly, and did
maintain them with such courage and stomach, (this is that which he speaks
in ye fourth Chapter) that very hardly I had ever forsaken and renounced them,
to believe the Gospel, if the authority and testimony of the Church, had not
induced, moved and provoked me thereto.

The fourth reason: He that has authority and power, to take away, or to
change some thing in the word of God, has also authority over it. But so it
is, that ye church has authority and power, to take away, or to change
something in the word of God: It follows therefore, that the Church has
authority over and above it.

They thus prove the assumption, which is the second proposition or sentence of
of the reason. Saint Peter had authority and power, to take away and to
change some thing, in the word of GOD, for he changed the form of baptism
prescribed by Jesus Christ, as it appears by this, that Jesus Christ having
commanded to baptize, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, Matt. 28.19
and of the holy Ghost, Act. 2.38.
Saint Peter changing this form, has enjoined and commanded men to be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ only. As it is written in the second of
the Acts verse 38. Now if Saint Peter have had this authority and this
power, why also should not the whole Church have it, as well as he?

I answer, first for the consequence, that it is not necessary and good. For
who is he that will yield to this, that all that, which was in former time
permitted to the Apostles, should now be permitted to the Pastors and
ministers of the Church, who are their successors?

Secondly I say, that that which is taken from Saint Peter as true and right,
is false. For Saint Peter did in no case change the form of baptism: and in
the place of the Acts before alleged, it is not said, that they must be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ only, Act. 2.38.
but simply said thus, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ. Petrus Lombard lib. 4. did. 3. sect. B. and hab. de Consecrat.
did. 4. cap. in Synod. etc.
But let us see, how Peter Lombard, the master of ye sentences expounds this
place. If any (says he) be baptized without invocation of the Trinity, he is
not a perfect Christian, unless he be baptized in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: yet we read in the Acts of the Apostles,
Act. 8.12.
that the Apostles baptized in the name of Christ: Act. 10.48.
but under this name, Ambr. lib. 1. de spi. sanct. cap. 3.
as S. Ambrose expounds it, is understood the whole Trinity, for when a man
names Christ, these are understood, to wit, the father, of whom the son was
anointed, and the son, which was anointed, and the holy Ghost, by whom or
with whom he was anointed. Behold the advice and judgment of ye master of ye
sentences, who does not altogether satisfy us, though he speak much for us.
For whether we regard the substance of the sacraments, or else the form
thereof, we hold that the Lords ordinance ought to be retained and followed in
the whole, and through the whole, and that it does not belong to any particular
person, no not to the Church it self, to alter or change any thing therein.
And indeed, as I have already said, Saint Peter did not change the form of
baptism: But mark this: His intent and purpose was to teach, that the
foundation, accomplishment and fulfilling of baptism, is in Jesus Christ
alone. For to be baptized in the name of Christ, is taken and used by S. Peter,
for to be received to grace and favor in baptism, by the name of Jesus
Christ. So that this manner of speech which Saint Peter uses, is not in any
sort to be referred to the form of baptism, but only declares, that all the
virtue, power, and efficacy of baptism consists only in Jesus Christ
alone, because that all that, which baptism does represent and figure unto us,
1. Ioh. 1.7. Romans 6.4.
is comprehended in him alone. For by the blood of Jesus Christ, we are washed
and purged from all our sins, and by baptism buried with him, to the end
that as he is raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, so we also
should walk in newness of life.

The fifth reason: The Church has changed the Sabbath to the Lords day, or
that which we call Sunday, although that God by express writing, commanded
the observation and keeping of the said Sabbath. Wherefore it follows, that
the Church has power and authority over the holy scripture.

I answer in the first place, That the Church has changed nothing at all, of
the commandment, touching the observation of the Sabbath, in or concerning
the substance thereof, but only in or concerning the circumstance. For the
thing or matter abides always, that is to say, the substance of the
commandment, seeing that one day of the week is reserved, to be employed and
bestowed upon the holy rest, which thing is enjoined by the commandment, as
being indeed the verity and truth thereof. So that the observation and keeping
thereof is only changed in respect of the time, which change does not
derogate any thing from the commandment, and neither alters nor changes
any thing therein, of that which God minded to commend and command to us.

Next: the commandment of the Sabbath, in respect of the figure was
temporal, and endured but a season, and therefore it ought to have an end, as
the other ceremonies of the law had. Wherefore the figure was taken away and
changed, not by the authority of the Church properly, or as you would say, of
it own authority, but by the truth it self, which declared and showed it
self in Jesus Christ: whereupon also the Apostle says, Col. 2.16.17
Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect of an
holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath day, which are but a shadow
of things to come.

The sixth reason: The Apostles decreed in the first Council which they held in
Jerusalem, Act. 15.29.
that the Christians should abstain from a blood, and from that that is
strangled: which decree, yea brought and put into writing, the Church has
taken away and changed, after the time of the Apostles, giving leave to
christians to use both blood, and that that is strangled. It follows then,
that it is lawful for the Church, to change some thing in the word of God, and
by co^sequent that the Church is above the same word.

I answer that the place of the Acts, touching that which the Apostles
determined in the Council, which they held in Jerusalem is ill understood, and
yet more ill applied, to fetch and draw from it such a consequence. For the
Church after the Apostles, has not established any thing, against the decree
of the Apostles, in that they have suffered Christians, to use and eat blood,
and that that is strangled. For the decree of the Apostles was made, set up and
published, for a time only, and therefore it ought to end. The Church in the
time of the Apostles, was builded as well of the Gentiles as of ye Jews. Some
weak ones amongst the Jews, thought, that they were yet bound in their
consciences, to the observation of the law of Moses, that is to say, to the
ceremonies thereof: The Gentiles on the other side, strengthening themselves
with that Christian liberty, which Jesus Christ has brought unto us, would
without any difference use, all manner of meats, and so amongst the rest,
blood, and that that was strangled. Whereupon the Apostles, least that so free
a use of blood, and of that that was strangled, might breed and bring some
offense to the weak Jews, determined and decreed in their Council, that
every one should abstain from such meat for a time, til that they might see
a good agreement and peace, between these two peoples. Now afterward, the
fear of such an offense being taken away, the Church judged, that the
observation and keeping of the said decree, was not any more necessary, or any
longer needful, and therefore respecting the intent and purpose of the
Apostles, gave liberty to the faithful to use all kind of meats, or else
(to speak better) did by the word of God declare unto them the liberty that
they had to use all manner of meats without, in any thing altering or changing,
the intent and purpose of the Apostles, when they made and established the
foresaid decree, not being appointed and set up by them, but for a time only.

And thus much touching the reasons of the Romish Catholics, who affirm that
the certainty, and truth of the word of God, does depend of the judgment
and authority of the Church. Behold now our reasons to the contrary.

The first is this: The certainty of the Church depends upon the authority
of Gods word. It follows then that the contrary can not be true, to wit,
that the certainty of the word of God should depend upon the authority of the
Church. Now we prove the antecedent or former proposition, by that which the
holy Ghost says, Ephe. 2.20.
that the Church is builded upon the foundation and doctrine of the Ppophetes
and Apostles. Whereupon it follows, that the Church depends upon the
authority of the same doctrine: And hereunto belong, the sentences of the
ancient Doctors, which we have cited and quoted before in the third Chapter, by
which this is showed and proved, that the Church is marked, declared, and
known, by the holy scriptures.

2. Tim. 3.16.
The second reason: The holy scripture being given by inspiration of God, as S.
Paul says, has the authority from it self, as we have declared in the
beginning of this Chapter, in aunswering the first reason of the Romish
Catholics: wherein we have followed the judgment of Alfonsus de Castro. It
follows then, that it takes not credit or authority from the Church,
neither more nor less, than the edict and law of the King, which has the
authority it has, from it self, that is to say, from the King, from whom it
proceeds and comes, and not from the parliament, to which it is sent,
although that the same be allowed, praised, yea and expounded sometimes by the
said parliament.

The third reason: If the word of God ought to be heard above the Church, then
certainly it does not hang of the authority of the Church, but that the word
of GOD ought to be heard above the Church, it appears by this which S. Paul
says, that it ought to be heard above the Apostles, Gal. 1.8.
yea the Angels them selves. Wherefore it follows, that the word of God does
not hang of the authority of the Church.

The fourth reason: Aug. cont. Max. lib. 3. cap. 14.
S. Saint Augustine openly declares, that the holy scripture is above the
Councels, and so by consequent above the Church represented by Councels. For
writing to Maximinus the Arrian, touching ye word Homousios, that is to say,
consubstantiall, or of the self same substance together with the father, which
word was confirmed by the Council of Nice, and on the other side, disallowed by
the Council of Ariminum, in the time of the Emperor Constantine, he says thus:
Now I have not to use or allege, the Council of Nice, neither thou the
Council of Ariminum, to prevail thereby one of us against an other. For as I
am not bound to the Council of Ariminum, so art not thou bound to the Council
of Nice. We have the authority of the scriptures, which are not partial or
particular witnesses, for the one, or for the other, but are common witnesses
to both of us. Let us therefore by them dispute, and reason of the matter in
controversy between us.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Discipline of the Church.
NOW we must speak of ye Ecclesiastical discipline, in which
notwithstanding, we will be brief and short, because there is of this matter a
very large and sufficient treaty extant already, which may satisfy and
content all good minds, and is entitled, The confirmation of the
Ecclesiastical discipline.
The confirmation of the Ecclesiastical discipline, observed in the reformed
Churches of the kingdom of France. And also he that will read the Institution
of M. Calvin, Calvin li. 4. Inst. Beza in confess. fidei.
specially in his fourth book, and Theodorus Beza his confession, shall find
there all that which may be said, touching this point or matter, if so be it,
that he will content him self with reason. Wherefore then we have in this
matter of the Ecclesiastical discipline, for this present time to consider of
four principal heads or points.

The first is, Discipline is necessary in the Church.
ye discipline is most requisite and most necessary in the Church, if we will
not have all things mingled and disordered therein, yea full of confusion. For
even as there is no city, nor town, nor house, which can be without
discipline, or policy, or some order, for the government thereof: so the
Church which is the city and house of God, cannot at any hand be without his
policy and spiritual government. And therefore Saint Cyprian has sometimes
called the discipline of the Church, Cyprian de tract. virgin.
The keeper of faith, and the mistress of virtue. For if it shall be lawful
for every one, to do what they will, without being held back by some
bridle, what confusion and disorder, shall we see in the Church? The same
Doctor compares also the discipline to the rudder or helm of a ship, Cypr.
lib. 2. epist. 7.
thereby to declare, not only how profitable the same is for us, but also how
necessary and needful. For seeing that the Church is in this world, as a ship
upon the sea, that is to say, subject to the billows, waves, and tempests of
tyrants and persecutors, yea to winds and whirlewinds of false doctrine, how
could it be able to subsist and stand, if together with the word of God, it had
not for the ordering and guiding thereof, her discipline, to be as it were a
rampart, ground work, foundation and stay? Wherefore those, which either
disallowe or despise this remedy (which serves to preserve the Church from
dissipation or scattering abroad, to keep men in the obedience of God, and to
hold every one in his order and calling) labor and endeavor no other thing,
what so ever they will pretend, than to overthrow the state of the Church, and
to bring into the same all beastly excess, and barbarous disorder, and that
they are to be esteemed in the number of them, of whom is spoken in the
fiftieth Psalm, Psalm. 50.16.17.
who giving them selves to all iniquity, and hating correction and discipline,
or to be reformed, are reproved for this, yt they took upon the^ to speak of
and rehearse the ordinances of God, and to take his covenant and word in their
mouths.

The second head or point is, The discipline does not so much as set a foot
into the Magistrates office.
that the Ecclesiastical or Church discipline, incrocheth not any thing at all
upon the magistrates charge and office. For first, the jurisdiction and
government of the Church, and the civil iurisdicton or government differ
greatly one of them from an other: because that the one is spiritual, and
reaches to the inward man, and the other is bodily and outward. Therefore
Saint Paul said: 2. Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to cast
down holds. The Church then has not prisons, or sergeants, or swords,
thereby bodily to punish evil doers, neither uses it force of hands,
confiscation or loss of goods, or amercements to punish the^ in their goods
and riches, but only draws out and occupies, Ephe. 6.17.
the spiritual sword of Gods word to correct men, and to bring them to
amendment, as the Magistrate draws out, and uses his material sword, to
punish them either in their goods, or in their bodies. And so both of them do
their duty, the one of them not bringing any prejudice or hurt to the other,
but contrariwise, very well ayding them selves between them selves, and
helping one an other, and being most necessary and needful in their several
charges and offices, the one not being able, to do that which the other does.
One example to make the matter plain. If some one have committed whordome, and
so by that means and fault, the civil laws shall be transgressed and broken,
and the Church also offended: Now in reformed Courts and places of law, such
a one shall be punished either by imprisonment, or by whipping, or by some
other punishment: and so the offender, shall have satisfied the Magistrates
laws, but yet the offense shall not be repaired or reformed in the Church. For
it may be, that such an evil doer will in steed of giving or showing some
sign of repentance, murmur, be angry, and despitefully deal with the
Church. In such a case the Church, before that it receives him to the holy
supper, shall require of him, a public testimony and open token of this
repentance, and by consequent, as the Magistrate shall have his justice
satisfied and answered, so shall the Church have her discipline satisfied and
answered. In sum, the Magistrate in ye exercising and executing of his
office, respects men's goods and their bodies, but the Church in the exercise
and execution of her discipline, regards simply and only, the souls and
consciences of men.

Secondly, so far off is it, that the discipline of the Church, derogateth or
takes any thing at all away from the Magistrate, that contrariwise she
maintains the obedience that is due unto him. For if she tend to no other
end, or shoot at no other mark, but to cause us to practice that, which is
contained in the word of God, and so it is that Gods word teaches us to submit
our selves, and to yield our selves subject, to our Magistrates, Romans 13.1.5.
Tit. 3.1.
and that not for fear of wrath only, but also for conscience sake, who sees
not this that she is established and set up by God, to maintain the Magistrate
in his authority, and to cause that obedience to be rendered and yielded to him,
which belongs unto him.

And also this is to be noted, that the church has not any particular member
or person in it, which she does not most willingly make subject to the
Magistrate, following therein that which S. Paul says: Romans 13.1.
Let every soul (that is to say, every person or man) be subject unto the
higher powers. Touching which the Priests, Friars, and Monks of the Romish
Church, and in sum, all those of the Popes Clergy, should here very well
take them selves by the nose, that if it may be, they may be ashamed, and so
come to repentance. For whereas they reprove and accuse us, to be rebels to our
superiors, I would wish them to look to them selves, and to mark how far
they show them selves obedient, and by what title and right they can boast
them selves to be exempted from all such subjection. It may be, that they will
not believe Saint Paul's words, without the interpretation of some of the
fathers, let the^ then well look to, and mark, that which Chrysostom has
written upon this place, whose words are very clear and plain. Chrysostom. in
13. cap. ad Roman.
When the Apostle speaks thus (says Chrysostom) Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers, he declares that this commandment is directed to all;
yea to Priests and Monks, and not only to them, which are busied and
occupied about the affairs of this present life, wherefore be it, that thou
art an Apostle, or an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or any other, thou ought to
be subject to the Magistrate. For this subjection does not hinder, disanull, or
take away godliness. These are this holy Doctors own words, who if he lived
at this day, I leave it to your selves to think of, how sharply and earnestly
would he set up him self, against the Romish Priests, Causa. 15. quaest. 6.
cap. Alius Romanus etc.
and namely against him, who does not only not subject or submit him self to
Kings, but also makes Kings subject to him, and translateth to his own
proper use, Kingdoms and Empires: and is not in the mean while ashamed to
say, that he is Jesus Christ's vicar, and the successor of the Apostles, Matt.
17.27
whereas indeed Jesus Christ subjected him self to Magistrates, yea even to
pay them tribute, Luke. 22.25.
and has said unto his Apostles: that the Kings of the earth bear rule etc.
but it shall not be so amongst you.

The third head or point is, The discipline ought to be exercised by the
Consistory.
that for the exercising and executing of the discipline, there must be in the
Church a Consistory, that is to say, an assembly, or a Council, compacted
and made of the ministers and Elders, to watch over ye insolences, Matt.
10.17. Act. 22.5.
breakings out and offenses, which may fall amongst the members of the Church.
This consistory was heretofore in use among the Jews, and was called
Synedrion and Presbytery. Now if when corruption burst into the Church, men
abused both the title, and the right and lawful use of the Consistory, it
follows not for all that, that Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, would have it
abolished, but rather have brought it back again to his former safety and
soundness, and used the same, when the time was for it. This is that which
Saint Paul means, when writing unto the Romans, Romans 12.8.
he says: Let him that rules, do it with diligence. For it is certain, that
he speaks not to Magistrates, but he speaks to the Elders, Ancients, and
ouerwatchers, who were joined to and with the Pastors, for the ruling and
guiding of the Church. Also, when he says to Timothy: 1. Tim. 5.17.
The Elders that rule well, are worthy double honor, specially they which
labor in the word and doctrine. For he makes there two sorts of Ancients
or Elders, some that travel in the word and doctrine, such are the Pastors
and Ministers, and other some which exercise an other charge, as the Elders, or
as we say, ouerwatchers, who are appointed to have regard to, and to watch over
the manners of the people.

But to make this point more plain: we must speak yet somewhat more thereof.
Saint Paul writing to the Romans, Romans 12.6.7.8.
divides the functions or offices of the Church into two sorts or kinds,
into the office of Prophets, 1. Tim. 3.18. Tit. 1.6. etc. Philip. 1.1.
and into the office of Deacons, as in an other place, he makes mention, but
of Bishops and Deacons, according to the example of the Apostles. Act. 6.3.4.
Acts 6.2.3.4. etc.

Again, he divides these two kinds or sorts, into certain other. Of
Prophets he makes two ranks or orders: some he calls Pastors, and the
other Doctors, whose charge and office is, to labor in the word and doctrine,
as we have heretofore sufficiently declared in the ninth Chapter.

Of Deacons, he makes three kinds. Some give themselves wholly to the
gatherings and distributions of the alms, which properly indeed are called
Deacons. Othersome are they to whom specially and chiefly this charge
belongs, to watch over the manners of the flock, and over such offenses, as
may fall out amongst them, and these are properly called Ancients, Elders, and
ouerwatchers. The third sort, are they which have a special care of the sick
persons, to be diligent about them, to take care over them, and to use them
courteously, gently, and well, and such were heretofore the widows, 1. Tim.
5.9. etc.
whereof mention is made in the scripture.

Touching which matter this is to be marked, that in succession and process of
time, certain Councels and Synods ordained, that women should be no more
admitted into such offices and charges of Diaconesses, and this was done to the
end, they might meet withal and prevent all inconveniences and offenses
rising thereon: in the place and steed of which women Diaconesses, yt like
administration and office, was commended to and laid upon men, lawfully chosen
and called thereto.

Now mark how these offices and charges, be at this day exercised and used
in the reformed Churches. As concerning the Pastors and Doctors, they handle,
entreat on, and expound the word, as we have said, and showed before in the
ninth Chapter, the Elders and Deacons not any manner of way meddling therewith.

There are two other companies or sorts. The one is called the assembly or
company, which have care of the poor: the other the Consistory: Both in the
one and in the other the Pastors are usually to be found and had, as well to
make public prayer, as to give advice and counsel, touching that which ought
to be done.

In the assembly or company which have care of the poor, they take advise
and order, for collections and distributions, for aid and assistance to be
given to the poor, and that the sick and diseased may be helped and succored.
And then are present with the Deacons, so many of the Ministers and Elders, yea
and of other citizens and town dwellers, or parishioners, as occasion and
necessity requires.

The Consistory is composed, made, and consists, of the Pastors and Elders,
whereunto also are admitted and received the Doctors and Deacons, so far
forth, and in as much as they shall judge it to be expedient and profitable,
to advise, give counsel, and consider of the Censures, and of that which is
requisite and necessary, for the guiding and government of ye Church.

Therefore of this company is it that we speak, to which we say appertains
the spiritual government of the Church. And indeed it appears, that the
primitive Church was governed and guided after this manner, by the Apostles,
accompanied with the Elders, who altogether assembled and met together, so
often, as there was need of such an assembly to be had. Act. 15.2.
For it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Church of Antioch,
being desirous to have advise and judgment, in a difficult and hard question
concerning doctrine, Act. 21.18.
did send to the Apostles and Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, and that they
assembled and met together. Also that the Elders of Jerusalem were assembled
and met together, when James was, to take counsel of that which Saint Paul
had to do, touching the purging and clearing of himself, from the slanders,
that were laid upon him, and given out against him. And we see also whither
Jesus Christ sends the offenders, who are stiff, and not yelding to a
confession of their fault, Matt. 18.17.
when he says: Tell it unto the Church. For by the Church there he means no
other thing, but the Consistory, that is to say, the governors and guiders of
the Church, even as Chrysostom has expounded it, as we have before observed
it, and put it down in the first Chapter.

To be short, it is very manifest and plain, that there must be in the Church
Ancients or ouerwatchers, appointed to this end, to watch over the manners of
the people, and who also together with the Pastors, must look to the exercise
and execution of discipline, that the Church may be well guided and governed.

The fourth head or point is, Of the corrections and censures of the Church.
touching the corrections, and censures of the Church, we have said, that in
every Church there ought to be a Consistory, to exercise and execute the
discipline. Now we add, that this ought to be found true, and declared
specially in the corrections and censures. Whereupon we have certain
considerations to be observed and marked.

The first is, that we must make a difference between secret faults, and those
which are public and open, that we may apply thereto meet and convenient
censures. I call them secret faults which are known to one alone, or to very
few persons. And I call them public and open faults, which are notorious and
manifestly known of every one, or else of very many men. If then the faults
be secret, we must follow in the correction and amendment thereof, ye rule
which is prescribed by Jesus Christ, in Matthew. 18. Matt. 18.15.
where it is said, If thy brother offend or sin against thee, go tell him
thereof between thee and him alone, etc. But if the faults be public and open,
we must follow the commandment and example of Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 5.20.
His commandment is this: Such as offend, reprove openly, that the rest also
may fear. His example is, in that when S. Peter had committed an offensive
fault, he did not warn him thereof apart, Gal. 2.14.
or by him self, but did reprove him openly, and that before the Church.

The second consideration is, that among open faults and offenses, there are
some which are less than other some are, and therefore discretion and
judgment ought to be used in the censuring thereof. But all the circumstances
cannot be easily expressed, wherefore the Consistory ought to be wise, and of
good judgment, to practice the admonition and warning of S. Jude de 22. 23.
when he says: Have compassion of some in putting difference: and other some
which fear, pulling them out of the fire. For amongst faults, some deserve,
but simple or bare admonition alone: othersome suspention from the holy
supper, others excommunication, and other, some other censure. But we can not
be deceived in this what so ever it be, in following and doing that which the
word of God commands us, that is to say, to cut off from the Church
rebellious and impenite^t persons, also faulty persons, Matt 18.17. 1. Cor.
5.3.4 Tit. 3.10.
which stand stiff in their faults, and consequently heretics.

The third consideration is: that when the question is of censures, and namely
of cutting off from the use of the supper, or of excommunication, one alone
should not take upon him the knowledge thereof, but it is necessary and meet,
that the judgment of the Church should be interposed or come between. For one
man alone, what so ever graces he has received from God, cannot, or ought not
to attribute unto him self such an authority. And therefore S. Paul being
willing to excommunicate the incestuous person, says thus: 1. Cor. 5.3.4.5.
I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have determined already,
as though I were present, that he that has thus done this thing, when ye are
gathered together and my spirit, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
such a one I say, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, be delivered unto
Satan etc. Although he was an Apostle, yet he alone and of his own
authority, does not cut off from the Church this incestuous person, but
communicates his advice and order, to and with the Church, to the end that
the matter might be done, by common authority and consent.

And indeed in old time this was ye common and usual manner, to wit, that the
Ecclesiastical censures, should be executed, by ye Consistory. For as it
appears by the Apologetike, Tertul. Apologeti. cap. 39.
or defensive writing of Tertullian, if question should be had, touching them
that ought to be excommunicated, or of them that had committed certain
faults, whether they ought to be received or no, this authority appertained
to the Ministers and Elders of the Church, who ordinarily and commonly
assembled and met together, for that purpose and matter. But the denouncing or
publishing of the excommunication, or the casting of one out, or the public
receiving of him again before the Church, was done by the Pastor.

In this sort Origin ordains, Origin in Johan. Hom. 7.
that he which has been three times admonished, and yet afterward amendeth
not, should be cut off from the body of the Church, by the governors of the
Church.

And Saint Cyprian, Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 10.14. and 27.
making mention of the custom and manner used in his time, touching the
public and open censures of the Church, says, that nothing at all was done
by the Bishop, without the counsel of the Clergy, and the consent of the
people. Wherefore the Pope of Rome declares him self to be a false dealer,
and indeed a tyrant, when snatching away, and that by violence from the
Church the right and power that belongs thereto, he arrogateth to him self
and to his power, and authority, to cut off from the Church, and to
excommunicate whom so ever he, or any of them shall think good.

The fourth consideration is, touching the ends, which men ought to set before
them, in the corrections of the Church, and namely in excommunication. Now
there are three special ends thereof.

The first is, that those which be of wicked life and conversation, may not
have any place amongst true Christians to the contempt of Gods name.

The second is, that good people may not be corrupted by the conversation of
the wicked, 1. Cor. 5.6.
for a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump.

The third is, that they which have fallen and offended, may be confounded and
ashamed in them selves, and afterward lifted up again, comforted, and
reconciled to the Church. 2. These. 3.14
That is it which S. Paul sets out and means, when he says: If any man
obey not our saying, note him by a letter, and have no company with him, that
he may be ashamed: 1. Cor. 5.5.
Also speaking of the incestuous person, I have determined (says he) that he
should be delivered to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. These three ends are very
largely laid out, and at length discoursed upon, in the fourth book of M.
Caluines Institution, Cap. 12. Sect. 5. Calu. lib. 4. Inst. cap. 12. sect. 5.
Whereof the sum is, that in corrections and censures, men must regard and
look to three ends, that is to say, the glory of God, the edification of the
Church, and the repentance and conversion of sinners.

The fifth consideration is, that men in the reprehensions and censures of the
Church, look well to this, that they have not such consideration, regard, or
respect, to the outward appearance and show of men's persons, yt they tread the
little ones, or poor people under their feet, and support, aid, and hearten
the great and rich: Deuteronomy. 10.17. Gal. 3.28.
For as God accepts no man's person: and in the Church, there is neither Jew
nor Grecian, bond nor free, male nor female, but all are one in Jesus Christ:
so the governors of the Church, ought always to walk with an upright and
equal foot, without turning aside any manner of way, in receiving and
allowing some, and in refusing and disallowing others. It is very true, that
corrections ought always to be tempered, measured, and accompanied with
gentleness, softness, and courtesy, to the end (as Saint Paul says) that he
that is reproved or blamed, 2. Cor. 2.7.
may not be swallowed up with over much heaviness. For otherwise we shall
turn the the remedy into poison and hurt. And therefore the same Apostle does
exhort us, Gal. 6.1.
That we should restore with the spirit of meekness such as be fallen into,
or overtaken with some fault. 1. Tim. 5.12.
And again: Rebuke not (says he) an Elder irreverently, but admonish or
exhort him, as a father, the young men as brethren, the elder women as mothers,
the younger as sisters with all pureness and chastity. We must therefore
moderate with gentleness and meekness, the rigor or hardness of the
discipline, least we hurt, rather then profit. But so far off is it, that
they ought to spare any man, that the corrections must be equally and
indifferently applied and administered to all them which shall have need
thereof, whether they be men or women, whether they be great or small, whether
they be masters or servants, whether they be Gentlemen, or of the common sort.
We know with what earnestness and heat Chrysostom was angry, against the
Pastors in his time, who for fear of great and rich men, durst not reject or
put from the supper any of them, when they offered them selves thereto, nor
before they were admitted thereto. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Matthew.
The blood (says he) of these men shall be required at your hands. If you
fear mortal men for their greatness and riches, verily men shall mock you:
but if so be that you fear the living God, he will bring to pass, that even
men them selves shall have you in honor and estimation.

And those which are lifted up in dignity, An admonition to great men not to
reject or despise the discipline.
ought not to refuse to submit them selves, and to make them selves, as it
were, subject to the discipline, and they ought not to refuse the corrections
of their Pastors and Elders, seeing that by this means, the Lord will set
them again upon their feet, after they are fallen. There is I know not what
manner of pride in many, which hinders them from submitting them selves unto
the discipline. There is besides I know not what manner of foolish and filthy
shame, which when it has once seized or taken hold of them, they love rather
to continue in their vices, than to be advertised or admonished thereof, to the
end that they may keep them selves there from.

But the Emperor Theodosius was better advised, and of a more godly mind. For
we read, Ambr. lib. 1. epist. 3. in oration. Theodosij.
that when Saint Ambrose had excommunicated him, by reason of much innocent
blood, which was spilt and shead at his commandment, he took such a censure
in good part, and so far off was it, that he was stubborn and self willed,
against his Pastor and his Elders, to recoile back again, or to withdraw him
self from the Church, that on the other side, approving the same correction
and censure, he unclothed him self of his kingly ornaments, and openly
bewailing his sin in the Church, he did with tears, gronings, and sighs,
demand and ask forgiveness thereof.

Certainly this is not in vain, that Jesus Christ has said to ye Pastors of
his church: What so ever ye shall bind or loose in earth, Matt. 18.18.
shall be bound or loosed in heaven. For thereby he has authorized his Church,
in the use of ye keys, by the word of God, to condemn the perverse, stubborn
and ungodly, and by the same word, to reconcile, and receive to mercy, all
true penitent sinners. Which authority of the Church, is not restrained or
hedged in, to be exercised and executed among the common people only, but also
upon Lords and Magistrates. Whereupon it follows, that none can distract or
withdraw himself therefrom, but he renounceth and forsakes the mean of his
salvation.

The conclusion is this: that seeing God has ordained correction and
discipline, to the end that we should profit and grow up in his doctrine, and
that we should not be hardened in our sins, but rather that they might be
reproved, to the end they might not engender and work in us an incurable
rottenness or infection, It follows that they which fly and refuse the
admonitions and censures of the Church, which are made and given them in the
name of God, refuse God himself, and despise their own salvation.

Behold, this is that, which we have here to note and mark, as touching the
discipline of the Church. For concerning the laws which she may establishe
and set up, according to the authority, given her of GOD, we will speak
thereof in the Chapter following.

The fifteen Chapter. Whether it belong to the Church to make laws? and if
she make some, how far the faithful ought to obey her.
WHen the question is of the laws of the Church, we know that some concern
the doctrine, under which we comprehend the Sacraments also, and other the
discipline or policy, and order, that is to say, the fashion and manner of
doing. The laws which concern doctrine, touch the conscience, and in the
knowledge and practice of them, stands the service and worship of God, and
our own salvation. Of this sort are all the points and articles of doctrine,
contained in the Scripture, which we must believe and observe, without adding
any thing thereto, or diminishing therfrom in changing it. Those which concern
the discipline, are to be referred to the order and honesty, which ought to
be kept in the church, and consist in a manner and fashion of doing, altogether
outward, and these may a man call indifferent, which a man may use either well
or evil, of this sort are ordinances touching the places, the times, the
seasons, and the hours, set for preachings and ministration of the Sacraments,
the celebration of marriages, fasts, publik prayers, and such like things: yet
notwithstanding this must be known, that no man may appoint in the practice
and perfourmance of these matters, the service of God, or our salvation,
neither must any man think, that of themselves they concern the conscience.

Now the difference and disputation that some move and make in the Church
touching this matter, is not as concerning this last kind of Laws,
apperteining only to the discipline or policy. So every one knows and
confesses, that the church cannot want her policy and order and that, to the
end she may abide united and tied together, she has need of certain outward
bonds: wherefore the church may without any difficulti or doubt, make laws
apperteining only to the outward discipline, and take them away, or change
them, according as she shall judge them to be expedient and profitable, having
always special respect to the times, places, and persons. As for example, the
church may ordeine and appoint some day of the week for public prayers,
whether the prayers be ordinary or extraordinary: the Church also may chose a
certain day, or a certain hour, to give thanks unto God when it shall have
pleased him, to have delivered out of some great danger either the whole
Church, or the Country, or the Magistrate, or some other members placed in
authority: the Church also may publish a fast, so often as necessity and
occasion shall require. It may take order also, that Baptism be ministered at a
certain time after the preachings: that the holy Supper be celebrated and
ministered so often in a year, and at those seasons, which they shall judge
expedient and meet: that the askings or publishing of the banes of marriage,
should be as it were proclaimed or declared three several Sundaies: And
lastly that the said marriages should be celebrated at the Sermons or
preachings, either in the morning or evening: that the consistories for the
manners of the people, and the assembly or company which have care for the
poor, assemble and meet together so often in a month, as shall be found
expedient, and profitable.

Wherefore the Church may establish these laws, and other such like, which
the faithful ought to obey, to the end that there may not be any disorder, or
any confusion among the people of God.

But the question is of laws concerning doctrine, and the Sacraments, or else
other laws touching the discipline, by which they would bind consciences,
and enclose and comprehend therein simply the service of God, that is to say,
whether it belong to the Church to make Laws thereof or no? The Romish
Catholics, say they may, and we affirm the contrary, and these are their
reasons following.

The first reason is this: The Church has authority to teach: wherefore she
has also authority to make laws, belonging to the doctrine or teaching.

But this argument may be ouerthrown in two words, if we deny the consequence
For these be matters very much differing, to wit, to have authority to teach,
and to have authority to make Laws belonging to the doctrine. Jesus Christ
has in deed given the first of these to his church: but so he has not the
second. And as God has expressly forbidden, to add any thing unto his law,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. 12.32.
so Jesus Christ has comanded his disciples, to teach only the doctrine which
they had heard and received of him.

The second reason. The church has the use of the keys, and can bind and
loose, absolve and excommunicate. Wherefore it follows that she has also
authorie to establishe laws apperteining to the doctrine.

I answer in one word, that the consequence is false as it was in the
argument last before going: for a Lord or Ruler will in deed give power and
authority to his officers to absolve and to condemn according to the laws
and ordinances, but yet it will not follow for all that, that he gives them
power, of themselves to make new laws over his people, and to judge by them
according to their own fantasy. So Jesus Christ has in deed given unto his
apostles and disciples, this power, to bind, and to loose according to his
laws, but this is ill concluded, to say that therefore he has given the^ this
power and this authority of themselves to make laws, and to establishe them
in his Church, and thereby to bind men's consciences.

The third reason Jesus Christ has said, Mat. 23.2.3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do: Heb. 13.17.
And the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrwes, Obey the^ that have the
oversight of you, and submit your selves to the^. Wherefore it follows, that
we ought to obey the Pastors of the Church in keeping and observing their laws.

I answer, that when we are commanded to obey our Pastors, this ought to be
understood, so far forth as their commandments proceed and come out of
Moses chai^re, that is to say, out of the word of God. For otherwise the Lord
protests and openly witnesses, that he is worshipped in vain, when men set
out, and preach for doctrine, the commandments of men. Matthew. 15.9.
And he himself does straightly command us earnestly to take heed and beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees and Saduces. Touching which matter, Mat. 16.6
August. in John. Tracta. 46. Cap. 10.
let us hear Saint Augustine. The Scribes (says he) and the Pharisees sit
in Moses seat, do that therefore which they shall show unto you. For being
set in the chair or seat of Moses, they teach the law of God, and so God
teaches by them. But if they would teach any thing of their own, hear them
not, and do not that which they will say: for they seek their own profit and
gain, and not Christ's profit. In sum then, if the Church make and ordeine
for us commandments drawn and taken from the word of god, it is our duty
to receive them, and to yield our selves obedient thereto: otherwise not. For
it is not the Churches duty to go beyond the bounds of Gods word, in making
laws of her own head and authority, and inuenting new fashions and manners to
serve God by. And the rule of our obedience ought always to be the very self
same word of God: as Cornelius said unto Saint Peter. Acts. 10.33.
Now are we al here present before God, to hear all things which are
commanded thee of God.

The fourth reason, we must obey the voice of the Church, Mat. 18.17. Luke.
10.16.
as we have a commandment given us therefore in these places, Mat. 18. Luke
10. But the laws and commandments of the church, are the churches voice,
wherefore it follows that we must obey the laws and co^mandeme^ts of the
church.

I answer, as above is answered, that we must obey the voice of the
Church, when it comes out of Moses chair and seat: that is to say, when
her commandments shall be taken and set from the word of God: and when also
the question shall be of things indifferent, which she shall ordeine and
establish, to keep good order, and to serve for edification, and the
maintenance and upholding of the discipline: For in the things which are
contrary to Gods word, and in those also which of them selves are
indifferent, but yet become and made evil through superstition, to wit,
because that in them, they would place the service of God, and that they would
think by them, to deserve Gods grace, and the forgiveness of sins, in these
things I say, we ought not at any hand to obey, Acts. 4.19. 5.29.
but in such commandments of the Church, we ought to say, that it is better
to obey God then men.

The fifth reason: Ester. 9.26. 27
As in Ester it was ordained, that besides the feasts commanded in the law,
they should celebrate every year the feast of lottes, which was called,
Purim: 1. Macha. 4.59.
and in the history of the Machabees, the feast of the dedication, called in
Greek by Saint John, John. 10.22.
Encaenia: So the Christian church may well at this day ordeine feasts, as
shall seem unto her to be expedient and profitable for the glory of God, and
the edification of the people: as it has in time heretofore ordained the
feasts and holy days of saint Peter, of saint Anthony, of saint Marcellus,
of saint Margaret, and all the rest.

I answer, that there is no likeness at all, between the feasts of Purim,
or lots, and of the dedication, and these of saint Peter, saint Anthony, and
such others. I deny not, but that those two first, were in former time
established by the church, besides the feasts ordained in the law: but let us
mark I pray you, how, and to what end. Certainly this was for the glory of
God, and to bring to their remembrance his great benefices, toward his
church, that they also might give him thanks therefore. For in Ester it is
said, that the feast of Purim, or lottes, was ordained by the church, for
remembrance of this, that the people was delivered from the cursed conspiracy
of Haman. And Judas Machabeus, with the consent of the whole church ordained,
the feast of the dedication, otherwise called Encaenia, in remembrance of the
deliverance of the people, and of the repairing, and hallowing again, as it
were, of the Temple, which had been polluted by Antiochus. And we deny not
but that Synodes, may ordein certain days, and solemnly keep them, to the
end that the people may cease from their own works, to fast, to pray unto God,
and to yield him thanks, according as things shall fall out, and occasion be
ministered, so that it be don without superstition, idolatry, or evil example.
But how can we, by the examples of the two feasts aforesaid, approve or
allow the feasts of the Papacy or Popedom? First they were but two only.
But in the Popedom, there is an infinite number. For what measure did they ever
keep in the number thereof? Secondly, the two above spoken of, were instituted
to the name of God, and at no hand to the name of any dead Saints. But these
are ordained to the name of creatures, and not to the name of God, as we hear,
they call them, the feasts of S. Anthony, of S. Frauncis, of Saint Vincent, of
Saint Sebastian, of Saint Agathon, of the virgin Mary, and so of others.

Thirdly, those had their foundation and beginning for the service of God, and
always served to edification, for they were established and appointed (as has
been said) to thank God, and to give him praise, for the benefits which he
had bestowed upon his Church. These had no foundation or beginning, but in
superstition and idolatry, and serve to no other purpose or matter, either
more or less, than the feasts and holy days of the Paganes and Ethnickes.
For wherefore is it, that the Papists give the names of Saints to their
feastiuall days, but because they mean, to sanctify the said feasts, in
the honor of those Saints (as they call them) whose name they bear? And in
so doing, do they not set up the Saints in Gods place, because they serve and
give that honor unto the^, which apperteineth to him alone, as in old time
the Paganes did in the celebration of their feasts and divine services?

These are the principal reasons upon which the Romish Catholics ground
them selves, thereby to prove, that it belongs to the Church, to make laws
to tie men's consciences withal. Now it remains, that we show and set
down our reasons, to prove the contrary.

The first is this: It is written in Isaiah: Isaiah. 33.22
The Lord is our Judge: the Lord is our law giver: the Lord is our King. Iam.
4. 12.
And in Saint James. There is one law giver which is able to save and destroy:
whereby it is very clearly seen, that it belongs to God alone, to make
Ecclesiastical laws, apperteining to his service.

The second reason: There is none but God alone, that can institute and ordeine
a lawful service, which may be agreeable to himself, and acceptable in his
sight, for this cause he him self says: Deuteronomy. 12. 8.32.
Ye shall not do after all these things, that ye do here this day: that
is, every man whatsoever seems good in his own eyes: but whatsoever I
command you, take heed ye do it: thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take
ought therefrom. And in Jeremiah. Ier. 7.22. 23
I spoke not (says he) unto your fathers, nor commanded them when I brought
them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices: but
this thing I commanded them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and
ye shall be my people, and walk ye in all the ways which I have commanded
you, that it may be well unto you. He says also by his Prophet Samuel: 1.
Sam. 15.22.
Think thou, that the Lord has as great pleasure in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as when his voice is obeyed? Behold to obey, is better than
sacrifice: and to hearken, is better then the fat of Rams. We may read,
many such or the like sentences, but specially this is notable and excellent,
that the sons of Aaron were horribly burned and consumed with the fire which
was sent out from the Lord, Leuit. 10.1. etc.
because they offered strange fire, and which in deed, was not commanded
them. But we add, that the laws which concern doctrine, and by which men's
consciences are tied, apperteine to the service of God. And therefore it
follows, that there is none but God alone which can make and establish such
laws.

The third reason: Laws concerning doctrine, and such as bind men's
consciences, ought to be unto us a testimony and pledge, of the will of God:
But God alone by his word can give unto us this testimony, and at no hand or by
no means, men, as of them selves, Isaiah. 40.13 etc. Romans 11.34.
For who has instructed the spirit of the Lord? or was his Counselor, or
taught him? as the scripture says: It follows the^, that God alone, may make
and establish laws concerning doctrine, and which shall serve to bind men's
co^scie^ces.

The fourth reason: If it belong to the Church, to make laws concerning
doctrine, and the service of god, this must needs be, that she has received
the prerogative and authority, from God him self, for me^ have not here in
their life, any power so to do. But so it is, that the Church has not
received from God this prerogative and authority. For contrariwise, God has
expressly and plainly forbidden them, to join or add any thing to his law.
Deuteronomy. 4.2.12.32.
Wherefore it follows, that it does not apperteine to her, to make laws
touching doctrine and the service of God.

The fifth reason. It is necessary, that they which make laws should have
Lordship, rule and authority over the^, to whom they give those laws. But the
church has no Lordship, or rule, over the consciences of the faithful: 1. Pet.
5.3.
for S. Peter speaks with a loud voice and plainly, That the Pastors and
Bishops have not any Lordshippe over the Lords inheritance, that is to say,
over the faithful, of who^ the church is composed and made. 2. Cor. 1.4.
And S. Paul plainly protests: touching himself, that he has not any
dominion over the faith of the Corinthians.

Wherefore it follows, that the Church may not make or establish laws, to
bind the consciences of faithful people.

Mat. 15.9.
The sixth reason: The Lord says: In vain they worship me, teaching for
doctrine men's precepts and commandments: 1. Tim. 4.1. etc.
And S. Paul calls laws and traditions, touching forbidding of marriage, and
use of meats, the doctrine of Devils. Collos. 2.16.18.
Also he says: Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect of
an holy day, etc. Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you, by humblenes
of mind, and worshipping of Angels. By these sentences, it is most plain and
evident, that the Church ought not, nor may not establish any such laws, to
bind, tie, or restrain men's consciences.

The seventh reason. The laws which take away from us, that Christian liberty
which Christ has gotten and purchased for us, ought not in any case to be
established or tolerated. For S. Paul exhorts us, Galat. 5.1.
to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and that we
should not be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. But the laws given by
men and not from God him self, touching matters, which are commended unto us,
with an opinion of necessity, and which are required of us, as works
meritorious, or as the service of God, take away from us the christian liberty
and freedom which Christ has purchased for us: of this sort are the laws
made, touching the observation and keeping of lent, celebration or keeping holy
of certain feasts, not to eat flesh, upon Friday, Saturday, and certain other
days: and such like things. Wherefore it follows, that such laws ought not
in any case to be established, set up, tolerated, or borne withal.

But we will make or put an end to this Chapter, with two sentences which make
altogether for us, Tho. Aquin. in summa. part. 3. in additio. 46. Artic. 6.
and are altogether against the Romish Catholics. The one is Thomas of Aquine
his own, saying thus. Because that the church is founded already and grounded
in the faith and in the Sacraments, it does not belong to the Ministers of the
Church, to make new Articles of faith, or new Sacraments, or to take away
those which are already made and established. For this is the excellency and
power, which belongs only unto Jesus Christ, who is the fou^datio^ of the
church. The other se^te^ce is of Alpho^sus de Castro his own containing these
words. Alphons. de Cast. aduersus omnes bareses, lib. 1. Cap. 8.
It may not at any hand be either done or suffered, that the church should
establish a new article of faith: but that which was in former time the true
faith, and which notwithstanding was hidden from us, the Church brings to
pass by her testimony and witness, that the same is made known unto us, And
the Abbot, is very much deceived in the decretals, expounding the Chapter,
which begins Cum Christus, that is, when Christ etc. in the title of
Heretics, when he says, That the pope may make new articles of faith. He
knew not, nor understood not what it was which he spoke, and therefore erred
and was deceived, as a Shoemaker should be, if he would take upon him some
matter over and besides his occupation.

The sixteenth Chapter. Of the afflictions and persecutions of the Church.
THere are diverse which would feign have a Church of sugar, or of velvet (as
you would say) that is to say, that in serving God they might be exempted, from
all afflictions: Such were Zebedeus his sons, James and John, who being
covetous and greedy of worldly honors, and desiring to live at their case and
rest, Mark. 10.35. etc.
demanded of Jesus Christ, That he would grant unto them to sit in his
glory, the one at his right hand, and the other at his left. But the
scripture teaches us altogether the contrary, that is to say, that so long as
we have to walk here below, it stands us in hand to battle or fight, yea to
pass through the thorns, and to be tormented by the malice of the Devil, and
wicked men his instruments: yea, so much the more, by how much we shall
endeavor and labor, sincerely to serve God. Which thing also Jesus Christ has
well and sufficiently declared, to the abouesaid sons of Zebedeus, when he
answered them: Mark. 10. 38.
Ye know not what ye ask. Can ye drink of the Cup, that I shall drink of,
and be baptized with the baptism, wherewith I shall be baptized? Meaning thereby,
that the common state and condition of Christians is this, that they should be
exercised in this world, by the cross and tribulations, before that they can
be crowned. And this is the cause, wherefore the church is called militant or
warfaring, so long as it is here below on the earth, eue^ as we have seen and
heard in the first Chapter.

And for this very self same cause also, Mark. 4.36. etc.
it is compared to a little ship, altogether tossed up and down, in the midst
of the bellows or surges, and of the tempests of the sea: also, to ground
continually ploughed over, Psalm. 129.3.
and through which men make the plough, continually to go, to rent or cleave
it, and to turn it vpside down. Therefore also S. Paul says in the Acts: Act.
14.22.
That by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. And in 2.
Epistle to Tim. All those that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
shall suffer persecution. Jesus Christ says also unto his Disciples: John.
15.20.
Remember the word that I said unto you, that the servant is not greater than
his master, If they have persecuted me, John. 16.1.2.
they will persecute you also. Also. These things have I said unto you, that ye
should not be offended. They shall excommunicate you: yea, the time shall come,
that whosoever kills you, will think, that he does God service. And this is
the state and condition, wherein God will have his Church to glorify him, here
below on the earth. And in deed, the first lesson that Jesus Christ gave to
his Disciples, was touching this matter of the Cross and persecutions: If any
man (says he) will come after me, Matthew. 16.24
let him forsake him self, and take up his Cross and follow me.

The experience of all times and ages, does sufficiently show unto us the truth
of this matter: whether we consider somewhat narrowly, as well the estate of the
ancient Church under the old Testament, as the state of that which came
afterward under the new Testament, insomuch that it may rightly say: Psalm.
129.1.
They have often afflicted me from my youth, and have done me a thousand
evils, as is said in the Psalms. For even from the beginning the Devil has
always been like to himself, that is to say, a lier, a murderer, John. 8.44.
envious, and a false and privy accuser, and war has always continued,
between the womans seed, and the Serpents seed. And how can any man join and
put together things which are of a contrary nature? Gene. 3.15. 2. Cor.
6.14.15.
How can any man make agreement between God and the Devil, between Christ
and Belial, between the faithful and the unbelievers.

Jesus Christ in the third Cap. of S. John, shows a reason, to declare why it
is impossible, that the good and the wicked should suffer one with another, and
agree together: John. 3.19.20.
to wit, That all the works which the world does are wicked, and therefore,
lest they should be discovered and laid open by the light, it hates the
light, and loves darkness. From hence is it, that even from the beginning of
the world enimites between the faithful, and the adversaries of the truth,
have taken and had their original and first foundation. This is the cause why
Cain slew his brother Abell: that Lot the faithful servant of the Lord, was
hated of the Sodomites, that Ishmael mocked Isaac, and persecuted him: that
Esaw went about to oppress and kill Jacob, even from his youth: that Joseph
had his own brethren for his enemies: that the Prophets could not agree with
the wicked Kings: nor S. John Baptist, with the incestuous Herod, nor Jesus
Christ with the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, nor the Apostles and
Martyrs, with the infideles and unbelievers of their times. And therefore it is
mere folly, to suppose and think, that the children of God, can ever be
beloved of the world. Whereupon by good right, and for good cause, S. James
says, That the amity of the world, James. 4.4.
is the enimitie of God. and he that will be a friend of the world, makes
himself the enemy of God. John. 15.19.
And for this cause also, Jesus Christ has said to his Disciples: If ye were
of this world, the world would love his own, but because ye are not of
this world, but I have chosen and separated you out of this world, therefore
the world hates you. To be short, if we would, that the Church of God,
should be without persecution, then of necessity must it be, that the world
should be without hatred, the Devil without envy, and our nature without
vice or sin.

But to the end that we may specify and declare certain things, A
discourse of the ten great persecutions of the Church.
touching the persecutions of the Church, let us examine, as it were one by
one, the ten persecutions, which came upon it, after the death of Jesus Christ,
under the Emperors, whereof the Ecclesiastical history makes mention.

True it is, that in the time of Augustus the second Emperor, the church was
much persecuted under the great Herod, who thinking to put to death the King
of the Jews, in the very cradle, commanded men to slaie all the babes and
little children of Bethlehem, and of all the borders thereof, from two years
old and under.

Also under Tiberius, the third Emperor, by Herod Antipas, the Tetrarch of
Galilee (who was the son of the first Herod) who took away his brother
Phillips wife, and put to death John Baptist, because he reproved him for
that sin and offense. And by Pilate also, who condemned and caused to be put
to death on the Cross Jesus Christ, the high Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and
Elders of the people, being the principal blowers of the fire, and chief
persecutors.

Moreover, under Caius Caligula, that horrible monster, who was appointed the
fourth Emperor, in the nine and thirtieth year after Christ's birth, and
reigned three years, ten months and eight days: and under Claudius also,
his successor. And it appears by the history of the Acts, and the Epistles
of the Apostles, how the churches were tossed and persecuted, in Asia,
Antiochia, Pisidia, Iconium, Lystra, Galatia, Ephesus, Macedonia, Philippi,
Thessalonia, Corinthus, Berrhoe, Rome, and many other places, but all these
persecutions, were as yet particular, and but in some one place or other, God
moderating and mitigating the hearts and hands of men, and governing after a
wonderful sort his Church in those Emperors days, to the end it might
more blessedly and plentifully grow. But omitting these, let us speak of the
ten great and general persecutions, as they are called, by which the Church
was eagerly assaulted, and cruely tormented on all sides.

The first persecution was under Nero, the sixth Emperor, who was called
Claudius Domitius Nero. He was ordained Emperor, in the year 57. after the
birth of Christ, and reigned xiiii years, seven months, and certain days.
And some say that the five first years he was a good man, but that afterward
he so disordered himself, and fell into such excess by incests, murders,
and all manner of wickednesses, that hardly there is as yet any other Emperor
to be found, who was defiled with such filthinesses.

Tertullian rehearses in his Apologetico, that this Emperor was the first
persecutor of the Church. Tertul. Apolog. Cap. 5.
Look (says he) into your histories and registers, and you shall find, that
Nero was the first, which exercised cruelty, against the christians, which
were under the Emperors authority, and principalie against the church which
was established at Rome. Corn. Tacitus lib. 15.
And Cornelius Tacitus declares, that the ocasio^ which Nero took to persecute
the church for, was this, that he comanded secretly to set on fire the city
of Rome, that he might see some form or image as it were, which might
represent and set out unto him the fire of Troy. And so the fire continued in
the City six days space, which made such a destruction, that he became
hereby very odious among the people. And seeing that he could not put out this
hatred, and waiting of him to do him some mischief for all the good turns
which he could do to the people, he found out this devise to sow abroad this
brute, rumor and report, that it was the Christians, who had been the blowers
of that fire, and the authors of that destruction, and from that time forward,
he began to persecute them, and to put them to death, both because they were
(as he said) the blowers of that fire, and also because they were enemies of
all mankind, by reason of that confession which they made of the name of
Christ. And to make them to die, his vpholders put upon their backs the
skins of wild beasts, that they might be torn and rent (if it were possible)
in pieces with dogs, where also they crucified them and burned the^ al alive:
and although the day failed the^, yet they burned them, that they might thereby
give light to the night. This first persecution began about the year of Christ
66. the x. year of Nero his reign and lasted 4. years and somewhat more,
until the death of that tyrant. Some say, and Eusebius amongst those recites
it, that this Nero, about the end of his days or reign caused S. Peter, and
S. Paul to be put to death.

The 2. persecution was under Domitian the xii. Emperor who was appointed
Emperor, in the year of Christ 83. and reigned xv. years, and vi. months.
He was so lifted up in cruelty and pride that he would have his subjects call
him God and Lord, and caused images of his own person to be made of gold and
silver. He ordained (as his father Vespasia^ had done before him) that inquiry
should be made against the race of David, and that they which were found to be
thereof, should be put to death, for he feared the coming of Christ, and about
the 14. year of his reign, and the year of Christ 97. he caused by an Edict
to be published, and proclaimed a cruel persecution against the Christians,
insomuche that the Church was miserably and a long time tormented under him.

The third persecution, was in the days of Traian, the fourteenth Emperor,
who was appointed Emperor about the year of Christ 100. who governed the
Empire nienteene years, six months, and fifteen days. He is greatly
praised of the Historiographers, as a courteous and gentle Prince: and some say
that he was so renowned and famous, by reason of his justice, and courtesy,
that ever after so often as any was created Emperor, the people yielded this
blessed exclamation, outcrie, and consent: Be he more happy then Augustus,
and better then Traian, yet notwithstanding he persecuted the Church, and mark
the occasion that he took so to do. He was brought up from his infancy, in
the Paganish and Heathenish superstitions, by reason whereof he disdained and
despised christian religion, because that it was contrary to these
superstitions. Besides that, he had about him certain courtiers, which were
blowers of that fire in him and augmented that disdain and dispite in him:
insomuch that diverse Historiographers record, that he was not so much of his
own nature inclined to shed blood, as deceived and stirred up thereto, by his
councellers, and principally by the Pagane Priests, Freculph. lib. 2. Cap. 20.
who (as Freculphus witnesses) gave good store of silver to the governors,
and bribed freely, to the end that they would put the christians to death as
their deadly enemies. Some add, that the number of Christians, was very much
increased, whereupon many inconveniences might come to the Roman Empire, if
the danger were not prevented: which also was a cause that Traian was the more
inflamed and kindled against them, as also Sabellicus writes, Sabellicus.
that the great number of christians were more suspected of this Emperor, then
the religion. After this sort then did they accuse the christians of sedition
and blasphemy, and for these causes they were cruelly persecuted, insomuch as
it appears by that which Pliny the second has written, Plinius secund.
That publik commandments were sent from the Emperor, to the governors of
all the Provinces, by which every governor was enforced too persecute: and so
the persecution was spread abrod through out all the places of the Roman empire,
which at that time contained, not only Europe, but also a great part of Asia
and Africa: And the said persecution endured about fourteen years, but yet
in such order that in the beginning of the reign of Traian, it was some what
less sharp, but afterward it flamed out, and burst forth more and more.

Tertul. Apologi. Capt 2.
Now the said Pliny the second had at that time the government of a certain
Province, to wit, of Bethina, and as Tertullian says, he was appointed too
persecute the Christians, about the year of Christ 112. and of Traian the
xiiii. year. Wherefore he being astonished with the great number of martyrs,
which were every day put to death, did write a letter too the aforesaid
Emperor, to advertise him, or to give him to understand of that which was
done in his Province, and to have his advice and counsel touching that which
he was to do in time to come, to whom the Emperor made answer by another
letter, declaring unto him, and making him to understand his intent and
purpose. And because that in these letters, we may see on the one side, the
innocence of the faithful people, and on the other side the injustice of
tyrants, and because they do lively set out unto us the estate of the
Christians at this day, and the manners and customs of those which persecute
them, and may by this mean stand the age wherein we live in very good
steed, for instruction both of the one and the other, it shall be good and
expedient that we inregister them, and put them down. Here now follows
Pliny his letter, which he sent to the Emperor Traian, even as it is written
in his own book.

Sir, Pliny the second his letter to Traian.
I am accustomed to declare unto your Majesty all the affairs and matters
whereof I am in doubt. For who can better correct my dullness, or instruct mine
ignorance? I was never yet present, at the trials of Christians, and
proceedings against the^ and therefore I know not what informations, they put
in against the^, or for what cause they punish them. And I have been in great
doubt, to wit, whether there be any difference too be made of ages, or
whether those which be very young, do not in some thing differ from these,
which are more strong or whether we should pardon them which repent, or
whether this might stand a man in any steed that has been a Christian, to be
so no more. And although the name import no wickedness, yet I doubt whether
the wickednesses tied to the name ought to be punished or no. But behold, what
way and mean, I have hitherto held and taken, touching them which were accused
before me as christians: I have asked the^ whether they were christians,
threatening them to bring them to trial and examination: and if some
perseuered, I have decreed and appointed them to be lead to punishment for I
doubt not at all, that whatsoever it was, which they would confess, but that a
man ought to punish such stubbornness and indurate obstinacy. There have been
some lead with such a like kindled folly, and because they were Citizens of
Rome, I have decreed that they should be sent back again to Rome. In process
of time (as it commonly falls out) the mischief is spread abroad and diverse
kinds are come up. Some have published a little book, without the authors
name, containing the name of diverse which deny themselves to be christians, or
so to have been, I have made the^ call upon the Gods, I spoke first, and they
after me: and seeing that they offered wine and ince^se, to your image which I
caused too be brought thither, with the images of the Gods, and besides this
that they cursed christ, I have decreed to let the^ go at liberty, and
specially because some say, that those which are Christians in deed, cannot be
induced or drawn to this, for any force or violence, which you can do to
them. Some being disclosed by the accusers, have first confessed that they were
Christians, and immediately have denied that they were such, yea indeed that
they had bin christians, though they would not be so any more: othersome said,
that it was but little above iii. years since they were such, but that they
would be so no more: other some said that it was a longer time, yea some that
it was above xx. years. Al worshipped your image, and the pictures and images
of the Gods: these also cursed Christ.

Moreover, they affirmed, that this was the sum or chiefest either of their
fault or of their error, that they had a certain day appointed, wherein they
assembled themselves before day, and did sing altogether a song or Psalm unto
Christ, as unto God, and it of their own accord they bound themselves by an
oath, not to commit any offense: but it was done to this end, that they might
not commit any theftes, robberies, or adulteries, least they should break
their faith promised and given, and should deny that which was given them to
keep, and this being done they are accustomed to depart, every one about his
business, and afterward assemble themselves together again, to take their
refection in common, and one with another, and yet without doing any manner of
evil. Now then they ceased after my edict and proclamation, by which,
according to your decrees I have forbidden to keep any asse^blies or
co^uenticles. And so much the more have I supposed it to be necessary, to know
this, by the examination of 2. maidens, which some say, have served such people.
But I have not found any other thing, saving a certain perverse superstition,
and therefore putting of to be instructed therein, I have had my recourse to you.
(Sir) to have counsel thereof, for it seemed unto me that this was a matter meet
and worthy to be co^sulted of, principally, by reason of of the multitude and
great number of the^, which are in danger. For diverse of all conditions and
estates, old and young, men and women, are commonly in danger, and so will
be. For the contagion and infection of this superstition is spread abrod, not
only in Cities, but also in towns, villages, and fields, and it seems, that
it cannot or will be easily stayed and corrected: and verily, we perceive, that
they begin to frequent and repair to the Temples, whereunto they were not wont
to come, and that they give them selves to celebrating the divine services,
which were long time omitted, and that many beasts are sold, to be offered in
sacrifice, whereas heretofore, there were few buiers found. By this we may
easily conjecture, what a multitude of men may come to ame^dme^t, if we would
give the^ leisure to repent themselves. And this is the co^tents of Pliny his
letter to Traian: now follows the answer.

My friend Secundus, Traianus answer to Pliny.
thou have done that which thou ought to do, in the knowledge of the causes
of these me^ who have bin accused before these christians. For we can not
generally establishe and ordein any matter, which has as it were a certain
form.

Let there be no more informatio^s and inquires made of them, but if any accuse
the^ let them be punished yet so notwithstanding, that he which shall deny
that he is a Christian, and shall declare the same by effect, to wit in making
supplication and prayer to our Gods, although that in time heretofore he have
been suspected, do obtain pardon by this repentance. And as touching the
books which are published and set out without the autours name, they ought not
to have place, or to be accounted amongst crimes or faults, for that is a very
ill example, and also it has not bin begun in our time.

Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. Tertull. Apolo. Cap. 2.
Behold the two letters, whereof Eusebius makes mention in his Ecclesiastical
History, alleging Tertullian in his Apologetico. which Tertullia^ censuring
the Emperors answer, speaks after this manner. O sentence confused and
darkened by necessity, which decrees that inquiry shall not be made of them,
because they seem innocent people, and yet in the mean while commands that
they should be punished as culpable and guilty. It uses pardon and cruelty,
it disse^bleth and punishes. Wherefore O Emperor do thou abuse thy self, in
thy charge and Censure. If thou condemn Christians, why do thou not make
and put in also informations against them? Or if thou make and put in no
informations, Wherefore do thou condemn them.

The fourth persecution was under Marcus Antonius verus, the xvi. Emperor, who
was created in the year of Christ 162. He is otherwise called of the
Historiographers Marcus Aurelius Verus, and surnamed the Philosopher. He
governed the Empire the space of xviii. or xix. years. His virtues were great
and wonderful, yet the true virtue was wanting in him, to wit, the fear of
God. For look by how much more he was gentle toward his own, by so much he
was the more rude and severe against the Christians, as a Stoicall man, and
nourished and brought up from his infancy, with the Priests of Satia, his
laws and edicts declare how cruel he was toward the Christians. For in
the book of digestes we find such a writing or law that he made: that those
which would do any thing against the religion of their Ancestors, should
be banished and sent into the Isles.

Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 62.
Eusebius recites certain things taken out of the Apology of Melitus, the
bishop of Sardis, amongst which is this also to be showed that the faithful
people suffered persecution, by reason of some new Edictes, which were
published in Asia, wherewith the slaunderers making themselves strong were
provoked and stirred up, to pill and rob the faithful in every place
wheresoever they found them, and to steal away the goods of the poor
innocents.

Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1
The Epistle of the Martyrs of Vienna, and of Lions, Cities of France, sent to
the faithful people of Asia and Phrigia (of which Eusebius makes mention)
speaks of a writing or law of the Emperor sent too the governor of France,
by which he ordained, that they should put to death the christians,
perseuering and continuing in their confession, and that they should let the
other go, which would abjure, forswere and forsake the same.

As touching the crimes and faults, whereof the Christians were accused, the
foresaid Epistle recites that the Pagans provoked, yea, constrained them to
confess strange matters: and behold what it says. Some were found amongst
us, which were weak, who being vanquished by Satan, and very much fearing
torments, which they saw the Saints suffer and abide, being also pushed on
by the soldiers, have alleged against us that in our bankettes, we should
eat the flesh of little children, as was used in Thiests his banquet, and that
we commit whoredoms and hortible incests, like Oedipus, and other things
which are not lawefull for us to name, yea and that so execrable and
abominable, that it is not possible to think that men should ever have
committed such acts.

And as concerning the torments, the self same Epistle rehearses them. That
the Christians were spied and watched both within their houses and without:
that men cried out against them in all public, and open places: that they did
beat and whip them, draw them up and down, stoned them, pilled, and took
away their goods, and imprisoned them: that they applied and laid unto them
burning blades of iron that they shut them together in an instrument of torture
and torment even unto the fifth hole, that they put them into obscure and dark
dungeons, that they strangled them within the prison, that they cast them to
beasts that they put the^ with in cauldro^s of iron to burn them, that they
hanged them on Gibbets, that they cast them to bulls, which might pearse and
gore them with their horns, and such other like things.

The 5. persecution, was under Seuerus, xxi. Emperor, who was established in
the Empire in the year of Christ, 196. He reigned 18. years. The state of the
church was some what peaceable, from the time of the Emperor Commodus (who was
the xviii. Emperor and created about the year of Christ 182.) until Seuerus
came, who in the ix. year of his reign (which was after Eusebius account in
the year of Christ 205.) moved and stirred up a terrible persecution against
the christians, by the gouerners of the Provinces and countries. And some
think, that he was moved thereto, rather by the vices and faults, which the
furious common people, did very fasly and wrongfully lay to the Christians
charge, then to say that of himself he had his heart inflamed against them.

Tertullian who was in his time, says, Tertullian, ad scapul.
that he showed him self for a certain time, not only courteous, gentle, and
full of beneficence, liberality and good will, but also did openly resist the
rage of the people: yet Eusebius proves by diverse examples of the Martyrs,
that this Emperout was a terrible persecutor of the Church.

Touching the crimes falsely objected and alleged, against the Christians,
Tertul. ad Scapu. and in Apologes.
Tertullian recites diverse of them, saying: That they were accused of sedition
and treason: that they had blamed and spoken evil of the Emperor his honor:
that they were murderers, Church robbers, incestuous persons, killers of
infantes, which they did eat, the flesh being raw: that they committed
whordome without having respect with whom, after that they had put out the
candles, with which filthiness, the Gnostici, were in deed spotted. Also that
they worshipped the head of an Ass, in the steed of God: that they worshipped
the Sun: that they were in nothing profitable for others: that they were
enemies of mankind, and the greatest and chiefest crime that they laid against
them, or upon them, was this, that they despised the gods which other men
worshipped.

And touching the sorts and manners of torments, we may gather it out of that
which Eusebius has written of it: Eusebius.
that some were buffetted and beaten: other some beheaded, others burned:
others had boiling pitch powered, over all the members of their bodies, and so
they were by little and little burned and put to death: and besides all this,
that all their goods were pilled away, robbed, and confiscate.

The sixth persecution, was under Julius Maximianus, the xxvi. Emperor, who
succeeded Alexander, in the year of Christ, 237. and reigned only about three
years. He was a sheepeheard in his young age, but because he was a great and
mighty man, being a Soldier, he was created Emperor without any authority
of the Senate, but by the only good will and pleasure of the Soldiers and
warlike company. He being cruel, barbarous, and rude, moved great
persecution against the Christians, but namely and chieflly against the
Doctors, teachers, and governors of the Churches, supposing, that when these
men, who were (as it were) the pillars of Christian religion, should be
discomfited, the people would thereby be easily turned away. Eusebius says,
Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 28.
that this Emperor was not kindled and set on fire, to execute this cruelty:
but only for hatred which he bear, to Alexanders stock and house, wherein
there were many Christians: But he had not any great leisure or time to
exercise his cruelty: for before he had reigned three whole years, he was
slain of his soldiers, and with him his son, who was nineteen years old,
and their bodies were cast into the River.

The seventh persecution, was under the Emperor Decius, about the year of
Christ, 247. Eusebius recites, Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 39.
that this persecution was moved by Decius, because he meant evil, to
Philippus his Predecessor. And yet notwithstanding in an other place he
says, Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 41.
That Dionisius the Bishop of Alexandria, writ unto Fabianus, the Bishop of
Antioch, that his persecution was not moved or stirred up by the Emperor
Decius, but only confirmed by a certain ordinance and decree which he made,
after it had been a whole year before stirred up by the Pagans, who were
provoked thereunto by reason of a certain stir and uproar. But whatsoever
was the cause thereof, this is certain, it was a terrible and cruel
persecution, against the poor Christians, Nicepborus. li. 5. Cap. 29.
insomuch as Nicephorus says, That it was as easy a matter to count the sand
of the sea, as to number all them which suffered martyrdom, in this
persecution, and that not in one place, or two alone, but almost through all
the world.

And as touching the kinds of punishments, which they used against the
Christians, we may easily judge how diverse and many they were, by the extract
which Euse. has made, Eusebius.
out of Dionisius his writings, touching the Martyrs of Alexandria: for he
makes mention of boiling pitch, of stoning, of throwing or casting sharp
Reeds against their faces and eyes, of trayning them upon the pauementes of
the streets, of dashing or crushing them against the stones, of beating, and
whipping, of burning, of percing the inwardes or bowels, with pointed or sharp
percers, of cutting of heads, and of casting them down headlong from high
places. Saint Cyprian also recites, Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 25.
that certain were condemned to dig metal in the Mines. And Vincentius, in
his mirror or glass, Vincentius in specul.
adds the tearing of them a sunder with cords of iron, burning Lamps put
and set to the Martyrs sides, the rage of wild beasts, hanging, and
strangling, and an other sort of torture or torment, called Cheualet, when they
racked the^ in pieces with wild Horses. And besides all this, the persecutors
went so far astray, that they took away the christians goods, bringing and
leading the common people into the Christians houses, to pill and sack them,
as men are wont to do, in some mutiny, stir, or sedition, as we may behold in
the writing of Dionisius, sent to Fabianus, which says thus: That so long as
this persecution lasted, all the whole multitude of the faithful, were
enforced to flee into the Mountains, and into the wildernesses, and to wander
up and down, as vagabounds or straying people, whereof some dyed with hunger,
thirst, cold, and diverse sorts of sicknesses and diseases, other some were
devoured by wild beasts: other some, slain by thieves and robbers, and other
taken by the Barbarians, and led away as slaves.

The eight persecution, was under Licincius Valerian, and Galien his son, who
were created Emperors, about the year of Christ, 255. and reigned fifteen
years: Galien reigned together with his father, five or six years, and the
rest above. Eusebius. lib. 7. Cap. 10.
Eusebius records this of the foresaid Valerian: That in the beginning, he
was peaceable and quiet, toward the men of God, and guided by a very good
amiable, friendly, and loving affection: that he showed him self familiar
toward the faithful, and entreat them courteously and gently: that his
Court was full of Christian people, and became a Church of God, but that the
Master and Principal, of the Synagogue, of the Magiacens or Sorcerers of
Egypt, did afterward persuade him, to persecute and put to death the Saints,
who, as they said, let and hindered the Inchaunters, and their Inchauntmentes,
of which Valerian was an earnest lover: so under his authority, the Governors
of the provinces, did in every place execute a cruel persecution.

And the foresaid Eusebius, adds: Eusebius. lib. 7. Cap. 11.
that Dionisius writ these words, of the cruelty exercised in Alexandria:
This should be a thing superfluous and more than needed, to recite the names
of our Martyrs, seeing that the number is almost infinite, and there were
diverse which were unknown to me. But yet know this, that amongst them there
were of all sorts of people, men, women, young, old, mothers, daughters,
soldiers, handicraftes men, To be short, of all conditions, and of all ages.

As touching the names of torments, the Historiographers do rehearse them to
be diverse sorts: they reckon the whippe, wild beasts, fire, the sword,
tearing and renting a sunder of bodies, long keeping them in dark prisons,
where they made the Martyrs to wither and dry away with griefs and pininges:
forbidding any to go to visit them, laying to them flaming and burning rods of
iron to burn the^. Plummets or Balls of lead to kill the^, the drawinges with
Horses, blows with great staves, hurling them headlong into diverse tortures or
torments, named Cheualets, Bears and wild Bulls, rostinges upon Girdirons,
whot Ouens, banishments, violent taking away of goods, and besides certain
other torments.

The ninth persecution, was under Aurelian, who was created Emperor, in the
year of Christ. 273. and reigned six years. Vincentius in speculo.
Vincentius in his Mirror or Glass, lays out and rehearses at large, a
great many of the faithful, which he says, suffered Martyrdom under this
Emperor, and adds, that he caused them to be diligently sought out in
diverse places, and at the last put the^ to death in France and Italy: But by
the writings of other Authors worthy credit, it appears, that Aurelian
did nothing else, but think upon before hand, and devise this persecution, and
did not execute it. For Eutropius, Vopiscus, and Eusebius in his Chronicle,
have written, That after this Emperor had decreed the persecution, he was
sodeinlie very much astonished, with the destruction which would have come
thereof, and very quickly after he was slain. Eusebius. lib. 7. Cap. 30.
And Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history, speaks of him after this
manner. It is true that Aurelian was then such a one toward us, that is to
say, gentle, courteous, and a friend to Christians, but in the advancement,
grows and proceeding of his kingdom, he did somewhat estraunge himself from
us, insomuch that being already almost won by some cou^sellers, he moved
persecution against us, and great bruit or noise was thereof him amongst us.
Notwithstanding, even then when he was ready to persecute us, and had as it
were subscribed to the decree, which they were to publish against us, a certain
vengeance and wrath sent from God, sodeinly ouertooke him, which caused this
pernicious and hurtful cruelty to cease.

The tenth persecution, was under Dioclesian, and Maximianus Hercules.
Dioclesian was established Emperor, about the year of our Lord. 288. and
associating unto him Maximianus, in the government of the Empire, he reigned
twenty years.

Pomponius Laetus, in the abridgement of the Roman stories, recites, That
Dioclesian forgetting that he was a man, and naming him self the brother of
the Sun and the Moon, as though there had been in him some divine or
heavenly Majesty, made an edict and law, by which he commanded that they
should worship him as God, and that all without difference of what raze and
condition soever they were, should kiss his feet, and for this end, he had
shoes stuffed and beset with gold, and precious stones.

The selfsame Pomponius says also, That Maximianus was openly cruel, raging,
terrible to behold, without faith or trustiness.

Now this persecution, which they moved against the Christians, lasted ten
years, and was the greatest and cruellest of all.

Vincentius in specul. lib. 12. Cap. 2.
Vincentius in his Glass, speaks of a whole legion of Christians, called the
legion of Thebes in Egypt, which was all cut in pieces, because they would not
sacrifice to Idolles, as the Emperor had commanded. Vincen. in specul. lib.
12. Cap. 136


He says also, that at Trieres (which is a City situated by the River
Mosella) one Rictionarius exercised so great cruelty, that the Rivers were
red with the blood of the Christians that were slain: and besides, that he
sent Posts up and down, hither and thither, with decrees and express
commissio^s, to this end, that in whatsoever place any Christian was found,
they should presently put him to death, Sabellie.


Sabellicus recites, That in the City of Alexandria, Peter the Bishop of
the said place was beheaded, besides more than three hundred other.

Henry of Erforde, Henric. Erford.
makes mention of Gereon, Bishop of Colen, who as he says, was also
beheaded, with three hundred and eighteen companions.

Otto of Phrysingia, reheatseth, Otto Phrysing. lib. 3. Cap. 41.
that Mauricius, a conductour or Captain of a christian legio^ was slain, and
with him, 1666. persons of his own people: and that Victor was put to death in
the city of Troy (which is now called Panthus) with 366. of his companions or
fellows.

Chroni. Martin.
The Chronicle of Martin, and the book which is entitled Fasiculus temporu^,
Fasicul. tempor.
do witness, that so many Christians as were in England, were all put to
death.

Eusebius. lib. 8. ca. 3.
Eusebius says, That by the Edictes of these Emperors, commandment was
given, that the Temples should be rased and pulled down to the ground, the
holy scriptures burned, and all Christians perseuering in their religion made
infamous, and deprived of all their liberties, and of all their offices and
dignities. Also that all Prelates, Bishops, and Pastors, should be in
every place straightly imprisoned, and afterward with all cruelty
constrained and enforced to sacrifice to Idolles, otherwise that they should be
put to to death.

Eusebius. lib. 8. Cap. 11.
He says also, that the Emperor having sent certain commandments, to a
certain City of Phrigia, the commandments tending to this end, that the
inhabitauntes should offer sacrifices to the Gods, and should worship their
Images, they not minding to obey being all Christians, yea even the
Magistrate, the Treasurer, and the Captain, the City was besieged, and all
it, with all the people therein, were burned together.

Nicephorus writes, Nicepho. lib. 7. Cap. 6.
That in one City, at once, there were burned in one temple, on Christ's birth
day, twenty thousand persons, by the commandment of Maximianus.

To be short, the persecution was in every place so cruel and so sharp,
that the christian faith was almost extinguished and put out, as well in the
East by Dioclesian, as in the the West, by Maximianus.

And as concerning the fashions and manner of torments, they were sundry and
diverse, yea, and very strange. Eusebius lib. 8 Cap. 3.6.7.8.9
They did beat the Christians with rods, they racked them, they murdered
them, they burned them, they threw them by thousands into the depthe of the
sea, they cast them to wild Beasts as Leopardes, Bears, Lions, Bullockes and
Bulls, provoked against them by fires and sharp pricks or goades: they
hanged them on Gibbettes, they put them to death on Crosses, they tied them to
posts with their heads downwarde, they lifted them upon forkes, upon the which
they kept them alive, until famine and hunger caused them to dye: they
spoiled them all naked, and they tied them by one of their feet, and lifted
them up into the air, which was a cruel and vilainous spectacle, specially in
the women so cruelly handled: they tied them to branches and to trees, and
they made men bow down the strongest boughs, to draw and tear in sunder
the members of the poor faithful people, who were tied thereto: they beheaded
them: they choked them with smoke, which proceeded from a little fire: they
cut of their hands, their ears, and other members: they roasted them upon the
coals, not to the end to make them dye sodeinlie or quickly, but to torment
them more long: they pricked them under their nails, at their fingers ends
and toes, with Reeds and other sharp instruments: they powered upon them
boiling lead: they fleied them all alive, and afterward cast upon them
Vinagre and Salt, Sabellic. Eunead. 7. Cap. 8.
and so killed them most cruelly: In sum, there were so many Martyrs, so
many deaths, so many sorts of punishments in this general persecution, and
these so cruel, vilainous and horrible, that there is no tongue, which can
suffice to rehearse the same.

But above all this is to be noted, that this persecution (as Eusebius
recites) came through the just judgment of God, Eusebius. lib. 8. Cap. 1.
because that the Christians, abusing the liberty which God had given them to
serve him withal, became slow and sluggish full of hypocrisy and false shows
and dissembling, seditious, contentious persons, pursuing one an other, for
small injuries, and that through deadly hatred. The Bishops and Pastors,
inflamed with envy, hatred, and ill will, puffed up with ambition and pride,
having also rejected the rule of godliness and charity, lifted up them selves
one against an other, provoking and outragiously threatening one an other,
insomuch that they seemed rather to hold and possess, the seat of tyrants,
than of Prelates: an example certainly which ought very well to teach us, to
walk in humility, and in the fear of God, and to remain and abide united
and joined together one of us with an other, diligently keeping through the
band of peace, that spiritual unity (which God commands us,) if we will
live in tranquillity, and enjoy some rest here below, on the earth, in the
midst of a perverse and crooked generation.

And thus much touching the ten great and general persecutions of the
Church, as we have been able to gather them out of the Historiographers.

But as we have before noted, that before this the Church was persecuted, in
the time of the Emperors Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius: so we
have to mark, that in the time of other Emperors, who reigned between the
time, of whom we have spoken in the general persecutions, the faithful
people and Christians, did not so live at their ease, but that every day some
new assaults, were made against them, and laid upon them.

And after these Emperors, yet was not the Church in rest, but was afterward
almost every day, assaulted and tormented, as for example, under Galerius, a
cruel Tyrant. who increased the persecution begun by Dioclesian, and under
certain others.

Now this is to be noted, that from the first Bishop of Rome, unto Siluester
the first of that name (who was constituted and set up in the year of Christ.
314.) there were thirty and two Bishops of Rome, all them suffered
martyrdom. Since that time, the other Bishops of Rome, for the most part, yea
almost all, have duly governed and behaved themselves, in the execution of
their charge and offices, and in steed of the vow of martyrdom, which their
predecessors had, they have usurped another very trim haunte, they themselves
making themselves in steed of the Pagane Emperors, Tyrants and persecutors of
the Church But yet notwitstanding, there were also certain cruel. Emperors
under whom, Julian the Apostata.
or in whose days the Church suffered very much.

Julian the Apostata, about the year of Christ 363. reigned Emperor about
two years. He ordained that the Christians should not be received to
warfare, and that they should not have any temporal office, touching criminal
judgment, meaning thereby any authortie to judge, touching life and death,
saying (he in deed mocking them) that by their law it was forbidden to use the
sword. He made a law by which the goods of the Galilea^s (for so he called the
christians) should be co^fiscate saying, that Christ had commanded them
poverty. He ordained and set a certain punishmente by money upon them which
would not offer Sacrifice, and thereby found the mean to get and catch a
great some of money, and when the christians complained thereof, it belongs to
you (would he say) to suffer euilles, for your Galilean has so commanded
you. Socrates recites all this, Socrates. lib. 3. cap; 13. and 14. Valens.
in his Ecclesiastical history. lib. 3. Cap. 13. and 14.

Valens being created Emperor, about the year of Christ 366. reigned
fifteen year. He sent many Bishops, Elders, and Deacons into exile, and
caused them to be grievously tormented, and used great cruelty against the
Christian Church.

Touching which, we will note and put down a history meet to be remembered,
Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 18. Sozom. lib. 16.8.
which fell out about the year of Christ 380 whereof Socrates the
historiographer, and Sozomen. both make mention. There was (say they) in the
City of Edessa in Mesopo tamia, a temple of S. Thomas, whereto the Christians
did commonly come and wherein they had their ordinary asse^blies, which thing
the Emperor Valens seeing, and knowing that this multitude detested his
heresy, he gave the Provost of the City a blow with his hand, because he had
not given order to drive from thence the said Christians. Now this Provost
having received that blow, and being ready and at the point to execute the
Emperors commandment, against his will and affection, not willing also to
commit so great a murder against so great a multitude, secretly advertised
them and gave them intelligence to withdraw them selves that they might not be
found, but none would yield to his counsel, not fearing any threatening insomuch
that on the morrow all assembled themselves and meet together in the aforesaid
place, as they were accustomed. Then as the Provost of that City went with a
great company of soldiers to the said Temple, to put in execution the
Emperors commandment, a pore woman, holding a little child of hers by the
hand, made have to go to martyrdom with her brethren, and with the haste
which she made, she brake the ranckes and rows of the soldiers. Wherewith
the Provost being angry and much moved, caused the said woman to come unto
him, to whom he said O cursed woman, whither runnest thou so unorderly,
thither (says she) whither all the other make have to go. Do not thou
(says he) understand that the Provost goes thither to murder and kill all
those that he shall find there? I understood it (says she) very well, and
therefore I make have that I may be found with the^. And whither leadest thou
this little child, said he? The woman said, thither also, to the end that
he likewise may receive the crown of martyrdom. When the forsaide Provost
understood these things he marvelled at the courage and boldness, of the
Christians, and returned toward the Emperor, declating unto him, that al
were prepared and ready to endure and suffer death for their faith: and that
it was not reasonable or meet too put to death in so little time, so great a
multitude of people. By which word he persuaded Valens to moderat and stay
his wrath and so the aforesaid faithful people of Edessa escaped death.
Notwithstanding it is said in another place, that they were afterward
thrown out of the City and sent into banishment.

We might in deed easily bring forth in this place, many other examples of
persecutions under the Emperors, but then this discourse or Treatise would be
ouerlong. And also it is certain that the greatest persecutions have sithence
the abouenamed, fallen upon the poor Church, by them that pretended themselves
to be the gouerners thereof, who had on their side, worldly kings and Princes,
who also gave them all, and showed them all favor, as the histories of the
Martyrs, both in former ages, and also in our time, do yield sufficient
credit and witness thereof: so that it is not needful to insert or allege
in this place any examples thereof.

But touching this matter of the persecutions of the church, Points to be
marked touching the persecutions of the Church.
we have to observe and mark certain points.

The first reason is, that persecutions and afflictions come not without the
providence and appointment of God. To this end are to be referred these places,
Isaiah. 45.7.
I am the Lord that form the light, and create darkness. I make peace and
create evil, I the Lord do all these things, Amos. 3.6.
this is in Isaiah. And Amos says: Shall there be evil in a City, and the
Lord has not done it? And David, I should have been dumb, Psalm. 39.9.
and not have opened my mouth, because thou did it. So does S. Peter
conclude. 1. Pet. 4.19
Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls unto
him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator. Job. 1. 21.
Heereunto Job had regard also, when he said. The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord. And David saying (as I
have ere while alleged) I should have been dumb, Psalm. 39.9.
and not have opened my mouth, because thou did it. Also when he was reviled,
railed upon, and as it were cursed by Shimei, Suffer him (says he) to curse
David, 2 Samuel i6. 10
for he curses, eue^ because the Lord has bidden him curse David, who dare
the^ say, wherefore have thou done so? Here unto likewise Jesus Christ had
regard, when he said to Pilate. John. 9.12.
Thou could have no power at al against me, except it were given thee from
above.

Now this point or matter contains three arguments and reasons to comfort us
in the midst of our crosses and troubles. The first is, that we are not in or
under the power of fortune, or of men, but of God. The second, that God does
justly and for good causes afflict us: for as he is faithful and righteous in
all his works: so he does not send or lay upon us any affliction, Mat.
10.19.26.28. etc. Psalm. 33.4. 1. Cor. 10.13 Romans 8.28. Heb. 12.11. Psalm. 126.
throughout, -pecially, verse 5.6. John. 16.20. Luke 16.25.
but that which we have indeed deserved. The 3. that seeing the affliction we
suffer comes from god our father, it shall not ouerwhelme or overthrow us,
but shall turn to our great good, joy, and salvation. Now if the cross fall
not from our shoulders, so long as this life lasts god himself minding and
willing to have it so, let us remember that which is said of Lazarus and the
wicked rich man in S. Luke: Thou wicked man remember that thou in thy life time
receiuest thy pleasure, and likewise Lazarus pains. Now therefore he is
comforted and thou art tormented.

The second point is, wherefore god does rather aflict his church the^ other
people, as S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 4.17.
The time is come that iugdement must begin at the house of god. And there are
5. principal reasons or causes hereof. The first, because that by affliction,
God declares unto us, that he loves us, as he speaks thereof in the
Proverbs, Pro. 3.11.12 Heb. 12.5.6.
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Seco^darily, because it pleases God by
this means too discern us that are his children from infidels and hypocrites,
as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrwes declares the same in the xii.
Heb. 12.8. 1. Cor. 11.19
Chapter: and for this cause also Saint Paul said unto the Corinthians: There
must be heresies even among you, that they which are approved among you might
he known: Iam. 1.2. 3. 1. Pet. 1.7.
And Saint James, and Saint Peter do for this very cause, call the afflictions
of the faithful trials of their faith. Thirdly, because they which know the will
of their master and do it not, Luke. 12.47.
are less excuseable, yea shall be beaten with many stripes. Fourthly, because
it serves too set out the justice of God, to the end we should not think that
God winketh at the sins of his people.

Fifthly, because it serves also, to give example of instruction to the wicked:
for as Jesus Christ says: Luke. 23.31.
If they do these things to a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? And
Saint Peter: 1. Pet. 4. 17. etc.
If judgment (says he) first begin at us, what shall be the end of them
which obey not the Gospel of God. And if the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?

The third point, that the afflictions of the Church and faithful people,
are always moderated and kept in good measure by the hand of God himself: For
he has promised, that although he chaste^ his people yet he will not destroy
them for all that. Hitherto must be referred these places: When thou art in
tribulation, Deuteronomy. 430.31.
and all these things are come upon thee, at the last if thou return to the
Lord thy God, and be obedient unto his voice (for the Lord thy God is a
merciful God) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the
covenant of thy fathers, which he swear unto them: 2. Sam. 7.14 15.
I will be his father, and he shall be my son: and if he sin I will chasten him
with the rod of men, and with the Plagues of the children of men. But my mercy
shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I have put away
before thee. Isaiah. 48.9.10.
For my names sake will I defferre my wrath, and for my promise will I refrain
it from thee, that I cut thee not of. Behold I have fined thee, but not as
silver, I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, Jeremiah. 30
11.12.13.17.
I am with thee (says the Lord to Jacob) to save thee though I utterly
destroyed all the nations where I have scattered thee, yet will I not utterly
destroy thee, but I will correct thee by judgment and not utterly cut thee of.
Ezechil. 14.21.22.
For thus says the Lord, Thy bruising is incurable, and thy wound is
dolorous. There is none to judge thy cause, or to lay a plaster, there are no
medicines nor help for thee: but I will restore health unto thee, and I will
heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord etc. When I send upon Jerusalem my
four sore judgments (says the Lord) that is to say, Hosea. 5.15. Hosea.
6.1.2
the sword, and famine, and the noisome beast, and pestilence to destroy man
and beast out of it. Yet behold therein shall be left a remnant of them that
shall be carried away both sons and daughters, and ye shall be comforted, In
their afflictions they will seek me diligently, saying: Come and let us return
to the Lord, for he has spoiled, and he will heal us, he has wounded us,
and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us, 1. Corin. 10.13.
and in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.
There has no temptation taken you, but such as apperteineth to man: and God is
faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able, but
will even give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear it.

The fourth point, wherefore God does not send succor and aid to his Church,
so soon as it is afflicted. Certainly the cross is sometimes so weighty and
heavy upon our shoulders, that it seems to us that God sleeps, or else that
he has forgotten us: as we hear the complaints of Saints touching that matter
in the Scripture. How long will thou forget me O Lord, says David, Psalm.
13.1.
how long will thou hide thy face from me? And again, Up, why sleep thou O
Lord? Psalm. 44.23 24
awake he not far of for ever. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
forgettest our misery, and our affliction? And Habacu. O Lord, Haba. 1.2.13.
says he, How long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? even cry out unto thee
for violence, and thou will not help? Thou art of pure eyes and can not see
evil, thou can not behold wickedness: Wherefore do thou look upon the
tra^sgressors, and hold thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man, that
is more righteous then he? But God sleeps not at any hand even as it is said
in one of the Psalms, Psalm. 121.4.
Behold he that keeps Israel will neither slu^ber nor sleep: neither does he
forget us, as he himself assures us by his Prophet Isaiah, when he says.

Isaiah. 49 15
Can a woman forget her child? or will she not pity the fruit of her womb?
But though she should forget, yet will not I forget thee says the Lord. And in
deed God, does not at any time forget his mercy, no not in the midst of his
wrath and anger, Haba. 3.2. 1. Corin. 10.13.
neither does he suffer us to be tempted above our strength.

Wherefore then is it, that he does not send us succor and aid without
delay, thereby to deliver us from oppression? It is first and foremost, because
our sins are the cause thereof. Isayah. 59.1.2
Behold (says the Prophet) the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot
save: neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear. But your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hidden his face from
you, that he will not hear. Secondly, because that serves for the advancement
of God his glory, and for the augmenting and increase of our faith: as
appears by that which is written touching the sickness, and death of Lazarus,
John. 11.14.15.
the brother of Martha and Mary. This sickness, says Jesus Christ, is not to
death, but for the glory of God, that the son of God might be glorified
thereby: and after wards Lazarus is dead, (says he) and I am glad for your
sake that I was not there, that ye may believe. And to this last point is
referred that which S. Paul says, We received the sentence of death in our
selves, 2. Cor. 1.9.
because we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead.

The fifth point: that afflictions and dangers increase, even then when the
deliverance is nigh, examples hereof, are set out unto us in the scripture.
The Israelites were meruellously tormented in Egypt, Exodus 14. throughout.
all the while that they were kept captives and prisoners there: but they never
had so great an occasion to fear, neither were they at any time so pressed,
yea oppressed, as when God brought them out of their captivity and bondage, to
make them pass through the red Sea, and to guide them in the wilderness, as
we may see in the xiiii. Chapter of Exodus. 1. Sam. 27. 1. etc.
David before he came to the inioying of the kingdom which was promised him by
god, was constreined to depart out of the Country, and to seek a place of
refuge and comfort amongst the Philistines his enemies, yea in the Court of
king Achish. Where he found himself in extreme danger, Isaiah. 37. throughout.
yea more great then at any time before he had escaped. Then was the angel of
the Lord sent from him to remove the siege of Zenacherib from before the City
of Jerusalem, and so by that means to deliver king Ezekias, and the people
which were within, when for the great oppression thereof, they were held and
kept in so narrowly and short, that they were at the point or very nigh, to see
the City re^dred and delivered, Mark 6.47. etc.
to the Assyrians pity, and mercy. Jesus Christ did very well behold that his
disciples were in great danger in the ship, which was tossed to and fro, with
the outrage or violence of the winds and tempests, but yet notwithstanding, he
came not unto them to succor them, but about the 4. watch of the night.
Wherefore let us not loose our courage and stomach, in the midst of the greatest
persecutions and afflictions, which can come. For when all the means of help
and aid on men's side, or in respect of them, do fail us, and that it seems
that all were done with us, and that the church should be altogether worn out,
consumed and beaten down, even then will god perform his own work, he alone
succouring us, to the end, that unto him alone also, the glory of our
deliverance may be wholly and absolutely referred.

The sixth point, that God through his power, keeps and defends his church
against the violences and assaults of tyrants and persecutors, and delivers
the same out of their hands when time is therefore. Thereto tend and belong
these promises. The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2
Pet. 2.9.
and to reserve the unjust until the day of judgment to be punished. Psalm.
12.5.
For the oppression of the needy, and for the sighs of the poor. I will up
says the Lord, and will set at liberty him whom the wicked has snared. The
Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them, that fear him, and delivers
the^. Psalm. 34.7.17 19.20.22.
The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of al
their troubles. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them al. He keeps al his bones, not one of them is
broken. The Lord redeemeth the souls of his servants, and none that trust in
him shall perish. Psalm. 50.15 Psa. 9.14.15
Call upon me says the Lord, in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me. And again, Because he has loved me, therefore will
I deliver him, I will exalt him because he has known my name: He shall call
upon me and I will hear him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him,
and glorify him.

Psalm. 125.2.
As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his people, from
hence forth and for ever. Mat. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall not overcome it. Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom.

And we have many examples hereof in the Scripture: Exodus 14. throughout.
Dan. 3. Daniel. 6. throughout. Isaiah. 37- throughout. Acts 12.7, Acts. 5.19.
as when god brought the Israelites out of Egypt, by the Ministry of Moses,
when he delivered Daniel out of the Lions den, and Shadrach, Messiach, and
Abednego out of the burning flame and oven, when he delivered from death
Susanna, already condemned: when he set Jerusalem at liberty, when he brought
Saint Peter out of Prison, and the other Apostles by the ministry of an
angel. And at this day, although we see not angels visiblie round about us,
yet for all that we cease not by experience to feel Gods aid and succor,
and that after many sorts, yea extraordinary. We know also that which is
spoken in Zacharias, Zachari. 2.8.
to wit: He that touches you, shall touch the apple of mine eye says the
Lord. For in deed, Jesus Christ accou^teth the persecutions, which me^ bend
against his Church, as bente against his very own person, which appears
by the reproof that he gave Saint Paul, Act. 9.4.
saying, Saul, Saul, wherefore do thou persecute me? who would ever have
looked for such assistance and help, as God has bestowed upon his Church in
our time? were there at any time more furious and raging persecutions? was the
pride of the enemies of Gods Church ever greater? They spare not wisdom, nor
counsel, nor power, nor diligence, nor men, nor money, to the end that the
poor Church might be altogether cast down and made ruinous. But behold, the
prudencie, the counsel, the might and the wisdom of God, is far above all
that, which sets it self against his greatness, yea, he works
miraculouslie, by hidden, close, and secret means, insomuch that all the
height of the world, is confounded and overthrown. For as the wise man says:
Prou. 21.30.
There is no wisdom, neither understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. And
in an other place it is said: Psalm. 33.10. Job. 5.12.13.
The Lord breaks the counsel of the Heathen, and brings to naught the
devises of the people: the counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the
thoughts of his heart through out all ages. To be short, we see that the
Church has in time heretofore, been very aptly and fitly represented, Gene.
15.17.
by a lamp or firebrand shining in the midst of dark, or smoking Furnaise,
even as the vision thereof was given and showed to Abraham, whereof the reason
is assigned and showed, because God would not suffer, that his people should
be put out in the midst of darkness. Also by the burning bushe, which yet
consumed not: Exodus 3.2.
as Moses also saw the vision thereof. For as the bush, was kept safe and sound,
in the midst of the flame: so the Church has always been preserved, by and
through the presence of God, although the tyrants and wicked men have sought,
to set it on fire, and utterly to destroy it.

The seventh point: That the Church increases in the midst of persecutions.
This is seen from the time, wherein under the Emperors, the Church was
persecuted. For look by how much they enforced them selves, utterly to
extinguish and put out the truth, by so much the faithful ones were ready
and prepared to defend and maintain the same. In the Acts it is said, Act.
4.3.4.
That when the persecutors laid hands upon the Apostles, and had put them in
prison, many of them that had heard the word at their mouth, left not of for
all that to believe, but that the number of believers was increased, till it
came to be about five thousand persons: Also, Act. 11.19.20.21.
that they which were scattered abroad, because of the affliction that arose
about Steven, walked throughout till they came unto Phenice, and Cyprus, and
Antiochia, and that some of them which were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, when they
were come into Antiochia, spoke unto the Grecians, and preached the Lord
Jesus, and that the hand of the Lord was with them, so that a great number
believed, and turned unto the Lord. Saint Paul speaks after this manner unto
the Philippians. Philip. 1.12.13.14.
I would ye understood (brethren) that the things which have come unto me,
are turned rather to the furthering of the Gospel, so that my bands in Christ
are famous, throughout all the judgment hall, and in all other places:
Insomuch that many of the brethren in the Lord, are boldened through my
bands, and dare more frankly speak the word.

And this is that which David has prophesied touching Christ, when he said:
Be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. Psalm. 110.20 The Church compared
to a Palm tree, to Roses and to Lilies.
The state of the Church of God, is like unto the state of the Palm tree, and
like to the condition of Roses and Lilies. For even as the Palm tree, the more
it is laden and pressed down, the more it grows and stretches out or
spredeth his boughs, in length and breadth: so the Church the more she is
persecuted and afflicted, the more force, courage and liveliness she takes
to her self. Also as Roses and Lilies are accustomed to flourish among thorns:
so this is a common thing to the Church, to flourish and to increase in the
midst of persecutions. The Church compared to a Vine, or Vineyard.
Justinius compares the Church also to a Vine or Vineyard, when he speaks
thus, in a speech with Trypho^. They every day perceive (says he) that we
which believe in Christ, Justinius Martyr, de veritate Christiana religionis to
in. 2 page 224. lin 14.
cannot be astonished or amazed, by any man, or any manner of way, let them cut
of our heads, let them crucify us, let them cast us to wild beasts, let them
torment us, with fire, faggot, and any other torments: the more they do
torment us, the more does the number of Christians grow and increase: no
otherwise than when men priune and dress a Vine or Vineyard, they do it to
make it more fruitful and plentiful. For the Vine or Vinyard which God has
planted, and our Savior Jesus Christ, is his own people. These are in that
place almost Justinius his own words. And verily we learn by our own
experience, that so many cruel persecutions, murders and slaughters of the
Martyrs, have been as it were so many seals in our hearts, to seal therein
the holy Gospel of Christ: so that a good Doctor has very rightly said:
That the blood of the Martyrs, is the seed of the Church.

The eight point: What is the cause, for which the church is afflicted and
persecuted of the wicked. We may very well say, and rightly confess, that we
do justly deserve, by reason of the sins we have committed, to be afflicted by
God, and persecuted of the world. Leuit. 26.14.15. etc.
For we read in Leuiticus, how God threatens his people, to send upon them
war, plague, pestilence, famine, and other his rods, if they yield not them
selves obedient unto his commandments: Isaiah. 5.2.3. etc.
And in Isaiah, he speaks after this manner: Ye inhabitants of Jerusalem
(says he) and ye men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and my
Vineyarde: What, could I have done any more to my Vinyarde, that I have not
done unto it? I have hedged it, and gathered out the stones of it, and have
planted it with the best plants, and built a Tower in the midst thereof, and
made a Wine press therein, looking that it should bring forth Grapes, but in
steed of Grapes, it brings forth wild Grapes. And now I will tell you,
what I will do to my Vineyarde: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it
shall be eaten up: I will break the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down,
and I will lay it wast, Isaiah. 24.3.4.5.
etc. And again: The earth shall be clean emptied and utterly spoiled: the
earth shall lament and vade away: for the inhabitants thereof have transgressed
the laws, they have changed the ordinances, and have broken the everlasting
covenant. Therefore shall the curse devour the earth for the inhabitants
thereof have done wickedly: And therefore shall the inhabitants of the earth
burn, and few men shall be left therein: Ierem. 25.8.9. etc.
Also in Jeremiah: Because ye have not heard my words, behold I will send
and take to me all the families of the North, and Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babell my servant, and I will bring them against this land, and against the
inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and I will
destroy them, and make them an astonishment, an hissing, and a continual
desolation. In this place, Isaiah. 10.5.
the Lord calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant, as in an other place he calls
Saneherib, or Ashur, The rod of his wrath, because he serves him self with
Princes, tyrants, and wicked Magistrates, and uses them, that he may by them
punish the ungodliness and unthankfulness of his people. Isaiah. 59.2.
Wherefore Isaiah speaks excellently well: That our iniquities have made a
division, or separated between God and us. And therefore when we are
afflicted and persecuted, we ought to confess and acknowledge, that God by
that mean punish us, as we in deed have rightly deserved it.

Yet all this notwithstanding, we have to consider and weigh an other cause,
for which the world persecuteth us, which ought to be a great comfort unto
us, in the midst of our Cross and Martyrdom.

For in the first place, the world in persecuting us, looks not to our
sins, but to that religion which we make profession of, which religion in
deed the world rejects and persecuteth, because it knows not the Author
thereof, and because it is altogether contrary, to his manners, and perverse
and wicked orders of life and conversation: even as Jesus Christ has foretold
the same, and made his Disciples to see it, John. 3.19.20.
when he said unto them: This is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness, rather than light, because their deeds were
evil. For every man that evil does, hates the light, neither comes to
light, lest his deeds should be reproved: John. 15.20.21.
Also, if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. But all these
things will they do unto you, for my names sake, because they have not known
him that sent me. John. 17.14.
And again: Father, I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them,
because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world. Hereby we may
see, that the right and very cause of the persecutions of the church, is the
plain profession of the truth, righteousness, and word of God: as Saint
Paul says: That That all they which will live in the fear of God, or godly
in Christ Jesus, 2. Timo. 3.12
shall suffer persecution. And also, what should be our consolation and
comfort, in the midst of the Cross, if this point were not? Socrates.
The answer which Socrates made to his wife, was very apt and fit for the
purpose: she lamented because they put him to death wrongfully: but he being
somewhat moved, answered, That it was better for him to die an innocent and
without cause, than if he had offended. But how much greater matter, and just
cause have we, of comfort and joy, seeing we know that God of his
unspeakable gentleness, goodness, and mercy, burying all our sins, gives us
over, or leaves us but for a time, to suffer unjust persecutions, to the end
that we bearing the Cross with Jesus Christ, should communicate also and be
made partakers of glory with him? The punishment (Saint Augustine has said)
makes not a Martyr, but the cause. August.
And the Devil has as well his witnesses and Martyrs, as Jesus Christ has
his. In former times, there were Heretics, which bragged much and boasted
wonderously, under the shadow and color that men persecuted them: And at this
day the Anabaptists do in that behalf the very self same thing, yea, and
that so far, that by this means they account them selves blessed and happy.
Math. 5.10
But we must mark what the scripture says: Blessed are they (thus says
Jesus Christ) which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Luke 6.22.
Blessed are you when men hate you, and when they separate you and revile you,
and put out your names as evil, for the son of ma^s sake. If ye be rayled
upon for the name of Christ (says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 4.14.15.16.
) Blessed are ye: For the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, which
on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is glorified. But let none of
you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil dooer, or as a
covetous person of other men's goods, or as a busy body in other men's matters.
But if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God in this behalf. And this is the mark or badge, by which the
scripture discerns the Lords true Martyrs, from others that suffer. For the
wicked men and ungodly persons do in deed suffer persecution, but in the
mean season it so falls out, that they cannot bost them selves for all that
to be true Martyrs, neither by consequent, that they are blessed: for they
suffer not for righteousness sake, neither to maintein Gods truth, as do the
Martyrs and witnesses of Jesus Christ.

Moreover, we ought to mark, that our good God shows us great grace, and
aduaunceth us to singular honor, when he vouchsafes us meet and worthy to
suffer any thing for his names sake, when as, he might very justly (if he
would have pursued us with rigor, nay if he would have proceeded against us
by justice) have punished us, with all kinds and sorts of afflictions,
sending them to us, and laying the same upon us. wherein he deals with us, as
if a king should take from the Gibbet or Gallows some man, who had rightly
deserved to be bound thereto and hanged thereon, and yet would set and appoint
him, among the chief Capitaines of his orders, that he might go to war, and
employ him, for the maintenance and defense, of his Crown, and of his kingdom.
For who or what are we? poor worms of the earth, dwelling here in
filthiness and corruption, and infected with so many spots, as nothing more
than we: yea, we are abominable sinners, who have rightly deserved not only
by tyrants in this life, to be persecuted in our goods and bodies, but also
to be for ever lost, drowned, and swallowed up in the Devils possession in
hell: and yet notwithstanding, that God has vouchsaued us worthy of this
honor, to use our life and our death, to withstand his enemies, and to
maintain and advance his glory, by our Martyrdom. If we had but so much as
one drop of good judgment, and were pushed on forward, with as little right
zeal as may be, to serve our God, should not this kindle and inflame us, in a
singular and wonderful desire, to employ and bestow our selves in the
maintenance of his honor (whatsoever assaults should be set before us) and to
keep our selves strong and steadfast, in the midst of persecutions, that we
might suffer and abide the same courageously and cheerfully, for the name of
Christ.

The ninth point: What be the ends which God respects and regards, in the
persecutions and afflictions of his Church, and of his faithful people, whereof
we will mark and put down eight.

First, that the glory of God might be advanced. For it is said, Prou. 16.4.
The Lord has made all things for his own sake and glory: yea even the
wicked for the day of evil. When the Disciples asked Jesus Christ, touching him
that was born blind, saying, Master, John. 9.2.3.
who did sin, this man or his Parents, that he was born blind? Jesus
answered: Neither has this man sinned nor his Parents, but it is to this
end, that the works of God should be manifested in him, and showed on him.
Jesus Christ meant to teach thereby, that God does not always afflict men for
their sins, but to the end, that his glory may shine forth and be made
manifest, by the succor and comfort which he sends them. And this is the
same which he spoke also touching Lazarus: John. 11.4.
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of
God may be glorified thereby. And thereunto had Saint Paul respect and
regard, when he said to the Corinthians: We are afflicted on every side,
2. Cor. 4.8.9.15.
Yet are we not in distress: in poverty, but not overcome of poverty: we
are persecuted, but yet not forsaken: we are cast down, but yet we perish
not, for all things are for your sakes, that most plenteous grace by the
thanks giving of many, may redounde to the glory and praise of God.

Hebr. 12.8. Zacha. 13.9. Iam. 1.2.3. 1. Pet. 1.7.
2 That the faithful may be discerned, from the unfaithful and hypocrites, as
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, very well declares. And for this
cause, temptations and afflictions, are called in holy scripture, the trials
of faith.

3 That we might be humbled, and kept in our duties, the more earnestly to
serve GOD. Wherefore David said: Psa. 119.67.71.
Before I was afflicted, I went astraie, but now I keep thy word. It is good
for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. And Saint
Paul: 2. Cor. 12.7.
Lest I should be exalted out of measure, through the abundaunce of
revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me.

4 That our old man might be more and more beaten down, conquered and
mortified: for affliction serves to correct and amend the remnauntes of sin,
which are as yet in this our flesh. Wherefore Saint Paul said: 2. Cor. 4.16.
Therefore we fainte not by reason of our afflictions, says he, but though
our outward man perish or be corrupted, yet the inward man is renewed daily.

5 That we might be provoked to pray unto God, and pricked on forward to
return unto him. For in prosperity we easily forget him: Psalm. 78.34.
Hosea. 5.15. Hosea. 6.1.
When God slew them (says David) then they sought him, and they returned and
fought God early: And in Hosea: In their affliction they will seek me
diligently, saying: Come and let us return to the Lord: for he has
spoiled, but he will heal us: he has wounded us, but he will bind us up. We
know that men naturally, when they are at their ease and quiet, sleep
therein, and be as it were drunken therewith, insomuch that they seldom or
never acknowledge the Author of their prosperity: but being once afflicted
with sicknesses, or else tossed upon the sea, with tempest and storm, or else on
the land assaulted by thieves and robbers, or else straying and wa^dering through
wildernesses, and unknown countries, or else being persecuted, with some other
of Gods rods: then is it that every one runs and has his recourse to
GOD: whereunto nature it self thrusts them forward, they not going thither
to a right end, but this is also, to make them so much the more without
excuse. And touching the elect, the lord not minding to destroy the^, awaketh
them by this mean and way. Wherefore let us mark, that the Lord lays upon
us many necessities, miseries and afflictions (the deliverance from which, he
has reserved to him self) placing us therein, as it were in examination and
upon the rack, and torture to make us to confess that, which our
unthankfulness and malice would choke up, that is to say, that all our good,
joy, and prosperity, comes from him above, to whose fatherly goodness, it
is meet for us to resort by our supplications and prayers

6 That the Gospel might be advanced: for it flourishes in the midst of
persecution, as we have before showed in the seventh point to be marked in the
persecutions of the Church, spoken of a little before in this very Chapter.

7 That our patience and hope may be exercised. Romans 5. 3.4. 5
Wherefore Saint Paul says to the Romans: We rejoice in tribulations,
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

8 That we might so much the more willingly despise the world, and that we
(leaving without grief this life altogether full of miseries) might aspire
upward to heaven, where our City is, 2. Cor. 4.27.18.
to the place of our perpetual abode, So said Saint Paul: Our l^ght
afliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far most excellent and
eternal weight of glory: while we look not on the things which are seen, but
on the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen, are
temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

The tenth point: what issue or end the afflictions have in respect of the
faithful ones: It is certain that they turn and work to their good joy, and
salvation: as appears by these places following. It is good for me that I
have been aflicted, Psalm. 119.71 James. 1.12.
that I may learn thy statutes. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation:
for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. 1. Pet. 1.6.7.
Wherein ye rejoice, though now for a season (if need require) ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial of your faith, being
much more precious then gold (that perishes) though it be tried with fire)
might be found unto your praise and honor, and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 4.14.
If ye be rayled upon for the name of Christ, blessed are ye: for the
spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, which on their part is ill spoken
of, but on your part glorified. Mat. 5. 10.11 12.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men revile you, and persecute
you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely.

Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Roma. 8.28.
Al things work together for the best, unto them that love God, eue^ to the^
that are called according unto his unchangeable purpose. Phil. 2.27.
In nothing fear your adversaries which is to them a token of destruction, but
to you a token of salvation: and that of God. All the persecutions and
afflictions which ye suffer are a manifest token of the righteous judgment
of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.6.7.
that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the which ye also
suffer. For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense trybulation to them
that trouble you: and to you which are troubled, deliverance and rest with
us, When the Lord Jesus shall show him self from heaven, with his mighty
Angels.

This is a true saying, 2. Timo. 11.1^
That if we die with Christ, we shall also live with him, and if we suffer
with him, we shall also reign with him.

Now out of these places we gather a very great and singular comfort. An
exhortation to the faithful, patiently and courageously to bear their cross.
For in the first place, we know, that there is not any ignominy or shame,
in the persecutions and afflictions, which we suffer for Jesus Christ's sake,
but that they are a good and sweet smelling savor before GOD because he
approoueth and allows our obedience, when that by the Sacrifices of our
selves, we do most willinglye present and offer our selves unto him.

Moreover, our combat and fighting, shall not be without good hyre: for rest
and quietness is set out unto us in our pain and travel, and eternal life in
our death: of which it is written: Psalm. 116.15
Precious before the face of the Lord is the death of his Saints. And we are
well assured, that this our good god beholds from above our good will, and the
confession of his holy name which we make and yield, and that as he aideth our
strength and power, so also that he will crown our victory, and reward in
us, all that which he has given to us, and will honor that, which he
himself has begun and made perfect in us. In sum by these persecutions we
advance and thrust forward our selves to go to the true and eternal
dwelling places of the Martyrs, that we may there clearly behold God, and
that there we may be partakers of so excellent a glory, as all the afflictions
and sufferings of this present life (even as Saint Paul says) are not
worthy of. Romans 8.18. Isaiah. 6.4. 1. Cor. 2.9.
For the things which the eye has not seen, neither the ear has heard,
neither came into man's heart, are they which God has prepared for them that
love him. Wherefore let us not fear them which kill the body, Mat. 10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul, but let us rather fear him which is able
to to destroy both soul and body in Hell. Mat. 10.32.33.
Whosoever shall confess me before men (says Jesus Christ) him Will I
confess also before my father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven. He
that will save his life, shall loose it, Mat. 10.39.
and he that loses his life for my sake shall save it. Let us know and
understand this, that from the beginning of the world it has been thus
ordained and determined, that all which will live godly in Jesus Christ shall
suffer persecution: 2. Tim. 3.12
And that by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. For
at the beginning, the righteous Abell was slain and put to death, and after
him all the righteous persons, the Prophets and Apostles, sent by God: whereof
some were delivered and cast to wild beasts: others died in prison through
famine: others were hanged and strangled, others dug into earth, and buried
quick therein, others drowned, burned, beheaded, broken, and ground as it were
to pieces, dismembered, roasted, boiled, singed and sawed, flayed all alive,
stoned whipped, etc. And is there any which is able to describe and set out all
the torments, which the tyrants, as well under the old as under the new
testament, judged the Christians worthy of? Now the Lord Jesus has set out
unto us an example in himself, teaching us that none shall come to his
kingdom, but they which have followed him by his own way. Mat. 16.24.
Wherefore let us not be faint hearted for the persecutions and afflictions
which shall come unto us, but let us show our selves strong and constant, and
let us through a certain spiritual power and force, pursue and that even to
the end, the way into which we are entered. If the waves, billows, and surges
of the Sea of this world, lift up themselves and rise against us, to swallow
us up, and to ouerwhelme us: if our enemies in great companies and bands
compass us on every side, and assault us, Let us cry with the apostles, Mat.
8.25.
Master, or Lord save us, and he will deliver us out of al dangers. If death
fear us, let us remember that Jesus Christ in dying has brought this to pass
that death is not death unto us, but a very ready way to guide and lead us, to
life and eternal glory. If the world continue his assaults against us, yea
dubbleth them, and trebbleth them as you would say, Mat. 10.22. 2. Timo. 2.5.
let us call to our remembrance, that he Which endures unto the end shall be
saved, and if any man strive for a maistery, Mat. 28.20. Mat. 10.28. 2. Tim.
1.12. Psalm. 112.6.
he is not crowned except he strive, as he ought to do. The son of God, is
our protector and defender, who has promised us to be with us always eue^
until the worlds end. If we die for him and for his sake, he will keep our
souls: Pro. 10.7.
and that which we have committed unto him, shall be very sure in his hands, even
unto the last day. Psalm. 34.20.
He will keep the remembrance of us for ever, that it may not be any manner of
way fading away or darkened He will keep our bodies to the very bones
thereof, Job. 19.25.
against the day of the resurrection of al flesh. and will at the last crown
us with eternal life, which he himself has purchased for us by his own
blood. O death then, 1. Cor. 15.55.
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory.

Certainly, we have very much wherewith to comfort our selves by the
consideration of these things: and when we hear that Jesus Christ says
unto us: Luke. 9.23.
If any man will come after me, let him deny him self, and take up his cross
daily, and follow me. We ought to learn how and after what sort it behooves
us to bear afflictions.

For first by these words, Let him take up his cross, Jesus Christ means,
that we should willingly bow down our shoulders under the burden of the
cross, and should subject our selves, with a free heart and courage to bear
the same, yea that we should be glad and rejoice, if in this respect and
behalf we could yield and perform any service to God, Acts. 5.41. Romans 5. 3.
according to the example of the Apostles and the doctrine which they taught.
Secondly when he adds daily, he declares that we are never at the end of
our striving, until we depart out of this world: and therefore this is our
continual exercise, that when we shall have endured and suffered sundry
persecutions, we should prepare and dispose our selves, to suffer them
again, and other new beside them, knowing (as we have ere while alleged)
That he which shall continue to the end shall be saved.. Mat. 10.22.
Wherefore they abuse and deceive them selves who think that they have rightly
and duly discharged their duty, if they have stood fast in the time of one
persecution or of two: for it is not with the first flight, that we fly to the
joys of Paradise: and Jesus Christ commands us not any thing here which he
himself has not first of all showed us the way thereto, seeing that he was
not only under the cross, but that al his life was no other thing, then a
perpetual combat and striving against afflictions. 2. Corin. 11.14. etc.
And Saint Paul although he might have set out, his labors, his perils, his
prisonings, his beatings, his shipwrackes, and an infinite number of other
afflictions, notwithstanding, he said yet, That he was altogether ready to
suffer not only to be bound and put in prison, but also willingly, Acts.
20.23 24.
and without any grief to dye for Christ's cause. O how great is this honor to
give up our life for the name of God. They that are in the wages or
souldiership of some eathly Prince, make no great difficulty, to forsake their
own parents, and their goods, that they may go to his service: yea it
troubles them not much to hazard and give up their own lives, to maintain
his quarrel and cause, which very often is unjust and wicked: And shall we
which have such a Prince as Jesus Christ the son of God is, who died for us
poor and miserable sinners, shall we I say doubt to leave all things, yea to
adventure and yield up our own lives, to maintain his cause, and his quarrel,
which is so just and upright, specially seeing he has power to render and
give the same again unto us afterward.

Moreover, the meditation of the glory to come (as we have already touched the
same) ought to strengthen and encourage us in the midst of afflictions: as we
see Saint Paul fully resolved and settled himself thereupon, when he said
to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 4. 17.18.
Our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far most
excellent and an eternal weight of glory: While we look not on the things
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: For the things which
are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen, 2. Tim. 2.11 12.
are eternal. And to Timothy, It is a true saying: If we be dead with Christ,
we shall also live with him: if we suffer with him we shall also reign with
him. Do we think to have the crown of glory, without having first fought as
our great Captain did? Do we think to reign with the Prince of life on high
in heaven, without having first suffered and borne troubles with him in this
world? If men take the earth from us, let us look up to heaven, Acts. 7.55.56
which is open for us as it was to Saint Steeuen. If they put us to death, let
us look to Jesus Christ, who is our life, who also dyed and rose again, Romans
14.8.9
to the end that if we dye, we should dye unto him. that afterward we
may be raised up in glory, as he was. Phill. 3.21.
If our abject and base body be despised and dishonored let us look to the
glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, like unto which our bodies shall be
made in the last day.

To be short, if we weep and wail in this wonderful heap and sea of
miseries, 2. Cor. 5.1.
being in this world strangers, pilgrims, and passengers, let us remember,
that when we shall once come to our celestial and heavenly City, which we
now wait and hope for, then we shall rejoice with a joy which cannot be
comprehended, and that with God himself, and the holy angels, Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs: Reuela. 21.4
For the Lord will wipe away all tears from our eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain.
Then shall we feel the fruit of the cross and tribulation which we have
endured and suffered in this world. Then shall we know how much we be
blessed, Reave. 21.4.
that have suffered for Jesus Christ, and have made our robes white in the
blood of the Lamb. 1. John. 3.2. 1. Cor. 13.12
Then shall we behold God even as he is, and shall know him perfectly, as he
knows us, and we shall live and reign with him for ever. The Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, does by this meditation encourage the faithful, when
he said unto the^: Ye have bin partakers of the aflictions of my hands, Hebr.
10.34.35.
and suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods: knowing in your selves how
that ye have in heaven a better and enduring substance. Cast not away
therefore your confidence, which has great recompense and reward. But shall
we now think or suppose, that we loose our life, when we shall have
abandoned, forsaken, and as it were given up the same unto tyrants for gods
cause and matters? Mat. 5.12.
Shall we judge that we die upon imagination, and as it were foolish and
insensible mad people (as in deed the world supposes) seeing Jesus Christ
has promised us so great a reward and hyre in heaven? Shall we say that our
death is wicked and accursed when he himself by his sacred and holy Reave.
14.13.
mouth has pronounced the same blessed? or else that when we die for Christ
Jesus his name, we should be cursed when the holy Ghost pronounces us
blessed?

Wherefore let us not stay our selves in the judgment of the flesh, which is
so much blinded, that she sees not life in death, neither blessedness in
the curse: but let us behold with the eyes of our faith, the promises of God,
and be fully resolved of this, that the way and mean to make us conformeable
and like to our head Jesus Christ, is to carry and bear with patience our
cross after him. For as (Saint Paul says) We must suffer with Jesus
Christ, Romans 8. 17.
that we may also be glorified with him.

The eleventh point, what is the end which persecutors have had: Examples of
the punishments and vengeances of God, against the persecutors of the Church.
Experience teaches us, that there was yet never any tyrant with whom it went
well at the last, in banding and setting himself against God. And the holy
Scripture gives us also a faithful testimony and an assured witness
thereof, as also the Ecclesiastical history it self, God having wylled and
appointed that the issues and ends of the persecutors of his Church, should be
put in order and declared by writing for a testimony of his wrath and fury
against them: to the end, that the examples of his vengeance might be known
to them that came after, that thereby they might be bridled and kept in, and
not exercise cruelty against his faithful people, unless they would be most
severely and sharply punished, as their predecessors were: to the end also,
that Christians living holily, should be comforted in this, that their keeper
and defender is in heaven, who sees and knows al their oppressions, to take
vengeance thereof in time and place, as to himself seems good. Wherefore it
is necessary, that we show here some examples, touching the issue and end of
tyra^ts and persecutors of the children of God. And first of Pharaoh and of his
Egyptians, It is written that they pursuing the Israelites, were all
overwhelmed and drowned in the Sea: so that there remained not of them, Pharao.
Exodus 14.6.7.8.9.28. Saneherib. 2. Kin. 19.35
so much as one alone, although they were a very great number.

Zennacherib, and his Assyrians making war upon Israel did not less feel
by experience Gods revenging hand. For they being before Jerusalem, and
besiegeing it, it came to pass that the Angel of the Lord went forth, and
slew an hundred, fourscore and five thousand men of those that besieged it.
And as concerning Zennacherib himself he at that time escaped and went to
dwell at Nineveh, but as he worshipped in the temple of his idol he was slain
by his two sons Adramilech, and Sharezer.

Antiochus, what end had he, Antiochus. 2. Macha. 9.4
for all the oppressions and cruelties, which he exercised against the Jews?
After an infinite number of murders which he had committed, and that in his
pride, he had said, that he would make Jerusalem a common butcherie and burying
place of the Jews, the Lord God of Israel stroke him, with an innumerable and
invincible plague, so that a horrible grief took him in the bowels and
grievous torments within in his body: he notwithstanding ceased not for all
this from his malice, but having his heart kindled and set on fire against the
Jews, and hastening his journey to go to Jerusalem, there to execute his
purpose, it came to pass, that going over hastily and violently, he fell from
the Chariot, and hurt himself sore in the members and parts of his body, so
that all his body was bruised, and in the same body was so great corruption,
that worms issued and came out of it, and his flesh whilst he was alive,
fell of from the bones by peece-meale through pain and torment: insomuche that
his army being grieved, at the smell or stinch of his corruption, and
rottenness, and he himself also not being able any longer to endure the
same, died like a murderer and blasphemer, of a miserable death.

Herod the great.
Herod the great, after that he had committed many execrable and detestable
offenses against the innocent people, ended not his days, but that the
vengeance of God, was horribly and fearfully kindled against him. For he was
tormented with many and very cruel sicknesses, neither more nor less then if
he had had hangmen or tormentors always beating his body both within and
without, till that at the last he dyed of a violent and cruel death. And
behold here what Josephus has said thereof: Josephus. lib. 17. Cap. 8. de
antiquitat. Iudaeor.
The disease and sickness of the King increased, waxed more sharp, and God
manifestly and openly showed, that he punished him for his ungodliness, for he
was burned with a very slow heat, neither could any man perceive that heat
without, but he him self felt it within, because that it gnawed his entralles
and bowels. Moreover, he was so hungry, that he took no leisure to chewe
his meat, but devoured and swallowed up all that entered into his mouth, and
so they must cast meat continually into his throat. Besides this, he had his
inward parts full of sores, hurtes and biles, and was tormented with the
colicke of passion: he had his feet puffed up and swelled with a moist kind
of fleme: he had also his nose swelled. His privy parts and members, were
rotted and full of worms, and his breath was very stinking, insomuch that
none durst come nigh him. Besides all this, he had a certain shrincking or
drawing together of the sinews, and he had much ado to take breath. Wherefore
all they, who made profession to device and foretell things to come, were of
one and the self same opinion, and resolved all upon this, that this was a
very punishment and vengeance sent from God, who punished him for this,
because he had so many sorts and ways, violated the honor, and profaned the
reverence, which he ought to God, and the love which he ought to his wives and
children: and so he died miserably.

Herod Agrippa.
Herod Agrippa the son of Aristobulus, (who was the son of the foresaid
Herod the great, by his second wife named Marianne, and put to death by him)
having cruelly tormented and persecuted the Church, Act. 12.1.2.3.4.18.19. etc.
and namely put Saint James to death, being also at the last lifted up, to
the highest of his honors, clothed in his kingly apparel, and set upon the
judicial seat, making an oration to the people, and the people crying out,
this is the voice of God, and not of a man, he (I say) was stricken sodeinly by
the Angel of the Lord, and was gnawen and eaten with worms, and gave up the
Ghost.

Herod Antipas.
Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee, and of Peroe (the son of the foresaid
Herod the great, by his fourth wife named Marthaca) who by violence, took
Herodias from his brother Philippe, and caused John Baptist to be beheaded,
Mat. 14.3. etc. Luke 13.31.32. Luke 23.11. Josephus. lib. 18. Cap. 9. de
Antiquitate. Iudaeor. Eusebius. lib. 2. Cap. 4.
prepared and laid his Ambushmentes in wait for the Son of GOD him self:
and when Pilate sent Christ to him, he mocked him, and sent him back again
with great ignominy and reproach: after what manner died he? The
Historiographers recite and record, that he obeying the motions and
prouocations, of his shameless harlot Herodias, and having been condemned by
the Emperor Caius Caligula, to be perpetually baninished, did miserably
finishe his life at Lions amongst the Frenchmen, being quite and clean
spoiled of all his goods and glory.

As concerning Pilate: Pilate.
This wicked and cursed man, suffering him self to be won by the Jews, yea
even so far, that he condemned Jesus Christ against his own conscience, and
having exercised and practiced diverse cruelties and outrages against the Jews
them selves, showing him self always prepared and ready, to execute the
ordinances and commandments of the Emperor, whatsoever wickedness was
therein: Supplimen. Chro. Eutrop. lib. 7. Cap. 7. Eusebius. lib. 2. Cap. 7.
at the last (as it is contained in the histories) in the one and fortieth
year of our Savior Christ, he was sent into exile by Caligula, to Lions,
where the vengeance of God being fallen on him, he was locked up and closed
in, with such terrible griefs, that beating and striking him self with his
own hands, and thinking to finish and end his evils, in pricking forward and
hasting his own death, he killed him self. Behold, hitherto, the horrible
example of Gods vengeance upon these tyrants and persecutours of the Church.
For it must in deed needs be, that they which had provoked God and men
against them, should so cursedly and wickedly finishe their days. God they
provoked principally in this, that they had warred and fought against his word:
and men in this, that they left not of any cruelty or barbarousnesse, which
they exercised not against them. But as we have heretofore more particularly
described the cruel persecutions, assaied and executed, by the Emperors
against the Church generally: so we must here speak, of their wicked and
cursed ends.

Nero.
Wherefore now to begin with Nero: Eutropius in his eight book, Eutrop. lib. 8.
speaks thus of his end: A decree was made by the Senate, that Nero should
be led naked openly before all the people, and that a forke should be put on
his neck, and that he should be beaten with rods, until that death
followed thereof, and that afterward he should be cast down, from the top
of a rock. After this manner being forsaken of all, he fled out of the
Palace, and about midnight went out of the City, accompanied only with
Pharon, and Epaphroditus, Neophytus, and Spore his Eunuche, and being about
four mile of from the City, he thrust him self clean through, with one
stroke of a sword, and because his hand trembled and shook, his Eunuch helped
him to thrust forward the sword, before which time he not finding any man that
would strike him, he began and took upon him to cry. Is it so, that I have
neither friend nor enemy? I have lived vilainously, but yet I die more
vilainously. Behold then, what wages and hier this cruel Emperor received for
his grievous wickednesses, and accursed offenses.

Domitian received also the reward and Domitian.
recompense of his cruelties. For he was slain in his own Palace, by the
hands of his own servants and household people, his own wife Domitia being
consenting thereto: and the Senate of Rome decreed and ordained, that his body
should be carried and brought to the earth by the buriers after a vile
manner, and without honor, and that all the Images of his person, should be
beaten down and cast to the ground. Therefore the said Senate also, disanulled
all his ordinances and decrees, and called back all other men, which by his
authority and commandment were exiled and banished.

Traian. Dion.
Traian (as Dion says) did no more escape the vengeance of God than the rest.
For first having had all his members withdrawn, all his body without feeling,
and his senses dulled and stopped up as it were, so that he conceived an
opinion, that he had been poisoned: moreover, being become full of the
dropsy, and very much puffed up and swollen, at the last he dyed very
porely, in Selmion a City of Sicilia.

Marcus Antonius Verus, Marcus Aurelius.
otherwise called Marcus Aurelius, having persecuted the Church, at the length
died, feeling the wrath of God upon him after this manner. Being in the war of
Pannonia, The Dial of Princes. Cap. 40.
which at this day is called Hongarie, and keeing besieged a famous City in
that country called Vendebonna, and going upon a certain night round about
his Camp, to visit his bands and hundreds, sodeinlie there fell upon one of
his arms a palsy, insomuche that from that time forward, he could not,
either put on his garments, or draw his sword, neither yet bear a spear.
After this an other sickness came upon him, called a Lethargy, wherewith he
was wonderfully tormented and troubled. Thus being sick in his Tent, he caused
a cruel battle and a hard assault to be given against that people, and the
Hungarians insomuch that there was great bloudshead committed on the one side,
and on the other. The Emperor hearing of the evil order amongst his
soldiers, and namely, that five of his Capitaines were dead, and that none of
them all could there be found: a certain heaviness ceased and possessed
his heart, insomuch, that all thought that upon a sodeine, and as it were in
the turning of a hand, he had lost his life: and so he continued two days
and three nights, without having a will or mind to behold the light of the
firmament, or to speak to any man in the world: so that his heat was very
great, his rest very little: he had continual sighinges and groninges, a great
thirst, small appetite to eat, no sleep, and above all, he had his visage
altogether wrinckled, and his lips altogether black, his eyes hollow and
suncke into his head, and his tongue swollen, without being able to spitte. And
so a little while afterward, not knowing to whom he might commit and commend
his soul, but as it were one altogether lost and cast away: speaking these
words unto Commodus his son, Remembering me of this that I have come into
life, I have now no more delight or pleasure to live. But as I know not
whither death carries us: so I fear and refuse death it self. What should I
do, seeing that the Gods tell me not what I shall do? Immediately he roled
and turned his eyes, and lost his feeling, and having been in this pain and
agony, by the space of more than a quarter of an hour, he yielded up the Ghost.

Seuerus was blessed and happy in the beginning of his reign, Seuerus.
but so soon as he had moved persecution against the Christians, then
immediately his prosperity began also to fail, and he was distracted and
drawn hither and thither, by many dangers, and diverse civil wars, Platina.
as Platina says. And as touching his end, although he were not slain, or
that his blood was not shead, Victor.
notwithstanding (as Victor has left it in writing) feeling a vehement grief
in all his members, and specially in his feet, he asked and desired that some
would give him poison, to cause him to die, and so with a hasty and headlong
death he finished his days in England.

Maximinus, Maximinus.
after he had begun his persecution, was so ouercouered with shame, that
there was never any Emperor more miserable than he.

The Senate of Rome in despite of him, This is found written in Aurelius,
Victor, and Capitolinus.
chose other Emperors, while he lived. His soldiers revolted from him in
Africa. And at the last, after that he had reigned whole three years he was
slain by his own soldiers, being threescore years old, and with his own
son being nienteene years old: and the manner of his death was terrible and
fearful, for he was cut in pieces and cast into the River, and this scoff
or taunte trotted, and was rise in the soldiers mouths, that it was not meet
to keep, no not a little dog, of a naughty raze or kind. Afterward all
those favorers which were joined with him, and all those which had been his
familiar friends and acquaintance were slain, drawn up and down, and cast
into the iakes and priuies.

Decius.
Concerning the Emperor Decius, behold that which we find of his end.
Nauclerus rehearses that he was drowned, Nauclerus.
and that his body was never found. Pomponius has written, Pomponius.
that in a wicked war against the Goths, he was swallowed up of a whirlepoole,
into which he threw himself headlong, to the end that he might not fall into
his enemies hands. Fasciculus Temporum says, Fasciculus tempo.
that he was slain in war, and his son also, which also is in like sort
put down and set forth by Eusebius saying, that before he had reigned two
years, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 1.
he was miserably slain together with his children.

The vengeance of God, likewise horrible, was declared in and against Valerian,
Valerianus.
punishing him for the christians blood, which was spilte by his appointment
and commandment. For we read in the xxiii. book of Volateranus, Volateran.
lib. 23
and in other history writers, that he alittle before he began to persecute
the Christians, went to make war against the Persians, and that in battle he
was taken by Sapores the king of the said Persians, who handeled him so
discourteously, and entreated him so chourlishly, that so often as this king
Sapores, would get up on horse back, he used the back of this poor slave,
to help him to mount up: and so this Emperor spent his old age, in this so
miserable servitude and bondage. Eusebuis.
Eusebius in the Oration or Sermon which he made to the assembly of the
Saints, says, that Sapores at the last caused Valerian to be fleied: and
these are his words. And thou also Valerian, because thou did exercise so
great cruelty of murders, against the servants of GOD, the just judgment
of God has been declared on thee, when being captive, and bound, and led
with thy imperial ornament, had at the last thy skin pulled off, by the
commandment of Sapores King of the Persians, and salted, thou have set up
somewhat as a perpetual remembrance of thy wickedness.

Henric. Erdford. lib. 6. Cap. 27.
Some say that Claudius, Valerius his Lieuetenant, was possessed with a Devil,
and that his tongue was cut out of his head, and chopped in pieces, and that at
the last he was choked.

Aurelian.
Aurelian was not exempted from Gods punishment: for as he began his
persecution against the Christians, a thunderbolt fell nigh unto him, wherewith
he was sodeinly afraid, as we have said heretofore. But he became not the
better for that. Wherefore pursuing his enterprise and attempt, soon after he
was slain by his own people, going the second time to war against the
Illyrians, and this was done between Constantinople and Heracleas, about the
year of Christ. 272.

Some affirm also of his Lieutenaunt Antiochus, Henric. Erdford. li. 6. Ca. 29.
that while they were tormenting Agapitus the Martyr, he sodeinlie fell from
his seat where he satte in judgment, crying (as though he dispaired,) that
he burned in his bowels, and that he dyed crying out, after that sort.

Diocletian and Maximianus Herculien, Diocletian and Maximianus.
having reigned twenty years together, and very much tormented the Church
of GOD, by the tenth persecution, which they moved against it, at the last came
to so great a change and alteration of their state and condition, and to such
wilfulness and madness, Nicepho. lib. 7. Cap. 20. Eusebius. lib. 8. ca. 13
Volaterra. lib. 23
both two of them that (as we read in the histories) for dispight, which they
had against Christ, because they had not power to establish and blot out his
name, being let by the constancy, courage, and might of the noble
Martyrs: they deposed them selves from the Empire, and leaving it to the
government of Galerius and Constantius, Diocletian withdrewe him self to
Nicomedia, and Maximianus, to Millain, and both of them afterward lived as
private men.

Dioclesian lived certain years after. But at the last having received
threatening letters, from Constantine and Licinius, because he would not be at a
marriage banquet or feast, they having also invited and bidden him thereto, and
fearing a shameful death, he drunk poison, and died when he was seventy
three years old. This is recited and reported by the Roman historiographers
themselves, Aurelius. Victor. Pomponius Laetus Volateranus.
Aurelius, Victor, and Pomponius Laetus. Volateran and certain others say,
that after his death he was Deified, that is to say put, placed, and
established in the number of the goods.

Nauele^us. Vespergensis in suo Cronic.
And as concerning Maximianus Heculien, the History writers say, that
Maxentius his son, having been ordained, created, and called Emperor at
Rome, the father took courage to him again, and purposed in his mind, to
recover the Empire from which he had deposed him self together with Diocletian.

In this hope he came to Rome, and assaied all the power he had, to put down
and cast out his son, but he was driven back and withstoode by the City,
and went from thence toward Constantine his son in law thinking to come upon
him at unawares, to catch him by treason, and so to kill him. But his treason
being discovered he fled away. and being pursued, he was slain by
Constantine nigh unto Marsilles, as Vincentius recites it in his mirror or
glass the thirteen book, Vincentius in. specul. lib. 13. cap. 2. Marcel.
histo. 2.
and second Chapter. Notwithstanding that book which is called the Sea of
Histories, says, that being taken at the forenamed Marsilles, he there hanged
himself with a halter, being threscore years old.

Behold a summarie and short description of the horrible punishments which
the Lord sent upon the ten Emperors, under whom, and in whose days, the
ten great persecutions against the Church fell out and were committed.

Now as the Emperors which succeeded those, did not all withholde themselves,
from persecuting the poor Christians, so the hand of GOD was not shortened,
but that punishmente and vengeance was executed upon the persecutors. For that
which Saint Cyprian said in the Apology or defense he made against
Demetrianus the Governor, Cyprianus contra Demetrianum.
is very true, to wit: that very hardly there was any man at any time, who
through wickedness, lifted up him self against the Christians, but that
incontinently thereupon, Gods vengeance and justice, followed him, and pursued
him therefore.

Galerius. Volaterran. li. 23
Galerius a cruel Emperor, or rather in deed a tyrant, has very well tried
and proved the same: for having continued and increased, the persecution
begun by Diocletian, and having with all manner of punishments tormented the
Christians, both cruelly and furiously, at the last having reigned thirteen
years, not being able to abide, the torments and pains of a certain
sickness, wherewith he was taken and held, through impaciencie he slew
himself with his own hand. And some say, that in the time of his sickness,
he put his Physicians to death, because they could not heal him: of which
one declared and said, That his disease proceeded from the vengeance of God.

The death of Julian the Apostata, Julian the Apostata.
may very well also testify, what end the persecucutors of gods children may
look and wait for. For the histories declare, Theoderit. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Volaterran. lib. 23.
that he continuing the war against the Persia^s, which was begun by the
Emperors his predecessors, and upon the way having made a vow, again to
shed and spill the Christians blood, and namely in Jerusalem, and to make them,
or set them out openly as a show, in some solemn place, if he came again
victorious and a conqueror, as he was entered into a desert and wilderness, he
and his army wandering up and down together without guide or leading, he was
suddenly taken and stricken with a stroke either of an arrow, or a sword, or of
some other weapon (for none knows as the historiographers say, wherewith, or
how he was stricken) and so dying in despair, having not as then reigned
twelve whole years, he cried out with a horrible blasphemy, keeping and
holding his blood, which gushed into his hand, and casting it into the air
said: O Galilean (for so in desspite he was wont to call Christ) at the last
thou have overcome, thou have overcome.

Valens. Theod. lib. 4. Cap. 19.
Valens also did very well feel and know, the power of Gods vengeance in his
miserable death. It is said of him, that having received the doctrine of the
Arrians, a certain season after that he harkened unto the instruction of Basil
and received it: but straight ways he returned to his former natural
disposition, and assalted and set upon Basil, and when it so fell out, that he
could not persuade him, to join or take part with the Arrians, he commanded
that a Law and Decree should be made for his banishment. And when he was
minded to subscribe the said decree, the pen was found bruised after a sodeine
and marvelous manner, so that he could not therewith make a stroke, only or
sign of a letter. They brought unto him the second pen, yea even the third,
and it fell out in the^ as with the first: and notwithstanding he yet
endeavored, to vndersigne, subscribe and ratify that decree, but he felt that
his right hand shoke and trembled, Socrates. lib. 4. cap. 36. Theodoret. lib.
4. cap. 36. Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 40.
and then being feared he tare the paper. But shortly after he died wickedly.
For in a certain battle which he had against the Goths (who rebelled
against him, being enforced thereto through famine and hunger) he was hurt
with an arrowe.

Wherefore he fled, and withdrewe himself into a small graunge or farm house
in the fields, with some of his people, and being close or hidden there, the
Goths set fire on it, not knowing that Valens was therein, and there he was
burned all alive, And to the end that they which should come after might have
a more evident testimony that this was in deed a punishment sent from God, and
that also in this wicked person, there might always be had an example of the
wrath of God, he remained without any burial at all,

But when will it be, that we shall make an end, if we would largely pursue
and recite, the Catalogue or beadrole, as you would say of tyrants and
persecutors of the Church, who for a just recompense of their cruelties have
been punished by the hand of God, and died miserably? We should not want
examples of former ages, neither yet of our time. For God has always had care
over his Church, maintaining it, and punishing the riottes and murders
committed against it: yea he will always maintain it, and will exercise and
execute his justice upon them, which would oppress it, because he accounts
it as dear, Zachari. 2. 8.
as the apple of his eye, which should bring unto us, a singular comfort and
instruction. For it serves well to comfort us, when we understand, that we
have a keeper and defender in heaven, who in the midst of our afflictions,
will not forsake us, no not then, when it seems unto us, that the whole
world conspireth and arises against us. On the other side, we ought to
receive and take instruction thereby, because that we hear that God takes
vengeance in his good time, and as pleases himself, upon them which persecute
his Church, to the end that we should spoil our selves of, and cast far from
us all particular affections or motions of reuengement, and should leave the
judgment of our cause unto god, to who^ alone (as he says) Vengeance to repay
the same, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Romans 12.19.
does belong when he shall see good and meet. And notwithstanding the tyrants
and persecutors, have to learn by the above said examples, to have in horror
and wonderful fear, the great judgments of God, and to know, that albeit
God do for a time defer and put of, the punishment of those which ragingly and
furiously fall upon his well-beloved Saints, yet such are not for all that any
whit the more blessed. The fury and wrath of God (as one has said) walks
and goes very softly: Valerius Maximus in his history.
but after it has been long time deferred or foreslowed, it does at the last
recompense that slownesse, as it were, and long forebearing by very terrible
torments: yea it comes and draws nigh by little and little, with feet of
wool, as it were, but being once arrived and come, it declares that it has
an arm of iron, to bruise in pieces and beat down, all unrepentant wicked
persons. O blessed is he (as a certain Poet has said) who is made wise by an
other man's dangers and examples. I wish that this might open the eyes of the
men of our time, who do openly band and set themselves against God and his
Church. For some there be who are so arrogant and presumptuous, that they take
pleasure and delight in no other thing, then to murder and persecute poor
innocent people, and as though they had made a covenant or agreement with death
it self (as Isaiah says) They lift up the^ selves above the clouds, Isaiah.
28.15
neither have they any taste or feeling of the judgment of God, and therefore
they harden them selves in a cursed kind of licentiousness. But so much there
is, that their end (if they amend not) shall make manifest an alteration and
change not looked for, by which the Lord (when so seems good unto himself)
knows rightly to execute his own judgments: yea that his hand although it
appear not, and that it seems as though he had it shut up in his bosom, is
notwithstanding nigh to ouerwhelme them, and where as they lift up them selves
against heaven, that he will in a moment, and twinkling of an eye make them to
fall backwarde to the earth, yea and cast them headlong to the deapth or bottom
of Hell. O that tyrants and persecutors would think well of these matters. But
what? What should a man do to hard hearts, and to blinded eyes? The wicked
become more proud through the prosperity which they have in this world, as
though that no punishment for their cruelties were prepared for them. It fares
with them as with Dionysius the tyrant, who after he had spoiled and robbed a
temple, went to the Sea, and seeing he had a good wind began to say that the
Gods favored Church robbers or spoylers of temples. So likewise these men,
when they behold that their offenses remain unpunished, and that their
villainies and wickednesses are not corrected immediately, they give them selves
over to work wickedness outragiously, and to conclude in their carnal and
fleshly understanding, that there is no judgment of God at all, and that he
has no punishments ready, and prepared for their iniquities. But as the holy
Scripture determines and pronounces the quite and clean contrary: so
ordinary and common, experience, of the examples of gods wrath does
sufficiently show unto us, that when god spares the wicked persecutors of his
people for a time, and makes as though he seemed not to look upon their
extortions, outrages, and violences, it is not because he is favorable unto
them, neither because he reaches them his hand and helps them: for it
cannot otherwise be, but that one day (as he is a just judge) he will give
unto the enemies of his glory, and the good and salvation of his Children,
such recompense and hyre, as they shall have deserved, first in this life (if
it be expedient) that they may shamefully and wickedly end their days: and
afterward in the other world that they may utterly perish (if they repent
and amend not in this life) and may be tormented eternally in Hell fire, where
there is nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

FINIS.
A Table containing the principal matters handled in this present book
A
AFflictions and the causes thereof. Page 333. etc. Afflictions of the church.
274. Afflictions of the Church, and the ends which God respects therein. 340.
and. Afflictions of the Church increase, when the deliverance thereof is nigh.
325. Afflictions of the Church is always ordered and governed by Gods hand.
321. Afflictions come not without the providence of God. 318. Afflictions, and
their issue in respect of the faithful. 345. Afflictions and their issue in
respect of the persecutors. 357. Ancientes. 133. Antiochus. 359, Apostles. 128.
Archebishops. 69. 144. Aurelian. 304 372. Augustine, and in what sense he said
that he would not believe the Gospel without the authority of the church.
222. Ancient fathers did not acknowledge the bishop of Rome for Pope. 92. etc.
B
BBaptisme of the Roman Church. 115. Bishop. 69. 133. 143. Bishop universal, is
a title of Antichrist, when it is given to men. 94.
C
CAlling, see Vocation. Cardinals. 146. Censures. 247. Censures three ends
thereof. 252. Censures of the Church must be applied with out respect of
persons. 255. Chaplines. 140. Councels. 202. Consistory. 241. Corrections, and
censures. 247. Curates. 142. Church whence it comes. 2. Church how many ways
taken. 2. Church which is true has two substantial marks. 15. Church and
her continuance. 55. Church and her head is Jesus Christ alone. 68. Church and
her holiness. 184. Church compared to a Palm tree, roses, lilies and to a
Vine, 332. Old Church of Rome, what a one it was according to Tertullian his
judgment. 106. Church catholic is one alone. 11. Church catholic and
invisible what it is. 7. Church distinguished into three sorts. 4. Church in
what sense called the pillar and ground of truth. 200. Church in what sense
said to be without spot or wrinckle. 189. Church whether above the scripture.
213. Church whether more old then the scripture. 220. Church must not be judged
by the great number. 58. Church whether it may err. 197. Church why called
catholic. 9. Church why said to be invisible. 12. Church represented by a
bright lamp or firebrand in the midst of a burning or smoking furnace. 330.
Church represented by the burning bush. 330. Church of Rome has not the marks
of the true church. 19. Church of Rome, is not the true church. 102. Church of
Rome has not true unity. 113. Church increases in the midst of
persecutions. 330. Church visible what it is. 14.
D
DEcius. 299.370. Deacons. 136. Diaconisses 244. Dioclesian. 305. 373.
Discipline necessary in the Church. 235. Discipline incrocheth nothing upon
the magistrate. 237. Doctors. 132. Domitian. 283. 365. Donation of Constantine
to Siluester. 87.
E
EVangelistes. 130. Excommunication, and 3. ends thereof. 252. Exposition of
Scriptures, and two principles necessary therein. 20. Elders. 135.
G
GAlerius. 376. Galien. 302. God delivers his church out of afflictions, when
it is time. 327. God why he afflicts rather his church then other people.
319. God why he sends not succor to his church so soon as it is afflicted;
323.
H
HEad of the church is Jesus Christ alone. 68. Herod Agrippa. 362. Herod
Antipas. 362. Herod the great. 360. High or chief Bishop. 97. Holiness of
the Church imperfect. 187.
I
IGnorance excuses not. 125. Julian the Apostata. 313. 377.
K
Keys in the Church, and the use thereof. 79.
L
Laws Ecclesiastical. 258.
M
MArcus Aurelius. 293. 357. Maximianus Herculien. 305. 373. Maximinus. 298.
369. Metropolitanes. 69. 144. 149. Ministry, and how much should be given
thereto. 179. Ministry of the word ordained by God for our weakness sake.
177. Ministry necessary in the Church. 160. Ministers considered after two
sorts. 180. Ministers of the church, and their degrees or orders. 128.
Miracles are not sufficient to prove a calling. 53 Multitude makes nothing at
al for the church 58.
N
Nero. 184. 364.
O
Orders of the Pope his clergy. 139.
P
POpe. 97. 152. Pope and his blasphemies. 75. Popes two at Rome, at one time.
91. Pastors. 131. Patriarchs. 69. 149. Paul should rather be taken for Pope
then Saint Peter. 100. Persecutions of the Church. 274. Persecutions of the
Church, ten great and general, and a discourse thereof. 279. Persecutions come
not without Gods providence. 318. Persecution the first under Nero. 281.
Persecution the second under Domitian. 283. Persecution the third under Traian.
284. Persecution the fourth under Marcus Aurelius. 293. Persecution the fifth
under Seuerus. 296. Persecution the sixth under Julian Maximinus. 298.
Persecution the seventh under Decius. 299. Persecution the eight under Valerian
and Galien. 302. Persecution the nienth under Aurelian. 304. Persecution the
tenth under Dioclesian and Maximianus. 305. Pharao. 358. Peter, whether he were
Bishop of Rome, is uncertain. 98. Peter was not the head of the Church. 71.
Pilate. 363. Pontifex or high Bishop. 97. Predecessors of ours who died in the
faith of the Roman church, whether saved or condemned. 126. Priests. 140.
Prophets. 129. Parsons. 158.
S
Sabbath changed to the Sunday. 228. Sanctity or holiness of the church is
imperfect. 187. Sanctification how wrought in us. 186. Sanctification and three
degrees of it. 69. Saints in what fense we are called. 185. Sancherib. 358.
Seuerus. 296. 269. Succession and three sorts thereof. 26. Succession to what
end, and in what sense the ancient Doctors used an argument taken there from.
28. Sucession personal has some times had a breach in the seat of Rome. 35.
Succession and calling of persons. 24.
T
TRaian. 284. 356. Teachers. 132.
V
VAlens the Emperor. 314. 378. Valerian. 362. 371. Vicars. 140. Unity in
verity is not in the Romish church. 113. Vocation of Pastors, three things
necessary therein. 39. Vocation ordinary, and extraordinary. 47.
FINIS.

