^^WIS THE XIII KING OF FRANCE.
portrait of Louis XIII

ARTICLES CONCLVDED AND AGREED UPON by the Lords, the Cardinals, de la
Roche-Foucaud, and de Bethune, in the name of the King of France, to the Queen
Mother.

Together with certain Letters interchangeably sent between the said King and
the Queene-Mother

Translated out of the French Copy.

fleur-de-lis surmounted by a crown

Printed by G. E. for George Fairebeard, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
North entrance into the Royal Exchange. 1619.

ARTICLES CONCLVDED AND agreed upon by the Lords the Cardinals de la
Roche-Foucaud and de Bethune, in the name of the King of FRANCE, to the
Queene-Mother.
1 HIs Majesty agrees and consents, that the Queen Mother shall dispose of
her house, as it shall please her, calling unto her and receiving such persons
into her service as she thinks good.

2 THat She shall and may go and come, and also soiourne in such place or
places of the Realm as She will, His Majesty's Court of Presence not excepted.

3 THat during her life, She shall enjoy whatsoever She has heretofore
enjoyed, by Assignation, of Gifts, Pensions, and Gratifications to her given
and granted by the late King, and by his Majesty: and that She shall be paid
all the Arrerages thereof whatsoever.

4 THat She shall freely dispose not only of the charges, Offices and
benefits depending upon and appertayning to the Demaines, which her Majesty at
this present enjoys, but also of those that were given unto her for the full
and perfect Assignation of her Matrimonial Dowry, all conformable to the
expedition which she already has.

5 HIs Majesty promises to deal friendly (as with other his Subjects and
servants) with all those, that have served, aided and assisted the said Queen,
upon occasion of her retraict from Bloys, namely the Duke Despernon and his
Children.

6 THat his Majesty will suffer them to enjoy their Charges, Dignities,
Offices, and Benefits, and reestablish them in all the Towns, Places, and
Castles without any exception, where they find themselves to be dispossessed,
since the retraict of the Queen: and further that they shall be paid their
Pensions, Reuennues, and other Fees.

7 THat all those that by Judgment, or otherwise, have been banished from the
Court, or out of the Realm, shall be recalled, and those that are retained
prisoners, or are in prison, shall be released and set at liberty.

8 THat all whatsoever has happened or is past, by means of her Majesty's
retraict from the Town of Bloys, whether it shall be leuying of Soldiers,
Impositions, or Taxations of money, and other things whatsoever, shall be put
in oblivion, without any renouation or calling in question of any person for
the same.

9 THat within two months, the said Queen Mother shall be satisfied and
contented, for the disbursments which she has been constrained to make since
her retraict to Angoulesme.

10 THat within six weeks, the declaration of the Kings grant to her made,
shall be verified and approved in all the Courts of Parliament, according to
the form and tenure thereof, without any restriction or moderation whatsoever.

Made and promised in Angoulesme by the said Lords, the Cardinal de la
Roche-Foucaud and de Bethune, by virtue of their Commission given them by the
Kings Majesty.

Signed, LOVYS.
And allowed,

PHILIPPE A VLX.



The King of France his Letter, written to the Queene-Mother, the 3. of May.
1619.
MADAME,
by the return of Father Berule, you shall know what resolution I have taken
concerning the propositions by him made unto me. I assure my self, that when
he shall have informed you of my intents, and the reasons whereupon they are
grounded: you will judge and be persuaded, that I have omitted nothing
whatsoever I thought might procure the good of mine estate and your
contentment, which ought to be inseparable: but that which I specially desire
and aim at, is, that you should believe and be persuaded, that you shall
never find any thing to be truer then the effects of my affections, whereof I
will seek by all occasions, to give you so many proofs, that you shall
perfectly see and know, that one of the things in this world which I most
desire, is, to see us reunited in so perfect amity, and with entire wills and
affections that we may never have other difference, but only to strive which
of us shall yield more unto the other: you Madame of a good Mother, and my
self of a most affectionate Son: which I am persuaded, by the grace of God, I
shall see happily performed, assuming my self of your good nature, my
conscience warranting me, that there wants no point of all those respects
whatsoever in me, which may justly give me the Title and Name, MADAME, of your
most humble and obedient Son,

LOVYS.
From St. Germain the 3 of May 1619.
The Queene-Mothers Answer, sent to the King of France, her Son, the 28. of
May. 1619.
MY LORD my Son,
I do give thanks unto God with all my heart, upon this Feast of the
Ascension, that you have acknowledged, that in my departure from Bloys, I had
no other intent nor meaning but only that which tended to the felicity and
advancement of your service, and a desire to enjoy the liberty of true Peace
and quietness, and that acknowledging it, you have fully and entirely granted
the same unto me, and given Peace unto your people, discharging and
vnburthening them of the troubles and oppressions, which they endured by means
of the Soldiers, wherein as on the one side, I have had so much respect, that
I would not oppose those forces that were prepared for the necessity of my
defense, so I have conceived great pleasure and contentment to see that you
have acknowledged the truth in this; that after my retraict, I oftentimes writ
unto you, that this running to Arms would wholely be unprofitable to you. I
have deferred to write unto you, hoping from time to time, that to the comfort
and solace of those Provinces and others under your obedience, you would be
pleased to discharge and remitte the Soldiers, as the declaration, (which it
has pleased you to send me,) imports, and whereof I speak not as doubting
the same, knowing your inviolable word, protesting unto you, that concerning
that which touches my particular security: The greatest that I can have in
this world, and which also is most acceptable unto me, is, the affection which
you promise me by your last letters and whereof you assure me, to give me
such proofs, as I ought to believe, that you have thereby yielded unto me
that perfect amity, which I always procured and sought to merit by all actions
worthy of a most good Mother, and a most faithful subject. Therefore I trust
only in your royal promise; and lay hold upon that contentment which to me
is most essential, and only can procure me all the rest, among the which the
principallest is, and shall be to see your authority more and more to increase
and prosper, and that not any person shall once dare to trouble the Peace and
Tranquillity of your Realm, which I desire and wish, as much as the
preservation of mine own life, which I will continue under the only
Protection of your Majesty, inioying the free liberty, by you granted unto
me, and witnessing unto you in all sorts of occurrences (as the Earl de
Bresne will tell you) that I hold and esteem nothing so dear, as the
passionate affection, my Lord my Son, which I have to be,

Your most loving mother and subject, MARY.
From Angoulesme the 28 of May 1619.
A third Letter sent by the Lord Admiral the Duke de Mont-morancy to the King
of France.
SIR:
The thanks which I am bound to yield unto your Majesty, for the infinite
favors which it has pleased you to show unto my Lord the Prince, which I
understand by his letter, and by the report of Monsieur de la Bauine, that it
constrains me by the excess of bounty to yield witness of the just
fe^ling which I have thereof, so that I cannot choose but join them next unto
those which I owe unto God for his health, and to the most humble thanks which
I shortly hope to yield unto your Majesty, for the perfection of a work so
favorably begun: as also the honor which it has pleased the same to afford
me, in putting that confidence in me, to permit this Gentlman to tell him so
much from me, redoubleth my hopes, augmenteth my duties, and encourages me,
still without ceasing, to continue my most humble and most instant prayers and
supplications in this subject, which may bring so great a good and benefit to
your service, and much and so sound a reputation to your bounty: my Uncle de
Dissimieux has already made your Majesty acquainted with the State of this
Province, where the effects of my fidelity God be thanked (are so different
from the shadows that are imposed on them by some) that I think and assure my
self, that it would be a blemish to the innocence of my actions and
thoughts: If I should enter into any other justification, then only by a new
oath made, to continue in my obedience, with an affection answerable to my
endeavors wherein I will expect the success of the negotiation of my Lords the
Cardinals de la Roche-Foucaud, and de Bethune, beseeching God with all my
heart, that it may fall out to the contentment of your Majesty, and the Peace
of your subjects, to whom the same evidently declares the desire and the care
that it has of their good: For my part I shall never be satisfied in that
desire that I have to testify unto your Majesty, that I am and always shall
be,

Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and
servant. L. De Mont-morency.
From Beziers the 24. of May 1619.
FINIS.

