THE KINGS DECLARATIONS UPON HIS Edicts for Combats, Importing the confirmation
and enlarging of the same. Published in a Parliament holden in Paris, the 18.
day of March. 1613. Hereunto is also adjoined the said Kings Edict, Importing
an order for apparel, therein prohibiting all his Subjects from using upon the
same, any Gold or silver, either fine or counterfeit; all Embroderie, and all
Lace of Millan, or of Millan fashion: either to make any guilt works in their
houses, under the penalties therein contained. PVBLISHED IN A PARLIAMENT holden
in Paris the 2. of April. 1613. Hereunto is also annexed, A Letter from the
Lord Rosny, Treasurer of France, to the Queen Regent.

Faithfully translated into English by E. A.

LONDON Printed by Tho: Creed for William Wright, and are to be sold at his
shop on Snowe-hill, at the sign of the Harrow near Holborne Conduit. 1613.

TO ALL WORTHY AND GOOD LAW-MAmakers, Rulers, Judges, Obseruers, Pleaders, and
keepers in general, past, present, and to come, greeting; under favor, hereby
not to offend any, but ever to respect and honor all of them, as most
especial Instruments in any Commonwealth under God.
HErein may Fully, Effectually, and plainly appear, the just and true intent
of JEWS, the ( Now French King,) in the behalf, and for the general good of
his Commonwealth, and all his loyal and true hearted Subjects therein: Whereby
he earnestly, with a full and well intended Resolution, does desire, aim at,
and intend, the happy and most flourishing Estate of that most Christion
Kingdom, and well-gouerned people: To the great comfort of them in general,
and assured hope of his most happy Reign over them. To his timely ( Infant
beginning, Honor;) by intending of their Eternal benefits: For which cause,
let us look home with a special eye, unto the well and due intended
Reformation and Execution of these Laws and Edicts, lately made in Paris, by
their hopeful King, That has (as you may hereafter see) not only renewed
diverse old Laws and Edicts concerning Combats, and other laws, with special
remedy for offenders therein: But also has enlarged and declared the same in
Parliament, the 18. day of March last. Wherein he has also set down and
published for general good, the very Law of Laws, or absolute cause and
directest means of true continuance, and due performance and keeping of these,
or other laws fit for any worthy Prince in any Commonwealth, made for
general good, to be performed and kept according to their true intents, which
is performed in this King, Queen Regent, etc. Assembled in Parliament, fully,
freely, firmly, and effectually set down and made known within all that
kingdom, to all persons, that they shall be duly justly, absolutely and
effectually performed and kept, by all persons whatsoever within their
jurisdictions, without exceptation of any person, For birth, kindred, affiance,
or any other cause whatsoever, wherein he also takes away all hopes of
graunts, favors, pardons, remissions, or any means whatsoever. To be
discharges to any of the Transgressors of the said Laws; So that those wilful
persons that will presume notwithstanding those good laws, with so due and
effectual declaration thereof, are well worthy (in my opinion) by the laws
of God and man, for their great presumption therein, to undergo and endure the
penalties in those, or any other good Laws contained. These are true, just,
and direct means, to show that God gave not unto men laws in vain, but that
if they would presume to break or offend against those good laws by him or
his Deputies in any Commonwealth made and ordained, That then those persons so
offending, should suffer or forfeit, according to the true intent and meaning
of those good laws, what, when, or wheresoever, that without any manner of
hope of favor (to imbolden them therein) they might make and be examples to
other to beware to sin, or offend any just laws contrary to their true
intents, for which they wear and are made and ought to be duly and truly
performed and kept, for the upholding of peace, plenty and virtuous actions in
general: And the avoiding and beating down of sin and vice in general,
according to the divine founding, and true intent of good laws in general,
which God grant may hereafter be well established, redressed, renewed,
declared, performed and kept, within these lands: To the honor and glory of
God, The honorable and perpetual memory of our King, The everlasting memory
of all the good instruments therein. The beating down sin, the rewarding of
virtue, the speedy doing of true justice between party, and party, the most
good of this great and flourishing Commonwealth, And happy comfort of all his
Majesty's true hearted subjects therein in general. Blame me not in being long
herein, for in some lawful, and some law less proceedings, which some too
many, too well knows, in many causes, is to great length: All which, I will
leave now to touch: And so proceed to the other Laws and Edicts lately made
in Paris, herein mentioned against the general wearing of gold and silver
lace, and diverse other sorts of gilt works, etc. With many other things which
they have found as harmefull weeds or instruments of pride, most idle and
unfitting to be suffered longer amongst them, to hurt and abuse their people
and Commonwealth. And I trust in Cod our worthy King and his honorable privy
Council, with the Lords, Bishops, and Judges, and other good members of this
Commonwealth; will (in due time) of themselves, and by good example from other
Princes, make, amend, renew, declare, and publish, (to a virtuous end) our good
and wholesome laws in this Commonwealth, whereby to banish and beat down (as
in their good discretions shall ^eeme best) all, and all manner of vanities,
vices, idle toys and abuses in general, according to the true intent and
meaning of our good laws in general, the rather for that ^e seldom find
love, Charity, virtue, and honest dea^ing, Now in that measure under many of
those superfluous garnishes of apparel, as formerly was ordinarily to be ^ound
under a Frise Ierkin, or other abilliments suitable. So that I wish there were
upon many (seeming) Gentlemen in these our days less vicious cost, and in
them more ^ause of truly virtuous, Honor, and Worship, which in word would
become them better, and be a good means (...) cast off pride, whereby virtue
might increase, (which ^ride keeps low,) and to beat down vice which it
ex^lts, to the general good of all these kingdoms, over which it has pleased
God by his mercy and grace many dangers past) to make his Deputy and Servant,
our King and governor, and we to be his faithful loyal Subjects duly to obey
him, which I desire m^ long continue, to Gods will and pleasure, and the co^^
of all his faithful subjects souls, so to live here, as to chase with Gods
mercy in their departing hence, eternal.

Farewell.
THE KINGS DECLARATIONS UPON HIS Edicts for Combats; As also an order for
Apparel: Therein prohibiting all his Subjects from using upon the same, any
Gold or Silver, either Fine, or counterfeit; All Embrodery, and all Lace of
Millan, or of Millan Fashion: Either to make any Guiltworkes in their houses,
under the penalties therein contained. Published in a Parliament holden at Paris
the 2. of April. 1613.
The Kings declaration upon his prohibition of Combats.
JEWS, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre; To all to whom these
presents shall come, Greeting: With extreme sorrow and grief do we daily see
our Edicts and Drdinances, concerning Quarrels, Combats of meetings, and
others, so slenderly observed and kept, contrary to the holy intents of our
late King: our most honored Lord and Father, [who God pardon] and ours; That
our Subjects do bear themselves in a manner, in as great licentiousnes in
matter of Quarrels, Combats, Chalenges, Enquiries, and meetings, as aforetime:
which yet would proceed further to the contempt and most grievous prejudice of
our authority, and grow to a mere and public disobedience, were it not
speedily and seriously prevented.

In this regard, We are resolved with the good advise, and discreet Counsel
of the Queen Regent, our most honored Lady and Mother, in such sort to
provide, that cutting up this mischief in the very root* our Subjects may
reap the fruit which we desire, and our Conscience rest discharged. But as we
cannot bring it to pass with greater foresight and better order then the same
which our said late Lord and Father, by his Edicts of the years 1602. and
1609. had enacted and ordained, and the same which since (after his imitation,
and for the effecting of his will and resolutions) we have determined, as well
by our Letters of Declaration, of the 4. of October, 1610. as of the first of
July, 1611. We are now only to provide, by confirming of them, for a more
severe and assured punishment of the Repugnances, and disobediences there
against committed: Also to cut off all sorts of Excuses, Recommendations,
Supports, and Favors, which not without great griese of conscience, we
acknowledge to have been sought out, to delude the just chastisements of those,
who unto this day (falling into such offenses) have not been punished as they
ought.

In these considerations, having caused very diligently and carefully to peruse
in our Counsel, The Queen Regent, our most honored Lady and Mother being
present, with the assistance of the Princes of our blood, other Princes, and
the Officers of our Crown, with sundry others, the most notable of our
Council about us, all the said Edicts and Declarations, as well of our said
Lord and father, of the month of April, 1602. June, 1609. and our
Declarations confirmatiue of the same, of the said fourth of October, 1610. and
of the first of July, 161^. We have again said, Decreed, and Declared, and
do Say, Decree, and declare by these presents, Signed with our hand, that they
all shall take place; That to that end it shall be again read and published in
our Courts of Parliament, and throughout all our jurisdictions within the
extent and resort of the same, yea even within our Court and train: So as
hereafter none of our Subjects of whatsoever state, condition or recommendation
soever they be, may hope by us, as likewise we neither will nor mean that they
shall by others, to be dispensed withal, or discharched from the entire and
absolute execution of our said Edicts, and declarations: As to the end to take
away the means, and to put them out of all hope, to obtain at our hands any
thing that may be contradictorie to the same. We for our entire discharge
before God and man, and that the discharge of the said Queen Regent our
mother, and for the common acquit of our consciences: do declare with a firm
and irreuocable resolution: That we will, and do entend hereafter, to
maintain and preserve the said Edicts and declarations in their full force for
every man, without exception or acception of any person, merit, or other
favorable consideration whatsoever, so to cause them to be kept, proceed and
grow to their full effect according to their form and Tenure, throughout the
Extent of our Realms, Countries, and Lands of our Obedience, without
swaruing hereafter, or for our parts doing any thing to contrary the same:
neither to permit or suffer it to be disobeyed, contradicted, or any thing to
be attempted, directly or indirectly, upon any cause or pretense, or by any
person whosoever. This with our resolution and determination, we will, and
ordain to be known to all the said Princes of our Blood, other Princes,
Officrs of our Crown, of our courts of Parliament, and other our Officers,
servants, and subjects, and that we neither will nor purpose hereafter, to
give or grant, or cause to be dispatched, delivered, or recorded, any favors,
pardons, abolitions, remissions, or whatsoever discharges to any the
transgressors, or disobeyers of the said Edicts and declarations, to the end
that all men may be out of hope to obtain them of us: and that none presume to
be so hold as to require us thereof, in respect of any neerenes in Blood.
Obligation, or other Recommendation and favorable consideration, that he may
pretend to have. Which we have at this present forbidden them, and do forbid
them, that they shall neither pray, interpose, entreat, or become mediators and
intercessors for this, to our selves, or to our said Lady and Mother; under
pain of incurring our indignation.

Likewise most expressly forbidding them) to receive or conceal in their
houses, or in any other place, any the tra^sgressors, or to yield them any
Retreat, support, or assistance whatsoever* But rather to the contrary, we
enjoin them (upon the like penalties) to accuse and bewray them, but
especially, to deliver them into the hands of Justice, if by the officers they
be so required. Also, to minister all aid, force, and assistance to that
Effect, if they be in place where they may do it. Also that we may the more
advance and make easy the effect of the said Edicts, in the course and
execution of that which our said Lord and Father did parcicularly ordain by
that of the month of June, 1609. We ordain, that such as shall have received
any hurt, shall do their endeavors, within one month after the said hurt
received, to frame their complaint, and to provide themselves for the
reparation of the same, before our dear and well-beloved Couzins, the Constable
and Marshalles of France, or other the Judges to that purpose ordained, and
established by the said Edict. Otherwise, the time of the month ouerpassed,
the said parties cannot be tried by them, but shall be bound to provide
themselves, and to undergo the jurisdiction for the said offenses.

Also, in regard of that which may after ensue in consequence of the same,
before the Ordinary Judges, and by Appeals into our courts of Parliament. Also,
in respect of the parties that may be pretended to have done the Offense, If
after due calling and summons, in virtue of the Oidinance of the said Judges,
established by the said Edict twice pronounced, they make default, they shall
have judgment according to the extremity of the said Edict.

And shall likewise be bound to provide themselves, and to undergo the
jurisdiction for the Offense and Quarrel, and for all that shall thereof
depend, in our said Ordinary Courts of Justice, and Courts of Parliament, in
every of them, accordingly as it shall appertain: so as the said Judges
ordained by the said Edict, shall take no further notice thereof, which as well
in the one, as in the other cases, we have even at this time, for that cause
forbidden and prohibited, and do forbid and prohibit, in pain of Nullitie of
all that may by them be committed or done to the contrary.

And the said knowledge is attributed, and we do attribute it to our said
Ordinary Judges, and by Appeal, to our said Courts of Parliament, except in
such cases, as may fall out in the same Towns or Cities, where our Courts are
established: Of the which our meaning is, that they shall directly take notice.
Most expressly enioyning them to proceed in one or other of the said Courts,
as is aforesaid, by the course, and with the severity of our Ordinances, and
therein to execute Justice, without the support or acception of any person
whatsoever. Also to our Atturnies general, and their substitutes, in the said
ordinary Jurisdictions to assist them, and by the said substitutes, to certify
our Courts of their diligence, so speedily as they may, according to the
distances of the places, and generally from 2. months to 3. months, to
advertise them of all that shall pass in this respect throughout the extent of
their charge: And this upon the Declarations that shall be made by the Judges
ordained by the said Edict, of the year 1609. who shall be bound, as we do
also now expressly enjoin them to the said substitutes, in the iurisdictio^s
that shall lie nearest to the place of their ahead: the Abstract copy of such
records as they are to make of their Judgments, importing how they have
Declared to the parties, that they are no longer their Judges. We will also,
do Decree, and Declare them to be unworthy, and incapable to be Admitted in
their complaints, and to be tried before our said Couzens, Governors, or
Lieutenants general, for quarrels, injuries, or offenses, or other matter,
concerning the said Edicts: But all such shall be presented and tried in our
said ordinay Seaz of Judgment, or courts of Parliament, in like form as
Offenders aforesaid, who before they have sought remedies by the ways
aforesaid, shall either by chalenges, or in open Act, maintain their Quarrels
and controversies. And moreover shall, even as the aforesaid offenders, be
deprived of their Pentions, if they have any, and of all Offices, Charges, or
Estates whatsoever: and besides, to be condemned by our said ordinary Judges,
and courts of Parliament, to whom the knowledge thereof is (as is aforesaid)
attributed, according to the rigor of our said Edicts and Ordinances, wherein
they shall proceed with all possible diligence. And the rather to take from them
all occasions of default or delay, our intent is, that all the charges of
Justice shall be leauyed of the goods of the said offenders and transgressors.

We therefore do command our beloved, and trusty Counselors, the People
holding our courts of Parliament, that these presents, together with the former
Edicts and declarations, they cause to read, publish, and enroull, that they
keep, hold, maintain, and observe them, and that they cause them to be
holden, maintained, and observed inuiolably throghout the ertent of their
Resort with out contradiction: neither that they suffer any attempt or
resistance, directly or indirectly: for any cause or pretense, or by any person
whosoever: ceasing, and incontinently causing to cease, repair, and restore
all things to the contrary hereof. For such is our pleasure. In witness
whereof, we have caused our seal to be affixed to these presents.

Given at Paris, the 28. of January, in the year of grace, 1613. and of our
Reign, the third: Signed, LEWIS.
And upon the fould, By the King in his Council The Queen Regent his Mother
being present. DE LOMENIE.
And sealed upon a double Labell, with the great seal, in yealow Wax.
JEWS by the grace of God, king of France and of Navarre. To our beloved and
trusty Counselors, the people holding our Court of Parliament at Paris,
Greeting. By our Letters Patents of declaration of the 28. of Januarie last,
we have in confirmation of the Edicts of the late King our most honored. Lord
and father (whom God pardon) and other our declarations upon matter of combats,
largely enough given to understand our pleasure and intent, concerning the
execution of the same, and the punishments of the transgressions and
disobediences daily committed, having with the advice of the Queen Regent, our
most honored Lady and mother, the Princes of our blood, other the Princes
Officers of our Crown, and the most notable personages of our Counsel added
thereto the premises, we thought it fitting for stay of the course of such
wretched accidents and inconveniences as have but too often fallen out, and do
still daily happen, which we presumed should have ceased after the publication
of our letters, had the same been performed. Now since understanding, the
reasons and considerations, whereupon ye have hitherto delayed the said
publication, we with the like advice of our said Lady and mother, of the
Princes of our blood, other Princes and Officers of our Crown and Council,
have again, and moreover said and declared, and do say and declare by these
prosents, signed with our own hand, that we will not, neither do mean upon
any causes or considerations that are or may be, to grant any pardons,
remissions or abolitions to such as shall under whatsoever color, pretense, or
occasion, transgress the said Edicts and declarations in matter of Combats and
quarrels, Chalenges, or other heads therein contained and specified, but will,
that they be extraordinarily proceeded against, and according to the rigor of
our Edicts and declarations against the transgressors, and those that shall
harbor, conceal, assist, or have them in their powers: who upon the like
penalties, and other more grievous, if it so happen, shall be bound and forced
to bring thee into trial. We also forbid all Judges, that they undertake
nothing to the prejudice of these presents: Namely, the Provost of our house,
and great Provost of France, that they take no knowledge of all such
transgressions as may be committed against our said Edicts and declarations in
matter of combat, and of all that may depend thereof, under pain of defacing,
and reuocation of all proceedings, and of all expenses, damages, and interests
in behalf of the parties that may have been pursued. Moreover, we will, and it
is our pleasure, that if to the prejudice of these presents, the said Provost
of our house, or other Judges shall have taken knowledge of such causes, yet
notwithstanding our Atturneys general, their substitutes, and parties
diminished, their widows and heirs shall be admitted to see the guilty and
their accomplices, who shall be debarred, as also their widows and heirs to
pretend extinction of crime by lapse of twenty years, or any other time.

We also do commend and ordain, that our said letters of declaration, and
these presents, together with the said Edicts and declarations precedent, you
cause to be read and published over the contents of the same inuiolably
executed, kept and observed from point to point, according to their form and
tenure: Also that of the fines to us adjudged, the third part be applied to the
sustenance, and maintenance of the poor shut up in this our Town of Paris,
and the Suburbs of the same. Enioyning our Attorney General, in our said
Court, to use all requests and diligence necessary for the said publication
and execution. For such is our pleasure.

Given at Paris, the 14, day of March, 1613. and of our reign the third.
Signed, JEWS.
By the King in his Council, the Queen Regent his mother, being present. DE
LOMENIE.
And sealed with the great seal, in yealow wax, upon a single Labell. Read,
published and recorded, in the hearing, and at the request of the Kings
Attorney general. The court does ordain, that Copies examined, shall be sent
to the Baylywickes and Stewardships, there to be read, published, recorded, and
executed, by the diligence of the substitutes of the Kings Attorney General,
who are thereof to certify the Court within the month: Likewise, if to the
prejudice of the same, any letters of abolition have been directed to the
Provost of the house, or judgments by him pronounced, notwithstanding the said
letters, his judgments, and all other proceedings shall be void, and as such
defaced: and process shall pass against the guilty according to the Kings
Edicts and declarations, wherein the obstinate shall not be admitted his
purgation, unless he pay the third part of the fine assessed upon him,
appliable to the poor, shut up, without repetition.

At Paris in a Parliament, the 18. of March. 1613. Signed, Voisin.



A LETTER FROM THE LORD OF ROSNY, GREAT Treasurer of France. TO The Queen
Regent of France, Concerning the Resignation of his offices.
MADAME,
AMong all the honorable Conditions of a French Gentleman, I always held that
to be of the most esteem, which was employed in the Important Affairs of his
Country, in the happy Administration of the same: and in obeying the
Commandments of his Prince: Throughout the course of many years, I have
managed the principal of this Estate, with unexpected success: under my king,
from a bottomless Gulf of misery, I have guided them to the top of all
glory.

At this day ( MADAME) I do obey the desire and express will of your
Majesty, I remit into your hands the two fairest Tokens of the benefits and
rewards of my good Master, The Bast^^c, and the Treasury, which (so long as
he lived, I possessed;) Now that he is deceased, I restore them to you: and
well content my self, that the Effects of my services may remain engraven in
the hearts of your people. An other not so faithful as my self, might fill
all France, with his complaints: But my perpetual devotion to the place of my
Nativity, and to my King, do restrain and bridle my Tongue, and makes me to
seek rather in mine own incapacitie, then in any other consideration, the
cause of so great an alteration.

In one only point is my spirit impatiently tormented: that is; Of that more
then absolute resolution of your Majesty, to urge me to take money in
recompense for my Offies: Not that I do not sufficiently judge how necessary
this course is, for the good of your service: But on the other side, it is to
my self so preiudicall, and so contrary to my demands, that whatsoever power
I have over my self to content you, yet have I not sufficient to accept it.
But contrariwise ( MADAME) I am forced to refuse it, and contrary to my duty
in this occasion, to prefer my particular Interest, before that of your
Majesty: of all the means provided to wade through this business, this must
needs be to me the most odious: and indeed I do abhor it, and hold it as
proceeding not from your goodness, but from the malice of mine Enemies.

For ( MADAME) wherefore do they not rather lay this pretense upon my
ouerwild humor, an incompatible estrangement from all gratification of
whatsoever society, and dissimulation, upon the weak order that I may
paradueture have taken in the affairs of my Offices: upon my bad Husbandry,
in matter of the Treazurie: upon the evils that have proceeded of such strong
intelligences as I have practiced, as well within as without the Realm: and
upon such extreme care as I took to establish my self in the preservation of
my Fortunes: Wherefore (I say Madam) have they not rather chosen this
foundation, rather then any other: neither so fair in show, and yet far
more unlikely? For, so publish or give out, that I never craved any other
recompense, then for my Office of the Treasury, neither yet any other reward
then the Office of a Marshal of France. It is a matter that cannot be truly
maintained; The impudency of mine Enemies, and the complaint of some of my
Friends, shall never be of force sufficient, otherwise to testify it.

But if your Majesty do accuse me, that of my self I have offered you all
that I did possess, I confess it: Neither do I deny, but that many times I
have assured your Majesty, that all that was mine depended upon you; yea, even
my very life it self.

But surely ( MADAME) I will also aduow, that at that time I could not imagine
that such Offers to a man's Sovereign, could be offense sufficient to be
therefore deprived and put from his Dignities. So as if now you do so take it,
it is a principle in my opinion, very new: Yet shall not this novelty
nevertheless ever make me to repent that I have done my duty.

But contrariwise ( MADAME) at this present, I do again offer to your
Maistie, not only my honors, my goods, but also my very life, with the lives
of my Children: Neither do I present them unto you upon any condition, but to
use them according to your pleasure; Yea, even to honor my very Enemies with
them, if to take them from me simply be not matter of content.

If my passed Actions have tended to the advancement of this Crown, I will
also that my obedience shall be the first to show the means to pressrue it.
And whatsoever my Enemies do publish of my love to that I possess, or
whatsoever other men's humors may help to breed belief, yet is it true (
MADAME) that I will abandon all that my services have purchased me, with more
constancy, yea, with a thousand times more resolution, then an other shall
possess them with pleasure. It shall suffize me in my solitarines, to learn
how your Majesty does daily make your Scepter to flourish, and preferring in
these Affairs a goodly Order, and in your Coffers Treasure sufficient to
support this Estate, which principally subsisteth upon the support of these
two Pillars.

This is it wherein I will most quietly entertain my idle cogitations, and
comfort my self over the loss of my good King, without being constrained (if
it may so please you) to accept or reserve any other recompense for my Offices,
then my contentment to receive none, and the honor of your express
Commandments* But if nevertheless, for a final Resolution, and that I may
not show my self disobedient to your wills, your Majesty do absolutely
enjoin me to the contrary.

This then ( MADAME) is the greatest favor, and that which I most desire,
wherewith I do most humbly beseech you to recompense me, that it may please
your Majesty (MADAME) immediately to command my greatest enemies to go into
the Chamber The Millions are of Crowns and not of Pounds.
of Accounts, there to verify and take view of the profits or detriments of
my 12. years watchings. Then if it be not found, that during the said time,
under the power and authority of my great King, I have by my dexterity and by
my trauails, rooted out the greatest confusion that ever was in the Treasuries
of France: that beside the sparing of eight Millio^s every year: whereof he
yearly became indebted to his Officers, besides the payment of all charges, and
of all the ordinary Expenses of the Estate, of all the wages of the sovereign
Courts, of all the wages of the men of War, of all the Garrisons, Embassages,
the Kings house, the Voyages and Marriag^^ giving of Rewards and Recompenses,
with a thousand other expenses, too tedious to be here set down, besides also
the Guardes ordinary sums, without augmenting either Taxes or Impositions in
the Realm.

Yea contrariwise, If they find not that I have yet for the entertainment of
three great Armies, whereof the one recovered Amiens, an other reduced
Bretaigne, and the third conquered Bresse, and Sauoye: found means
extraordinarily to furnish above twelve Millions: for the discharge of the
debts of France, grown by Treaties, above five and twenty Millions: for the
payment of those of Switzerland, Germany, Italy, and England, above thirty
Millions: For the payment of Pensions, both within and without the Realm,
above four and twenty Millions: For the succor of foreign Provinces, above
eight Millions: For the refurnishment of the Artilleries, Fortifications,
Highways, and Buildings, above eight Millions: For the relief of the poor,
above six Millions: To lay up in the Treasury, in the Coffers of the
Bastille, or to leave in Deposito, in the hands of the Treasurer of the
Espa^^ne, above seue^teene Millions: To satisfy many other Expenses, which may
easily be verified, above twenty Millions: If I have not also besides procured
Contracts for the redeeming of the Demaynes of France, that were engaged,
whereof the greatest part is daily put in Execution; Such Redemptions,
amounting to above forty Millions.

Finally, ( MADAME) If I have not in my great care, by my only Vigilancie, put
in practice these sparings: If also to continue the same duty to France, I have
not at all times offered to your Majesty, to loose my life, or to support the
affairs, and that in the same eminency, yea, even to present them in a higher
degree.

If I say, I have not preferred all these things and more, then do I submit my
self ( MADAME) to any punishment for my presumtion, to receive such odious
recompense, that you shall appoint me, as the price of my honors and of my
offices: But if also ( MADAME) there be not any one of these Articles found
false, (unless it be that they speak too little) and that my former affection
has received no other alteration, but to be grown more ardent and strong,
suffer me ( MADAME) for my more worthy satisfaction, to endure the harm that
you do me, without accepting the good that you offer me. Revoke and call in my
offices without this gracious charge. Or if necessarily ( MADAME) you will
vouchsafe yet to honor me with some favor, Let it be only, if it may so
please you, a perpetual remembrance of my fidelity: A favor which I desire
of your Majesty: not that hereafter I might be recalled to the painful
travel of the affairs: but only to leave me in rest, that I may still live
in the remembrance of her, who is this day the Regent of my country: the living
soul of my master, and the mother of my King. And surely ( MADAME) it is also
an honor, and last acknowledgement which you Madame cannot justly deny me: for
since all they whom in my offices I may have offended, do labor to see me
deprived, much more may they remember my services that do triumph in them.

Farewell house, farewell fortress, which I have had in keeping and government
above twelve years. Farewell Temple of the Goddess Mon^ta Money, who have
procured me so great envy: Let me now go, now that I am weary of these
affairs; Return me to a private life, wherein I may no more have such cares.
I am he, who strong in spirit and courage, having comprehended the very ground
of the riches of the King and Kingdom, have governed them: I am he, unto whom
the felicity of this estate, augmented in new revenues, and the coffers of
our young masters, replenished by just and lawful means, stand bound for that
plain and assured order that I have established; I have reaped great honors
and large recompense for that industrious care that I took under a great king.
I was of great power, and had great authority, but even in the turning of a
hand, in his bloody fall, I have seen all fallen and ruined. In the same
mishap, have I seen extinct, all that envy, that made diverse many times to
threaten my undoing and utter ruin, whiles I procured the good of the estate,
and that I sought nothing but to purchase only my masters favors, without
any regard of the great ones, and never knowing what it was to seek the favor
and good will of the people, evermore bending my self wholly to this purpose.

But now in the end, depart from me all troublesome carking care, I am now
resolved to mew up my ship in a calm, and safe haven: peradventure the state
having lost me, shall better acknowledge wherein I have been profitable unto
it, and the people shall find it, albeit ouerlate, when favor and affection
shall succeed hatred: but I do not so highly esteem my own grace and good,
as that I should desire to obtain it, by the disasters and calamities of my
country: But contrariwise, grant O God, that the fortune of this Realm, may
evermore continue in good estate, that I may never see it overthrown, and that
it may never have cause to be sorry for the loss of me, or to wish for me
again.

FINIS.
THE KINGS Edict, Importing the ordering of Apparel: with prohibition to all
his Subjects: not to wear upon the same any gold or silver, pure or
counterfeit: Embroderie, Lace of Millan or of Millan fashion: neither to make
in their houses any guilt work, under the penalties therein contained.
JEWS, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, To all people presant,
and to come, Greeting.

The late Kings our Predecessors, to the end to restrain the great and
excessive expenses, growing of the excess and superfluity of Apparel; have
Enacted sundry just and commendable Ordinances; Yea, even the late King, our
most honored Lord and Father (whom God pardon) by his Edicts of the month of
Julie, 1601. and of November, 1606. Did forbid all manner of men whatsoever,
generally to wear in their Garments, any Gold or Silver: which
notwithstanding, the most part of our Subjects have suffered themselves to be
led away with this vain and unprofitable expense, and that with so much
licentiousness, and excess, that were there no provision made to the
contrary, themselves would remain either utterly undone or brought into such
discommodities, that they could have no means to serve, if any important
occasion should fall out for the good of our Estate. Upon these considerations,
with the advice of the Queen Regent, (our most honored Lady and Mother) of
the Princes of our Blood, and of other Princes, Officeers of Crown, and
principal of our Council: and of our own full power and authority Royal,
by this our perpetual and irreuocable Edicts, have Decreed and Ordained, and
do Decree and ordain as follows.

I.First, we do enjoin all Church* men (ever hereafter to continue, as now
they do) in wearing of modest Apparel, decent, and convenient for their
profession: Also all other our Subjects, to abstain from all those
superfluities, whereinto in time past they have been carried away: under pain
of such penalties, as the ordinances of the Kings our Predecessors, for such
causes do import. II. We do expressly forbid all persons whatsoever,
generally within our Kingdoms, Lands, Countries, and the Dominions of our
obedience, of whatsoever Sex, Quality, Calling, or condition soever they be;
Not to wear any Garments enriched with Gold or silver, Fine or counterfeit,
whether woollen or Linen, Pur^ileurs, Embroderies, Laces, Stripedstuffs, or
any thing equiuolent, which may serve their bodies, in whatsoever sort or
manner: under pain of fifteen hundred Francks fine: one third part appliable
to our use, an other third part to the poor, shut up in this our good Town of
Paris, and the Suburbs of the same, and the other third part to the Enformer.

Always excepted, the Harness and Saddles for Horses, already made, wherein
we are content for six Months, to Tolerate the workmanship of Gold and
silver.

III.We also forbid, in whatsoever kind of Garments, all Embrodery of Gold,
Silver, or Silk, as also the use of Laces of Millan, or Millan-fashion, under
pain of a thousand pounds Fine. IIII.Nowbeit, we mean not in these
Prohibitions, to comprehend the use of Gold, Silver, or Embroderie, in
Gyrdles, Hangers for Swords, Hat-bands, Garters, Knots, Irons, Tagges, and
Supporters, and Collers, for Women and Maids, Ladies and Gentlewomen. Neither
also the guilding of Sword Hiltes, or Chapes, at the end of the Skabberds in
Armours, Spurs, Bittes for Horses, and Stirrops. V.We also forbid all
workmen hereafter not to guild, or cause to be gilded, any Carroches, under
pain of a thousand-pounds, to employed as it is aforesaid. VI.We also forbid
from henceforth, the making of any guilt work, in any of the houses of our
subjects, either upon the lead, stone, timber, plaster, or other thing
whatsoever, under pain of the like fine. VII.We also forbid all Lords,
Gentlemen and others, of whatsoever calling, he^ceforth not to cloth their
Pages or Laquies, in any garments of silk, whom we will have to be apparelled
in stuffes of wool, with a passement lace upon the seames and outward edges
only. VIII.We moreover forbid all Tailors, Embroderers, doublet makers,
Hosiers, and other workmen, as well of our own Train, as dwellers in any
Towns else where, not to make, or cause to be made, any garments or other
thing heretofore forbidden: under pain if they be found transgressors against
this our ordinance, to be condemned in the sum of three hundred pounds Fine,
for the first time, and for the second, in an other fine double the former, to
be employed as before, and for the third, in corporal punishment. IX.We will
and ordain, that this our present ordinance be strictly observed by all
persons of whatsoever calling or condition, the same to take place at the day
and feast of Easter at hand. X.And the better to prevent such transgressions as
may be made to the prejudice of our said prohibitions, we will and ordain,
that all Judges royal, by prevention, all Commissaries, Guardes, and all other
Officers, shall take notice, Execute, and cause to be kept, and observed, these
our present Prohibitions, and that the Fines be assessed as well against the
proper Owners of the things forbidden, as against all concealers, and paid
notwithstanding any Oppositions, or Appeals whatsoever, and without prejudice
of the same.
We also do command all our trusty and beloved Counselors, All such as hold
our Courts of Parliament, and all our Bayliffes, Stewards, Prouosts, Judges,
and other our Justices and Officers, to whom it may appertain, that these our
said Inhibitions, and Prohibitions, they cause to be Red, Published, and
Recorded, in all parts and places of their Resorts, Jurisdictions, and
Liberties, and the same (from point to point) to maintain, keep, and
inuiolably observe.

Expressly enioyning out Atturneyes general of our said Parliaments, and
their substitutes, in every of our said Bayliwickes, Stewardships,
Prouostships, and other Jurisdictions, to assist the said Executions, and to
make out all Processes and Instances, thereto requisite and necessary: Our
Receivers of Fines in their Accounts, to make actual Receipt of all such, as
upon this cause shall be assessed: Also, to all governors of Hospitalls, and
Masters of the Fyles or Records of the poor, upon their loyalties and
consciences, to employ the said money upon the sustenance and maintenance of
the said poor: For such is our pleasure.

And for that in sundry and many places, they may stand in need of these
pre^^^^s, We will, that upon the Vidimus of the same, being duly collationed
and examined, faith shall be given thereto as to this present Original.

Whereto in witness hereof, we have caused to set our Seal.

Given at Paris, in the month of March, the year of Grace, 1613. and of our
Reign, the third: Signed, LEWIS.
And underneath By the King in his Council. The Queen Regent being present.
Signed DE LOMENIE.
And on the side, VISA. And sealed with the great Seal, in green Wax, upon
Laces of Red and greeeene, and lower Written, Read, Published, and Recorded, in
the hearing of the Kings Attorney general, requiring that it might take place,
to begin the fifteenth day of May, in the same year, and Decr^^d, that
Coppies examined should be sent to the Bayliwickes and Stewardships, there to
be Read, Published* Recorded, and put in Execution, by the diligence of the
substitutes of the Kings Attorney general, who shall monthly certify the
Court.

At Paris, in Parliament the second day of April, one thousand, six hundred,
and thirteen. Signed VOISIN.




