THE FRENCH KINGS DECLARATION AGAINST the Dukes of VENDOSME and MAYENNE, The
Marshall of Bouillon, the Marquis of Coeuure, the Presdent le Iay, and all who
assist them.

Verified in the COURT of PARLIAMENT the 13. of February, 1617.

Stilo Nouo.

LONDON Printed for WILLIAM BARRET, 1617.

THE FRENCH KINGS DECLARATION AGAINST the Dukes of Vendosme, Mayenne, and the
Marshall of Bouillon.
Verified in the Court of Parliament the 13. of FEBRVARY 1617. Sti. Nouo.
LEWIS, by the grace of God King of France and Navarre, To all Men present and
to come, Greeting.

The bounty, and clemency We have used, and the favors and benefits We have
bestowed on some Princes, Dukes, and Peers of this Realm, as likewise on
other of our Subjects, made us hope with good reason, that they would co^taine
themselves within the bounds of that respect and obedience, which they owe unto
Us by the bond of Nature, even they to whom We had not only pardoned the crimes
which they had committed, but also augmented Our bounty by new favors.

But this notwithstanding, it is come to pass, that postposing all these
considerations, and forgetting their promises made at the last Treaties of
Loudun, and Soissons, whither they retired at the very time, when We gave order
that the person of Our Cousin the Prince of Conde should be seized on by
Arrest, they have in such sort declared themselves against Us and Our State, by
new Leagues and Combinations, both within and without the Realm, that We may
truly say, they have no other desseigne then to procure the total ruin
thereof, if We prevent it not by a speedy course: and their inducement hereunto
proceeds from impunity, and from those profits they have received thereby
heretofore, and the hope they have to draw from thence in stead of punishment
the same advantages, for the future.

Now, whereas the Dukes, Vendosme, and Mayenne, and the Marshall of Bouillon,
with whom the Marquess of Coeuure has joined himself, are they, who contrary
to all the protestations of loyalty, which they had made, and caused to be made
unto Us, since the said Treaties of Loudun and Soissons, never to depart from
Our obedience, and from that natural duty, wherein they are obliged unto Us:
nevertheless, to Our exceeding grief, notwithstanding the exhortations which
We have caused to be used unto them by many, rather to make further trial of
the effects of Our clemency, then of the force, and rigor of Our Arms, are
anew reioyned, confederated, and combined, or rather have continued in the same
League, Faction, and Association, which to the prejudice of Our service, they
had together with the Duke of Neuers, whom for like faults We have declared
guilty of Treason; and in committing al kinds of Actions, which are contrary
to the duty of Subjects and Officers of the Crown, most nearly obliged to
their King: The said Duke of Mayenne, in his particular, having not only barred
the Lieutenant General, and other Officers of Soissons, who were turned out by
his commandment, during the last troubles, from reentring into the Town, and
caused our Letters of Declaration against the Duke of Neuers, to be forcibly
and violently taken out of our said Officers hands, in those other Towns,
where he has authority; with prohibition, that they should not publish them,
as they were commanded by Us: but which is more, to cloak his evil carriage,
vented publicly a rumor of a practice against his life, whereof, when he had
written unto Us, We, to be fully informed of the truth, caused our Court of
Parliament to decree, that the Offender should have his trial at Soissons, and
afterward be brought to Our said Court, to receive such punishment as the
enormity of the crime required: the execution whereof, the same Duke has
hindered, seeing that the offender did not persist in his accusation, but
contrariwise, acknowledge before all the Officers, that he had bin induced
thereto by some of his part: so that the said Duke, to keep men from further
knowledge thereof, was enforced to cause the Archers, whom the Court had sent
thither for the bringing of the Offender, to be kept by some of his People,
that by reason they had not seen the Officers of the Presidial Court there, at
their return, they might not be able to inform the said Court of Parliament,
how the whole business had passed. Moreover, the same Duke, and all the rest
jointly, to the prejudice of Our Inhibitions, so strictly and solemnly
published, have made leuies of soldiers, and quartered them in those Towns,
and places, the guard whereof we have committed to their trust; have likewise,
and do daily compel a great number of Our poor subjects to work and toil
in the fortifications they make there; detain and seize on Our moneys within
the Coffers of Our receipts, and, labor all they can to debaush and alienate
from Us, and consequently, from their duty, the Captains and Governors of
Our Towns and Castles, being aided and assisted in these violences and
contempts, by the advice and counsel of le lay, President in Our Court of
Parliament. Which courses, if we should endure with patience, and dissemble Our
notice thereof, until they be joined together in Arms, and take the Field, it
would not but tend to the ruin and spoil of Our Subjects: whereupon they
constrain Us, contrary to the benignity and mildness of Our nature, to take
order that they be proceeded against, by due and lawful ways, to the end,
that through a just chastisement, We may stay the continuance, and progress of
such crimes; for which otherwise We should stand answerable to GOD, who has
put Justice and Power in the hands of Sovereign Princes, that they should
oppose themselves against such violences, and prevent the ruin of the People,
over whom GOD has established them: for these causes we give to understand,
that after deliberation taken hereupon by Our order, in this Our Council, where
the Queen, Our most honored Lady and Mother was present, with some Princes of
our blood, other Princes, Dukes, Peers, Officers of Our Crown, and principal
Lords of the same Counsel; by the advice thereof, We have pronounced and
declared, pronounce and declare by these presents, signed with Our hand; The
said Duke of Vendosme, and Mayenne, the Marshall of Bouillon, Marquess of
Coeuure, and President le Iay, and all other who do, or will assist them in
their disobedience, and who are, or will be their adherent to them in their
dessignes, have forfaited all their Honors, Dignities, States, Offices, Power,
Governments, Charges, Pensions, Privileges, and Prerogatives, which they have
received either from Us, or from the Kings Our Predecessors; and that we have,
and do revoke the same, from this present, declaring the said Dukes, Marshall,
Marquess and President, and all their adherents, to be disobedient, Rebels,
Perturbers of the public Tranquillity, and guilty of Treason, and in that
quality, Our will is they be proceeded against, as well in their persons, as
their goods, memory and posterity: as likewise all those who shall assist or
favor them directly, or indireclty. We give charge and commandment to all
Governors and Lieutenants General of our Provinces, Captains, Chiefes, and
Leaders of our Forces, to set upon them; and to all Our Officers, Mayors,
Consuls, and Sheriffs of Our Towns, to seize on their Persons, if they be
there, that they may put them into Our hands, and pursue them by all the
courses and seuerities of Our Constitutions, made concerning like crimes; but
with this exception, if within fifteen days after the publication of these
present Letters in Our Court of Parliament, the said Dukes of Vendosme, and
Mayenne, Marshall of Bouillon, Marquess of Coeuure, and President le Iay, do
not acknowledge their fault, nor acquit themselves effectually and personally,
before Us in that which is their duty toward Us; and if they do not cause
those strangers to void our Realm, whom they have drawn into it; and do not
dismiss all the Forces they have levied, and dissolve the Garrisons which have
been placed by them or their adherents, without any order or commission from
Us: And for so much as concerns the Gentry and other of Our Subjects, the
exception serves likewise, if within the said time they do not present
themselves at the Tribunalls of Our Bayliwicks, and Seneshall-ships, within the
jurisdiction whereof they hold their residence, to make due declaration and
protestation to be registered within the Secretaries Offices thereof; and do
wholly desist from all actions and enterprises, prejudicial to Our authority
and service, and to Our Constitution, Declarations, and Inhibitions.

Now, in case the said Dukes, Marshall, Marquis, and President, and all other
who shall have assisted them, do conform themselves, they shall remain
exempt and discharged from all penalties, contained in this Declaration, and
shall be received into Our favor: We will and command Our trusty and
well-beloved Counselors, such as hold Our Courts of Parliament, Our Bayliss,
Seneshalls, or their Lieutenants, and all other Our Justices and Officers, to
whom it shall appertain, each in his particular, that they register or cause
to be registered, kept and observed these Our Letters, according to their form
and tenor: And do in like sort will and command Our Atturneys General of the
said Courts, to make all pursuits, and use al diligence for the execution
hereof, and for the punishment, and chastising of all those who shall infringe
the same. For such is Our pleasure. In testimony whereof We have caused Our
Seal to be put to these presents. Given at Paris in the Month of February,
the year of our LORD 1617. and of Our Reign the seventh.

Signed Lewis, and somewhat lower, By the King. de L'omenie.

A REMONSTRANCE OF THE PRINCES, TO THE FRENCH KING.
Dated the Fourth of FEBRVARY.
SIR,
YOur most Humble and most Faithful Subjects and Servants, the Dukes, Peers,
ancient Officers of your Crown, and principal Lords of your Kingdom; seeing
the dangers which inviron you, and the evils which threaten your State with an
inevitable subversion, if speedy order be not taken, and that they are denied
all access unto your Person, wherewith they might freely, and securely,
discover the causes, and propound the remedies thereof; do in all humility
beseech your Majesty to take in good part, this their most humble
Remonstrance, which cannot but well befit their mouths, sithence it does
testify nothing but fidelity and affection unto your service, to the
conservation of your Sacred Person, and the good of your States. And it is by
so much the more convenient, because they are thereunto obliged, both by Divine
and Humane Laws, by the Oath which they have taken, and the duty which they
owe unto your Crown. We are not ignorant, that the evil is disguised by those
who do it, and who labor by all possible means to cover it, as well as
commit it, still indeuouring to make those distasteful unto your Majesty, who
complain thereof. And the unhappiness of France is such, that they having all
the power of your Estate in their hands, they cause you to hold your
faithfullest servants for Enemies. But the violence of their Tyrannical
carriage is grown to that excess, that it cannot longer be endured; The
complaints of it are general; every one sees it, and feels the miserable
effects; And their Artifices can no longer hinder the cries, and public
grief from striking your Majesty's ears, and from moving your compassion to
relieve your People; and your justice against the Authors of so great
miseries; which every one knows, and openly detesteth; And by a common vow of
your faithful Subjects are destined to just punishment, according to their
demerits.

The insatiable ambition, and avarice, of the Marquess of Anchre, and his Wife
is the only cause of the evils we are sensible of; of the disorders we see, and
of that we fear most.

This is the ulcer which has festered, yea, spoiled the whole body of your
State. It is of him only that men do complain, and of the Ministers and
Executors of his violent and raging passions, and no other.

This is the complaint of the greatest part of your Subjects, who as yet have
true French hearts: who seeing themselves compassed about with fear and
apprehensions, and exposed to all manner of dangers, by the intestine
conspiracies which aim at the ruin of your State, do implore your Justice,
to protect them from the oppression and servitude, unto which those persons
would make them subject; and for to free your Crown from the many disasters,
which now increase to the overthrow of the same.

The remedy (SIR) is in your own hands, and in your power, which if you do not
make use of, the disease will shortly grow incurable: And therefore to shun
it, the cause must be taken away, which being known unto you, there needs
now no other thing then your word only; to give order that the Marquess of
Anchre, with his Wife and Adherents, be chased from your Sacred Person, and
from the Queen your Mother: And to give way unto Justice, that it may duly
punish them for those crimes whereof they are culpable touching your State.

Every man well knows what deceit he has used, since the death of the last
King of most happy memory, to draw unto himself the entire and absolute
Administration of your Kingdom; to make himself Master of your Councels, of
your Treasure, of your Arms, and of your Fortresses, to dispose of your
public Offices, and Charges, your Favors, and Pardons; because he would be
the sole Judge of Honors, and Dignities, and dispose of the life and death of
your Subjects. The courses he has taken to banish the Princes of the Blood
from the Court, and to breed discord between them, are not unknown; and
likewise of the rest of the Princes, Officers of your Crown, and principal
Lords of the Kingdom: The practizes and corruptions which he has used to
weaken and depresse the authority of your Parliaments, and violently to choke
the lawful freedom of their Remonstrances, imprison your chief Officers, and
make a division through all the orders of your Kingdom; that he might have
the whole disposing of them, and reign alone within the State, as he does now
with an insupportable presumption and insolency, supposing that nothing can
resist his ambitious Dessignes, seeing that, through extreme wrong and
injustice, he has imprisoned the first Prince of your Blood; and by this
audacious Action violated the public faith of the Treaty of Loudun;' upon the
observation of which did depend the repose and tranquillity of your State,
which he had rather plunge into the calamities of a War, then to have the
mask of your Royal Authority taken from him; whereof he makes his benefit,
and uses it as an Instrument, for the destruction of your most faithful
Subjects.

These things are so manifest, and his proiects and guile so plainly
discovered, that no doubt can be made hereof. And the strange proceedings, and
violence, which he uses every day under your Majesty's name, against the Duke
of Neuers, upon so notorious pretexts, and forged imputations, that even the
voice of the people serves for proof enough to refute them; do witness
sufficiently, that the conspiracy is general, against all the Princes and
Nobles of your Kingdom, who will not stoop to his tyranny, and can resist his
plots, which he continually puts in execution, thereby to subvert the State.

For what offense is the same Dukes, saving only, that he is a Prince of the
most renowned Houses of your Kingdoms, one that loves his Country, seeks the
peace of it, and who has always testified his zeal unto your service, and
acknowledges no other Authority lawful then your Majesty?

He complains of some injury done him by one of his Tenants; and that in
contempt of the dignity of his Office, he cannot freely exercise his charge in
his Government.

He has prosecuted an execution of some feodal rights within his own
possessions, by the ordinary means of Justice, as unwilling to lose that which
his Predecessors left him: Perceiving some secret enterpises, ready to be
executed upon his Houses, he provided, as indeed he ought, for the securing,
defense and keeping of them under your Authority, and for your service.

These lawful and necessary causes are wrested to his rebuke; nay, are imputed
to him as a heinous crime and Rebellion.

We have seen the Declaration that has bin published against him, under your
Majesty's name, and the reasonable conditions unto which he does submit
himself for his trial, and make his innocence appear, which being known
unto us, we most humbly beseech your Majesty to be pleased to protect the same,
and not to suffer it to be oppressed and viole^ced by the Marquess of Anchre,
whose outrages and offenses we can no longer dissemble, because our long
patience has not hitherto served for ought else, then for to render it more
audacious, and insolent; that we be no more vpbraided, that our affection is so
small unto your Majesty, that we are so ungrateful to out Country, so disloyal
and unprofitable unto our selves and to our Posterity, as to be silent, when we
behold the prodigious favor of this Stranger, trampling thus insolently on the
throat of your State, holding prisoner in his hands the first Prince of your
Blood, treading under foot both Laws and Magistrates, emptying your Coffers by
his profusions, consuming your people with excessive charges, and causing your
Subjects to be trecherously murdered, without any punishment at all. And for
recompense of such treachery and disloyalty, conferring upon them the
Governments of your places; deposing and discharging the chief Officers of your
Councels and Parlements, bereauing them of those Titles and Honors, which their
Age, their Virtue, and their Deserts have purchased them; for to establish in
their places his creatures, who are persons altogether unworthy, and
unexperienced for the manageing of your State, being men borne in bondage, and
therefore enemies to all honest men, and most proper to execute his passions,
what detrement soever may ensue thereby to your service, holding nothing
unlawful which may advance his passionate dessignes.

This is that which has induced us, thus humbly to beseech your Majesty to
consider the miserable estate wherinto your Kingdom is now brought, and to
apply, by your Wisdom and Authority, the necessary remedy, which depends
upon your own will, and not to suffer either your name, or your Arms to be
employed to the effusion of your Subjects blood, and oppression of your
Domestical servants, for the maintaining of Strangers to their prejudice, but
to banish them for ever from you: and by the chastisement and due punishment of
the guilty, reestablish confidence and security in your Kingdom, repair the
public Faith, which has bin broken, and set the Prince of Conde at liberty.
And to the end that order may be taken by convenient means, against the
disorders of your State; to cause the Treaty of Loudun to be observed; call
again unto you, and into your Councels, the Princes of your Blood, with the
rest of the Princes, Dukes, Peers, and the ancient Officers of your Crown,
and Counselors of State, whom the deceased King used during his Reign, who
also by natural affection, and as being particularly interessed, as strictly
obliged to the conservation of your State. And then we shall have the
happiness to render you in all security, every man according to his Rank,
Dignity, and Place, that most humble service, and faithful obedience which we
owe you, and which whilst we live we will yield you, as being

Soissons, the fourth of February 1617. New Style. Your most humble, most
loyal, and most obedient Subjects and Servants, Signed, Caesar de Vendosme.
Henry de Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne. Henry de la Tour, Duke of Bouillon.


A RELATION OF THE VICTORIES OBTAINED BY the Prince of PIEMONT, from the 27. of
January, to the last of the same Month.
ON the 27. of January at night, the Prince of Piemont departed from Masserano,
with eight thousand Foot, and four hundred Horse, having left the rest there,
being as many as made up together, the number of a thousand Horse, with a
thousand Foot: and he went with a purpose to attempt Creuacore; where being
arrived before day, he caused those stations and passages of the Mountains to
be taken, which border on the Valley of Sesia, specially those of Guardabuzon
and Guardella, which are the most commodious for the Spaniards sending of
fuccours; and this was performed without the receiving of any loss, or hurt,
from those of the Town and Castle. So soon as it was day, our Men took a
little Hill fortified, which commands the Town within Musket Shot,
enforcing those that held it, to fly and retire into the Town. The whole day
was spent in skirmishing, and they within, being summoned by a Trumpet, that we
might see whether they would yield, returned Musket Shot for answer, belike,
to give us to understand thereby, that they stood in little fear. In the
evening before Sunset the Canon arrived, accompanied by the Valdostans; two
Regiments of French, and four Companies of Carabins: a thing almost
incredible, that it was brought in so short a time, in regard of the
incommodious, hilly, and difficult ways through which it passed. All night long
great diligence was used in planting a Battery, so that on the 29. day in the
morning it was ready, within half a Musket-shotte of the Town, and we began
to batter a little Tower that flanked two cortines, which within few hours was
beaten to the ground, and besides, a breach made in the wall. Whereupon our Men
advanced courageously to the assault; whose resolution being seen by those
within, did so affright them, that they retired, flying to the Castle; though
they could not be so quick of foot, but that about threescore were killed in
the throng, as they rushed out of the gate, and as many taken prisoners.

The Prince not willing to lose time, the rather because he knew, that there
were arrived in the Valley of Sesia two thousand Foot, and three hundred
Horse, sent to the rescue of this place; dispatched immediately certain
Companies of Cuirassiers and Carabins, to seize on a place, by which they who
were retired (as is touched before) might have fled, and gone to their
succors, caused the Canon to play on them that withdrew themselves to the
Castle, and whereas some part of them made a stand on a little Hill, in the
midway from the Castle, which did much annoy our Men, they were beaten thence,
it being not yet noone, when all this service was performed. From the same
place of the battery, we began, without losing any time, to beat the Castle,
wherewith they within being terrified, seeing themselves brought to such a
straight, made a sign that they would parlee, and render the place; and to
that purpose, the Sergeant Mayor Vertua, who commanded there, sent his Ayndante
to treat, whose demand was to depart with life and Arms: whereto he was
answered, that his Highness was content to grant it, the said Ayndante having
first declared, that he was authorized to make a composition, and that they
treated in their own names, and not in the name of the Princess of Masserano;
to whom also his Highness was willing to show favor, commanding she should
have no displeasure done her, but be permitted to go whither she would. With
this resolution the Ayndante returned, and in the mean while his Highness
gave order for the appointing of those soldiers, who should have the guard of
the Castle; but the Sergeant Mayor, who having bin made acquainted by the
Ayndante, with that which he had concluded, showed himself not contented
therewith, but that he would depart with match in cock lighted, though the
Ayndante replied, that he had fully capitulated in the aforesaid manner, fell
to shooting anew. Every one maruailed at this strange course, the news of the
Composition being now spread through the Camp; and his Highness commanded the
battery should be continued, which was done thoroughly till dark night; during
which, our Men won ground by little and little, and made themselves Masters
of certain Houses and Barricadoes, which they within held in the Mountains.
His Highness on the other side, made four Pieces of Canon to be drawn in all
diligence to the top of a Hill that was near, which by break of day were
ready planted, to gall and offend the enemy more; having observed, that from
the place where they were before, they could not work that effect which was
necessary for the giving of an assault. At which instant, they within did
again demand Parle; and although his Highness, in regard of the Sergeant
Majors bad dealing the day before, had just cause to stop his eeares, and
seek to use him, as he deserved, as he was likewise persuaded and counseled
by every one, nevertheless, to show that he makes good war, and to prevent
any disastrous accident which might fall upon the Princess, who was within,
thought not good to reject the demand, whereupon they treated a new, and agreed
as follows.

ARTICLES FOR THE RENDRY OF THE CASTLE OF CREVACORE, ACcorded by FRA. GALEAZZO
PIETRA, Knight, Commander of the Forces which issued out of the Town, and
retired under the Castle, assisted by Lewis Albertazzo Ayndante, to Francis
Bernardin Vertua, Sergeant Mayor; as well in the name of the Princess of
Masserano, as of themselves and their Troops.
FIrst, the said Knight and Ayrdante, with all their men, yield themselves to
the Prince, upon this only condition, that they shall have their lives and
Arms, without match, powder, or bullet, leaving all other things that they
have, as well within, as without the Castle, to their Highnesses.

Besides, in the name of the Princess, they render to his Highness the Castle
of Creuacore, to dispose thereof, with all that is within the same, as he shall
think good.

And their Highnesses by D. Antonio Bobba, principal Esquire and Gentleman of
the Chamber, promise to give the said Knight, Ayndante and their men, free and
safe passage for their retreat. Thus agreed in Creuacore, the 30. of January,
1617. Signed, D. Antonio Bobba, Era. Galeazzo Pietra, Ludouico Albertazzo,
Francesca Ferrera Fiesca, Francesco Bernardino Vertua.

In this action must not be ouerpassed in silence, the praise due to the
French, especially to the Chiefes, who have showed great valor and courage.

Of our men, I do not believe there are ten slain, but some few were hurt, and
amongst others, Monsieur de Limogion, Lieutenant of the Prince Thomas his
Troop, hurt in that foot which was sound, having lost the other in Asti: and
the Sergeant Mayor of Monsieur d'Eguebon, who is of the Marshall des Desguieres
his Troops.

As the Enemy was ready to depart out of the Castle, because some difficulty
was made about their carrying of powder in their Flaskes, contrary to the
agreement, some of them threw down their powder, others their Flaskes, and one
of them having by chance let fall a burning match, the powder that lay on the
ground was thereby fired, and that likewise gave fire to the powder in the
Flaskes, and to certain barrels, from whence it passed to the Muskets and
Harquebuses, which some of them carried charged; whereupon followed very
lamentable disasters; for many lost their lives, many were burnt, of which
fortune some of our men tasted, being amongst them, and many for fear cast
themselves down from the wall.

While the rest marched away, accompanied with four Companies of Horse, which
his Highness had given them for their conuoy, according to the agreement, that
they might not be molested by our Men; there came one of our Light Horse, with
a Horseman of the Enemies, who was hurt, and had been taken prisoner by him.
The news he brought, were, that a a good number of the Enemies Musketeers,
with some three hundred Horse, coming from the Valley of Sesia, by the way of
Guardella, to succor Creuacore, and the Horse being past the water, our Horse,
who were there in guard, charging them resolutely, did break and put them to
flight, slew twenty, took prisoners the like number, and hurt many; and it is
not unlikely some Chief has laid his bones there, because there were taken
two Cornets, one of a Spanish Captain called Auila, another of the Marquess of
Santa Lucida.

The Princes hereupon marched instantly that way, with a greater force of
Horse, and Foot, to give a greater blow, if the occasion had served, but they
found the Enemy already retired. The next day the Prince going to take view
of the lodgings and quarters of his Men, and being come to those of Guardella,
and Guardabuzone, the one being quarter of the Baron of Diguoyne, and the other
of the Marquess of Vrse, when he saw the Enemies Trenches within a good Musket
shot, determined to try with fifty Musketeers, what countenance he would
make: who assaulting him with great resolution and valor, won the first
stations, whereupon the Prince sent a renfort of an hundredth more to pass
further, who coming thither, fought so successefully, that they became Masters
of all the Enemies other quarters and trenches, where Don Sancho de Luna was
slain, who was Governor of the Castle of Milan, and General in that part;
with many other Captains, and fifty Soldiers: there was taken Prisoner the
Colonel or Camp-master, Carlo di Sanguine, and a Nephew of his: now there
remaining no more to do, the troops had order to retire to their first
stations. But in their retreat, they of Sesia, who were come forth at the
noise, followed them in gross as far as the first trenches which they had
won, nevertheless we lost only one Captain, and six Soldiers in the
fight we had with them.

There was found the Cassocke of D. Sancho de Luna, and his Sword, which was
sent by the Prince to the Duke his Father; and amongst diverse Letters written
to the said D. Sancho, as well from the King of Spain, as from Don Pedro de
Toledo, were these two which follow, worthy to be known to every man; that men
may see the charity of Don Pedro toward those who are allied in blood, or
recommended to the Crown of Spain.

DON PEDRO DE TOLEDO TO D. SANCHO DE LVNA.
NO great account is to be made of the Prince of Masserano's news: neither is
your Lordship the man that needs to attend my order touching that which may
occur, and be judged convenient. For I refer my self wholly to that which
you shall think good, and am content that the Pontons be made. When the
troops of the Territory of Alexandria shall be come, who are to be here to
morrow, we will send them forward with the Germans. I am told this morning,
that the Duke of Sauoy goes toward Villa-noua: but I am not assured of it. I
will give your Lordship advertisement of all things. Alonso Perez Rosales put a
Conuoy into Saint German. At Quinto he lighted on a Conuoy of the Enemy: each
of them fled his own way, seeking to carry away his Conuoy in safety. The
Companies that are to go to Satinara will march along, I suppose, tomorrow, or
the day after, as the Count Tauerna writes me. Don Alonso draws our men from
the lodgings that are near, and says, that if the Duke of Sauoy pass Sesia,
he will seek to give him a blow; and the Dukes speeches tend to such a
construction. Nevertheless, I am desirous to lodge our men, and refresh them
against the good season, because France is in Arms; God continue it so, by
means whereof, we shall compass our business here, both happily and
speedily by GODS help, through which I wish you may cut off some of the
Enemies forces, and work us a diuersion. Then let us see how GOD will farther
assist us in our intentions, to whose protection, I commit your Lordship; from
Nouara, the eight day of January 1617.

Moneys are leauying for you, and your Nephew is upon the point of his dispatch.

Don Pedro of Toledo and Osorio.

DON PEDRO DE TOLEDO TO DON SANCHO DE LVNA.
I Wrote to your Lordship by the Prince of Masserano, but it may be this
Soldier will be with you sooner, and this Letter have safer conueyance; whereof
being confident, I tell you, that I cannot be at quiet, until I know that the
Troops are come to you, and that you have rescued Creuacore: for if it be lost
after so many days, in which the loss might have been prevented: it is good
to consider how our Enemies (for yours and mine are all one) will gird at us. I
hold it more convenient to hazard somewhat, and to fight, then to make good the
Valley of Sesia. For if the men which are in Creuacore were two hundred, as at
the first, it were not a matter so considerable, as now it is: but if so many
men should miscarrie, it were enough to lose all reputation in Italy.

This strange man, the Prince of Masserano has embroiled us herein. For if he
had put our men in time within Masserano, and lastly, in Creuacore, neither had
the first action succeeded, nor should we be now in this perplexity: but since
we are in it, we must commit the issue to GOD and our hands. The Count Tauerna
tells me, there is so much bread, that the one half would serve. I send you
two thousand crowns more, for speedy exigences, which cannot be managed
without money. I hope GOD will clear us happily, to whose protection I
commit your Lordship. From Nouara, the 29. of January 1617.

Don Pedro of Toledo and Osorio.

FINIS.

