ANNO QVARTO Henrici octaui.

royal coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MALO Y PENSE

These be the Statutes established in diverse Parlyaments, for the mystery of
the Pewterers of London, and concerning the search of pewter, brass, and
untrue beams and weights, and for deceiuable Hawkers, with diverse other orders
and redresses to be had in the said mystery, with the renewing and confirming
of the same Statutes,

An act made the fourth year of our Sovereign Lord, King Henry the viij.
concerning Pewterers, and true weights and Beams. the vij. chapter.
FOR as much as a certain Act was made and stablished, in the Parlyament
holden at Westminster, the xix. of the reign of the last most famous King,
your Father, Henry the vij. (whom GOD pardon:) concerning Pewterers and
Brasiers, hawking and walking about the Countries, and also concerning false
Beams, Scales and Weights, with a provision for casting of fine Metal and of
perfect goodness, which act was made to endure to the next Parliament, the
tennor whereof insueth.

That where many simple and evil disposed persons, of this your Realm of
England, using the said crafts, daily go about this your Realm, from village,
from Town, and from house to house, as well in woods and Forests, as other
places, to buy Pewter and Brass. And that knowing thieves and other pickers,
that steal as well Pewter and Brass belonging to your Highness, and under
your mark, and to the Lords spiritual and temporal, as to other your
Subjects of this your Realm, bring soch stolen vessels to them, in such hid
places to sell, and sell it for little or naught, and about they bring it to
privy places, or into corners of Cities or Towns, and there sell much part of
it to strangers, which carry it over the Sea by stealth.

Also, the said persons so going about, and diverse other using the said
crafts, use to make new vessels, and to mixed good metal and bad togethers,
and make it naught and sell it for good stuff: where in deed the stuff and
metal thereof, is not worth the fourth part that it is sold for, to the
great hurt, deceyt and loss of your Subjects.

Nota. Also, diverse persons using the said crafts, have deceivable and false
Beams and Scales, that one of them will stand even with twelve pound weight at
the one end, against a quarter of a pound at the other end, to the singular
advantage of themselves, and to the great deceyt and loss of your Subjects,
buyers and sellers with them.

The ordinance. For reformation of the premises, it would please your
Highuesse, of your most aboundaunt grace, with the advice of your Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present Parlyament assembled,
and by the authority of the same, to enact and stablish, that no person, nor
persons, using the said craft of Pewterers and Brasiers, from henceforth shall
sell or change any Pewter or brass, new or old, at any place, or places,
within this your Realm; but only in open Fayers or Markets, or in their own
dwelling houses, but if they be desired by the the buyers of such wares: upon
pain of forfeiture to our Sovereign Lord the King, Penalttie x. pound.
for every such Default, ten pounds.

Nota. Also by the same authority, may it be established, that no person, nor
persons, of what condition or degree so ever, he or they be, from henceforth
(within the City of London, and York, or without,) either cast, or work any
Pewter vessels, or Brass, at any place, or places, within this your Realm: but
that it be as good fine metal, as is the Pewter and brass, cast and wrought
after the perfect goodness of the same within the City of London, and by the
statutes of the same ought to be, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Pewter
and Brass so cast and wrought, of worse Pewter or Brass than ought to be
wrought in the same Cities. The one half of every such forfeiture, to be to
the use of your Highness, and the other half to the use of the finders thereof.

Provision Provided always, that this forfeyture in no wise extend to brass
or pewter, being in the possession of any person, other than the workers of the
same, or such as have the same to sell, and being of the crafts or mystery.
Nota. Also that it may by the same authority be enacted and stablished, that
no manner of person, or persons, of what degree or condition soever, he or they
be, from hence forth make no hollow wares of Pewter. That is to say, Saltes
and Pots, that is made of pewter, called ley metal, but that it may be after
the assyse of pewter ley metal wrought within the City of London. Penalty.
And that ye makers of such wares, shall mark the same with several marks of
their own, to the intent that the makers of such wares shall auowe the same
wares by them (as is abouesayd) to be wrought.

And that all and every such wares, not sufficiently made and wrought, and not
marked in form above said, founden in the possession of the same maker or
seller, to be forfeited. Penalty. And if the same ware be sold, the said
maker to forfeit ye value of ye same, so vnlawefully wrought and sold, the one
half of the said wares, or the value thereof, to be to the use of your
Highness, and the other half to be to the use of the finders or searchers of
the same.

Beams and weights.
Also that it may (by the same authority) be enacted and stablished, that if
any person or persons, hereafter using buying and selling of Pewter or brass,
that hereafter occupy and deceaueable or false beams, or weights, of ye said
wares, that every such person or persons using or occupying such deceiuable and
untrue beams or weights, to forfeit twenty shillings: the one half to the
King, and the other half to the party that therefore shall sue by action of
debt. And that in the said action, no protection nor essoyne shall be
allowed. And also the said party so offending, shall forteit his Beam to him
that shall sease it. And if the said offender, or offenders, be not sufficient
to pay ye said sum, or sommes, by them so forfeited, that then it shall be
lawful to the Mayors, Baylifs, or other head Officers of such place, or places,
where any such offenders shall be found, to put them in the Stocks, and them so
to keep till the next Market day, next adjoining, and in the Market place to
put them in the Pillory all the Market time. And furthermore, that it be
lawful by the said authority, Search.
that the Master and Wardaines of the said craft of Pewterers, within every
City or Borough of this Realm, where such wardaines are. And where no such
wardaines are, the head officers or governors of the same City, or Borough,
to appoint certain persons most expert in the knowledge of the same to make
search within the said Cities or boroughs where they dwell. And over this, the
Justices of peace within every shire, at the general Sessyons holden at
Michaelmas, shall assign and appoint two certain persons, having experience
therein, to make search in the premises, in every part of the shire, as well
within the franchise as without, saving in Cities or boroughs where searthers
be appointed by the heads or governors of the same. And that all such
unlawful pewter or brass, as the said searchers shall find, the one half
to the use of your Grace, and the other half to the searchers. And that in the
default of the said Masters and Mardaines of the said occupations, not
searching in form as is aforesaid, and whereby that any such unlawful Metal
is cast or made, or unlawful weightes used, that then it shall be lawful to any
person, or persons, having suffici^et cunning and knowledge in the said
occupations, by oversight of the Majors, Baylifs, or head Officers of the said
Cities, and boroughs, and towns, to search all the said places, and to put
those said authority and act in execution, in form aforesaid. Please it
therefore your Grace, and wisdoms, in so much as the said act is thought good
and profitable, that it be ordained, enacted, and established, by the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present Parlyament assembled,
and by the authority of the same, that the said act may endure for ever. For
true mettallct workmanship.
And over, that it be enacted by the said authority, that if any untrue, or
deceiuable metal, or workmanship of Tin or Pewter, be founden, either in
Platters, Chargers, Dishes, Sawcers, Potengers, Trenchers, Basins, Flagons,
Bottles, Pottes, Saltsellers, Goblers, Spoones, Cruets, or Candlestickes, or in
any other such wares of Tin or Pewter, where soever it be cast, made, or
wrought, within this Realm or without, and brought to be sold within the
same Realm. That then it shall be lawful to the Mayor of the City of
London, and the Master and Wardaynes of the craft of Pewterers of the said
City, for the time being, and their deputyes, to have search of the same,
within the city of London, and the suburbs of the same, and that in all
other Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, where any Mardaines be, or shall be, the
Mayors, Baylifs, or head Officers, and Mardaines to have like authority.

And where no Mardaynes be, then the head Officers or governors of the same
Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, to appoint certain persons most expert and
cunning in knowledge of the same, to make search within ye said cities,
Boroughs, and Towns where they dwell.

Pewter being defective to be forfeited.
And if any such new wares, wrought of Tin and Pewter as is aforesaid, be found
defective, and being in the possession of the seller, that then the same person
or persons, that puts any such new wares of pewter to sale, shall forfeit the
same wares, the one half to the use of our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
other half to the searchers or finders of the same.

Provision Provided always, that this act concerning ye forfeiture, be not
prejudicial or hurtful to any person or persons, having grant of our
Sovereign Lord ye King, or of any of his noble Progenitors by his letters
pattents of such forfeiture, but that they and every of them shall have and
enjoy the same according to their former graunts and liberties.

An Act concerning Pewterers, made in the xxv. year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord, King Henry the eight, in the minth Chapter.
Peticion. IN their most lamentable wise showen, and pitteously complain unto
the Kings most royal Majesty, and to this most high Court of Parliament, the
Kings most humble poor and obeysaunt subjects, the Master, wardaines, and
poor fellowship of the craft and mystery of Pewterers, as well of the City of
London, as of all other places within this Realm of England, that where the
said craft or mystery, before this time has been one of the best handicrafts
within this Realm, which has not only grown and contiuued by mean of
diverse good acts and statutes made for the true exercise of the same, whereof
one was made in the xir. year of the Kings most renowned Father, whose soul
God pardon. And one other was made in the fourth year of the Kings most
victerious reign, concerning the crafts of Pewterers and Brasiers, of and for
the true making, mixting and selling of good and true pewter, and brazen
vessels. And also for exercising and using of true weights and beams, to be
occupied by the sellers of any such pewter or brazen vessels, within this
Realm, so that none of the Kings Subjects, nor any other person, should (by
any sale of any false mixed brazen and pewter vessel, or any untrue weights)
be deceived, as by the said statutes more plainly does appear.

Which good Statutes duly put in execution, has caused the said craft to
increase and multiplye, to the great profit and utility of a great number of
the Kings Subjects, and the commodity of pewter vessel much to be had in
reputation, in all strange Regions and Countries, until now of late, diverse
evil disposed persons, being the Kings Subjects borne, which have been
apprentises and brought up, in the exercise of the said craft of Pewterers,
have now of late, for their singular lucre, repaired into strange Regions and
Countries, and there do exercise the said craft of Pewterers, teaching
strangers (not only the cunning of mixting and forging of all manner of
Pewter vessel) but also do teach all things belonging to the said craft of
Pewterers. By means whereof, there is not only brought (daily into this
Realm) out of strange Regions to be sold, great number of things made of
Pewter, untruly mixted, and made of Tin, where with the Kings Subectes be
daihe deceived, and the people of strange Countries greatly instructed, in the
cunning of the said craft of Pewterers, in such wise that thereby not only a
great number and quantity of pewter vessel, and other things of pewter, made in
diverse sorts and fashions, amounting to a great value, which was daily and
continually wont to be carried and conveyed out of this Realm, by Merchants,
into strange Regions and Countries, and there to be sold and vended. Whereby
the commodity of Tin made into Pewter vessel, which has bin had in great
estimation, as things very necessary and commodious, and the kings customs
thereby much advanced, is now like utterly to cease and decay, and not to be
esteemed as here to fore has been but also the said craft of Pewterers,
which at this day sets and keeps in work and occupation, a great number
of people, shall be be utterly undone. And a great multitude of the Kings natural
subjects, thereby fall into idleness, to the great impouerishment of this
Realm, if speedy remedy for the redress of the premises be not provided.

In tender consideration whereof, and for reformation of the premises, Any
manner of Pewter wrought out of this Realm to be forfeited.
it may please your highness, by the assent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present Parlyament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, to ordain and enact, that no person or persons
hereafter, at any time now inhabiting, or which hereafter shall inhabit within
this Realm shall buy, or otherwise take by exchaung for other wares, any wares
made, or hereafter to be made out of this Realm, Search and seasure.
of Tin, or mixed with Tin, as Platters, Dishes, Sawcers, Pottes, Basyns, Ewers,
Flagons, Goblets, Salt, Saltsellers, Spoones, or any other thing made of Tin
or Pewter as aforesaid, whatsoever it be, upon pain of forfeiture of the
same ware, in whose hands soever it may be found or taken: and also, lawful
money current in this Realm to the value thereof. The one half of the same
forfeiture to be to the use of the Kings Highness, and the other half to the
use of the finders of the same.

Penalty. And furthermore be it enacted, that it shall be lawful for the
Master and wardaines of the said craft of Pewterers, as well within the
City of London, as within every other City, Borough, and Town of this Realm
where such wardaines be. And where no such wardaynes be, to the head Officer
or governor, head Officers or governors of the same City, Borough, or
town, for the time being, to appoint diverse persons most expert in knowledge
of the same, to make search and seasure, and to take into their hands and
possession all such wares as hereafter shall be brought contrary to the true
intent and effect of this present Act, in whose soever hands or possessions
any such shall be found.

Prentises or Iourney-men strangers borne.
And also be it enacted by the authority abouesaide, that no person or
persons, occupying the said craft or occupation of Pewterers, within this
Realm, shall set on work, or retain in his or their service, any person or
persons, to be his or their Apprentice or Iourney-man, being stranger borne
out of this Realm, upon pain to forfeit for every such Apprentice and
Iourney-man, ten pounds sterling. Strangers shall not work pewter within the
Realm.
And that no stranger, borne out of this Realm, shall occupy, exercise, or use
from the feast of Penticost, next coming, the said craft of Pewterers, nor
work any manner of vessel or other ware aforesaid to be made of Tin or
Pewter, within any place or places of this Realm, upon pain of forfeiture of
ten pounds sterling: and also, upon pain of forfeiture of the same Pewter
or Tin so wrought, in whose hands soever it may be taken or found.

Exercise beyond Sea.
And also, be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that no person nor persons,
being borne within this Realm, occupying or excercising the said craft of
Pewterers, shall at any time here alter resort to any strange Regions or
Countries, there to use, teach or exercise ye said craft of Pewterers, upon
pain to loose the privilege and benefit of an Englishman. And if in case any
of the Kings Subjects at this present time, being dwelling in any strange
Country or Region, and there occupying the said craft of Pewteters, do not
repair into this Realm, within three months next after request and warning
to him be given, by writing sealed with the common seal of the Wardaynes of
the said craft, within the said City of London, and here in this Realm
continually from henceforth dwel^ inhabit, that then and from henceforth he
shall be taken and reputed as no Englishman, but shall stand and be from
henceforth out of the Kings protection.

Hawkers.
And forasmuch as sundry evil disposed persons which commonly be called
Hawkers, by authority of the Kings letters pattents or placarde, do not only
go about from place to place, within this Realm, using buying and selling of
brass and pewter. And by color and pretense of the same Lycenses and
Placardes, use unlawful and deceyueable Weights and Beams, but also do use to
sell both pewter and brass, which is not good, nor truly, nor lawfully mixed
nor wrought, to the great deceit of the Kings true liege people, contrary to
the form and effect of the said good Act and Statute made in the said fourth
year of the Kings most noble reign. Be it therefore enacted by authority of
this present Parliament, that all such lycences and placardes heretofore had,
made, or granted to any such person or persons, contrary to the true meaning,
form, and effect of this Statute shall be from henceforth by authority of
this present Parliament, clearly void and of none effect. And where as in the
said act of Parliament, (concerning the craft of Pewterers and Brasiers) made
in the said fourth year, for diverse causes and considerations in the same
contained, among other things, it is expressed that no person, or persons,
using the said craft of Pewterers or Brasiers should from henceforth fill or
change any Pewter or brass, new or old, at any place or places within this
Realm, but only in open Fayres and Markets, or in their stone dwelling
houses, but if they were desired by the buyers of such wares, upon pain of
forfeiture for every such default, ten pounds.

Hawkers. For as much as the same forfeiture is to the only use of the Kings
highness, and that any party searching or finding the same, is not entitled
to have any benefit thereby, it has not been known that any person, or
persons, have taken any pain to insearch or make any inquiry thereof. By
reason whereof, diverse and many evil disposed persons, using buying and
selling both of brass and pewter, and not regarding the said good act, nor
the said penalty, daily go about from village to village, Town and town, and
from house to house, to sell such pewter and brass, which is not good. And
also use deceivable Weyghts and Beams as they did before the making of the
said act, to the great hurt and deceit of the Kings true liege people and
Subjects. Penalty for Hawkers.
Wherefore be it enacted by the authority abouesayde, that as well the moytie
of the said forfeiture of ten pounds, limited in the said estatute made in
the said fourth year, as also the moytie of all other forfeitures before
expressed, and every of them be and shall be to the use of the Kings
highness, his Heirs and Successors: and the other moytie of the same
forfeitures, and every of them, to the use of him, or them, that shall seize,
find, or present the said forfeitures, or any of them, or that shall sue for
the same in any competent Court or Courts, within this Realm by action of
debt, bill, plaint or information, wherein the defendant shall in no wise be
admitted to wage his law, or any protection or essoyne to any person or
persons, which shall be impeached to have offended contrary to the form and
effect of this Statute, shall be allowable. This act to endure to the last day
of the next Parliament.

The annotations of the confirmacions and renouations of the aforesaid
Statutes.
Confirmation. ANd it is to be noted that the said last act was reuewed in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, the viij. day of June, in the xxviii. year
of our said Sovereign Lord, to and among other acts. And that all causes,
articles, and provisions therein contained, to stand in their force and
strength, to the last day of the next Parliament. And also, the said act was
renewed again in the Parlyament holden at Westminster the xviij. of April, in
the xxj. year of our said Sovereign Lord, amongst other acts, as is
aforesaid. etc.

An act concerning Pewterers made in the xxxiij. year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Henry the viij. Chap. iiij.
Recital of the Statute made the xxx. year
WHere at the Parlyament begun at London the third day of November, in the xxj.
year of the reign of the King our Sovereign Lord, and from thence adiourned
to Westminster, and there holden, and from that time continued by diverse
progenitors, unto the xv. day of January, the xxv. year of his most noble
reign, it was ordained and established by the assent of the Kings Majesty, his
Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in the said Parlyament then
assembled, and by the authority of the same, that no person, or persons, from
that time than inhabiting, or which after that time should inhabit within this
Realm, should buy, or otherwise take by exchange for other wares, any manner
wares made, or hereafter to be made out of this Realm, of Tin, or mixed with
Tin, as Platters, Dishes, sawcers, Pots, Basins, Ewers, Flagons, Goblettes,
Saltes, Saltsellers, Spoones, or any other thing made of Tin or pewter as
aforesaid, whatsoever it were, upon pain of forfeiture of the same wares, in
whose hands soever it might be found or taken, and also lawful money current
in this Realm, to the full value thereof, the one half of the same forfeiture
to be to the use of the Kings highness, and the other half to be to the use
of the finders of the same. And further it was enacted, that it should be
lawful to the Master and Wardaines of the Pewterers, as well within the City
of London, as within every other City, Borough, or Town within this Realm
where such Wardaines were, and where no such Wardaynes were, to the head
Officer or governor, head Officers or governors of the same City, Borough,
or Town for the time being, to appoint diverse persons, most expert in
knowledge of the same, to make search and seasure and to take into their hands
and possessession, all such wares as thereafter should be brought, contrary to
the true intent and effect of the said act, in whose soever hands or
possessions any such hold be found. And it was also enacted by the authority
above said, that no person, or persons, occupying the said craft or
occupation of Pewterers, within this Realm, should set on work, or retain in
his or their service, any person, or persons, to be his or their apprentice, or
Iourneyman estraunger borne out of this Realm, upon pain to forfeyt for every
such Apprentice and Iourneyman, ten pounds sterling: And that no stranger,
borne out of this Realm, should occupy, exercise, or use, from the feast of
Penticost then next coming, the said craft of Pewterers, nor work any manner
of vessels, nor other ware aforesaid, to be made of Tin or Pewter, within any
place or places of this Realm, upon pain of forfeiture of ten pounds
sterling: and also, upon pain of forfeiture of the same pewter or Tin, so
wrought, in whose hands soever it should be found or taken. And it was further
enacted by the said authority, that no person, or persons, being borne
within this Realm, then occupying or exercising the said craft of Pewterers,
should from thenceforth resort into any strange Regions or Countries, there to
use, teach, or exercise the said craft of Pewterers, upon pain to loose the
Privilege and benefit of an Englishman.

And if in case any of the Kings Subjects, at that time being, dwelling in any
strange Country or Region, and there occupying the said craft of Pewterers,
did not repair into this Realm, within three months next after request and
warning to him to be given, by writing sealed with the common seal of the
Wardaines of the said craft, within the said City of London, and here in
this Realm continually (from thencefoorth) dwell and inhabit, that then and
from henceforth he should be reputed and taken as no Englishman, but should
stand and be from henceforth out of the Kings protection.

And it was than further enacted, that where sundry evil disposed persons,
which commonly were called hawkers, by authority of the Kings Letters patents,
or Placarde, did not only go about from place to place, within this Realm,
using buying and selling of brass and pewter, and by color and pretense of
the same Lycenses or Placardes, did not only use unlawful and deceivable
weights and beams, but also did use to sell both Brass and Pewter which was
not good, nor truly or lawfully mixed or wrought, to the great deceit of the
Kings true liege people, contrary to the form and effect of a good and
laudable act and statute, made in the fourth year of the Kings said most
noble reign, that all such lycences and placards, before that time had made or
granted to any such person, or persons, contrary to the true meaning, form,
and effect of the said estatute, should be from thencefoorth by the authority
of the said Parliament, clearly void and of none effect. And where as in the
said act of Parliament (concerning the said craft of Pewterers and Brasiers)
made in the said fourth year, for diverse causes and considerations in the
same act contained, amongst other things, it was expressed, that no person or
persons, using the said craft of Pewterrrs or Brasiers, should from henceforth
sell or change any pewter or Brass, new or old, at any place or places
within this Realm, but only in open Faires and Markets, or in their own
dwelling houses, but if they were desired by the buyers of such wares, upon
pain of forfeiture for every such defaulte ten pounds. And so than the same
forfeiture was to the only use of the Kings highness, and the party searching
or finding the same was not entitled to have any benefit thereby: it was not
known that any person or persons had taken any pains to insearch or make any
inquiry thereof. By reason whereof diverse and many evil disposed persons than
using buying and selling as well of brass as pewter, and not regarding the said
good act, nor the said penalty, went daily about from Village to Village,
Town to Town, and from house to house, to sell such pewter and brass, which
was not good, and also used deceivable weights and Beams, as they did before
the making of the said act, to the great hurt and deceit of the kings true
liege people and Subjects. Wherefore it was enacted by the authority of the
said Parliament, that as well the moytie of the said forfeyture of ten pounds
lymited in the said statute made in the said fourth year, as also the moytie
of all other forfeitures and penalties, expressed and specified in the said
acts, and every of them should be to the use of the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and Successors, and the other moytie of the same forfeitures and
penalties, and every of them, to the use of him or them that would feaze,
find, or present the same forfeitures, or any of them, or that would sue for
the same in any competent Court or Courts within this Realm, by action of
debt, byll, plaint or information wherein the defendant should in no wise be
admitted to wage his law, or any protection or essoyne to any person or
persons which should be impeached to have offended, contrary to the form and
effect of this Statute, should be allowable, as in the said act more plainly
appears, which act was appointed to endure only to the end of the next
Parliament, then next following, and which act was afterward renewed in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, in the xxviij. year of the reign of our
said Sovereign Lord, to endure until the end of the next Parliament then
next following: And which act was also renewed at the Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the xxxj. and xxxii. years of our said Sovereign Lords
reign to endure until the last day of the next Parlyament then next ensuing:
Confirmation. Prayen therefore in this present Parliament our said Sovereign
Lords true and obedient Subjects, the Pewterers of this his said Realm, and
other the true commons of the same, because the same act is beneficial and
necessary for the commonwealth of this Realm: That it may be enacted by the
King our said Sovereign Lord, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the
commons in the present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, for
as much as the same act, and every thing therein contained, is good and
beneficial to the Commonwealth of this Realm, that all and every the said
acts and statutes, and all and every article, sentence, and clause comprised
in the same, may from henceforth stand and abide in as full strength and
effect, for evermore from henceforth to endure, according to the purport,
tenor and effect of the same act and acts, as though the said articles,
sentences, and clauses, were specially lymited, recited, or declared in this
present act. Wares made and brought from beyond the Sea.
And that no person, ne persons, from henceforth buy or take by exchange, or
otherwise take into or within this Realm, to the intent to sell any such
things or wares, above rehearsed, made or to be made out of this Realm, upon
pain of like forfeitures and penalties, as are and were expressed in the said
several acts, the same penaltyes and forfeitures to be leuyed as is before
expressed.

Master and Wardaines shall not be let to search.
And that it may be further enacted by authority aforesaid, that if any
person, or persons, do unlawfully withstand, interrupt, disturb, or let the
Master and Wardaines, or their deputies of the said craft of Pewterers, for
the time being, or the head Officer or governor, head Officers or governors
of Cities, Towns, and Boroughs, within this Realm, wherein no such Master and
Wardaines are, or shall be, or any of them, in searching, seasing, and taking
into their hands and possessions such wares as shall happen to be bought, or
brought into this Realm contrary to the purport and effect of the said
estatute, made in the said xxv. year of the reign of our said Sovereign
Lord, that then every such person, and persons, so offending, in letting,
disturbing, or withstanding the said seasure, or taking of such wares as is
aforesaid, shall loose and forfeit for every time so doing, the sum of five
pounds sterling, the one half whereof, shall be to the Kings use, and the other
half to him or them that will or shall sue for the same, by action of debt,
writ, byll, playnt, or information in any the Kings Courts of record, in
which action or suite, no Protection, Privilege, nor wager of law, shall be
allowed nor admitted.

God save the Queen. Thomas Wood Master. William Mayor Wardens. Walter Hill.
Wardens.


AT LONDON Printed. Anno Domini. 1593.


