A REPORT OF THE Kingdom of CONGO, a Region of AFRICA. And of the Countries
that border round about the same.

1. Wherein is also showed that the two Zones, Torrida and Frigida, are not
only habitable, but inhabited, and very temperate, contrary to the opinion of
the old Philosophers. 2. That the black color which is in the skins of the
Ethiopians and Negroes etc. proceeds not from the Sun. 3. And that the
River Nilus springs not out of the mountains of the Moon, as has been
heretofore believed: Together with the true cause of the rising and increase
thereof. 4. Besides the description of diverse plants, Fishes and Beasts, that
are found in those Countries.
Drawn out of the writings and discourses of Odoardo Lopes a Portingall, by
Philippo Pigafetta.

Translated out of Italian by Abraham Hartwell.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1597.



To the most Gracious and Reverend Father in God, JOHN by the providence of
God, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England,
and one of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
MOst Reverend Father, my singular good and gracious Lord: In all humble duty
I do offer to your grace this poor and slender present, in auspicium nascentis
anni, which I do most heartily pray, may be as happy and prosperous both for
your health and quiet government, as (thanks be to God) your latter years
have been. It is a description of a certain Region or Kingdom in Africa,
called Congo, whose name is as yet scarce known to our quarters of Europe,
neither is there any great or solemn mention of it in any books that have
been published of that Third part of the old World. And because this treatise
does comprehend not only the nature and disposition of the Moci-Conghi, which
are the natural inhabitants and people of Congo, together with all the
commodities and traffic of that Country, very fit and pleasant to be
read, but also the religion which they professed, and by what means it
pleased God to draw them from Paganism to Christianity: I thought good thus to
make it known to my countrymen of England, to the end it might be a president
for such valiant English, as do earnestly thirst and desire to atchieue the
conquest of rude and barbarous Nations, that they do not attempt those actions
for commodity of Gold and Silver, and for other transitory or worldly
respects, but that they would first seek the Kingdom of God, and the
salvation of many thousand souls, which the common enemy of mankind still
detayneth in ignorance: and then all other things shall be put in their
mouths abundantly, as may be seen by the Portingalles in this narration.
Written it was by one Philippo Pigafetta, an Italian, and a very good
Mathematician, from the mouth of one Lopez a Portingal, together with two maps,
the one particular of Congo, the other general of all Africa, and especially
of the Western Coast, from 34. degrees beyond the Aequinoctial northwardes,
down along to the Cape of Good-Hope in the South, and so vpwardes again on
the Eastern Coast by the great Island of Madagascar, otherwise called the Isle
of S. Laurence, til you come to the Isle of Socotora, and then to the Red
Sea, and from Egypt into the Inland Southwards to the Empire of
Presbiter-Iohn. I beseech your grace to accept of this my poor travel, and I
will not cease to pray to Almighty God, according to my duty, that he will
multiply many good years upon you, under the happy government of our most
gracious and sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth: whereunto the Church of England
is bound to say, Amen. From your Graces house in Lambehith, the first of
January. 1597.

Your Graces most humble Servant at commandment, Abraham Hartwell.

The Translator to the Reader.
I Find it true, that Sophocles writes in his Whipp-bearer Ajax, (...): Labor
labori laborem adfert, that is to say, Labor does breed labor upon labor.
For after that the translation of the Book, containing the Wars between the
Turks and Persians written by Iohn-Thomas Minadoi was published, diverse of my
friends have earnestly moved me to be still doing somewhat, and to help our
English Nation, that they might know and understand many things, which are
common in other languages, but utterly concealed from this poor Island. I have
answered some of these my friends to their good satisfaction, and told them,
that the weakness of my body would not suffer me to sit long, that the hours
of my leisure were not many, unless I should vnduetifully defraude those to
whom I am most beholden and bounden, of that duty and attendance which I owe
unto them: and lastly, that I had no great pleasure to learn or inform my
self of the state of other Nations, because I do not as yet sufficiently know
the Estate of mine own Country. Whereof (I am verily persuaded) I may justly
avouch that which Ulysses protested of his Ithaca: (...). Then which poor
Country can I never see any sweeter. Among others that made these Motions unto
me, M. R. Hackluyt.
one there was, who being a curious and a diligent searcher and obseruer of
Foreign adventures and adventurers, as by his good pains appears, came unto
me to the house of a grave and learned Prelate in Suffolk, M. H. Castelton.
where I lay in my return out of Norffolke, and there made the like request
unto me, and I the like answer unto him. But it would not satisfy him: for he
said it was an answer answerelesse, and it should not serve my turn. And
presently presented me with this Portingall Pilgrim lately come to him out of
the Kingdom of Congo, and apparrelled in an Italian vesture: entreating me
very earnestly, that I would take him with me, and make him English: for he
could report many pleasant matters that he saw in his pilgrimage, which are
indeed uncouth and almost incredible to this part of Europe. When I saw there
was no remedy, I yielded, and even (as the Poet says) (...), Homer.
I brought him away with me. But within two hours conference, I found him
nibling at two most honorable Gentlemen of England, whom in plain terms he
called Pirates: so that I had much adoo to hold my hands from renting of him
into many mo pieces, then his Cosen Lopez the Doctor was quartered. Yet (...),
My second wits stayed me, and advised me, that I should peruse all his Report,
before I would proceed to execution: which in deed I did. And, because I saw
that in all the rest of his behavior he contained himself very well and
honestly, and that he used this lewd speech, not altogether exanimo, but rather
ex vitio gentis, of the now-inueterate hatred, which the Spanyard and
Portingall bear against our Nation, I was so bold as to pardon him, and so
taught him to speak the English tongue. In which language, if you will
vouchsafe to hear him, he will tell you many notable observations of diverse
Countries and peoples inhabiting in Africa, whose Names have scarce been
mentioned in England. As namely, the Kingdom of Congo, with all the Provinces
thereof, the Kingdom of Angola, the Kingdom of Loango, the Kingdom of the
Anzichi, the Kingdom of Matama, the Kingdom of Buttua, the Kingdom of
Sofala, the Kingdom of Mozambiche, the Kingdom of Quiloa, the Kingdom of
Mombaza, the Kingdom of Melinde, with the three great Empyres of Monomotapa,
of Moenemugi, and of Prete-Gianni. He will tell you the several Rites and
Customs, the Climates and Temperatures, the Commodities and Traffiques, of all
these Kingdoms. He will tell you the sundry kinds of Cattle, Fishes and
Fowls, strange Beasts, and Monstrous Serpents, that are to be found therein:
For Africa was always noted to be a fruitful Mother of such fearful and
terrible Creatures. He will tell you of great Lakes, that deserve the name of
Seas: and huge Mountains of diverse sorts, as for example, Mountains scorched
with heat, Mountains of Snow proceeding of cold, Mountains of the Sun,
Mountains of the Moon, Mountains of Crystal, Mountains of Iron,
Mountains of Silver, and Mountains of Gold. And lastly, he will tell you the
Original Spring of Nilus, and the true cause of the yearly increase thereof.
In any of these points, if his Mouth shall happen to run over (as I hope,
much it does not) you must needs bear with him, for he will challenge the
privilege of the English Proverb, A Traveler may lie by authority, and the
old Greek Agnomination, (...), Every Pilgrim is not a Sooth-sayer.

But to leave this long Allegory, which indeed is meant of this Book, and to
come seriously and briefly to certain faults, that some Readers may
peradventure find therein, I will do my best endeavor to satisfy them in such
objections as may be made. And first, they will except perhaps against the
Method of the Author, because he keeps no continuate Order in this Report,
but leapeth from one Matter to another, without any coherence, like Marots
Poem, called Du Coqual' Asne: and so makes a Hotchpot of it. But herein
Pigafetta is not greatly to be blamed, who gathering this Report out of the
tumultuarie Papers of Lopez, and from his vnpremeditated speeches, uttered by
mouth at several times, could not so well reduce it into so exact a form and
Method, as curious wits do require. He is rather to be commended, that having
so rude and undigested a Chaos to work upon, he could frame so handsome a
little world of it as this is. If happily it be further urged, that the
Translator should have taken pains to cast him in a new Mould, and to make his
members hang proportionably one upon another: I must answer, that I neither
do, nor ever did like of that kind of course. I was always of this opinion
(and therein I do still dwell) that Authors should be published in the same
Order, in the same Terms, and in the same Style which they themselves used.
For how know I, what moved them to observe this Order or that Order, and to
make choice of one word rather then of another? peradventure the reason of
their so doing might prove to be so strong, as I doubt it would not easily be
overthrown. Style.
And touching Style, some are so scrupulous and so nice, that they cannot abide
to have old and ancient Writers to be published in Latin, unless they do
imitate one of the Triumuiri of the Latin tongue, Cicero, Caesar or Salust. If
all men should be of that humor, we should be bereaved both of singular
Divinity, and antique History, which have been written by men of no great
learning, as Monks and Friars, whom (though they were very simple and mean,
yet) it pleased God in the times of ignorance, to use as means to preserve
unto us those Monuments of Antiquity. And therefore I could wish, that they
might be published in their own Style, and (as it were) in Puris Naturalibus,
yea though they write false Latin, as some of them do. On the other side, some
of our Critikes are so Critical and so audacious, that when they publish any
of the foresaid Triumuiri, or any other Classical Author, they will transpose,
and omit, and foyst into the Text many words and many conceytes, whereof the
Author never dreamed, as Eustathius and Seruius have done upon Homer and
Virgill. But if algates some Enthusiasme have come upon our Critikes, that has
revealed unto them tanquam ex antro Trophonij, the certainty of the Authors
writing and meaning, to be such as they have confidently set down, let me be
bold to entreat them, that they would muster their conceytes in the Margin
(if the Margin will hold them: as I doubt it will not in this Hypercriticall
world) or else that they would reject them (as some of them have done) to the
later end of their publications, under the title of Corrections, Castigations,
Emendations, Animaduersions, Variae Lectiones, or such like, Vt suo quisque
vtatur iudicio and sensu abundet, That every man may use his own judgment, and
abound in his own sense. But Maledicta Glossa quae corrumpit Textum. Cursed be
that Gloss that corrupts the Text. And sorry I am, that some of our later
Divines have erred in this point, even in translating the Holy Scripture.

Another exception may be taken against the Paradoxes that are maintained in
this Treatise, As namely, contrary to the opinion of the old world, and of the
ancient Philosophers, That the two Zones, Torrida, and Frigida, are both
habitable and inhabited. But hereunto if the Authors reasons here alleged do
not sufficiently answer, I do refer them, that will not yield therein, to
the excellent Treatise of Josephus a-Costa, de Natura Noui Orbis, printed this
last year, and composed by him in Anno 1584. in which Theological and
Philosophical work, he does at large both by good reasons and also by his
own experience prove this his position to be true. And therefore I protest
unto you, it was one of the chief Motives, which moved me to translate this
Report, to the end it might be more publicly known, that it was not the
single fancy of one man, touching the temperature of these two Zones, but also
of diverse others that by their own travel have tried the certayntie thereof:
among whom, this Lopez was one, who delivered this Relation in Anno 1588,
being four years after the Treatise made by Iosephus-a-Costa. And I do not
doubt, but that within few years you shall have it confirmed by many others
that are and have been travelers, who have not as yet published their
knowledge and trials in this behalf. In the mean time we do great injury to
them that have been already so desirous to acquaint us with their labors, and
to make us know as much as they know upon their credites and honesties: when in
stead of showing our selves thankful unto them for the same, we skoffe and
mock at them, and confidently swear that they are liars, and opposite to all
ancient Philosophers. But in a word, I will answer herein with an Argument,
Rhetoric* lib. 2.
which Aristotle uses, (...). i. Siquidem in vsu est hominibus, mentiri id
quod credibile: existimare oportet and contrarium, Incredibilia multa
hominibus, contingere vera: which for the better understanding I must
paraphrase in English: If it be an usual thing among men, that when a thing is
reported, which is very credible and like to be true, yet afterward it falls
out to be a stark lie: Then must we needs think on the contrary, That many
Reports or things which are incredible, do in the end fall out to be true. In
which case, as Credulity leans a little to Foolerie, so Incredulity
smells somewhat of Atheism.

Another Paradox is, That the heat of the Sun is not the cause of Whiteness
or Blackness in the Skins of men. This Position in the Negative he may
safely defend against all Philosophers, by virtue of the reasons that he has
vouched in this Report, which in deed do utterly overthrow their Affirmative.
But because neither any ancient Writer before this age, nor he himself, has
ever been able to declare the true cause of these colors in humane bodies,
very honestly and modestly he leaves it undecided, and refers it to some
secret of Nature, which hitherto has been known to God alone, and never as
yet revealed to man. And therefore I do wish, that some sound Natural
Philosopher, such as Fernelius that wrote De abditis rerum causis, or as
Leuinus Lemnius de Occultis Naturae miraculis, or as Franciscus Valesius de
Sacra Philosophia, would enter into the Closet of Contemplation, to find out
the true Natural cause thereof. In the mean while I hold still with my Author
in the Negative.

The third Paradoxe touching the Amazones mentioned in this book, I do not
see, why it should be counted a Paradox to believe, that there is such a
Nation, considering how many Authors both Greek and Latin, both
Historiographers and Cosmographers, both Divine and Profane, have acknowledged
that Nation, and the Country wherein it inhabited. But our new Writers say,
that a little after King Alexanders death it was utterly overthrown and quite
extinguished. What? Vsque ad vnam? not one of them left alive? Certainly that
depopulation must needs proceed, either from the peculiar visitation of God
almighties own hand, or else it was the strangest slaughter that ever was
heard of, that of a whole Nation, being so populous as that was, there should
not remain some few, that escaped. But yet suppose that some Hypsiphile, or
Penthesilea, or Thalestris, or some such other, did wisely conueigh her self
away, cum Dijs Penatibus, cum Matre, and cum filia, and being guided by some
happy Venus, arrived in a far remote Region, and there observed the customs
and fashions of their own Native Country: Might not these three, together
with some other women that were desirous of Rule and government, and allured by
them to be of their Society; might not they (I say) in process of time, (for
it is a long time since Alexander died) breed a New Nation of Amazones,
although we never heard, in what Climate they remained? Yea it may be for any
thing that I know, this latter generation might grow again to be so populous,
that they could send forth Colonies from them into other places, and so plant
themselves in diverse Countries. For I hear that there are of them about
Guiana, and here in this Report I read that some of them serve in the wars
of the King of Monomotapa. And I hope that in good time, some good Guianian
will make good proof to our England, that there are at this day both Amazones,
and Headless men. And thus much for the Paradoxes.

The last exception which may be made against this book, is the discourse of
the Conversion of the Kingdom of Congo to Christianity, which is amplified,
and set out with such Miracles and Superstitious Vanities, as though it had
been plotted of purpose for the glory and advancement of the Pope and his
Adherents: Wherein, because it does concern matter of Religion, I will deal
more warily and seriously to satisfy my Reader. True it is that the
Inhabitants of Congo were all Pagans and Heathens, until they entertained
Traffike with the Portingales: Among whom, one Massing Priest became a means
to confer with a Noble Man of Congo concerning Christianity, who taking
liking thereof, as being a Man of good inclination and disposition, was very
desirous to be further instructed. The Priest being wise, took opportunity to
make way for his Countreymens traffike, and also for planting of the Christian
Faith in that Region, It may be in hope to be preferred and advanced in a new
established Church, as commonly our traveling Priests use to do, that wanting
maintenance, or being upon some occasion discontented at home, do leap over
sea into foreign parts, not for the desire which they have to gain Christian
Souls, or to preach the Gospel, but to procure to themselves either dignities
or wealth. But I do not say that this Priest was such a one: for I neither have
reason nor authority so to say. For he sent over into Portingall for some
fellows to help him, who being come into Congo, labored so much, that in
time the King and his people consented to become Christians. Then did the
Portingall-Priests bestirre themselves nimbly in Baptising the King, the
Queen, the Lords, and the Commons. They built Churches, they erected Altars,
they set up Crosses, and at last brought in a Bishop. And all this was done (I
must needs confess) with all pomp and solemnity, after the Romish manner,
which in deed is so plausible, as it is able to allure any simple Man or
Woman, even with the very sight thereof. Yet will I not deny, but that these
Priests had a good intent, and for my part I do believe that they were in bona
fide, because they converted a great part of the People, not to Popery, but to
Christianity, the true foundation of all Religion. And this Action, which
tends to the glory of God, and may be a notable example to the World, of
doing the like, shall it be concealed and not committed to memory, because it
was performed by Popish Priests and Popish means? Philip. 1. 1^.
God forbid. S. Paul makes mention of diverse that preached Christ, Some of
envy and strife, and not purely, and Some of love and good will. What then?
Yet Christ is preached, whether it be under pretense, or sincerely, and therein
do I joy. So these Men are not to be regarded, whether they preached Christ for
vaineglory, and for maintenance of Popery, or of a sincere mind: but certain
it is, that Christ was preached by them, Mark. 9.
and therein ought we to joy. In Mark and in Luke, S. John says to Christ,
Luke. 9.
Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, but we forbad him,
because he follows not with us. Forbid him not (says Christ) for he that is
not against us, is with us. If we see a Turk, or a Jew, or a Papist, upon
what pretense soever, seek to draw any to Christ, or to drive the Devil of
Ignorance out of any, let him alone, forbid him not, mislike him not, for in
that point he is not against us, nay peradventure he may become one of us.
Numb. 11.
In the book of Nombers, word was brought to Moses, that Eldad and Medad
prophesied in the host. And Joshua said, My Lord Moses forbid them. But Moses
said, Enuiest thou for my sake? Would God that all the Lords people were
Prophets. And are we angry, or shall we find fault, that the Portingall
Priests being Papists, should be reported to have converted the Realm of Congo
to the profession of Christian Religion? Shall we envy them in their well
doing? I for my part do earnestly wish with all my heart, that not only Papists
and Protestants, but also all Sectaries, and Presbyter-Iohns men would join
all together both by word and good example of life to convert the Turks, the
Jews, the Heathens, the Pagans, and the Infidels that know not God, but live
still in darkness, and in the shadow of Death. What a singular commendation
would it be unto us, if it might be left in Record, that we were the first
conuerters of such a Nation, and such a people, and first brought them to the
knowledge of God, and the true profession of his glorious Gospel?

Thus I have (gentle Reader) labored to satisfy such scruples, as may arise
in thy mind touching this Treatise: which if it shall breed either profit or
delight unto thee, I shall rejoice to my self: If not, I shall be sorry that I
have employed my precious time so idly. Farewell in Christ.

Abraham Hartwell.

Errata.
Folio. 5. in the Margin. The commodities of S. Elena. Fol. 14. line 2. put out
in. Fol. 15. lin. 11. Card. Fol. 19. lin. 23. (...). Fol. 21. in the Margin.
Songa. Ibidem lin. 22. language. Fol. 30. lin. 14. Equinoctial. Fol. 31. lin.
25. Goat. Fol. 39. lin. 19. Tissue. Fol. 40. lin. 13. Infulas. Fol. 49. lin.
31. Peacocke. Fol. 57. in the Margin. Capo. Fol. 63. lin. 15. Diameter. Ibid.
in Margin. Cap. 1. Fol. 67. lin. 6. and for diverse. Fol. 114. line 22. put out
the comma. Fol. 137. line 11. Natural. Fol. 172. lin. 19. and. Fol. 192. lin.
18. Marquis. Fol. 199. lin. vlt. est. Fol. 204. lin. 14. come. Fol. 211. lin.
5. put out the comma. Fol. eod. lin. 31. put out and. Fol. 212. lin. 15.
Ptolomee. Fol. 216. in the Margin, for head, read heaven.

In the Table.
Folio vlt. line 26. to the Red sea.

A REPORT OF the kingdom of Congo, a Region of Africa.
Gathered by Philippo Pigafetta, out of the discourses of M. Edward Lopes a
Portugal.
Chap. 1. The journey by sea from Lisbone to the kingdom of Congo.
IN the year one thousand five hundredth threescore and eyghteenth, Anno Dom.
1578.
when Don Sebastian king of Portugal, embarked himself for the conquest of
the kingdom of Marocco: Edward Lopes borne at Beneuentum (a place xxiiii.
miles distant from Lisbone, near upon the South shore of the river Tagus)
sailed likewise in the month of April toward the haven of Loanda, situate
in the kingdom of Congo, in a ship called S. Anthony, belonging to an uncle
of his, and charged with diverse marchandises for that kingdom: Patache 1. a
Brigandine or a Pinnisse.
And it was accompanied with a Patache (which is a small vessel) whereunto the
ship did continually yield good guarde, and ministered great relief,
conducting and guiding the same with lights in the night time, to the end it
should not loose the way, which the ship it self did keep. He arrived at the
Islande of Madera, belonging to the King of Portugal, The Island of Madera.
distant from Lisbone about six hundred miles, where he remained xv. days, to
furnish himself with fresh vittaile and wine; which in great abundance
grows in that Islande, yea and in mine opinion the best in the world, whereof
they carry abroad great store into diverse countries, and especially into
England. He provided there also sundry other confections and conserues of
Sugar, which in that Islande are made and wrought both in great quantity, and
also of singular excellency. From this Islande they departed, leaving all the
Canaries belonging to Castile, The Canaries.
and took haven at one of the Islandes of Capo verde, called S. Anthony,
without having any sight thereof before they were come upon it: Isle of S.
Anthony.
and from thence to another Islande called Saint Iacopo, Isle of S. James
which commands all the rest, and has a Bishop and a Chaplen in it, that
rule and govern them: and here they provided themselves again of victuailes.

I do not think it fit in this place to tell you the number of the Canarie
Islands, which indeed are many: nor to make any mention of the Islandes of
Capo verde, nor yet to set down the history and discourse of their situations,
because I make have to the kingdom of Congo: and the ship stayed here but
only for passage, and especially for that there does not want good store of
Reports and histories, which in particularity do make relation of these
countries: Only this I will say, The Islandes of Capo verde.
that these Islandes of Capo verde were established by Ptolomee in the tables
of his Geography, to be the beginning of the West, together with the Cape or
Promontorie which he terms Cornu vltimum, or the Islandes Macarie or Blessed,
which we commonly call Fortunate. In these Islandes of Capo verde the
Portugalles do often arrive, and in those countries do traffic with sundry
marchandises, as little balls of diverse colored glass, and other such
things, wherein those people do greatly delight, and Hollande cloth, and cappes
and knives, and colored clothes: In exchange whereof they bring back again,
slaves, wax, honey, with other kind of food, and cotton-cloth of sundry colors.
Moreover, right over against them within the land are the countries and
rivers of Guynee, and of Capo verde, and Sterra Leona, that is to say the
Mountain Leona, which is a huge great mountain and very famous.

From the foresaid Islande of San Iacopo, they directed their fore-decke
toward Bresil: for so they must do to gain the wind, and taking such
harboroughes as were convenient for the seasons that reign in those places,
Two ways from S. Iacopo to Loanda.
to arrive at the end of their voyage. Two are the ways, whereby they sail
from the Isle of San Iacopo to Loanda a haven in the kingdom of Congo: The
first way.
the one is by the coast of Africa, the other by the main Ocean, still
enlarging their course with the North wind, which very much rules there in
those Months, and for the most part is called North, even by the Portugalles
themselves, and by the Castilians, and by the French, and by all those people
of the North sea. And so turning their foreshippe to the South, and south-east,
they hold on forward till they be near the Cape of Good-Hope, leaving behind
them the Kingdom of Angola; for by that way they must afterward return: and
then they come to the altitude of between xxvij. and xxix. degrees beyond the
equinoctial, quite opposite to our Pole, which South Pole in this writing
shall be called the Antarctike, The Antarctik is the South Pole.
that is to say, contrary to the Arctike, which is our North Pole, and so the
Antarctik is opposite thereunto toward the South.

In that altitude then of the contrary Pole, the Sailors use to meet with
certain winds that they call Generali, which do blow there almost all our
Summer, and are termed by them Northeast, and Northeastes in the plural number,
and by us Italians, Li venti dal Graeco, that is to say, the winds between
the Northeast, and the East in the spring time: which peradventure the
Venetians in their proper speech do call Leuantiere, that is to say, easterly,
and the Greeks and Latins term them Etesii, that is to say, such winds as
every year do ordinarily blow in their certain and accustomed seasons.

And thus sailing even to xxix degrees of the Antarctik, with the North wind,
there falls out an admirable effect. For diverse sailors, perceiving the first
General winds when they blow, do straight turn their sails about, and set
their fore-ship directly on the way to Angola, and so very oftentimes they
fail and are deceived. But better it is for him that desires to arrive at his
wished haven to go much further, and to expect a lusty wind, and after to
return backwarde: wherein it is to be noted for a most memorable accide^t, that
the winds do blow very strong from the North, even unto xxix. degrees beyond
the Equinoctial, and then they meet with other winds, which being more fierce
and furious then they are, do drive them back again. And this is usual and
seasonable there for six months in the year.

Now the ship called S. Anthony, holding on his foresaid course, met with the
said General winds, and then turned their prowe and their sails, by North
and by Northwest on the right hand toward the kingdom of Congo. And sailing
onwardes closely with the half ship, they came in twelve days and twelve
nights, to the Islande of S. Elena, not looking for the same, nor thinking of
it. Isle of S. Elena.
This Islande was so called, because on the feast day of S. Helene, which
falls upon the third day of May, it was by the Portugalles first descried.
And as it is very small, so is it (as it were) singular by it self: for being
situate in the height of xvi. degrees toward the Antarctike, it contains in
compass nine miles about, and is far distant from the firm land. As you
sail by sea, it may be discovered thirty miles of, through certain hills:
and it is a great miracle of nature, that in so unmeasurable an Ocean, being
all alone and so little as it is, it should arise (as it were) out of a most
tempestuous and deep sea, and yet yield a most safe harborough, and most
abundant store of relief and victuaile, for ships that are forewearied, and
ready to perish for thirst, which come out of the Indies.

The woods of it are very thick, and full of Ebene trees, The commodities of
S. Elena.
whereof the Mariners do build their boats. In the barks of these trees you
may see written the names of an infinite number of Sailors, Wood.
which passing by that Islande, do leave their names cut and carved in the
said barks, the letters whereof do grow greater and greater, as the bodies
of the trees do wax greater in bigness. The soil (even of it self) brings
forth very excellent fruits. Vine trees
For there grows the vine, (which was in deed at the first brought thither
by the Portugalles) and especially in the arbours and walks that are about the
little Church, and in the lodgings that are there for such as sail thither.
Fruits.
You shall see there also huge wild woods, of Orenges, of Citrones, of Limons
and other such Apple trees, that all the year long do carry flowers and
fruits both ripe and unripe. And likewise Pomegranates, great and sweet, and
of a good indifferent taste, with kernelles great and read, and full of
pleasant juice, and the stones within them very small: and ripe they are at all
seasons of the year, as the Orenges are: and figs very great both in
quantity and abundance: which natural gift and property (of being ripe all
the year long) Homere noted to be in diverse fruits of the Isle of Corfu.
Odysi. H.


Over all the country they take Goats, Victuailes.
and wild Kiddes, that are very good to eat, and Boares and other
foure-footed beasts, and Partriches, and wild hens and Pigeons, and other
kinds of fowls, both great and small. All which beasts and fowls are so
secure and so tame, that they fear not a man, because they do not know in
what danger they are to be killed. So that the people which dwell there do
take of them daily, and poulder them with salt, that is congealed on the banks
of the Islande in certain caves and holes of the rocks, that are naturally
made hollow and eaten by the waves of the sea. And the flesh thereof being thus
preserved, they give to the Sailors that arrive at the Island.

The earth is as it were crommeled like ashes, The Soil.
of color read, very fat and fruitful beyond measure, and so soft, as if ye
tread on it with your foot; it will sink like sand, and the very trees will
shake with the force of a man. And therefore it needs no labor or tillage:
for when it reigns, the fruits do presently spring up out of the old
seed. It bears roots of Radish as big as a man's leg, Roots and herbs.
and very good to eat. There grow also Colewortes, and Parsley, and Lettise,
and Goordes, and Chiche-person, and Faselles, and other kinds of Pulse,
naturally: which being ripe do fall into the fruitful ground, and multiply
of themselves, and spring again without any tilling. Every ship that comes
thither, brings with it some fruit or garden herb, which being planted
takes root presently: and bountiful nature yields a courteous reward and
usury, by reserving the fruit thereof for the Sailors when the ship returns
again.

There are certain little Rivers in this Islande, Rivers.
that run in diverse parts of it: whose water is good and wholesome, and
wherein are sundry safe places for ships to ride in, as if they were havens.
But the principal of them is in a place, where they have erected a little
Church, wherein are kept the ornaments of the Altar, and the priests
vestimentes, and other necessaries for Mass. And when ships pass that way,
the Religious persons go down unto them to celebrate divine service.

There is also in the same place a little cottage, wherein for the most part
some Portingalles do remain, sometimes three, sometimes two, yea and
sometimes but one alone, being left there, either by reason of some infirmity,
or for some offense committed, or else even voluntarily, because they do
desire by this means to lead the life of an Heremite in that wilderness, and
so to do penance for their sins.

Moreover, Fish.
in the same place there is so great abundance of fish, as if the sea were
very near unto them: so that you shall not need but only to cast your hooks
into the water, and you shall presently draw them out again laden with fish.

I once demanded the question, Why the Island of S. Elena is not fortified
what reason there was, why the Portingals did never make any account, nor had
any care to fortify this Island, considering it was so fit and necessary for
sailors, and founded there (as it were by the providence of God) for the
relief of the Portingals which pass that way, as Granata does largely
discourse upon the Creed, first written by him in Spanishe, and since
translated by my self into Italian: But answer was made unto me, that there
was no need so to do: for that the Islande serves to no purpose for the
voyage into the Indies, because there is another way for that passage, and it
is also a very hard matter to find it out: but in returning from thence it
lies full in the way, and is very easily descried. So that it would not quite
the cost to bestow money and time in maintayning soldiers therein without any
profit, seeing none other vessels come thither but only the Portugals. And
when I replied, that the English had now twice entered into those seas; This
slanderous term used here by this Portugal, cannot impeach the credit of
these two honorable gentlemen
once under the conduct of Drake, and secondly this year 1588. under another
Pirate, being also an English man and more valiant then he, called Candish,
who is returned home full of great richesse: It was answered, that yet for all
that it could not possibly be brought to pass to fortify the same within a
sea being so far off, and seeing that all the provision which should build
there, must of necessity be brought out of Europe.

To be short, The Climate.
besides all these natural good gifts above rehearsed, the climate is
temperate, the air pure, clean and wholesome, and the winds which blow there
are very pleasant. So that sick persons, and such as were half dead with
the diseases of the sea, arryuing at this Island, have been presently healed,
and recovered their former strength, through the benignity of this Country.

From the Islande of S. Helena, The Port of Loanda.
they made sail with the same weather, and so within the space of xvij. days
came to the haven of Loanda, which is in the province of Congo, the winds
being somewhat more calm then they were before. This is a very sure, and a
great haven, so called of an Islande of the same name, whereof we shall speak
hereafter.

I told you before, there were two courses of sailing from the Islands of Capo
verde to Loanda; the one of the^ is now declared, which being never used
afterward, was at the first attempted and performed by the same ship wherein
Signor Odoardo went, being then guided by Francesco Martinez the kings Pilot, a
man very greatly experienced in those seas, and the first that ever conducted
vessel by that way: the other is achieved by passing along the coast of the
firm land.

From the Island of San Iacomo, The second course of sailing to Loa^da. The
Isle of S. Thomas.
they come to Capo dos Palmas, and from thence direct themselves to the Islande
of San Thomas, which lies under the Equinoctial, so called because it was
discovered upon that day, wherein the feast of that Apostle is used to be
celebrated. It is distant from the firm land CLxxx. miles, right against the
river called Gaban, which is so termed because it is in shape very like to that
kind of vesture that it is called a Gaban or a cloak.

The haven thereof is fore-closed with an Island that raises it self in the
channel of the river, The Haven of S. Thomas.
whereunto the Portingalles do sail with small barks from S. Thomas Islande,
carrying thither such things as usually they carry to the coast of Guinea, and
from thence carrying back with them Iuory, wax and honey, Oil of Palm, and
blacke-More slaves. Near to the Islande of S. Thomas toward the the North
lies another Islande, called the Isle of the Prince, The Isle of the Prince.
distant from the firm land an hundred and five miles, being of the same
condition and traffic, that the Isle of S. Thomas is, although in circuit
somewhat less. This Islande of S. Thomas is in fashion almost round, The Isle
of S. Thomas. Great traffic.
and in breadth contains Lx. miles, and in compass Clxxx. Very rich it is
and of great traffic, discovered at the first and conquered by the
Portingalles, at such time as they began the conquest of the Indies. It has
diverse havens, but the principal and chiefest of all, whereinto the vessels
arriving there, do withdraw themselves, is in the place, where the City
stands.

The Islande breeds an infinite deal of Sugar, and almost all kinds of
victuals. Sugar. Churches. A Castle.
In the City there are some Churches, and a Bishop, with many Clerks and one
Chaplen or Priest. There is also a Castle, with a garrison and Artillary in
it, which beat upon the haven, being a very great and a safe Port, where many
ships may ride. But a very strange and admirable thing it is, that when the
Portugals did first come thither, there was no sugar there planted, but they
brought it thither from other Countries: Ginger.
as they did Ginger also, which took root, and grew there in most abundant
manner. The soil in deed is moist, and as it were appropriated to foster the
Sugar Cane, which without any other watering, multiplyeth of it self, and
fructifieth infinitely: the reason whereof is, because the dew falls there
like rain and moisteneth the earth.

There are in this Island above Lxx. houses or presses for making of Sugar, 70.
houses to make sugar in.
and every press has many cottages about it as though it were a village, and
there may be about some three hundred persons that are appointed for that
kind of work: They do every year load about forty great ships with
sugar. True it is indeed that not long ago the worms (as it were a plague to
that land) have devoured the roots of the Canes, and destroyed the fruits of
their sugar, in such sort, as now of the forty ships, they do not load above
five or six vessels with that merchandise. And thereupon it comes that sugar
is grown so dear in those Countries.

The Island of S. Thomas holds traffic with the people that dwell in the
firm land, which do usually resort to the mouths or entries of their Rivers:
The first whereof (to begin withal) is named the river of Fernando di Poo, The
River and Island of Fernando Poo.
that is to say, of Fernando Pouldre, who did first discover the same, and
lies in five degrees toward our Pole. Right against the mouth of it, ryseth
an Island of the same name, R, Bora. La Riuierae del Campo.
lying thirty and six miles distant from it. The second River is called Bora,
that is to say, R. di San. Benedetto.
Filth. The third La riuiera del Campo: The fourth, di San Benedetto, and the
fifth, that of Angra, which in the mouth of it has an Islande called di
Corisco, R di Angra. The Isle of Corisco.
that is to say Thonder. All these do traffic the same marchaundises, which
we mentioned before.

But to return to the voyage of S. Thomas: The Cape of Lupo Gonzale.
Departing from thence toward the South, we found the Cape of Lupo Gonzale,
which stands in the altitude of one degree beyond the Equinoctial toward
the Pole Antarctike, a hundred and five miles distant from the foresaid Isle.
And from thence they sail with land winds, creeping still all along the coast,
and every day casting ancre in some safe place, either behind some point, or
else in some haven, until they come to the mouth of the greatest River in
Congo, called in their tongue Zaire, Zaire the greatest River of Congo.
which signifies in Latin Sapio, (in English I know.) From whence if ye will
go through to the haven of Loanda, ye must sail the length of an hundred and
fourscore miles.

These be the two voyages by sea, that be used from the Islande of San
Iacomo, which is one of those Islandes, that before we told you were the
Islandes of Capo verde, and was but a little while ago first begun to be
frequented.

And now it is time to entreat of the kingdom of Congo, and all the
conditions thereof.

Chap. 2. Of the temperature of the air of the kingdom of Congo, and whether
it be very cold or hot: whether the men be white or black: whether are more
or less black they that dwell in the hills, or those that dwell in the
playnes: Of the winds and the raynes, and the snowes in those quarters, and of
what stature and semblaunce the men of that Country are.
THe Kingdom of Congo in the middle part thereof, The situation of Congo.
is distant from the Equinoctial toward the Pole Antarctike (just where the
City called Congo does lie) seven degrees and two thirdes: so that it
stands under the Region which ancient writers thought to be uninhabitable, and
called it Zona Torrida, (that is to say, a Cincture or Girdle of the earth,
which is burnt by the heat of the Sun) wherein they are altogether deceived. The
temperature of the kingdom.
For the habitation there is exceeding good, the air beyond all credit
temperate, the winter nothing so rough, but is rather like Autumn in this
Region of Rome. The people use no furs, nor change of apparel: they come
not near the fire: neither is the cold in the tops of the Mountains
greater then that which is in the plains: but generally in Winter time the
air is more hot then it is in summer, by reason of their continual raynes,
and especially about two hours before and after Noone, so that it can hardely
be endured.

The men are black, The complexion of the people.
and so are the women, and some of them also somewhat inclyning to the color
of the wild Olive. Their hair is black and curled, and some also red. The
stature of the men is of an indifferent bigness, and excepting their blacknes
they are very like to the Portingalles. The apples of their eyes are of diverse
colors, black and of the color of the sea. Their lips are not thick, as the
Nubians and other Negroes are: and so likewise their countenaunces are some
fat, some lean, and some between both, as in our countries there are, and
not as the Negroes of Nubia and Guinea, which are very deformed. Small
difference between their, days and nights.
Their nights and their days do not greatly differ: for in all the whole
year ye shall not discern the difference between them to be more then a
quarter of an hour,

The Winter in this country (to speak at large) begins at the same time,
Their winter and summer.
that our Spring here begins, that is to say, when the Sun enters into the
Northren signs, in the Month of March. And at the same time that we have our
winter, when the Sun enters into the Southern Signs in the month of
September, then begins their summer. In their winter it rayneth 5. months
almost continually, that is to say, in April, May, June, July and August. Of
fair days they have but a few, because the rain falls so greatly, and the
drops of it are so big, as it is a wonder to see. These waters do maruellously
supple the ground, which is then very dry, by reason of the heat of the
Summer past, wherein it never rayneth for the space of six months together,
and after the ground is full and as it were ingorged with water, then do the
rivers swell beyond all credit, and are so replenished with troubled waters,
that all the country is surrounded by them.

The winds which blow in these Moons through all this region, The winds in
this Country, in winter time.
are the very self same that Caesar calls by a Greek word Etesij, that is
to say, Ordinary every year: whereby are meant those winds that in the Cearde
are noted from the North to the West, and from the North to the Northeast.
These winds do drive the clouds to the huge and high mountains, whereupon
they rush with very great violence, and being there stayed of their own
nature, they are afterward melted into water. So that when it is likely to
rain, you shall see the clouds standing (as it were) upon the tops of their
highest hills.

And hence arises the increasing and augmentation of the rivers that spring in
Aethiopia, The cause of the increase of Nilus, and other rivers in Ethiopia.
and especially of Nilus and others, that discharge themselves into the east
and west Ocean: And in the kingdom of Congo and Guinea, through which runs
the river Nigir, so called by the ancient writers, and by the new termed
Senega, The River Nigir or Senega, runs westwarde.
you shall see the said river increase at the very self same time that Nilus
does; but in deed carries his waters toward the west, directly against the
Islandes of Capo Verde, Nilus runs northwarde.
whereas Nilus runs by the Isle of Meroe in Egypt toward the North,
refreshing and watering all those Regions that are full of scorching heates,
and wildernesses and deserts. Now for as much as in the regions of Congo and
Aethiopia it is always wont to rain every year at a certain set time, the
swelling and ouerflowing of the rivers there, is of no great consideration, nor
any strange accident to make account of.

But in the Countries, It never rayneth in Egypt but only in Alexandria.
that are far distant and very dry, as in Egypt, where it never raineth
(saving only in Alexandria and the territories thereof) it is accounted a
marvelous matter, to see every year so great a quantity of thick troubled
water come upon them, from places so remote, at a certain set time, without
missing: which water does quicken the ground, and ministers food both to man
and beast. And thereupon the ancients did sacrifice to that river, calling it
(...), the good God, as Ptolomy notes in his fourth book. Yea and some of our
Christians at this day do hold it for a miracle. So that without these waters
they should perish for hunger, because their lives do depend upon this
increase of the water, as S. Chrysostom says.

Thus these winds called by Caesar Etesij, and by the Portugalles Generali, do
blow with us in Summer; but with them in winter, and carry the clouds unto the
tops of those huge mountains, which make them to melt into rain. And so it
falls out that by reason of these raines, their winter (as it is aforesaid)
is nothing so cold, because the waters do engender a certain kind of warmth
in those hot regions. This is then the cause of the increase of Nilus, and
other rivers in that Climate, whereof the ancients of old times made so great
doubt, and invented so many fables and errors

But in their summer, which is our winter, there blow other winds that are
quite opposite to the former, Their winds in summer time.
even in Diametro, and are noted in the Card, from the South to the southeast,
which out of all question must needs be cold, because they breath from the
contrary Pole Antarctike, and cool all those countries, even for all the
world as our winds in Summer do cool our countries. And whereas, there
with them, these winds do make the air very fair and clear, so do they
never come unto us, but they bring with them great store of rain. And this
comes to pass by a certain natural disposition of the earth which is
governed by the Heavens and the Clymates thereof, and by the sovereign
providence of God, who has parted the heaven, and the course of the sun and
of the other planets in such sort, that every country upon the face of the
earth, does enjoy the virtue of their lights, both in heat, and in cold, and
also in all other seasons of the year, by a most singular measure and
proportion. And certainly if the breath of these winds did not refresh and
cool these countries of Aethiopia and Congo, and other places near about
them, it were not possible for them to endure the heat, considering that even
in the night time they are constrained to hang two coueringes over them to
keep away the heat. The same cooling and refreshing by winds, is common also
to the inhabitants of the Isle of Candie, and of the Islandes in Arcipelago,
and of Cyprus, and of Asia the less, and of Soria, and of Egypt, which do
live (as it were) with this refreshing of the foresaid winds of the Northwest,
and of the West: so that they may well be called as they are in Greek Zephyri
quasi (...), No Snow nor ice in Ethiopia or Congo.
breeders of life.

Let it be also remembered, that in the mountains of Aethiopia, and of Congo
and the regions near adjoining, there falls no snow, neither is there any at
all in the very tops of them, saving only toward the Cape of Good-Hope,
and certain other hills, which the Portugalles call, Sierra Neuada, that is
to say, the Snowie mountains. Neither is there any ice or snow to be found
in all the Country of Congo, which would be better esteemed there then gold,
to mingle with their drinks: So that the rivers there do not swell and
increase by melting of snow, but because the rain does fall out of the clouds
for five whole Moons continually together, that is to lay in April, May, June,
July, and August: the first rain sometimes beginning on the xv. day, and
sometimes after. And this is the cause why the new waters of Nilus, which are
so greatly desired and expected by the inhabitaunts there, do arrive sooner or
later in Aegipt.

Chap. 3. Whether the children which are begotten by Portugalles, being of a
white skin, and borne in those Countries by the women of Congo, be black or
white, or Tawney like a wild olive, whom the Portugals call Mulati.
ALL the ancient writers have certainly believed, The true cause of white and
black in the bodies of the inhabitants of these countries.
that the cause of black color in men is from the heat of the Sun. For by
experience it is found, that the nearer we approach to the cuntries of the
South, the browner and blacker are the inhabitants therein. And contrariwise,
the farther you go toward the north, the whiter shall you find the men, as
the French, and the Dutch, and the English, and others. Notwithstanding it is
as certain a thing as may be, that under the Equinoctial, there are people
which are borne almost all white, as in the kingdom of Melinde and Mombaza
situate under the Equinoctial, and in the Isle of San Thomas which lies also
under the same Clymate, and was at the first inhabited by the Portingalles,
though afterward it was disinhabited, and for the space of a hundred years
and vpwardes their children were continually white, yea and every day still
become whiter and whiter. And so likewise the children of the Portingals, which
are borne of the women of Congo, do incline somewhat toward white. So that
Signor Odoardo was of opinion, that the black color did not spring from the
heat of the Sun, but from the nature of the seed, being induced thereunto
by the reasons above mentioned. And surely this his opinion is confirmed by the
testimony of Ptolome, who in his description of the innermost parts of Lybia
makes mention of white Ethiopians which he calls in his language (...);
that is to say, white Moors, and in another place also of white Elephants,
which are in the same country.

Chap. 4. Of the circuit of the Kingdom of Congo, and of the borders and
confines thereof. And first of the Western coast.
THe Kingdom of Congo is distinguished by four borders: The first, of the
West, which is watered with the Ocean sea: the second of the North: the third
of the east, and the last which is toward the South.

And to begin with the border lying upon the sea, the first part of it is in
the Bay, The western border of Congo. The Bay of Cowes.
called Seno delle Vacche, and is situate in the height of 13. degrees upon the
Antarctik side, and stretches all along the coast unto 4. degrees and a half
on the North side, near to the Equinoctial; which space contains 630. miles.
This Seno delle vacche is a haven but of a moderate bigness, and yet a good one
and able to receive any ship that arriueth. It is called Seno delle vacche,
that is to say, the Bay of Cowes, because thereabouts there are pasturing very
many heardes of that kind of Cattle: The country is plain, and abounds with
all manner of victuailes: and there you shall find some kind of mettels to be
publicly sold, especially silver, and it is subject to the King of Angola.

A little more forward lies the River Bengleli, The River Bengleli.
where a certain Lord, being subject to the King of Angola does specially
command: and about the said River is a great compass of country, much like
to the former. And a little further runs the river Songa, The R. Son
so called by the Portingalles: wherein you may sail 25. miles vpwardes in a
country also like to the former. The follows the river Coanza, which issues
out of a little lake, The R. Coa^za
fed by a certain river that flows out of a great lake, being the chief
and principal spring or head of Nilus, whereof in the other part of this
discourse we shall have occasion to write. Coanza at the mouth of it is two
miles broad, and you may sail with small barks vpwardes against the stream
about 100. miles, but has no haven. And here it is to be noted, that all this
Country which we have here described, was wont to be subject to the king of
Congo: but a while ago the Governor of that country is become the absolute
Lord thereof, and professes himself to be a friend to the king of Congo,
but not his vassal: and yet sometimes he sends the King some present, in
manner of a tribute.

Beyond the River Coanza is the haue^ of Loanda being in ten degrees, made (as
it is said) by a certain Island called Loanda, The Island of Loanda.
which signifies in that lauguage, Bald or Shaven, because it is a Country
without any hills and very low: for indeed it scarce rayseth it self above
the sea. This Island was framed of the sand and dirt of the sea, and of the
river Coanza, whose waves meeting together, and the filthy matter sinking down
there to the bottom, in a continuance of time it grew to be an Island. It may
be about 20. miles long, and one mile broad at the most, and in some places
but only a bowshoote. But it is a marvelous thing, that in such a sandy
ground if you shall dig to the depth of two or three hande-breadthes you
shall find sweet water, the best in all those Countries. Wherein also there
is a very strange effect, that when the Ocean ebbeth, this water becomes
somewhat salt, but when it flows to the top, it is most sweet. A thing that
falls out also in the Islande of Cadis in Spain, by the report and testimony
of Strabo.

This Islande is the Mine of all the money which the King of Congo spends,
The money of Congo.
and all the people thereaboutes. For upon the shores you shall have certain
women, that use to diue and ducke into the sea, two yardes deep and more, and
fill their baskets with sand, and afterward divide the gravel from certain
small Shel-fishes that are among it, which are called Lumache: and when these
Lumache are severed by themselves, then do they pick out the Males from the
Females, which they may easily do, because the Female is more fine then the
Male, and greatly esteemed for her color, which is very neat, bright and
pleasant to the sight.

These Lumache do breed in all the shores of the kingdom of Congo, but the
best of all are those of Loanda, The Lumache of Loanda.
because they look very fine, and of a very bright color, some gray or
ashecoloured, and some of other colors not so precious. And here you must note
that gold and silver and mettell is not of any estimation, nor in use of money
in these countries, but only these Lumache: so that neither with gold nor
silver, in mass or in coin you shall buy any thing there, but with these
Lumache you shall buy both gold and silver, or any thing else.

In this Islande there are 7. or 8. Towns, called in that Country language,
Libata, the principal whereof is Spirito sancto: Spirito Santo.
and therein dwells the Governor which is sent from Congo, to minister
justice, and to gather the treasure of the moneys of these Lumache. Here are
also Goats, and Sheep, and Boares in great numbers, which being tame at the
first, do afterward become wild and live in the woods. Here grows also a
tree called Enzanda, which is a great one and always green, The tree Euzanda.
and endued with a singular quality. For from the bows of it that sproute
vpwardes, there hang down certain threedes (as it were) which creeping into
the earth do take roots, and out from these roots do rise other trees, and so
they multiply. And within the outmost bark thereof, there grows a certain
kind of pil like fine linen, which being beaten and cleansed, they spread out
in length and in breadth, and therewith they cloth their men and women, that
are of the basest sort.

In this Islande they have certain vessels, made of the bodies of Palme-trees,
Their Boats.
joined together and framed after the manner of our boats, with a prowe and a
stern, wherein they pass from place to place, both with oars and sails. In
these boats they use to fish about the rivers, which are indeed exceeding
full of fish, and sometime also they will go over to the firm land.

In that part of this Islande, which is toward the maine land, in certain
low places there grow certain trees (which when the water of the Ocean
ebbeth) discover themselves: and at the feet thereof you shall find certain
other Shel-fishes cleaving as fast to the trees as may be, Shelfishes.
having within them a great fish as big as a man's hand, and very good meat.
The people of the country know them very well, and call them Ambiziamatare,
that is to say, Ambiziamatare.
the Fish of the Rock. The shells of these fishes, they use to burn, and
thereof make very good lime to build withal. And being like the cork or
bark of the tree which is called Manghi, they dress their Ox hydes withal,
to make their shoe soles the stronger.

To be brief this Island brings forth neither corn nor wine, What kind of
money is used in sundry countries.
but there is great store of victuaile brought thither from all parts
thereaboutes, to fetch away these Lumache. For as in all other places all
things may be had for money of mettell, so all things here are had for Lumache.
Whereby may be noted, that not only here in this kingdom of Congo, but also
in her neighbor Ethiopia and in Africa, and in the kingdoms of China, and
certain others of the Indies, they use moneys of other matter then of
metal, that is to say, neither gold, nor silver, nor copper, nor any other
mixture tempered of these. For in Aethiopia their money is Pepper: and in the
kingdom of Tombutto, which is about the River Nigir, otherwise called Senega,
their money is Cockles or Shelfishe: and among the Azanaghi their moneys are
Porcellette: and in the kingdom of Bengala likewise they use Porcellette and
metal together. In China they have certain Shelfishes, called also
Porcellette, which they use for their money: and in other places Paper stamped
with the kings seal, and the barks of the tree called Gelsomora: Whereby it
appears, that the money which is paid for every thing is not metal, all
the world over, as it is in Europe, and in many and sundry other countries of
the earth.

This Islande in the straitest part of it, is very near to the firm land,
and the people do oftentimes swim over the channel there. In this strait
there arise out of the Ocean certain Islettes, Certain Islettes.
which show themselves forth from the water when it ebbeth, and are covered
again when it flows. And in those Islettes you shall see great trees, and
most excellent Shelfishes cleaving fast to the bodies of them, such as I told
you of before.

Near to this Islande toward the outward coast to the sea, Great store of
Whales
there swim an innumerable sort of Whales, that look black, and fighting one
with another do kill themselves: which afterward being by the waves cast up
upon the shore, as big as a midling merchants ship; the Negroes go forth
with their boats to fetch them, and to take the oil out of them, which being
mingled with pitch they use to trim their vessels withal. Upon the ridges or
backs of these creatures, there grow many Shelfishes, made like Snailes,
Cockles and Whelkes: whereof Signor Odoardo affirmed, that he had seen great
store. He was also of opinion that Amber comes not from these fishes. For
over all the coast of Congo, where there is an infinite number of them, Amber
comes not from the Whales.
you shall not find either Ambregriz, or any other Amber, black or white in
any place. And yet if it should come from these creatures, there must have
been of necessity great store of it found upon these Shores.

The principal haven of this Island has his entrance toward the North, The
haven of Loanda.
and on that side it is half a mile broad, and of a very great depth. Upon
the firm land directly over against the Island is a town called villa di San
Paulo, Villa di San Paulo.
altogether inhabited with Portingalles, and their wives, which they brought
with them out of Spain: and yet it is not fortified.

All this channel is very full of fish, especially of Sardinaes, Store of fish.
and of Anchioues: whereof there is so great store, that in the winter time
they will of themselves leap up to land. Other kinds of most excellent fishes
there are, as Soles and Sturgeons and Barbelles, and all manner of dainty fish:
and great Crabbes, in strange abundance, and all very wholesome: so that the
greatest part of the people that dwell about the banks there, do live upon them.

Into this channel runs the River called Bengo, The R. Bengo.
which is a very great one, and nauigable vpwardes xxv. miles. This River with
that other of Coanza, whereof I told you before, do make the Isle of Loanda,
because when their waters do meet together, they leave their sand and filth
behind them, and so increase the Island. There runs also into it another
great River called Dande, The R. Dande
which will receive vessels of an hundred tun: and then another River called
Lemba, The R. Lembe.
which neither has Haven, neither do any Ships enter into it. Very near
unto this there is also another River called Ozone, The R. Ozone.
which issues out of the same Lake, whence Nilus likewise springs, and it
has a haven. Next to Ozone, there is another called Loze, The R. Loze.
without any haven: and then another great one with a haven called Ambriz, The
R. Ambriz
which runs within four leagues near to the Royal City of Congo. The L.
Lelunda.
Last of all is the River Lelunda, which signifies a Trowtfish, and waters
the roots of that great hill, whereon the palace of Congo stands, The Oteiro
of Congo.
called by the Portingalles the Oteiro. This River Lelunda springs out of the
same Lake, from whence Coanza issues, and takes into it by the way another
River, that comes from the great Lake: and when it does not rain, then you
may pass over Lelunda on foot, because it has so little store of water in it.

Next unto this is the Zaire, The R. Zaire.
a huge River and a large, and in deed the greatest in all the kingdom of
Congo. The original of this River comes out of three Lakes: one is the great
Lake from whence Nilus springs, the second is the little Lake above
mentioned, and the third is the second great Lake which Nilus engenders. And
certainly, when you will consider the abundance of water that is in this
River, you will say, that there was no need to have any fewer or lesser
springes to make so huge a stream as this carries. For in the very mouth of
it, which is the only entrance into it, the River is 28. miles broad, and
when it is in the height of his increase, he runs fresh water. 40. or 50.
miles into the sea, and sometimes 80. so that the passengers do refresh
themselves withal, and by the troublesomnes of the water they know the place
where they are. It is nauigable vpwardes with great barks about 25. miles,
until you come to a certain strait between the rocks, where it falls
with such a horrible noise, that it may be heard almost 8. miles. And this
place is called by the Portingalles Cachiuera, that is to say a Fall, or a
Cataracte, like to the Cataractes of Nilus. Between the mouth of this River,
Certain Islandes.
and the fall thereof, there are diverse great Islands well inhabited, with
towns and Lords obedient to the king of Congo, which sometimes for the great
enmity that is among them do war one against another in certain boats,
Boats.
hollowed out of a stock of a tree, which is of an unmeasurable bigness, and
these boats they call Lungo. The greatest boats that they have, are made of a
certain tree called Licondo, The tree Licondo.
which is so great, that six men cannot compass it with their arms, and is
in length of proportion aunswerable to the thickness, so that one of them will
carry about 200. persons. They row these boats with their oars, which are
not tied to any loopes, but they hold them at liberty in their hands, and
move the water therewith at pleasure. Every man has his oar and his bow, and
when they fight together, they lay down their oar and take their bow.
Neither do they use any other Rudders to turn and govern their boats, but
only their oars.

The first of these Islandes, The Isle of Horses.
which is but a little one, is called the Isle of Horses, because there are
bredde and brought up in it great store of those creatures that the Greeks
call Hippopotami, that is to say, Water-horses. In a certain village within
this Islande do the Portingals dwell, having withdrawn themselves thither for
their better security. They have their vessels to transporte them over the
water to the firm land, upon the south bank of the River, which land is
called the haven of Pinda, The haven of Pinda.
where many ships do ride that arrive therein.

In this River there are living diverse kinds of creatures, Crocodiles.
Water-horses.
and namely mighty great Crocodiles, which the Country people there call
Caiman, and Water-horses above named: And another kind of creature, that has
(as it were) two hands, and a tail like a Target, which is called Ambize
Angulo, Hogge-fish.
that is to say a Hogge-fishe, because it it as fat as a Porke. The flesh of it
is very good, and thereof they make Larde, and so keep it: neither has it the
savor or taste of a fish, although it be a fish. It never goes out from the
fresh water, but feeds upon the grass that grows on the banks, and has a
mouth like the mozell of an Ox. There are of these fishes, that weigh 500.
pounds a piece. The fishermen use to take them in their little boats, by
marking the places where they feed, and then with their hooks and forkes,
striking and wounding them, they draw them dead forth of the water: and when
they have cut them in pieces, they carry them to the king: For who soever does
not so, encurreth the penalty of death, and so do they likewise that take the
Trowt, and the Tenche, and another Fish called Cacongo, Cacongo, a fish like a
Salmon.
which is shaped after the likeness of a Salmon, saving that it is not red: but
indeed so far it is, that it quenches out the fire whiles it is roasted or
broiled. Other fishes also there are that are called Fishes Royal, which are
carried to the king, upon very severe and rigorous punishments, by open
proclamation to be inflicted on such as shall do the contrary, besides other
kinds of fishes that are taken in this River, the names whereof we think it
superfluous here to recite.

Beyond this River of Congo, La Baia de las Almadias.
there comes down another River, which the Portingalles call, La Baia delas
Almadias, that is to say, the Golfe of Barks, because there are great store of
them, that are made there, by reason of the abundance of woods and trees that
grow thereabouts, which are fit for that use, and wherewith all the Countries
round about do furnish themselves. At the mouth of this Bay there are three
Islandes, one great Isle in the middle of the Channel, which makes a
convenient haven for small vessels, and two other less, but none of them
inhabited.

A little higher runs another stream, The R. de las Barreras Vermeglias.
not very great, which is called De las Barreras Rossas, of the red
Clay-pittes, because it flows from among certain Rocks of hills, whose earth
is died with a red color: where also there is a very high mountain, called
by the Portingals, La Sierra Gomplida, that is to say, The long Mountain.

And yet going up a little further, there are two Golfes of the sea in the
likeness of a pair of Spectacles, wherein is a good heaven, Baya d' Aluaro
Gonzales.
called La Baia d' Aluaro Gonzales, that is the Golfe of Aluaro Gonzales.
Beyond all these are certain hills and shoars, not worth the remembrance,
until you come to the Promontorie that is called by the Portingalles Capo de
Caterina, which is the border of the kingdom of Congo toward the
Equinoctial, Capo di Caterina.
and is distant from the Equinostiall line two degrees and a half, which is
150* Italian miles.

Chap. 5. Of the North coast of the Kingdom of Congo, and the confines thereof.
NOw from Capo de Caterina on the North side begins another border or Coast
of the kingdom of Congo, The Northren border of Congo.
which Eastwarde stretches it self to the place where the River Vuniba
joins with the River Zaire, containing the space of 600. miles and more.
Beyond this coast of Congo toward the North, and under the Equinoctial line
upon the sea shore, and about 200. miles within land, (comprehending in that
reckoning the foresaid Golfe of Lope Gonzales) the people called the Bramas
do inhabit in a Country, The Bramas.
that is now called the kingdom of Loango, The kingdom of Loango.
and the king thereof Mani-Loango, that is to say, the King of Loango. The
Country has great abundance of Elephantes, whose teeth they exchange for
iron, whereof they make their arrowe heads, their knives, and such other
instruments. In this Country also, they weaue certain cloth of the leaves
of Palm trees, in sundry sorts: as we shall tell you in some other place of
this narration.

The king of Loango is in amity with the King of Congo, The people of Loango
circumcised.
and the report is, that in times past he was his vassaile. The people are
circumcised after the manner of the Hebrews, like as also the rest of the
nations in those countries use to be. They do traffic together one with
another, and sometimes make war against their neighbors, and are altogether of
the same nature, whereof the people of Congo are. Their armor are long
targets, which cover almost all their bodies, Their armor, Empachias*
made of very hard and thick hides of a certain beast called Empachas,
somewhat less then an Ox, with horns like the horns of a Coat: (this
Creature is also bred in Germany, and is called a Dante.) The hides thereof
are transported out of these countries, and out of the kingdom of Congo into
Portingale, and from thence into Flanders, where they are dressed; and then
they make ierkens of them as good as breastplates and corselets, which they
call iackets of Dante. Their weapons offensive are darts with long and large
heads of iron, like Partisans, or like the ancient Roman Pilum or Iauelin: the
staves whereof are of proportionable length to cast, having in the midst of
them a certain piece of wood, which they take in their hands, and so with
greater force and violence discharge their darts. They carry also certain
daggers, which are in shape much like to the heads of their darts.

Beyond the kingdom of Loango, are the people called Anzigues, The country of
Anzicos.
of whom we shall deliver unto you a history, which in truth is very strange,
and almost incredible for the beastly and cruel custom, that they use in
eating man's flesh, yea and that of the nearest kinsefolkes they have: This
country toward the sea on the West, bordereth upon the people of Ambus: and
toward the North, upon other nations of Africa, and the wilderness of Nubia:
and toward the East, upon the second great Lake, from whence the River of
Congo springs, in that part which is called Anzicana: and from the kingdom
of Congo, it is divided by the River Zaire, wherein there are many Islandes (as
before is told you) scattered from the lake downewardes, and some of them
belonging to the dominion of the Anzigues, by which River also they do
traffic with the people of Congo.

In this kingdom of the Anzigues there are many Mines of Copper, Sanders.
and great quantity of Sanders both read and graie: the red is called
Tauilla, and the graie (which is the better esteemed) is called Chicongo,
whereof they make a poulder of a very sweet smell, and diverse medicines. They
do also mingle it with the oil of Palm tree, and so annoynting all their
bodies ouerwithall, they preserve themselves in health. But the Portingalles
use it being tempered with Vinegar, which they lay upon their pulses, Medicines
for the French Pockes.
and so heal the French Pockes, which they call in that language Chitangas.

Some do affirm, that this gray Sanders is the very Lignum Aquilae, that
grows in India: and Signor Odoardo affirmed, that the Portingals have proved
it for the head ache, For the headeache.
by laying it on the coals, and taking the smoke of it. The pith and
innermost part of the tree is the best, but the utter part is of no
estimation.

They make great store of linen of the Palm tree, both of sundry sorts and
colors, and much cloth of silk, whereof we will discourse more hereafter.
The people are subject to a king* that has other princes under him: they are
very active and warlike: Their Bows.
They are ready to take arms, and do fight on foot. Their weapons are
different from the weapons of all other people round about them: for their
bows are small and short, made of wood, and wrapped about with serpents skins
of diverse colors, and so smoothly wrought, that you would think them to be
all one with the wood. And this they do, both to make the bow stronger, and
also to hold it the faster. Their stringes are of little wooden twigges, like
reeds, not hollow within, but sound and pliable, and very dainty, such as the
Caualieros of Portingale do carry in their hands to beat their palfries
withal. They are of an ash color, and of a Lion tawney, somewhat tending to
black. They grow in the Country of the Anzigues, and also in the kingdom of
Bengala, Their arrows.
through which the river Ganges runs. Their arrows are short and slender,
and of a very hard wood, and they carry them on their bow hand. They are so
quick in shooting, that holding xxviij. shaftes or more in their bow-hand, they
will shoot and discharge them all, before the first arrow light on the
ground: yea and sometimes there have been seen diverse stout archers, that
have killed birds as they fly in the air.

Other weapons also they make, as Axes and Hatchets, Their weapons
which they use and frame after a strange manner. For the handle is shorter by
the half then the iron is, and at the lowest end of it there is a pommell* for
the faster holding of it in the hand, and all covered over with the foresaid
skin of a serpent. In the uppermost end of it, is the iron very bright and
shining, fastened to the wood with plates of Copper, in the manner of two
nails, as long as the handle: it has two edges, the one cutteth like a
hatchet, and makes a wound after the fashion of a half Roundell* the other
is a hammer. When they fight with their enemies, or defend themselves from
their arrows, they are so exercised with a wonderful speed and nimblenesse to
manage their weapons, that whirling them round about, as it were in a circle,
they keep all that compass of the air which is before them, so that when the
enemy shoots, and the arrowe begins to fall, it lights upon the
hatchet, being so swiftly and vehemently whirled about, that it breaks the
force of the arrowe, and so it is repulsed: Then do they hang the Hatchet upon
their shoulder, and begin to shoot themselves. They have also certain short
daggers, with sheathes of the serpents skins, made like knives with a haft unto
them, which they use to wear a cross. Their girdles are of diverse sorts, but
the men of war have their girdles of Elephants skin, 3. good fingers broad: and
because they are at the first 2. fingers thick, and very hard to handle
handsomely, by the heat of the fire they bow the^ round, and so with certain
buttons tie them overthwart about them. The men are very active and nimble, The
nature of the Anzicos*
and leap up and down the mountains like Goats. Courageous they are and
contemn death: men of great simplicity, loyalty and fidelity, and such as
the Portingalles do trust more then any other. In so much as Signor Odoardo
was wont to say, that if these Anzichi would become Christians, (being of so
great fidelity, sincerity, loyalty and simplicity, that they will offer
themselves to death, for the glory of the world, and to please their Lords
will not stick to give their own flesh to be devoured) then would they with
a far better heart and courage endure martyrdom, for the name of our
redeemer Jesus Christ, and would most honorably maintain our faith and
religion, with their good testimony, and example against the Gentiles.

Moreover, Their merchandise.
the said Signor Odoardo did likewise affirm, that there was no conuersing
with them, because they were a savage and a beastly people, saving only in
respect that they come and traffic in Congo, bringing thither with them
slaves both of their own nation, and also out of Nubia (whereupon they do
border) and linne^cloth (whereof we will tell you hereafter.) and Elephantes
teeth: in exchange of which chaffare they recarry home with the^ Salt and these
Lumache, which they use in steed of their money and coin; and another greater
kind of Lamache, which come from the Isle of S. Thomas, and which they use to
wear for brooches to make themselves fine and gallant withal. Other
marchaundises also they carry back with them which are brought out of
Portingall, as silks, and linen, and glasses, and such like.

They use to circumcise themselves: and another foolish custom they have, both
men and women, as well of the nobility, The Anzichi are circumcised and marked
in their faces.
as of the commonalty, even from their childhood to mark their faces with
sundry slashes made with a knife, as in due place shall be further showed unto
you.

They keep a shambles of man's flesh as they do in these countries for beef
and other victuailes. A shambles of man's flesh.
For their enemies whom they take in the wars, they eat, and also their
slaves, if they can have a good market for them, they sell: or if they cannot,
then they deliver them to the butchers to be cut in pieces, and so sold, to be
roasted or boiled. And (that which is a marvelous history to report) some of
them being weary of their lives, and some of them even for valor of courage,
and to show themselves stout and venturous, thinking it to be a great honor
unto them, if they run into voluntary death, thereby to show that they have
a special contempt of this life, will offer themselves to the butchery, as
faithful subjects to their Princes, for whose sakes, that they may seem
desirous to do them notable service, they do not only deliver themselves to
be devoured by them, but also their slaves, when they are fat and well fed,
they do kill and eat them. True it is that many nations there are, that feed
upon man's flesh as in the east Indies, and in Bresill, and in other places: but
that is only the flesh of their adversaries and enemies, A strange beastly
custom.
but to eat the flesh of their own friends and subjects and kinsefolkes, it
is without all example in any place of the world, saving only in this nation
of the Anzichi.

The ordinary apparel of these people is thus: Their apparel.
The common sort go naked from the girdle upwards, and without any thing upon
their heads, having their hair trussed up and curled. The noble men are
apparelled in silks and other cloth, and wear upon their heads blewe and
red, and black colors, and hattes and hoodes of Portingale Velvet, and other
kinds of cappes usual in that country. And indeed they are all desirous to
have their apparel handsome and neat as their hability will suffer them. The
women are all covered from top to toe, after the common manner of Africa. The
poorer sort of them do girde themselves close from the girdle downwards. The
noble women and such as are of wealth, do wear certain mantelles, which they
cast over their heads, but keep their faces open and at liberty: and shoes
they have on their feet, but the poor go barefoote. They go very quick and
lightsome: Their stature is comely, and their conditions fair and commendable.

Their language is altogether different from the language of Congo, Their
language.
and yet the Anzichi will learn the language of Congo, very soon and easily,
because it is the plainer tongue: but the people of Congo do very hardely learn
the language of the Anzichi. And when I once demanded what their religion was,
it was told me they were Gentiles, and that was all that I could learn of
them.

Chap. 6. Of the East coast of the Kingdom of Congo, and the confines thereof.
THe East Coast of the kingdom of Congo, begins (as we have told you) at
the meeting of the River Vumba, The Eastern border of Congo.
and the River of Zaire; and so with a line drawn toward the South in equal
distance from the River Nilus, which lies on the left hand, it takes up a
great mountain which is very high, and not inhabited in the tops thereof,
called the mountain of Crystal, The mountain of Crystal.
because there is in it great quantity of Crystal both of the mountain and of
the cliffe, and of all sorts. And then passing on further includes the hills
that are called Sierras de Sol, The mountains of the Sun.
that is to say, the hills of the Sun, because they are exceeding high. And
yet it never snoweth upon them, neither do they bear any thing, but are very
bare and without any trees at all: On the leaft hand there arise other hills,
called the hills of Sal-Nitrum, The mountains of Sal-Nitrum.
because there is in the^ great store of that Mineral. And so cutting over the
river Berbela, that comes out of the first Lake, there ends the ancient
bound of the kingdom of Congo on the East.

Thus then the east coast of this kingdom is derived from the meeting of the
two foresaid rivers Vumba and Zaire, until you come to the lake Achelunda, and
to the Country of Malemba; containing the space of six hundred miles. From
this line, which is drawn in the eastern coast of Congo to the river Nilus,
and to the two Lakes (whereof mention shall be made in convenient place) there is
the space of 150. miles of ground well inhabited, and good store of hills, which
do yield sundry mettalles, with much linen, and cloth of the Palm tree.

And seeing we are now come to this point of this discourse, The art of
making Silks in this Eastern Coast.
it will be very necessary to declare unto you the marvelous art which the
people of this country, and other places thereabouts do use in making clothes
of sundry sorts, as Veluets shorn and unshorn, cloth of Tinue, Sattens,
Taffata, Damaskes, Sarcenettes and such like, not of any silken stuff, (for
they have no knowledge of the Silkewormes at all, although some of their
apparel be made of silk that is brought thither from our Countries.) But
they weaue their clothes aforenamed of the leaves of Palm trees, which trees
they always keep under and low to the ground, every year cutting them, and
watering them, to the end they may grow small and tender against the new
spring. Out of these leaves being cleansed and purged after their manner they
draw forth their threedes, which are all very fine and dainty, and all of one
evenness, saving that those which are longest, are best esteemed. For of those
they weaue their greatest pieces. These stuffes they work of diverse fashions,
as some with a nappe upon them like Velvet on both sides, and other cloth
called Damaskes, braunched with leaves, and such other things; and the
Broccati, which are called High and Low, and are far more precious then ours
are. This kind of cloth no man may wear but the king, and such as it
pleases him. The greatest pieces are of these Broccati: for they contain in
length four and five spannes, and in breadth, three and four spannes, and are
called Incorimbas, by the name of the country where it grows, which is about
the River Vumba. The Veluettes are called Enzachas of the same bigness, and
the Damaskes Insulas, and the Rasi Maricas, and the Zendadi Tangas, and the
Ormesini Engombos. Of the lighter sort of these stuffes they have greater
pieces which are wrought by the Anzichi, and are six spannes long, and five
spannes broad, wherewith every man may apparel himself according to his
ability. Besides that, they are very thick and sound to keep out the
water, and yet very light to wear. The Portingalles have lately begun to use
them for tents and boothes, which do maruellously resist both water and wind.

This coast then shuts up the kingdom of Congo, which lies Westwarde of
it: The River Nilus.
and from this Coast with a line of equal distance somewhat more toward the
East runs the river Nilus, about 150. miles, containing within it a Country
that abounds with all the commodities above rehearsed, possessed by sundry
Lords, some subject to Prete Gianni, and some to the mighty King Moenemugi. In
all which Country there was nothing worth the noting, saving that from Nilus
toward the West, the people do traffic with the kingdom of Congo, and the
rivers of that sea: and from thence toward the East they go through the
kingdoms of Moenemugi, even to the sea of Mombaza and Mozambiche.

Chap. 7. Of the confines of the kingdom of Congo toward the South.
THis Eastern Coast (as it is before set down) ends in the mountain called
Serras de Plata, The Southern Coast.
that is the mountains of silver, The mountain of Silver.
and there begins the fourth and last border of the kingdom of Congo,
toward the South, that is to say, from the foresaid mountain to the Bay of
Cowes on the West, containing in length the space of four hundred and fifty
miles. And this Southern line does part the kingdom of Angola in the middle,
and leaves on the left hand of it, the foresaid mountains of Silver, and
further beyond them toward the South the Kingdom of Matama, which is a great
kingdom, very mighty, and absolute of it self, and sometimes in amity, and
sometimes at utter enmity with the kingdom of Angola.

The king of Matama is in religion a Gentile, The K. of Matama.
and his kingdom stretches toward the South to the river Brauagal, and
near to the mountains commonly called the Mountains of the Moon, and
toward the east bordereth on the Western banks of the river Bagamidri, and
so crosses over the river Coari.

This country abounds in vaultes of Crystal and other mettalles, and all
manner of victuaile, and good air. And although the people thereof, and their
neighbor borderers do traffic together: Yet the King of Matama, and the king
of Angola do oftentimes war one against the other, as we told you before:
And this river Bagamidri divides the kingdom of Matapa from the kingdom of
Monomata, which is toward the East, and whereof John de Barros does most
largely discourse in the first Chapter of his tenth book.

Toward the sea coast there are diverse Lords, that take upon them the title
of kings: but indeed they are of very base and slender estate: Neither are
there any ports or havens of any account or name in the rivers there. And now
forasmuch as we have oftentimes made mention of the kingdom of Angola, The K.
of Angola.
this will be a very convenient place for us to entreat thereof: because it
has been heretofore said, that the king of Angola, being in times past but a
Governor or Deputy under the king of Congo, although since that time he is
become a good Christian, yet has he made himself a free and an absolute
Prince, and usurped all that quarter to his own jurisdiction, which before he
had in regiment and government under another. And so afterward in time
conquered other countries thereabouts, insomuch as he is now grown to be a
great Prince, and a rich, and in power little inferior to the king of Congo
himself, and therefore either pays tribute, or refuses to pay tribute unto
him, even at his own good pleasure.

It came to pass, John the second, K. of Portingall, first brought
christianity into Congo.
that Don Giouanni the second, being king of Portingall, planted the christian
religion in the Kingdom of Congo, and thereupon the king of Congo became a
Christian. After which time the Lord of Angola was always in amity, and (as
it were) a vassal of the forenamed King of Congo, and the people of both
countries did traffic together one with another, and the Lord of Angola did
every year send some presents to the king of Congo. And by license from the
King of Congo there was a great trade between the Portingalles and the people
of Angola at the haven of Loanda, where they bought slaves and changed them
for other marchaundises, and so transported all into the Isle of Saint Thomas.
Whereby it came to pass, that the traffic was here united with the
traffic of S. Thomas: so that the ships did use first to arrive at that
Islande, and then afterward passed over to Loanda. And when this trade began
in process of time to increase, they dispatched their ships from Lisbone to
Angola of themselves, and sent with them a Governor called Paulo Diaz of
Nouais, Paulo Diaz the first discouerer of this traffic.
to whom this business did (as it were) of right appertain, in regard of the
good deserts of his auncesters, who first discovered this traffic. To this
Paulo Diaz did Don Sebastiano King of Portingale grant leave and authority to
conquer, Don Sebastian K. of Portingall.
for the space of xxxiij. leagues vpwardes along the coast, beginning at the
River Coanza toward the South, and within the land also, whatsoever he
could get, toward all his charges for him and his heirs. With him there
went many other ships that opened and found out a great trade with Angola,
which notwithstanding was directed to the foresaid haven of Loanda where the
said ships did still discharge themselves. And so by little and little he
entered into the firm land, Paulo Diaz builds a house in Anzelle
and made himself a house in a certain village called Anzelle within a mile
near to the river Coanza, because it was the more commodious and nigher to the
traffic of Angola.

When the trade here began thus to increase, and marchaundises were freely
carried by the Portingales, and the people of Congo to Cabazo a place belonging
to the Lord of Angola, The author calls him Lord, because he was then but a
petty king.
and distant from the sea, 150. miles, there to sell and barter them, it
pleased his Lordship to give out order, that all the Merchants should be
slain, and their goods confiscated, alleging for his defense, that they were
come thither as spies, and to take possession of his estate: but in truth it is
thought that he did it only to gain all that wealth to himself, considering
that it was a people that did not deal in the habit of warriors, but after
the manner of Merchants. And this fell out in the same year, that the King Don
Sebastiano was discomfited in Barbary.

When Paulo Diaz understood of this course, he put himself in arms against
the King of Angola, Paulo Diaz in arms against the K. of Angola.
and with such a troop of Portingals as he could gather together that were to
be found in that country, and with two Galleys and other vessels, which he
kept in the river Coanza, he went forward on both sides of the river
conquering, and by force subdued many Lords, and made them his friends and
subjects. But the king of Angola perceiving that his vassalles had yielded to
the obedience of Paulo Diaz, and that with all prosperous success he had
gained much land upon him, he assembled a great army to go against him, and so
utterly to destroy him. P. Diaz demands succor of the K. of Congo.
Whereupon Paulo Diaz requested the King of Congo that he would succor him
with some help to defend himself withal, who presently sent unto him for
aid an army of 60 thousand men, under the conduct of his cousin Don Sebastiano
Manibamba, and another captain with 120. Portingale soldiers, that were in
those countries, and all of his own pay for the atchieuing of this enterprise.
This army was to join with Paulo Diaz, and so altogether to war against the
King of Angola: but arriving at the shore, where they were to pass over the
river Bengo, within 12. miles of Loa^da, and where they should have met with
many barks to carry the Camp to the other shore, partly because the said
barks had slacked their coming, and partly because much time would have been
spent in transporting so many men, the whole army took their way quite over
the river, and so going on forwards they met with the people of the King of
Angola, that were ready to stop the soldiers of Congo, The millitary order
of the people of Congo.
from entering upon their Country.

The military order of the Mociconghi (for by that term we do call the
natural borne people of the kingdom of Congo, as we call the Spaniardes
those that are naturally borne in Spain) and the military order of the people
of Angola, is almost all one: For both of them do usually fight on foot, and
divide their army into several troops, fitting themselves according to the
situation of the field where they do incampe, and advancing their ensigns and
banners in such sort as before is remembrd.

The remoues of their army are guided and directed by certain several
soundes and noyses, that proceed from the Captain General, How the soldiers
do understand the pleasure of their General.
who goes into the midst of the Army, and there signifies what is to be
put in execution: that is to say, either that they shall join battle, or else
retire, or put on forward, or turn to the right hand, and to the leaft hand,
or to perform any other warlick action. For by these several sounds distinctly
delivered from one to another they do all understand the commandementes of
their Captain, as we here among us do understand the pleasure of our
General by the sundry strokes of the Drum, and the Captains soundes of
the Trompet. Three kinds of instruments used in their wars.


Three principal soundes they have which they use in war: One which is
uttered aloude, by great Rattles Iuory. Another is made by a certain kind of
instrument, fashioned like a Pyramid turned upward: for the lower end of it
is sharp and ends as it were in a point, and the upper end waxes broader
and broader like the bottom of a Triangle, in such sort that beneath they are
narrow and like an Angle, and above they are large and wide. This instrument is
made of certain thin plates of iron, which are hollow and empty within, and
very like to a bell turned up side down. They make them ring, by striking them
with wooden wandes: and oftentimes they do also crack them, to the end that
the sound should be more harsh, horrible, and warlicke: The third instrument
is Elephants teeth, some great, and some small, hollow within, and blown at a
certain hole which they make on the side of it, in manner of the Fife, and not
aloft like the Pipe. These are tempered by them in such sort that they yield
as warlicke and harmonious music as the Cornet does, and so pleasant and
iocund a noise, that it moves and stirs up their courages, and makes them
not to care for any danger whatsoever. Now of these three several sorts of
warlick instruments, there are some bigger and some less. The use of these
instruments.
For the Captain General carries always with him the greater sort, to the
end that by them he may give signification to the whole Camp what they shall
do. The particular bands and troops of the army have in like manner their
smaller sort, and every Captain in his several regiment has also one of the
smallest, which they strike with their hands. Whereupon it falls out, that
when they hear the sound of the general Rattle, or Cornet, or the other
third kind of instrument, every part of the army does presently answer in
the same note, signifying thereby that they have well understood the good
pleasure of the Captain, and so consequently the under Captains do the like.
Neither do they only use these instruments and sounds universally, but also
when they are in fight in skirmish, the valiant and courageous soldiers go
before the rest, and with this kind of belles, which they strike with their
wooden wandes, they dance, and encourage their fellows, and by the note do
signify unto them in what danger they are, and what weapons they have met
withal.

The military apparel of the better sort, The Millitary apparel of the
better sort.
and of the Lords of the Moci-Conghi is this. On their heads they carry a
cappe, which is garnished with sundry plumes of the feathers of the Eastruche,
of the Peaeocke, of the Cock, and of other kinds of birds, which make them
to seem men of greater stature then they are, and terrible to look upon. From
the girdle upwards they are all naked, and have hanging about them from their
necks, both on the right side and on the leaft, even as low as to both their
flanks, certain chains of iron, with rings upon them as big as a man's
little finger, which they use for a certain military pomp and bravery. From
the girdle downewardes they have breeches of linen, or sendale, which are
covered with cloth, and reach down to their heels, but then they are folded
again vpwardes and tucked under their girdle. Upon their girdle, which (as we
told you) is made with exquisite and curious work, they do fasten certain
belles, very like to the instruments that are before named, which in moving of
themselves and in fighting with their enemies, do ring and make a noise, and ad
courage unto them, while they are in combat with their adversaries. Upon their
legs they have likewise their buskins after the Portingall fashion. Their
weapons.
Their armor we have already declared, that is to say, bow and arrows,
sword, dagger and Target: but yet with this caveat, that whosoever wears a
bow, he wears also a dagger, but no target: for those two weapons may not be
worn together, but sword and target they may lawfully wear both at once.

The common soldiers go all naked from the girdlestead vpwardes, The Military
apparel of the meaner sort.
and have the rest of their bodies armed with bow and arrows and daggers.
These are they that do first offer the skirmish, going out before the rest of
the army, as it were severally and dispersedly provoking to fight, and
receiving the shot from a far of, they turn and wind this way and that way,
and do nimbly leap from one side to another, to the end they may avoid the
lighting of their enemies arrows. Besides these there are also certain quick
and gallant young men that run out before the rest, which with the ringing of
their bells (as before is said) are as it were comforters of their fellows, and
when they have fought so much, that the Captain thinks them to be even
weary, then does he call them back with the sound of one of those instruments
above mentioned: so that perceiving the medley to wax hot, they turn about
and retire themselves back again, and others succeed in their places, which
course is still observed and kept until such time, as both the armies do
indeed join all their maine forces together, and so fight it out.

In the place above described, The issue of this battle.
there were sundry encounters on the one side and on the other. And in the
first battles the people of Congo remained conquerours: but afterward, when
they had diverse times fought together with great loss on both sides, and
victuailes began now to fail, and consequently men waxed sick and died, the
Camp of the king of Congo was dissolved, and every man returned to his own
home.

In this mean while Paulo Diaz, P. Diaz at Luiola.
though he could not join his forces with the Army of his friends that came
to succor him, yet set himself forwards, and passing over the river stayed
at Luiola, because it was a place very strong and fit to resist the King of
Angola. The situation of Luiola is this: The two rivers Coanza and Luiola do
join together about 105. miles from the sea shore, and a little above the said
joining together, these Rivers do seauer themselves for the space of an
Arcubuse shot, so that they make as it were an Islande between them: In
which Islande at the meeting of the two rivers there rises a hill, which Paulo
Diaz surprised and fortified for his better safety. And whereas in times past
there was never any habitation there, now at this present it is grown to be a
pretty conntrey inhabited by the Portingalles.

From this place thus surprised by Paulo Diaz, and called Luiola, you may sail
along the river with certain small vessels, even to the sea, and go by land
without any danger for the space of one hundred and five miles. The hills of
Cabambe.
Near thereunto are the hills that are called the hills of Cabambe,
producing infinite store of silver: which the said Diaz does every day by
little and little endeavor to conquer. And these hills are the graund quarrel
between him and the people of Angola. For knowing that the Portingalles do
esteem greatly of these hills, in regard of the silver pits which are there
in great abundance, they do use all the force and skill they can to keep the
Portingalles from them. They fight also with them in diverse other places: for
the Portingalles passing over the river Coanza do continually make inroades
into the countries that are subject to the king of Angola.

The weapons of these peoples, are bows six handfulles long, The weapons of
the people of Angola.
with stringes made of the barks of trees: and arrows of wood, less then a
man's little finger, and six handefuls long. They have iron heads made like a
hook, and feathers of birds in the tops of them: and of these arrows they
use to carry to the number of six or seven upon their bow hand, without any
quiver at all. Their daggers are fashioned with a haft after the manner of a
knife, which they wear at their girdle, on their left side, and hold them
aloft in their hands, when they fight with them. Their military actions.
By their Military actions and proceedinges you may observe their great skill
and good order in matter of war. For in diverse battles that were between
them and the Portingalles, it was plainly seen how they could choose their
advantages against their enemies, as by assaulting them in the night time, and
in rayny weather, to the end that their arcubuses and guns should not take
fire, and also by dividing their forces into many troops, to trouble them the
more. The king does not use to go to the war in his own person, but sends
his Captains in his steed. The people are also accustomed to fly and run away
incontinently, as soon as they see their Captain slain, neither can they be
persuaded to stay by any reason or argument, but presently yield up the
field. They are all footmen, neither have they any horses at all. And
therefore the Captains if they will not go on foot, cause themselves to be
carried on the shoulders of their slaves, after one of the three manners, which
we will show unto you hereafter. This nation goes out to war in number
almost infinite, and very confusedly: they leave no man at home that is fit to
carry a weapon: they make no preparation of victuailes necessary for the Camp:
but such as perhaps have any, convey it with them upon the sholders of their
servants, and yet they have sundry sorts of creatures that might be managed,
and serve their turns to draw and to carry as in the second part of this
Treatise shall be described unto you. And thereupon it falls out, that when
they come into any country with their whole army, all their food is quickly
quite consumed, and then having nothing leaft to feed upon, they dissolve
their host even in the greatest necessity of prosecuting their enterprise, and
so are enforced by hunger to return into their own countries.

They are greatly given to Divination by birds: If a bird chance to fly on
their leaft hand, They are given to divination by birds.
or cry in such manner, as those which make profession to understand the same,
do say that it fore-sheweth ill luck and adversity, or that they may go no
further forwards, they will presently turn back and repair home: which
custom was also in the old time observed by the ancient Romans, and likewise
at this day by sundry other Pagans.

Now if it shall seem strange to any man, Why so small a number, as Paulo
Diaz, had with him, was able to resist so huge an army of the K. of Angola.
that so few Portingall soldiers as Paulo Diaz retayneth there with him, and
others of the Portingall nation, which traffic into the Realm, and relieve
him with succors, being in number but three hundred at the most, accounting
their slaves, and also the Malcontentes, the rebels and fugitives of Angola
which daily resort unto him, and amount not in all to the quantity of xv,
thousand men, should be able to make so gallant a resistance against that
innumerable rabble of Negroes, being subject to the king of Angola, which are
gathered there together (as it is said) to the number of a Million of souls. I
answer, that great reason may be alleged for the same. For the army of
the Negroes is all naked, and utterly destitute of all provision and furniture
for armor of defense: And as for their weapons of offense, they consist only
but of bows and daggers (as I told you.) But our few Portingalles that are
there, are well lapped in certain iackets that are stuffed and basted with
bombast, and stitched and quilted very soundly, which keep their arms very
safe, and their bodies downewardes as low as their knees: Their heads also
are armed with cappes made of the same stuff, which do resist the shot of the
arrow and the stroke of the dagger: Besides that, they are girt with long
swords, and some horsemen there are among them that carry spears for their
weapons. Now you must understand that one man on horseback, is of more worth
then a hundred Negroes, because the horsemen do affray them greatly: and
especially of those that do discharge guns and pieces of artillarie against
them, they do stand continually in an extreme bodily fear. So that these
few being well armed, and cunningly and artificially ordered, must needs
overcome the other, though they be very many in number.

This kingdom of Angola, The Kingdom of Angola very populous.
is full of people beyond all credit: For every man takes as many wives as
he lists, and so they multiply infinitely: But they do not use so to do in
the kingdom of Congo, which lives after the manner of the Christians. And so
Signor Odoardo did affirm and believe, that the kingdom of Angola had a
Million of fighting men, by reason that every man taking to him as many wives
as he would, begot many children, and likewise because every man does
willingly go to the wars in the service of his Prince.

This kingdom also is very rich in mines of Silver, and most excellent Copper,
The commodities of Angola.
and for other kinds of metal there is more in this kingdom then in any
other country of the world whatsoever. Fruitful it is in all manner of food,
and sundry sorts of cattle, and specially for great herds of Kine. True it
is, that this people do love Dogs flesh better then any other meat: and for
that that purpose they feed and fatten them, and then kill them, and sell them
in their open shambles. It is constantly affirmed, A Dog sold for 220.
duccates.
that a great dog accustomed to the Bull was sold by exchange for xxij.
slaves, which after the rate of x. Duckates a poll, were worth in all 220.
Duccates: in so high a price and account do they hold that Creature.

The moneys that are used in Angola, are much different from the Lumache of
Congo: The money of Angola,
for they of Angola do use beads of glass, such as are made in Venice as big
as a Nut, and some of lesser quantity, and of diverse and sundry colors and
fashions. These do the people of Angola make, not only to use them for money,
but also for an ornament of their men and women, to wear about their necks
and their arms, and are called in their tongue Anzolos: but when they are
threeded upon a stringe like a pair of Beads, they call them Mizanga.

The King of Angola is by religion a Gentile, The Religion of Angola.
and worshippeth Idols, and so do all the people in his kingdom. It is true,
that he has greatly desired to become a Christian, after the example of the
King of Congo. But because there has not been as yet any possibility to send
Priests unto him, that might illuminate and instruct him, he remains still
in darkness. The foresaid Signor Odoardo told me that in his time the king
of Angola sent an Ambassador to the King of Congo, requesting that he would
send him some religious persons to inform him in the Christian religion: but
the King of Congo had none there that he could spare, and therefore could
send him none. At this day, both these kings do traffic together, and are
in amity one with another, the king of Angola having now cleared and discharged
himself for the injuries and slaughters that were committed upon those of
Congo, and upon the Portingalles at Cabazo.

The language of the people of Angola is all one with the language of the
people of Congo, The language of the people of Angola.
because (as we told you before) they are both but one kingdom. Only the
difference between them is, as commonly it is between two nations that border
one upon another, as for example between the Portingalles and the Castilians,
or rather between the Venetians and the Calabrians, who pronouncing their
words in a diverse manner, and uttering them in several sorts, although it be
all one speech, yet do they very hardly understand one another.

We have signified unto you heretofore, that the Bay of Cowes does divide the
kingdom of Angola in the midst, and hitherto we have treated but of the one
half thereof: The rest of the Kingdom of Angola described.
Now we will describe unto you the second part of it, which lies from the
said Bay of Cowes toward the South. From this Bay then, to the black Cape
called Capo Negro, Copo Negro. 1. The black Cape.
by the coast of the Ocean they do reckon two hundred and twenty miles of such
country and soil as the former is, and possessed by many Lords that are
subject to the king of Angola. From Capo Negro there runs a line toward
the East, through the midst of the Mountains, that are called Monti Freddi,
Monti Freddi 1. the cold mountains.
that is to say, the Cold Mountains: which also in some certain parts of
them, that are higher then the rest, toward the Equinoctial are termed by
the Portingalles Monti Neuosi, or Snowie Mountains, and so ends at the
roots of other Mountains that are called the Mountains of Crystal. (Out of
these Snowie Mountains do spring the waters of the Lake Dumbea Zocche.) The
mounainest of Crystal.
This foresaid line from the mountain of Crystal draws onwardes toward
the North through the Mountains of Silver, till you come to Malemba, where we
told you the kingdom of Congo was divided, and parted the River of Coari in
the midst. And this is the Country possessed by the King of Angola, whereof
I have no more to say, then is already set down, neither of the qualities of
his person, nor of his Court.

Chap. 8. Of the circuit of the Kingdom of Congo possessed by the King that
now is, according to the four borders above described.
BEginning therefore at the River Coanza, and drawing toward the Equinoctial
375. miles, you shall find the River that they call Las Barreras Vermellias, The
West contains 375. miles.
or the Red Pittes, which are indeed the ragged ruins of certain rocks
worn by the sea, and when they fall down do show themselves to be of a red
color. The North 540.
From thence by a direct line upon the North, that which the King possesses is
450. miles. And the^ the said line dividing it self toward the South passes
by the hills of Crystal (not those that we told you before did belong to
Angola, The East 500,
but others that are called by the same name) and so by the mountains of
Salnitro, traversing the River Verbela at the roots of the Mountains of Silver
it ends at the Lake Aquelunda, The South. 360.
which is the space of 500. miles. The fourth line runs along the River
Coanza, which issues out of the said Lake and contains 360. miles. So that
the whole Realm now possessed by Don Aluaro the king of Congo is in compass
1685. miles. The kingdom of Congo contains in compass, 1685. miles.
But the breadth thereof begins at the mouth of the River Zaire, where the
point is, which in the Portingal speech is called Padraon, and so cutting the
kingdom of Congo in the middle, and crossing over the mountains of the Sun,
and the mountains of Crystal, In breadth 600. miles.
there it ends, containing the space of 6^0. miles, and within 150. miles,
near to the River Nilus. Very true it is indeed, that in ancient time the
predecessors of this Prince did reign over many other countries thereaboutes,
which in process of time they have lost: and although they be now in the
government of others, The title or style of the King of Congo
yet do the Kings of Congo retain still to this day the titles of those
regions, as for example, Don Aluaro, king of Congo, and of Abundos, and of
Matama, and of Quizama, and of Angola, and of Cacongo, and of the seven
kingdoms of Congere Amolaza, and of the Pangelungos, and Lord of the River
Zaire, and of the Anziquos, and Anziquana, and of Loango.

Chap. 9. The six Provinces of the kingdom of Congo, and first of the
Province of Bamba.
THis kingdom is divided into six Provinces, that is to say, Bamba, Songo,
Sundi, Pango, Batta and Pemba. The Province of Bamba, (which is the greatest
and the richest) is governed by Don Sebastian Mani Bamba, The first province is
Bamba, and the description of it. Sebastian chief Governor of Bamba, and those
that rule under him.
cousin to the King Don Aluaro last deceased, and it is situated upon the sea
coast, from the river Ambrize, until you come to the river Coanza toward the
South. This Don Sebastian has under his dominion many Princes and Lords, and
the names of the greatest of them are these, Don Antonio Mani-Bamba, who is
Lieuetenant and brother to Don Sebastian, and Mani-Lemba another, and
Mani-Dandi, and Mani-Bengo, and Mani-Loanda, who is governor of the Island of
Loanda, and Mani-Corimba, and Mani-Coanza, and Mani-Cazzanzi. All these do
govern all the sea coast but within land, for that part which belongs to
Angola, there are another people called the Ambundos, who dwelling on the
borders of Angola are subject to the said Mani-Bamba, and they are these,
Angazi, Chinghengo, Motollo, Chabonda, and many others of baser condition.

Note, that this word Mani signifies a Prince or a Lord, Mani what it
signifies.
and the rest of the word is the name of the country and Lordeshippe, where
the Lord rules. As for example, Mani-Bamba signifies the Lord of the
country of Bamba, and Mani-Corimba the Lord of the country of Corimba, The
Confines of Bamba,
which is a part of Bamba, and so likewise of the rest. This Province of Bamba
confineth with Angola, The country of Quizama.
on the South, and upon the East of it toward the Lake Achelunda lies the
country of Quizama, which is governed like a common wealth, and is divided among
a number of Lords, who in deed living at their own liberty, do neither obey
the King of Congo, nor the King of Angola. And to be short, these Lords of
Quizama, after they had a long time quarrelled with Paulo Diaz, yet at last
they became his subjects, because they would avoid the yoke of the King of
Angola, and by their good aid and assistance does Paulo Diaz greatly help
himself against the said King of Angola.

Now the aforesaid Country of Bamba, Bamba the principal Province of all
Congo.
(as we have told you) is the principal Province of all the Realm of Congo,
and in deed the very keye, and the buckler and the sword, and the defense
thereof, and (as it were) the frontier which opposes it self against all
their enemies. For it resists all the reuoltes and rebellions of those
quarters, and has very valorous people in it, that are always ready for to
fight, so that they do continually keep their adversaries of Angola in great
awe: and if it happen at any time that their king stand in need, they are
always at his command to annoy the other countries whenever. When need
requires, Bamba yields for a need 400000 men of war
he may have in Camp four hundred thousand men of war, and yet that
number is but only the sixth part of the whole kingdom, though indeed it be
the better part and the stronger. The principal City of this Province lies
in the plain which is between the river Loze and Ambrize, Panza the
principal City of Bamba.
and is called Panza (which is a common name for every town.) There dwells
the Lord of the Province, and it is distant from the sea a hundred miles. In
this Signorie also do the hills begin, Mines of Silver and other mettalles.
where the mines of Silver and other Mettalles are found, and so stretch out
toward the kingdom of Angola. It is very rich: for upon the coast of the sea
there, they have great store of the Lumache, which are used for Moneys over
all the kingdom of Congo: Besides, there is also a greater traffic and
Market for slaves, that are brought out of Angola, then in any place else. For
there are yearly bought by the Portingalles above five thousand head of
Negroes, which afterward they conueigh away with them, and so sell them into
diverse parts of the world.

The people of this Province are in arms the most valiant of all the Kingdom
of Congo. Valiant, mighty and strong men in Ba^ba.
They go armed like the Sclauonians, with long and large swords, that are
brought them out of Portingal. There are among them very mighty men, that will
cleave a slave in the midst at one blow, and cut of the head of a Bull at
one stroke with one of those swords. And (that which is more, and will
peradventure seem incredible) one of these valiant men did bear upon his
arm a certain vessel of wine, which was the fourth part of a Butte, and
might weigh about 325. pound, until it was clean emptied. Moreover, they do
carry bow and arrows, whereat they are very quick and nimble, and withal
their long Targets made of the Dants skin, whereof we told you before, when we
made mention of the Anzichi.

The Creatures that are found in this Province, are first the Elephantes,
Certain creatures in Bamba Province. Elephantes.
which do breed over all the kingdom of Congo, but principally in the
country of Bamba, because it abounds in Woods, in pastures and in waters,
more then any of the rest, by reason of the many rivers that run through it.
And therefore the country is (as it were) appropriated to nourishe and breed
such a kind of beast, as is indeed of an unreasonable bigness. An
Elephantes foot 4. spanne broad.
For Signor Odoardo told me, that he had oftentimes taken the measure of an
Elephantes foot in the dust, You may find hereby what the bigness of the whole
Elephant was* if you will use the Art of Proportion, as Pithagoras did by the
foot of Hercules, Aul. Gelltus lib. 1. Cap. 10.
and one of them was in plain Diameteer four spannes broad. Whereby if you
frame the whole circle of the foot, accordingly you may by proportion find
out the bigness of the whole body of the beast. This foot they call
Malo-Manzao that is to say, the Foot of an Elephant. And if in Portingal, in
Italy, and in Germany, there have been seen in our times, any of these creatures
that were far lesser in respect of the aforesaid hugenes, you must understand
that they were but young, and brought into those countries in their tender
age, of purpose to make them tame. The Elephant lives 150. years.
But in these quarters they say that the Elephantes do live an hundred and
fifty years, and that until the middle of their age they continue still in
growing. An Elephants tooth of 200. weight.
And to confirm this truth he added, that he had seen and waighed diverse of
their teeth (which are not of home, as some think) and their weight amounted
to 200. pounds a piece after the rate of xii. ounces to every pound. In the
language of Congo the Elephants tooth is called Mene-Manzao, that is to say,
The tooth of an Elephant: and their young ones are called Moana-Manzao, that
is, a young Elephant. Their ears are greater then the greatest Targattes that
the Turks use to wear, in length six spans, in shape like an Eg, and toward
their sholders they grow to be narrower and sharper. With their ears, and with
their tronke, and with their tail, they beat away the flies that trouble
them: yea and some have leaft it in writing, that where they cannot reach with
their tronke, with their ears, or with their tail, they will gather their
skin together, and so nip the poor flies to death between the wrincles.

They have in their tail certain hayres or bristles as big as rushes or
broome-spriggs, Certain hairs in the Elephants tail, very precious.
of a shining black color. The older they be, the fayrer and stronger they
be, and of great price among them. For the people of that country do greatly
esteem them because the noble men and women of the kingdom of Angola, and of
the Ambundi their neighbors do use to adorn and bedecke their necks withal,
and therefore do love them, for that they are indeed very fair and rare, and
grow upon so goodly a beast. They are very strong, and like a twined cord, so
that if a man shall strive to break them asunder with both his hands, he
shall not be able with all his force and strength to crack them, but rather
spoil his hands with them. And for the cause lately rehearsed, many there
are, which waiting for the Elephantes, when they ascend some steep and narrow
way, do come behind them, and with very sharp knives cut of their tails:
the poor beast being not able in those straits to turn back to revenge it
self, not with his tronke to reach his enemy. And this they do, only to have
those hairs, which they sell for two or three flaues a piece. Other light and
courageous persons there are, that trusting much to their swiftnes in running,
do he in a wait, and set upon the poor beasts behind, whiles they are in
feeding, and at one blow attempt to cut off their tails, and so endeavor to
save themselves by running away in a round. For the greatness of the beast is
such, as outright it is very swift, because it makes very large strides though
in deed but slow, and in the plain is far quicker then any lusty horse:
but in turning round it loses much time, and so the huntseman escapes in
safety. And therefore many have been surprised and slain by the Elephantes,
that have sought to escape from them by running away outright.

Our Ancestors, An error of ancient writers.
being not well informed in these matters have leaft in writing, that the
Elephantes could not ly down upon the ground, but that they used to lean
themselves against a tree: which being before weakened or sawed in sunder by
the hunters, both the Elephantes and the tree fell down to the earth, and so
were taken. But Signor Odoardo affirmed upon his credit, that they lay down
upon the ground, that they kneeled upon their knees, and that they would with
both their fore-feete leap upon the trees to feed on the leaves, and stoop
down to drink of the waters, that were in their caves, and that they had their
iointes as other creatures have, saving that in some parts they do somewhat
differ from others: as for example, from the hoofes of their fore-feete, up to
their shoulders, you shall not perceive that they have any more then two
joints. In their feeding: they use to shake and root up the great trees with
the force of their shoulders, The manner of the Elepha^ts feeding.
and strength of their whole backs* But the smaller trees they take between
both their teeth, and so bow them and pluck them down, that they may feed
upon the leaves of them: insomuch as sometimes they break one of their teeth
with so doing. And this is the cause why you shall find diverse of them in the
fields that have lost their teeth. They chawe their meat with their short
teeth, which are not seen as their two long tuskes are: and they carry it to
their mouth by their long Snout, or Tronke, which is to them in steed of an
arm and a hand. The tip of their Tronke is fashioned and divided into little
slits, and (as it were) fingers, wherewith they will take up very small
things, as Nuttes, and Strawes, and Berries, and so reach them to their mouth,
as I Philippo Pigafetta have seen my self at Lisbone.

The Females of these creatures do bear their brood in their womb for the
space of two years and no more: The Shee-Elephant.
And forasmuch as the young Elephant cannot so quickly be brought up, (for it
grows very slowly) the milk is kept from it, and so it waxes apt to feed
of it self. And therefore Mother Nature has provided that the Elephantes are
not great with young, but from seven years to seven years.

Their skin is hard beyond all credit. The Elephants skin.
For being four fingers thick, it cannot be pierced, no not with the shot of
an Arcubuse. And Signor Odoardo reported, that with a little Gunne, which is
called a Petreraa, one of them was stricken, without any wound making, but
indeed he was grievously bruised, so that he ran away from that place all in
a rage, the space of three days journey and there died, after he had slain
certain slaves that he met by the way. The manner of taking the Elephantes.


The people of that Country have not the skill to tame these beasts. Whereby
they might reap great commodity and profit, for carrying their stuff from
place to place for diverse other good uses. But yet they take them; by digging
certain deep trenches in the places, where they use to pasture; which
trenches are very narrow at the bottom, and broad above, to the end the
beast may not help himself, and leap out when he is fallen into them. These
trenches they cover with Soddes of earth, and grass, and leaves, because the
beast should not see their train, but passing over them remain there
entrenched. Whereupon the Gentleman beforenamed told me, that he had seen
with his own eyes a very strange and admirable thing in Coanza, A strange
effect of Nature.
namely, that a young Elephant following his damme fell down by chance into
one of these pittes, and after that she could not with all her skill and
strength draw him out of it, she buried him therein, and covered him with
earth, with branches, and with bows, insomuch as she filled the pit up to the
top, to the end that the hunters should not enjoy her calfe, choosing
rather to kill it her self, then to leave it to the mercy of the cruel
huntsemen. This loving and kind mother, not fearing the people (that stood
round about her, and shouted against her, and threatened her with sundryweapons,
and uttered strange clamours and noyses to affray her, and cast many fires at
her) but assuring her self in her own strong and valiant nature, did labor
and toil from morning till night, that she might draw her calfe out of the
pit: and when she found that it was not possible for her to atchieue what
she desired, then she covered it in manner as we have told you.

The Elephant is a very gentle beast, and trusts greatly in his natural
strength. He fears nothing, nor hurts any man that does not trouble him:
The nature of the Elephant.
and haunteth near to men's houses without doing any harm at all. If he epsy
men that go in his walk, he will not meddle with them, unless they seek to
molest him: saving that sometimes peradventure he will gently with his snowte
hoyse them vpwardes into the air, whom he meets withal in his way; and that
is all the hurt he will do unto them. These Elephantes do greatly delight in
waters: and if a man be desirous to see them, his best way is to lie somewhere
nigh to the Rivers, and Lakes, where they use to haunt about noone tide, to
drink, to refresh themselves, and to bathe their bodies in the water: for
there they will stand up to their bellies, and all the rest of their body,
that is above the water, they will wash all over with the water that they
snuff up into their snout for that purpose. And because there are so many
foords and pastures (as is said) in the kingdom of Congo, therefore is there
very great store of these creatures in that country. For Signor Odoardo
affirmed, that in the way between Cazanze, and Loanda, in a little grassie
valley he had seen about a hundred of them in a company, old and young that
followed their dammes: and these were the first young ones that ever he saw
till that day. And herewithall you must understand, that they use to go
together in heardes, as Kine, and Camelles, and other such like gentle
Creatures do, and not alone like Lions and other such wild beasts. Now the
reason why this country abounds so in Iuory, is easy to be yielded. For so
many Elephantes being bredde in that Region, they made no account of that
commodity in times past: but only after that the Portingalles began to
traffic with those countries, it grew in estimation: and so having gathered
together in so many ages an infinite quantity thereof, which they found in
their fields, they have sold them till this day at a very good penniworth.

It is not known, Rinoceros.
whether there be in that country any other beast that is so big as an
Elephant is, nor whether there breed therein any Rinoceros, which is a
Creatures as big indeed as the Elephant, and in India is called a Bada. But
yet there are brought into the countries of the Anzichi some of their horns
that grow upon their noses, that are both of great value and estimation, and
also used for the help of diverse diseases. So that it is very credible and
likely, that there are some of them to be found in those quarters.

There are in the Region of the Anzichi Lions also, like the Lions that breed
in other parts of the world, Lions.
but they do not use to haunt the Region of Bamba: But in Bamba there are very
great store of Tigres, which are of the very same shape that those in Florence
are, Tygres.
which Signor Odoardo saw there, and testified to be very Tygres indeed. He
told me also of a notable custom which they have: And that is, that they
will not set upon any men that are white, but only such as are black: And it
has been found, that when the white and the black have slept together in the
night time, they have slain the black to devour them, and spared the white.
When they are hungry they will be so bold as to fetch cattle even out of the
yardes that are about the houses without any fear at all, when they cannot
find any victuailes abroad in the fields. They are very dangerous and
hurtful to all kinds of Creatures whatsoever they be, and in that language
they are called Engoi. They are as fierce and cruel beasts as the Lion, and
roar as the Lion does. They are also altogether like the Lion, saving only in
the color of their hair; for the Tygre is spotted, but the Lion is all of one
color. The manner of taking the tame Tygres.
They use to take and kill these Tygres after diverse manners. For besides that,
which has been before spoken, they poison them with Sublimate or some other
venom, mingled with flesh which is laid for them. Or else they tie young Goats
at certain lines made like snares, and fastened about the stock of a tree, so
that when the beast comes to her pray, the engine opens it self, and the
more the beast strives withal, the more it is entangled, and so at last is
hanged therein. Another way they have to kill them, that is with arrows, with
Iauelins, and with Arcubuses. It is a Creature very harmeful, both to the
Negroes themselves, and also to their flocks of sheep and herds of cattle.
A tame Tiger.
Notwithstanding Signor Odoardo told me, that he had gotten one of them, that
was fifteen days old, and he brought it up with Goats milk: which being
afterward grown bigger would follow him like a dog: and although it were
very tame, yet it would not willingly suffer any other to touch it besides his
master. He would also roar mightily, and when he was angry, his eyes would
look very terribly and fearfully. But in process of time this Tygre killed a
Dog, belonging to the house, and also a Zebra, that were very (...) to their
master, and thereupon, perceiving (...) a beast it was, he slew it with an
Arcubuse-shot. He reported moreover, that the Mostacchios of the Tygre are
held in that Region to be mortal poison: for being given in meats, it
procures a man to die, as it were in a madness: And therefore the king does
punish all those that bring him a Tygres skin without the Mostacchios.

There breeds likewise in this Country another Creature, The Zebra*
which they call a Zebra, commonly found also in certain Provinces of Barbary
and Africa: which although it be altogether made like a great Mule, yet is not
a Mule indeed, for it bears young ones. It has a most singular skin, and
peculiar from all other creatures. For from the ridge of the chine down
toward the belly, it is straked with rows of three colors, black, white,
and brown Bay, about the breadth of three fingers a piece, and so meet again
together in a circle, every row, with his own color. So that the neck, and
the head; and the Mane (which is not great) and the ears, and all the legs
are so interchaunged with these colors, and in such manner and order, as
without all fail, if the first struck begin with white, then follows the
second with black, and in the third place the Bay: and so another course
beginning in white ends still in Bay. And this rule is generally and
infallibly observed over all the body. The tail is like the tail of a Mule,
of a Morell color, but yet it is well colored, and has a glistring gloss.
The feet like the feet of a Mule, and so are the hooffes. But touching the rest
of her carriage and qualities, she is very lusty and pleasant as a horse: and
specially in going, and in running she is so light and so swift that it is
admirable. In so much as in Portingale and in Castile also, it is commonly used
(as it were for a proverb) As swift as a Zebra, when they will signify an
exceeding quickenes. These creatures are all wild, they breed every year,
and are there in such abundance that they are innumerable. If they were made
tame, they would serve to run and to draw for the wars, and for many
other good uses, as well as the best horses that are. So that Mother Nature
seems to have sufficiently provided in every country for the commodity and
necessity of man, with diverse sorts of Creatures, of nourishments, and
temperature of air, to the end he should want nothing. And therefore they
having no horses at all in the whole Kingdom of Congo, nor any skill to use
their oxen to the yoke, or to the packsaddle, that they might either be drawn
or carried, nor to tame their Zebraes with bridle and saddle, or any other way
to take the benefit of their beasts, that might transport them from place to
place: The manner of the carrying of the Moci-Conghi.
Even very necessity has taught them to use men in steed of laboring cattle.
For either they lay themselves al along in certain Litters (as it were) or else
set themselves upright, with shadows over them to keep them from the Sun,
and so they cause themselves to be carried too and fro, by their slaves, or by
other men that for wages are always ready at Poste-houses to that purpose.
They that mean to journey with speed, do take with them many slaves, and when
the first number are weary, then do the second number undertake the burden,
and so successively change one after another, as the Tartarians and Persians
use to do with their horses: and these men being thus accustomed to these
labors, (and so often changing) will go as fast, as any Postilion gallop. Of
all which fashions of carrying or going in journey, we have set down the
pictures as also of the Zebra, of the apparel both of the men and women, of the
soldiers, and of the Military Instruments or Cornets.

There are also to be found in this country certain other foure-footed
beasts, The Dantes
somewhat less then Oxen, of color red, with horns like Goats horns, which
are very smooth and glistering, and enclining to black: whereof they make
diverse pretty knackes, as they do likewise of the Buffes horns. They have
their heads and their hairs, like the heads and hairs of Oxen: and their
skins are of great estimation: and therefore they are carried into
Portingall, and from thence into Germany, to be dressed, and then they are
called Dantes. The king of Congo is very desirous to have some men that had
skill to cleanse them and dress them, and to make them fit for use, to the end
he might employ them for Armor of defense. And yet those nations do already
use them for shieldes and Targats: and do find that they will resist the blow
of a weapon, and especially the shot of an Arrow. They kill them with Arcubuses
and with arrows. But if they do espy the huntsman, they will set upon him, and
being by nature very fierce, and courageous, they will so knock him and thumpe
him with their feet and their Muzzle (because they cannot do him any harm
with their horns) that they will leave him either half dead or stark dead.
There is also an infinite number of wild Buffes, Wild Buffes, Wild Asses.
that go wandering about the deserts in the kingdoms of the Anzichi, and wild
Asses likewise, which the Greeks call Onagri.

There are besides these, other beasts called Empalanga, Empalanga*
which are in bigness and shape like Oxen, saving that they hold their neck
and head aloft, and have their horns broad and crooked, three handbreadthes
long, divided into knots, and sharp at the ends, whereof they might make very
fair Cornets to sound withal: and although they live in the forests, yet are
they not noisome nor harmefull. The skins of their necks are used for
shoo-soles, and their flesh for meat. They might likewise be brought to draw
the plough, and do good service in any other labor, and tilling of the
ground. Moreover they feed great herds of Kine, and tame Oxen, Other fruitful
Cattle.
tame Hogs and wild Boares, flocks of Sheep and Goats. Signor Odoardo
affirmed, that the Goats and the Sheep do bring forth two, and three, and
four lambs or kids at a time, and two when they have fewest, and never one
alone at any time. And because their pasture is so fat, they do all suck, and
milk their own dammes, which he proved himself to be true in his own
house, where he had very great store of that Cattle.

There are Wolves also which love the oil of Palms beyond all measure,
Wolves.
and have a great sent: a property that Virgile attributes to Dogs, Odora
Canum vis, The smelling sent of Dogs. They will smell this oil a far off,
and steal it in the night time out of their houses of straw, and sometimes
from those that carry it by the way, whiles the poor souls do rest
themselves and sleep. The oil (as shall be told you) is made of the Palm
tree: it is thick and hard like Butter. And it is a marvel to see, how these
Wolves do take a bottle that is full of this liquor between their teeth, and
so cast it on their shoulders and run away withal, as our Wolves here do with
a Sheep. There are very great store of Foxes, Foxes.
that steal Hens as our Foxes do. And further in this country of Bamba,
there is an innumerable quantity of hunting game, Hunting game.
as Stagges, Fallow-Deere, Roebucks, and Gazelles, whereof he affirmed that he
had seen exceeding great heardes, as also of Conies and Hares, because there
were no hunters to kill them.

In the Region of Pemba there are many wild Ciuet-Cattes, In Pembae, Ciuet
Cattes,
which the Portingales call Algazia, and some of these the people of that
country had made tame, that they might enjoy their Ciuet, in the smell whereof
they do greatly delight. But this was before the Portingals did traffic with
those Countries. And in Manibatta there are caught many Sables, In Batta,
Sables.
with very white hayres and exceeding fine, called Incire: but no man may wear
these skins, unless the Prince permit him so to do: for it is held in great
estimation, and every Sable is worth a slave. Toward the Anzichi they catch
Marterns also, In Anzigua Marternes.
wherewith they apparel themselves, as in due place we will note unto you.

Apes, In Sogno, (...) and Monkeyes.
Monkeyes, and such other kind of beasts, small and great of all sorts there
are many in the Region of Sogno, that lies upon the River Zaire. Some of them
are very pleasant and gamesome, and make good pastime, and are used by the
Lords there for their recreation and to show them sport. For although they be
unreasonable Creatures, yet will they notably counterfeit the countenances, the
fashions, and the actions of men. In every one of these Regions abouenamed,
there are some of the aforesaid Creatures, in some places mo, and in some
places fewer.

Of Adders, and Snakes in these countries there breeds a certain kind,
Adders and Snakes of a huge scantling
that in respect of our countries is very strange, and of an excessive
greatness. For you shall find some that are xxv. spanne long, and five span
broad: and the belly and the mouth so large, that they can swallow and
receive into their belly a whole Stag, or any other creature of that bigness.
And it is called that is to say a great Water-Adder. The Author does not set
down the name.
It will go forth of the water up to the land to prey for his victuails, and
then return into the rivers again, and so it lives in both the Elements. It
will get it self up upon the bows and branches of trees, and there watch the
cattle that feed thereaboutes, which when they are come near unto it,
presently it will fall upon them, and wind it self in many twines about them,
and clappe his tail on their hinder parts, and so it strayneth them and
biteth so many holes in them, that at last it kills them. And then it draws
them into some wood or other solitary place, where it deuoureth them at
pleasure, skin, horns, hooffes and all. Now it falls out, that when it is
thus full, and (as it were) great with so monstrous a meal, it becomes
almost drunk and very sleepie, so that any child may kill it. And in this sort
will it remain full and satisfied for the space of 5. or 6. days together, and
then return again to prey. These Adders do change their skins in their
ordinary seasons, yea and sometimes after they have eaten so monstrously, and
the said sloughes, when they are found, are gathered up and reserved for a show
of so unmeasurable a Creature. These Adders are also greatly esteemed by the
Pagan Negroes, for they do use to roast them, and eat them for meat, and make
more account of them then they do of Hens, or any such delicate flesh. They
find great store of them when they have occasion to burn their thick woods:
for there they shall have them lying on the ground, roasted with the fire.

Besides these there are Vipers also, Vipers.
well known unto that people. Which Vipers are so venomous, that such as are
bitten by them do die within the space of xxiiii. hours: But the Negroes are
acquainted with certain herbs that will heal their wounds.

There are also certain other Creatures, Another strange creature.
which being as big as Rams, have wings like Dragons, with long tails and long
chappes, and diverse rows of teeth, and feed upon raw flesh. Their color is
blew and green, their skin bepaynted like scales, and two feet they have
but no more. The Pagan Negroes, do use to worship them as Gods, and at this
day you may see diverse of them that are kept for a marvel. And because they
are very rare, the Chief Lords there do curiously preserve them, and suffer
the people to worship them, which tends greatly to their profit, by reason
of the gifts and oblations which the people offer unto them.

There are there also to be found Chameleons, Chamelions.
which have four feet, and breed upon the rocks, and live of the wind and
the air, of the bigness and likeness of an Efte, with a sharp head, and a
tail like a saw. They are for the most part of the color of the sky, but
somewhat more duskie and greenish, and if you stand to look a while upon them,
you shall see them change themselves into diverse colors. They dwell much upon
high rocks and trees, to the end they may take air, wherewith they are
nourished.

Other serpents there are that are venomous, that carry upon the tippe of
their tail a certain little roundell like a bell, A strange Serpent.
which ringeth as they go, so as it may be heard. It may be it was there set
by nature, of purpose, that people should beware of them, and it is found by
experience that these belles and the heads of the serpents are very good
remedies against an ague, and against the trembling of the heart. These kinds
and sorts of lande-Creatures are to be found in these regions, besides others
also that are commonly to be had in other countries.

It rests now, that we speak somewhat touching Birds, The Eastrich.
and first of all of the Eastriche, because it is bigger then all the rest.
These Eastriches are found in those parts of Sundi and of Batta, that are
toward the Muzambi. The young Eastriches do spring out of their eggs, being
warmed and disclosed by the eye and heat of the Sun. Their feathers are used
in steed of Ensigns and Banners in war, Peacocks.
mingled with some plumes of the Peacocke, and are fashioned in the likeness
of a shadow against the Sun. And forasmuch as I am fallen into the speech of
Peacockes, I must tell you by the way, that in the parts, of Angola, there are
Peacockes brought up privately in a certain wood that is compassed about with
walls: and the king will not suffer any other body to keep those birds but
only himself, because they are for the Royal Ensigns, as I told you
before. And it is read in ancient histories of Alexander the Great, that he
did also privilege this Bird, at such time as he first saw it in Europe.

There are also Indie-Cockes and Hens, and Geese, and Duckes of all sorts both
wild and tame: Fowls of diverse sorts.
Partriches so many as children take them with ginnes. Other birds they have
likewise, as Pheasantes, which they call Gallignoles, Pigeons, Birds of prey.
Turtles, and of these small birds called Becca fichi an infinite number.
Birds of prey, as Eagles-Royall, Faulcons, Gerfaulcons and Sparhaukes, and
others, great store, which notwithstanding the people never use to hawk
withal. Birds of the sea, as Pellicanes (for so the Portingalles do call
them) white and great, Birds of the sea.
which swim under the water, and have their throats so wide, that they will
swallow a whole fish at once. This bird has so good a stomach, and naturally
so hot, that it easily digesteth the fish that it swalloweth whole, and the
skin of it is so hot, that the people of that country do use to wear them,
and to warm their cold stomachs withal, and therefore make great reckoning
of them.

There are many white Herons and Gray Bittours, Other kinds of foul.
that feed in the washes there, and are called Royal Birds. Other Fowls
there are of the likeness of a Crane, with a red bill and read feet, as
big as Storkes, and their feathers for the most part read and white, and
some dark graye. Goodly birds they are to look too, and the people of the
country do call them Flemminges, because they do much resemble them, and are
good meat to eat.

They have Parrattes of gray color, Parrats. Birds of music.
great and very talkatiue: and others of green color, but they are little
ones and not so talkatiue: They have likewise certain small little birds, which
they call Birds of Music, and yet greater the^ the Canarie Birds, of feather
and bill red: some green, with their feet and bill only black: some all white:
some gray or dunne: some all black, and this kind is more sweet in their
notes then all the rest aforenamed: for you would think that they talked in
their singing. Others there are of diverse colors: but they do all sing in
sundry sorts, so that the chief Lords of those countries, from ancient
times to this day, have continually kept them in cages, and greatly esteemed
them for their song.

Chap. 10. Of the Province of Sogno, which is the Country of the River Zaire,
and Loango.
THis Country is bounded with the River Ambrize, The second Province Sogno,
and the description thereof.
toward the North in seven degrees and a half, and so traversing the River
Lelunda, and the River Zaire it ends at the Rocks called Barreuras
Vermellias, that is to say, the Red pittes, which are in the borders of the
Kingdom of Loango. In the midst of this Province there is a certain
Territory, Sogno the chief town of this Province.
called by the same name Sogno, where the Governor of the Country dwells.
The chief Lords that rule this Province are called Mani-Sogno, that is
Princes of Sogno, and are commonly of the blood Royal. The Prince that
governs there at this day is called Do^ Diego Mani-Sogno. He has under his
dominion many other petty Lords, Don Diego chief Governor of Sogno, and those
that rule under him.
and other provinces, that in old time were free and lived by themselves, as
the people of Mombalas, situate somewhat near to the City of Congo, which are
now subject to this government. And on the other side of the River Zaire
toward the North is the Province of Palmar, that is to say of Palms, because
there is great store of Palm trees growing therein. Other Lords there are,
that border upon the King of Loango, who was sometime subject to the King of
Congo, but in process of time he became a free Lord, and now professes
himself to be in amity with the king of Congo, but not to be this vassal. The
people that are under these Lords in those borders, are called the Bramas: and
they reach within land, The Bramas.
under the Equinoctial line toward the East to the bounds of Anzicana, all
along the Mountains which divide them from the Anzichi upon the North. They
are called by the people of Loango, Congreamolal, because they were subject to
Congo.

In this Country of Loango there are many Elephants and great store of Iuory
which they do willingly exchange for a little iron, The commodities of Sogno
so that for the nail of a ship (be it never so small) they will give a
whole Elephantes tooth. The reason thereof is either because there grows no
iron in that place, or else they have not the skill to get it out of the mines
where it grows: But all the iron they can get they employ for heading of
their arrows, and their other weapons, as we told you, when we spoke of the
Bramas.

They make great store of cloth of the Palm trees, The manner of the life of
the inhabitants.
whereof we made mention before: but these are lesser and yet very fine. They
have great abundance of Kine and of other cattle before named. They are in
Religion Pagans: their apparel after the fashion of the people of Congo: They
maintain war with their bordering neighbors, which are the Anzichi and the
inhabitants of Anzicana, and when they enterprise war against the Anzichi,
then they crave aid of the people of Congo, and so they remain half in
freedom, and half in danger of others. They worship what they list, and hold
the Sun for the greatest God, as though it were a man, and the Moon next, as
though it were a woman. Otherwise every man chooses to himself his own idol,
and worshippeth it after his own pleasure. These people would easily embrace
the Christian Religion: For many of them, that dwell upon the borders of Congo
have been converted to Christendom: and the rest, for want of Priests and of
such as should instruct them in true religion, do remain still in their
blindness.

Chap. 11. Of the third Province called Sundi.
THis Province of Sundi is the nearest of all to the City of Congo, called
Citta di San-Saluatore, The third province Sundi, and the description thereof:
the City of Saint Saviors, and begins about 40. miles distant from it,
and quite out of the territory thereof, and reaches to the river Zaire, and so
over the same to the other side where the Caduta or Fall is, which we
mentioned before: and then holds on vpwardes on both sides toward the North,
bordering upon Anzicana and the Anzichi. Toward the South it goes along the
said river Zaire, until you come to the meeting of it with the River Bancare,
and all along the banks thereof, even to the roots of the mountain of
Crystal. The chief town of Sundi.
In the bounds of the Province of Pango, it has her principal Territory,
where the Governor lies, who has his name from the Province of Sundi, and is
seated about a days journey near to the Fall of the River, toward the South.

This Province is the chiefest of all the rest, This province of Sundi is
always governed by the heir apparent of the K. of Congo.
and (as it were) the Patrimony of all the kingdom of Congo: and therefore it
is always governed by the Kings eldest Son, and by those Princes that are
to succeed him. As it fell out in the time of their first Christian King, that
was called Don John: whose eldest son, that was Governor here succeeded him,
and was called Don Alfonso. And ever sithence, the Kings of Congo have
successively continued this custom, to consigne this Government to those
Princes which are to succeed in the kingdom: As did the king that now is
called Don Aluaro, who was in this Government before Don Aluaro the King his
father died, In all the kingdom of Congo, no man has any thing of his own
whereof he may dispose, or (...)
and was called Mani-Sundi.

And here by the way you must note, that in all the Kingdom of Congo there is
not any person, that possesses any proper goods of his own, whereof he may
dispose, and leave to his heirs: but all is the Kings, and he distributeth
all offices, all goods, and all lands, to whomsoever it pleases him. Yea and
to this law, even the Kings own sons are subject. So that if any man do not
pay his tribute yearly (as he ought) the King takes away his Government
from him, and gives it to another. As it happened to the king that now lives,
who at the time that Signor Odoardo was at the Court, being of his own nature
very liberal, and bountiful beyond measure, and one that bestowed much upon
his servants, could not discharge those impositions that the king had laid on
him. Whereupon he was by the king deprived of his reuenews, of his government,
and of his royal favor, that is to say in that language, he was Tombocado,
as we will declare more at full in the second part of this discourse.

Many Lords there are that are subject to the Governor or Sundi. The people do
traffic with their neighbor Countries, The manner of ye life of Su^di
inhabitants
felling and bartering diverse things. As for example, falt, and clothes of
sundry colors, brought from the Indies, and from Portingale, and Luma^^^^^ to
serve for their coin. And for these commodities they do exchange cloth of
Palm trees, and Iuory, and the skins of Sables and Marternes, and certain
girdles wrought of the leaves of Palm trees, which are greatly esteemed in
those parts.

There grows in these countries great store of Crystal, and diverse kinds of
metal: but Iron they love above all the rest, saying that the other mettalles
are to no use: for with Iron they can make knives, and weapons, and hatchers,
and such like instruments, that are necessary and profitable for the use of
man's nature.

Chap. 12. Of the fourth Province called Pango.
THe Province of Pango in ancient time was a free kingdom, The fourth
province Pango, and the description thereof.
that was governed of it self, and bordereth on the North upon Sundi, on the
South upon Batta, on the West upon the County of Congo, and on the East, upon
the mountains of the Sun. The principal Territory, Pa^go the chief town of
this Province.
where the Governors dwelling is, has the same name that the Province has,
viz. Pango. It stands upon the Western side of the River Barbela, and in
old time was called Pangue-lungos, and in time afterward the word was
corrupted and changed into Pango. Through the midst of this Province runs
the river Berbela, which fetches his original from the great Lake (whence the
river Nilus also takes his beginning) and from another lesser Lake called
Achelunda, and so discharges it self into Zaire. And although this be the
least Country of all the rest, yet does it yield no less tribute then the
rest.

This Province was conquered after the Country of Sundi, and made subject to
the Princes of Congo: and is now all one with it, both in speech and manners,
neither is there any difference at all between them. Don Francisco chief
Governor of Pango
The present Governor thereof is called Don Francesco Mani-Pango, and is
descended from the most ancient nobility of all the Lords of Congo: and in
all consultations touching the State he is sent for, because he is now an old
man, and of great wisdom. For he has remained in the government of this
region for the space of fifty years, and no man ever complained of him,
neither did the king at any time take his government from him.

The traffic of this Province is like the traffic of Sundi.

Chap. 13. Of the fifth Province called Batta.
THe bounds of this Province are toward the North, The fifth Province Batta
and the description thereof.
the Country of Pango: on the East it takes quite over the River Barbela, and
reaches to the Mountains of the Sun, and to the foot of the Mountains of
Sal-Nitre. And on the South from the said Mountains, by a line passing through
the meeting of the rivers Barbela and Cacinga, to the mountain Brusciato, that
is to say Scorched.

Within these bounds is Batta contained, Batta the chief town of all Batta.
and the Principal City, where the Prince dwells, is likewise called
Batta. In ancient time it was called Aghirimba, but afterward the word was
corrupted, and it is now called Batta. It was in old time a very strong and a
great Kingdom, and voluntarily of it self, without any war it joined it self
with the kingdom of Congo, peradventure because there was some dissension
among their Lords: The Preeminence of the Governor of Batta.
and therefore it has more pre-eminence then the rest of the Provinces of the
kingdom of Congo, in privileges and liberties. For the Government of Batta is
always assigned to one, that is of the blood of the Kings of that country at
their choice and pleasure, having no more respect to one then to another, so
that he be of the stock and blood Royal, neither to the eldest son nor to
the second. Neither yet goes this Government by inheritance, but the king of
Congo (as is told you before) does dispose it at his own pleasure to who^ he
thinks best, to the end they should not usurp it by way of succession, or by
rebellion. He dwells nearer the king then any other Governor or Lord of
the kingdom of Congo, and is the second person therein, neither may any man
gainsay his arguments and reasons, as they may any of the rest, for it is so
decreede among them. Now if the line of the king of Congo should chance to
fail, so that there were none of that blood to succeed, Don Pedro chief
Governor of Batta.
the succession shall fall upon the governor of Batta. He that now governs
there, is called Don Pedro Mani-Batta.

Sometimes he eats at the kings own table, but yet in a baser seat then the
kings seat is, and that also not sitting, but standing, which is not granted
to any other Lord of Congo, no nor to the sons of the king himself. His Court
and his train is little less then the Court and train of the king of Congo.
For he has Trompets and Drums and other instruments going before him, as
becomes a Prince, and by the Portingalles he is commonly called the Prince of
Batta, because (as it is said) if the succession should fail in the blood of
the kings of Congo, the empire of the whole kingdom must light upon some one
of this stock.

He does hold continual wars with the Pagans that border upon him: and he
is able to gather together about 70. or 80. thousand fighting men. And because
he does still mayntaine war with the people that are next him, The K. of
Co^go will not suffer any natural borne subject in Congo, to have an Arcubuse.
he has liberty granted unto him to entertain Arcubusiers, that shall be of
his own natural subjects. For the king of Congo will not suffer any other
Governor of any other Provinces, nor any of their children, to have any
Arcubusiers, that are borne within their Country, but only the Portingalles.
Signor Odoardo demanding once of the King, why he did not give leave to his
other Governors to retain shot about them: the King answered, that if
peradventure they should rebel against him with a thousand, or two thousand
Arcubusiers, he should not have any possibility to make them resistance.

And forasmuch as we have told you, The reason why the K. of Congo permits
Mani-Batta to have Arcubusiers in his Province.
that the King has granted license, only to the prince of Batta, to
entertain Arcubusiers in his own country, it is fit you should understand,
that he does it upon very necessary occasion. For toward the East of Batta,
beyond the mountains of the Sun, and of Sal-Nitre, upon the banks of the
East and West of the river Nilus, and in the borders of the Empire of
Mohenhe-Muge there lives a nation, The Giac^^^*
which by the people of Congo, are called Giaquas, but in their own language
they are called Agag: Very fierce they are and warlicke, much given to fight
and pillage, and make continual inroades into the Countries near adjoining,
and sometimes among the rest into the Province of Batta. So that this Country
must needs be in continual Arms, and stand upon good guarde, and maintain
Arcubusiers to defend themselves from them.

The Prince of Batta has many Lords under him: and the natural people of
this Province are called Monsobos, The conditions of the people of Batta.
and their language is well understood by the inhabitants of Congo. They are
far more rude and rusticall then the Moci-Conghi, and the slaves that are
brought from thence, do prove more obstinate and stubborn, then those that
come from other Countries.

Their traffic is the same, that the traffic of the other countries are,
Their traffic.
whereof we have last entreated. And the profit which the king receives from
Batta, amounts to double as much, as he receives out of any two of the other
Provinces before mentioned.

Chap. 14. Of the sixth and last Province called Pemba.
THe Province of Pemba is seated in the heart and middle of the Kingdom of
Congo, The sixth Province Pemba, and the situation thereof.
compassed and comprised within the bounds before described, whose
Goueruernour is called Don Antonio Mani-Pemba, Don Antonio chief Governor of
Pemba.
second son to King Don Aluaro, that dead is, and brother to the king that
raygneth at this present. And forasmuch as his father did love him dearly, he
assigned unto him this Government, because he knew not what better thing to
give him, saving the Realm it self: which in deed he would willingly have
bestowed on him, for that he was more like unto him in quality and nature then
his eldest son was. But it would not be by reason of the law of the Kingdom,
which would not have yielded thereunto.

This country is the very Center and midst of all the state of Congo, and
the original of all the ancient Kings, and the Territory where they were
borne, and the chief and principal seat of all the other Provinces and
Principalities. And therefore the chief and royal City of all that Empire is
assigned to this Province, The chief City of all Congo is situate in this
province of Pe^ba,
whereof we will heareafter deliver you a full information. The Governor of
Pemba dwells in a Territory of the same name, situate at the foot of the
Scorched Mountain, along the River Loze, which rises out of the Lake, and
runs through the Region of Bamba into the sea.

The Courtiers, and Lords, and seruitors belonging to the king of Congo, The
Courtiers etc. dwell for the most part in Pemba.
have their goods and possessions, and revenues in this Province, because it
is nearest to the Court, and very convenient for the conueighing of their
victuailes, and their other stuff unto the Court. Some of these Lords, in
that part specially, that bordereth upon the aforesaid Province of Bamba, have
much a do to keep fight and defend themselves from the people of Quizama,
because they are nearest unto them. For this people (as we told you) did
rebel against the king of Congo, and revolted from him, and do profess that
they will be at liberty, and governed of themselves.

And here will we end the first book, Conclusion of this book.
which consists of the description of the kingdom of Congo in general, and
of his borders, and in particular of all the six Provinces thereof. Now it
remains that we proceed forward to the second book: The contents of the
second book.
Wherein we will treat of the situation of the City of Congo, and of the
Territory thereunto belonging, of the first christening of the king, of his
manners, of his Court and of other conditions appertayning to the politic and
military Government of these people. And afterward we will describe unto you
the kingdoms near adjoining, and all the regions thereaboutes toward the
South, even till you come to the Cape of Good Hope, and the rivers and
countries of the Ocean that is right against India: and within land the
kingdoms of Presbiter John, touching also by the way the spring and original
of Nilus, and the causes of his wonderful increase, which sundry fools do
account to be a Miracle.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of the situation of the Royal City of the Kingdom of Congo.
ALthough the chief and Royal City of the Kingdom of Congo be after a
sort comprehended within the Province of Pemba, The Territory of the chiefest
City in all Congo contains in compass 20. miles about.
yet notwithstanding forasmuch as the government thereof, and the territory
thereunto belonging, which may in compass amount to the space of twenty miles
about, does depend wholly of the king of Congo himself, we will place it in
a several regiment, and entreat of it by it self.

This city is called San Saluatore, The chief City called San-Saluadore.
or Saint Saviors, and in times past in that country language it was called
Banza, which generally signifies the Court, where the king or the Governor
does ordinarily soiourne. The situation of the City.
It is seated about 150. miles from the sea, upon a great and a high Mountain,
being almost all of a rock, but yet having a vein of iron in it, whereof they
have great use in their housing. This mountain has in the top of it a great
plain, The mountain whereupon it stands.
very well manured and furnished with houses and villages, containing in
circuit about ten miles, where there does dwell and live the number of a
hundred thousand persons.

The soil is fruitful, The soil, the air, the waters and the cattle.
and the air fresh, wholesome and pure: there are great store of springes, of
indifferent good water to drink, and at certain times do not harm any man:
and of all sorts of cattle great abundance. The top of the mountain is
severed and distinguished from all the rest of the hill which is about it, and
therefore the Portingalles do call it The Otheiro, The Otheiro.
that is to say, a View, or a Watch Tower, or a Singular height, from whence
you may take a sight of all the Champeigne round about. Only toward the
East, and toward the River, it is very steep and rockie.

For two causes did the first Princes of this Kingdom place this habitation in
the foresaid Height of this Mountain. The reason why they built in this place.
First, because it lies in the very midst and (as it were) in the Center of
all the Realm, from whence he may presently send aid to any part of his
Kingdom that may stand in need of relief: and secondly because it is situated
in a Territory that is by Nature mounted aloft, having a very good air, and of
great safety: for it cannot be forced. By the chief common high way, that
goes up to the City, and looks toward the Sea, being distant from thence
150. Miles (as has been told you) which way is very large and competent,
though it go somewhat about incompasse, you shall ascend (five Miles from the
bottom to the top of the Mountain. Five miles from the bottom of the hill
to the top.
At the foot thereof on the East side there runs a River, whereunto the
women do descend by the space of a miles walk to wash their clothes. A river
at the hill foot
In diverse other parts thereof there are sundry valleys planted and manured:
neither do they suffer any part of the country thereaboutes to be left
untilled or unused, because it is the country where the Court remains.

The City is seated in a corner or angle of the hill toward the Southeast,
The particucular situation of the City.
which Don Alfonso the first christian king did compass about with walls, and
gave unto the Portingalles a several place for themselves, A several place
for the Portingalles.
shut up likewise within walls. Then did he also enclose his own palace and
the Kings howsen with another wall, and in the midst between these two
enclosures left a great space of ground where the principal Church was built,
The principal Church and market place.
with a fair market place before it. The doors and gates as well of the
lodginges of the Lords, as of the Portingalles inhabitations, do open on the
side of the said Church. For in the uppermost end of the market place do
diverse great Lords of the Court dwell, and behind the Church does the market
place run into a narrow street, where there is also a gate, and beyond that
gate many houses toward the East. Without these walls, (which do enclose the
kings houses, and the City of the Portingalles) there are a number of other
buildinges, erected by diverse Lords, every man making his several choice of
the place which he thinks most fit and convenient for his dwelling near unto
the Court. So that the greatness of this City cannot well be determined or
limited. Beyond these walls also, that thus do compass this City; there is a
great champaigne plain, full of villages, and sundry palaces, where every
Lord possesses (as it were) a whole Town within him self. The circuit of
the Portingalles city contains about a mile: and the kings housen as much.
The walls are very thick: the gates are not shut in the night time, neither
is there any watch or ward kept therein.

And although that plain does lie very high and aloft, Good store of water.
yet is there great abundance of waters in it, so that there is no want
thereof. But the Court and the Portingalles City do al drink of a certain
fountain, that springs continually, toward the North, and lies down the
hill, as far as a Gunne will shoot: And from hence they do fetch all their
water, and bring it to the City in vessels of wood, of earth and of
leather, upon the backs of their slaves.

All this plain is very fruitful, The plain very fruitful. Several sorts
of grain.
and well manured: It has meadows full of grass, and trees that are always
green. It bears sundry sorts of grain, but the principal and best of
all is called Luco, Luco.
which is very like to Mustardseede, but that it is somewhat bigger. When it is
grinded with Hand-Quernes (for so they use to do) it yields a very white
meal, whereof they make bread, that is both white, and also of a very good
savor, and wholesome withal: neither does it give place to our wheat in any
sort, saving that they do not celebrate the Sacrament with it. Of these
grains there now is great store over all the Kingdom of Congo: but it is not
long since that this seed was brought thither from that part of the river
Nilus, where it falls into the second Lake. White Milles called the Mazza of
Congo.
There is also a white kind of Millet, called the Mazza of Congo, that is to
say, the Corn of Congo: and another grain which they call Maiz, Maiz*
but they make no account of it, for they give it to their hogs: neither do
they greatly esteem of Rice. The foresaid Maiz they commonly term by the name
of Mazza-Manputo, that is to say, the Portingalles Corn: for they call a
Portingall Manputo.

There are moreover diverse and sundry sorts of trees, Diverse kinds of trees
bearing fruit.
that bear very great store of fruits, insomuch as the greattest part of the
people do feed upon the fruits of the Country, as Citrons, Limons, and
specially Orenges, very full of liquour, which are neither sweet nor sower, and
are ordinarily eaten without any annoyance or harm at all. And to show the
fruitfulness of this country, the said Signor Odoardo reported, that he had
seen from a kernel of the fruit of a Pome-Citrone, which was leaft within the
rind thereof, there spronge up within the space of four days a pretty tall
sprigge. Other fruits there are, which they call Banana, Banana
and we verily think to be the Muses of Egypt and Soria, saving that in those
countries they grow to be as big as trees, but here they cut them yearly,
to the end they may bear the better, The fruit is very sweet in smell, and of
good nourishment. In these plains there grow likewise sundry kinds of
Palme-trees: Diverse kinds of Palme-trees
one that bears Dates, and another that bears the Indian Nuttes, called
Coccos, because they have within them a certain shell, that is like to an Ape:
and thereupon they use in Spain to show their children a Coccola when they
would make them afraid. Another Palm tree there grows also very like to the
former, but of a more strange and singular property: For it yields Oil, The
oil of Palm.
Wine, Vinegar, Fruit, and Bread. The Oil is made of the Shale of the
fruit, and is of the color and substance of butter, saving that it is
somewhat greenishe. They use it, as other people do use Oil and butter, and it
will burn like oil. They anoint their bodies withal, and besides it is very
good to eat. They press it out of the fruit, as oil is pressed out of the
Olives, and then they boil it, and so preserve it. The bread is made of the
stone of the fruit it self, The bread of Palm
which is like to an Almond, but somewhat harder: and within the same is there
a certain kernel or pith, which is good to eat: very wholesome and of good
nourishment. The fruit of the Palm.
The whole fruit, together with the utter shale is green, and they use to eat
it both raw and roasted. The Wine is drawn from the top of the tree, The wine
and Vinegar of Palm.
by making a hole therein, from whence there distilleth a liquor like milk,
which at the first is sweet, but afterward sour, and in process of time
becomes very Vinegar, to serve for sallets. This wine they drink cold, and
it moves to urine very much: so that in those countries, there is not a man
that is troubled with gravel or stone in the bladder. It will make them
drunk, that drink too much of it: but in deed it is of a very good nutriment.

There are other trees, that bear a certain fruit called Cola, The fruit Cola
as big as a Pyne-apple, which has within it other fruits like
Chest-nuttes, wherein are four several shales or skins, of read and
Carnation color. These they use to hold in their mouths, and chawe them, and
at last to eat them, for the quenching of their thirst, and better relishing
of their water. They comfort and preserve the stomach, but above all other
qualities they are singular good against the diseases of the liver. And it is
said, that the liver of a Hen or of any other like bird, which is putrified
and stinketh, being sprinkled over with the matter of this fruit, returns
into his former estate, and becomes fresh and sound again. This food is
commonly and generally used among them all, and there is very great abundance
of it: and therefore it is good cheap. Other kinds of Palme-trees
Other kinds of wild Palme-trees there are, which yield diverse fruits that
are eaten: and their leaves reserved to make mattes, wherewith their houses are
covered, and baskets and skeppes, and such other like instruments, Trees
called Ogheghe.
that are necessary for their daily uses. Other trees there are likewise,
called Ogheghe which bear a fruit which is like a yellow Plumme, and is very
good to eat, and has a very sweet smell withal. Of these trees they cut off
the bows, and plant them so thick together, that they touch one another, and
stand closely all in a rank, so that when they are grown great, they make a
strong fense or wall about their housen, which being afterward covered with
mattes, it resembles a handsome Court or closse, wherein they use to walk,
(as it were) in an arbor that makes a great shadow, and defends them from
the heat of the Sun. In the midst of these enclosures they use to build
certain housing of wood, covered with straw, and divided into sundry
convenient rooms, all on the ground without any stories or Sollers above them:
These they do line with very fair and delicate mattes, and furnish them with
other ornaments in very handsome manner.

Wherein you must note that they do not build thus rustically and
shephearde-like for want of stuff to build withal. Great store of stone to
build with all.
For in the mountains of the Realm of Congo, there are a number of places,
that yield most exquisite fine stone of diverse kinds: From whence you may
dig out whole pillars, and principalles, and Bases, and other pieces as big
as you list, if ye be disposed to build. Insomuch as it has been confidently
affirmed, that there are to be found among them many masses and lumpes of
stone, which are of such thickness and hugeness, that you may cut out a whole
Church, even of one whole piece, yea and of the same kind of stone, whereof
the Obelisco is made, that is erected before Portadel Popolo in Rome. Besides
this, there are whole Mountains of Porphyrie, of Jasper, and of white Marble,
and of other sundry colors, which here in Rome are called Marbles of Numidia,
of Africa, and of Aethiopia: certain pillars, whereof you may see in the
Chapel of Pope Gregory. Other Stone there is, that is speckled with grains
or strakes, but among all the rest, that kind is most admirable, which has in
it fair Iacinthes, that are good iewelles. For the strakes being dispearsed
like veins over all the body of their Mother-Stone, if you shall divide them
and pluck them out as you would pick the kernels out of a Pomegranate, they
will fall into grains and little pieces of perfect Iacynth: But if you please
to make pillars, or Obeliskes, or other such like Memorialles, of the whole
Mass, you shall see them shine and sparkle, full of most fair and goodly
jewels. There are also other kinds of rare stones, which make a show of mettell
in them, as of Copper, and of sundry other colors, that are very fresh, and
bright, and smooth, whereof you may make Images, or any other work of singular
beauty. And therefore it is not the scarcity of matter or stuff, that is the
cause of this their simple building, seeing that their mountains have such
plenty of the foresaid stone, yea and perhaps more store of other kinds, then
is to be found in any other place of the whole world, Lime and timber, and
cattle to carry and draw. Want of workmen to build.
besides lime, and trees for beams, and cattle both for carryage and drawing
in the cart, and all other manner of provision, that is requisite for building.
True it is in deed, that they want Masons, and Cutters, and Plaisterers, and
Carpenters, and other such artificers: for when the Churches, and the walls,
and the other fabrickes in those countries were built, the workmen were
brought thither out of Portingall.

There are also Tamarindes, Stuff for building ships and housing.
and Cassia, and Ceders in such multitudes growing all along the River of
Congo, besides other trees of an unmeasurable length and thickness, that an
infinite number of ships and houses may be builded of them. Their gardens do
bear all manner of herbs and fruits, Herbs and fruits.
as Pompions, Melions, Cocombres, Colewortes, and such like, besides other
sorts that do not agree with our Climates of Europe.

Chap. 2. Of the Original beginning of Christendom in the Kingdom of Congo,
and how the Portingalles obtained this traffic.
THe K. of Portingal Don Giouanni the second, The first traffic of the
Portingalles into Congo.
being desirous to discover the East Indies, sent forth diverse ships by the
coast of Africa to search out this Navigations, who having found the Islands of
Capo Verde, and the Isle of Saint Thomas, and running all along that coast, did
light upon the River Zaire, whereof we have made mention before, and there they
had good traffic, and tried the people to be very courteous and kind.
Afterward he sent fourth (for the same purpose) certain other vessels, to
entertain this traffic with Congo, who finding the trade there to be so free
and profitable, and the people so friendly, leaft certain Portingalles behind
them, to learn the language, Mani Sogno the K. uncle entertaineth the
Portingals.
and to traffic with them: among whom one was a Mass Priest. These
Portingalles conuersing familiarly with the Lord of Sogno, who was uncle to
the King, and a man well stricken in years, dwelling at that time in the Port
of Praza (which is in the mouth of Zaire) were very well entertained and
esteemed by the Prince, and reverenced as though they had been earthly Gods,
and descended down from heaven into those Countries. But the Portingalles told
them that they were men as themselves were, and professors of Christianity.
And when they perceived in how great estimation the people held them, the
foresaid Priest and others began to reason with the Prince touching the
Christian religion, and to show unto them the errors of the Pagan superstition,
Mani-Sogno converted and become a Christian.
and by little and little to teach them the faith which we profess, insomuch
as that which the Portingalles spoke unto them, greatly pleased the Prince, and
so he became converted.

With this confidence and good spirit, the prince of Sogno went to the Court,
to inform the King of the true doctrine of the Christian Portingalles, and to
encourage him that he would embrace the Christian Religion which was so
manifest, and also so wholesome for his souls health. Hereupon the king
commanded to call the Priest to Court, to the end he might himself treat with
him personally, The King of Congo promises to become a Christian.
and understand the truth of that which the Lord of Sogno had declared unto
him. Whereof when he was fully informed, he converted and promised that he
would become a Christian.

And now the Portingall ships departed from Congo, and returned into
Portingall: and by them did the King of Congo write to the King of Portingall,
Don Giouanni the second, with earnest request, that he would send him some
Priests, with all other orders and ceremonies to make him a Christian. The
Priest also that remained behind, had written at large touching this business,
and gave the King full information of all that had happened, The K. of
Portingall sends Priests to the K. of Congo to instruct him.
agreeable to his good pleasure. And so the King took order for sundry
religious persons, to be sent unto him accordingly, with all ornaments for the
Church and other service, as Crosses and Images: so that he was thoroughly
furnished with all things that were necessary and needful for such an action.

In the mean while the Prince of Sogno ceased not day and night to discourse
with the Portingall priest, Mani-Sogno promoteth the Christian Religion.
whom he kept in his own house, and at his own table, as well that he might
learn the Christian faith himself, as also instruct the people therein: so
that he began to favor christianity with all his power. And forasmuch as the
Christian Religion had now taken root and begun to bud in those Countries,
and for that both the people, and also the king himself did continue in their
earnest desire to purge themselves from that abominable superstition, he did
instantly deal with the Priest, that he would proceed in the sowing and
dispearsing of the Christian doctrine, as much as he could. And in this good
affection did they wait for the Portingall ships, that should bring them all
provision for baptism; and other things thereunto appertayning.

At the last the ships of Portingall arrived with the expected provisions
(which was in the year of our salvation 1491) and landed in the port which is
in the mouth of the River Zaire. The ships return from Portingall. 1491.
Mani-Sogno and his train entertayneth the Portingals.
The Prince of Sogno with all show of familiar joy, accompanied with all his
gentlemen ran down to meet them, and entertained the Portingalles in most
courteous manner, and so conducted the^ to their lodgings. The next day
following according to the direction of the Priest that remained behind,
Mani-Sogno builds a Church.
the Prince caused a kind of Church to be builded, with the bodies and
branches of certain trees, which he in his own person, with the help of his
servants, most devoutly had felled in the wood. And when it was covered, they
erected therein three Altars, in the worship and reverence of the most holy
Trinity, Mani Sogno and his son baptized.
and there was baptized himself and his young son, himself by the name of
our Savior, Emanuel, and his child by the name of Anthony, because that
Saint is the Protector of the City of Lisbone.

Now if any man here demand of me, what names the people of these Countries
had, What names the people of Congo had before they were christened.
before they received Christianity: of a truth it will seem incredible that I
must answer them, that is to say, that the men and women had no proper names
agreeable to reasonable Creatures, but the common names of Plants, of Stones,
of Birds and of Beasts. But the Princes and Lords had their denominations
from the places and states which they governed. As for example the foresaid
Prince, which was the first Christian in Congo, was called Mani-Sogno, that is
to say, the Prince of Sogno, and when he was christened, was called Emanuel,
but at this day they have all in general such Christian names as they have
learned of the Portingalles.

After a Mass was celebrated and song, A sermon co^tayning the sum of
Christian Religion.
one of the Priests that came from Portingall went up, and made a brief
Sermon in the Portingall language, declaring the sum of the new Religion, and
faith of the Gospel which they had received. This sermon, the Priest that was
left behind, having now learned the Congo speech, did more at large expound
to the Lords that were in the Church: for the church could not possibly hold
the innumerable multitude of the people that were there gathered together, Mani
Sogno rehearses the Sermon to his people.
at the conversion of their Prince: who afterward came abroad unto them, and
rehearsed the whole sermon, with great love and charity, moving and exhorting
them to embrace likewise the true belief of the Christian doctrine.

When this was done, all the Portingals put themselves on their way toward the
Court, The Portingals go to the Court to baptize the king.
to baptize the King, who with a most fervent longing attended the same. And
the Governor of Sogno took order that many of his Lords should wait upon
them with Music, and singing, and other signs of wonderful rejoicing,
besides diverse slaves which he gave them to carry their stuff, commanding also
the people, that they should prepare all manner of victuaill to be ready in the
streets for them. So great was the number of people, that ran and met together
to behold them, as the whole Champaigne seemed to be in a manner covered with
them, and they all did in great-kindnes entertain and welcome the Portingall
Christians, with singing and sounding of Trompets, and Cimballes, and other
instruments of that Country. And it is an admirable thing to tell you, that
all the streets and high ways, that reach from the Sea, to the City of Saint
Saviors, being one hundred and fifty miles, were all cleansed and swept, and
abundantly furnished with all manner of victuaile and other necessaries for
the Portingals. In deed they do use in those countries, when the king or the
principal Lords go abroad, to cleanse their ways and make them handsome:
and therefore much the rather upon this special occasion, when the Portingals,
whom they reverenced as though they had been some of the old Heroes, did
purchase for their King the Jewel of Religion, and salvation of his soul, and
generally for every one of them the clear knowledge of God, and of eternal
life.

Three days journey from the place whence they departed, The Courtiers of
Congo meet the Portingals.
they descried the kings Courtiers, that came to meet them, to present them
with fresh victuailes, and to do them honor: and so from place to place they
encountered other Lords, that for the same purpose were sent by the King to
receive the Christians, who were the messengers and bringers of so great a joy.
When they were come within three miles near to the City, all the Court came
to entertain and welcome the Portingalles, with all manner of pomp and
ioyfulnes, and with music and singing; as in those countries is used upon
their solemnest feast-daies. And so great was the multitude of people, which
abounded in the streets, that there was neither tree, nor hillocke, higher then
the rest, but it was laden with those that were run forth and assembled to
view these strangers, which brought unto them this new law of their
salvation. The King himself attended them at the gate of his palace, The king
him self recceyueth them:
in a Throne of estate erected upon a high scaffold, where he did publicly
receive them, in such manner and sort as the ancient kings of that Realm
accustomed to do, when any Ambassadors came unto him, or when his tributes
were paid him, or when any other such Royal ceremonies were performed.

And first of all, the Ambassador declared the Embassage of the King of
Portingall, The Portingal Ambassador declares his Embassage.
which was expounded and interpreted by the foresaid Priest, that was the
principal author of the conversion of those people. After the embassage was
thus delivered, The K. rejoices at the Embassage.
the King raised himself out of his seat, and standinge upright upon his
feet, did both with his countenance and speech show most evident signs of
the great joy, that he had conceived for the coming of the Christians, and so
sat down again. The people rejoice at it.
And incontinently all the people with shouting, and sounding their trumpets,
and singing, and other manifest arguments of rejoicing, did approve the kings
words, and showed their exceeding good liking of this Embassage. And further
in token of obedience, they did three times prostrate themselves upon the
ground, and cast up their feet, according to the use of those kingdoms,
thereby allowing and commending the action of their king, and most
affectionately accepting of the Gospel, which was brought unto them from the
Lord God by the hands of those religious persons.

Then the king took view of all the presents that were sent him by the King
of Portingall, The K. vieweth the Presents sent unto him by the K. of
Portingall.
and the Vestimentes of the Priests, and the Ornaments of the Altar, and the
Crosses, and the Tables, wherein were depainted the Images of Saints, and the
Streamers, and the Banners, and all the rest, and with incredible attention,
caused the meaning of every one of them to be declared unto him, one by one.
And so withdrewe himself, and lodged the Ambassador in a palace made ready
of purpose for him, and all the rest were placed in other houses of several
Lords, where they were furnished with all plenty and ease.

The day following the King caused all the Portingalles to be assembled
together in private: Consultation among the Portingals for the Christening of
the K. and for the building of a Church.
where they devised of the course that was to be taken for the christening of
the king, and for effecting the full conversion of the people to the christian
faith. And after sundry discourses, it was resolved and concluded, that first
of all a Church should be builded, to the end that the christening, and other
ceremonies thereunto belonging, might be celebrated therein with the more
solemnity: and in the mean while the king and the Court should be taught and
instructed in the Christian Religion. The king presently commanded, that with
all speed provision should be made of all manner of stuff necessary for this
building, as Timber, Stone, Lime and Brick, according to the direction and
appoiutment of the Worke-maisters and Masons, which for that purpose were
brought out of Portingall. An insurrection raised by the Devil, to hinder the
progress of Christian Religion.


But the Devil who never cease to cross all good and holy proceedinges,
raised new dissentions, and conspiracies, and lettes against this promoting of
the Christian Faith, which in deed began to overthrow, and destroy the power
that he had long held in that Realm, and in steed thereof to plant the most
healthful tree of the Cross, and the worship of the Gospel. And this he did
by procuring a rebellion among certain people of the Anzichi, and of Anzicana,
which dwell upon both the banks of the River Zaire, from the foresaid falls
vpwardes, to the great Lake, and are subject and belonging to the King of
Congo. Now this monstrous River being! restrained and kept back by these
falls, does swell there mightily, and spreads it self abroad in a very
large and deep channel. In the breadth whereof there are many Islandes, some
small and some great, so that in some of them, there may be maintained about
thirty thousand persons. In these Islandes and in other places adioyninge to
the rivers thereaboutes, did the people make an insurrection, and renounced
their obedience to the king, and slew the Governors that he had sent thither
to rule.

And all this was done by the Devil, of purpose to interrupt the propagation
of Christianity, which was now begun, and to hinder it by the means of this
rebellion. But the King, by the inspiration of God, provided a good remedy for
this mischief, and sent thither his eldest son, Mani-Sundi goes against the
rebels.
called Mani-Sundi, within whose Province that country lies. And yet
afterward the trouble and tumult fell out to be so great and dangerous, that
the king must needs go himself in person to pacify these broils: howbeit
he resolved to be baptized before his going, and so was enforced to forbear
the building of the Church of Stone, and with all speed in steed thereof to
erect one of timber, which Church he in his own person with the advice of the
Portingalles, The K. builds in haste a Church of timber.
did accomplish in such manner and sort as it ought to be, and therein did
receive the Sacrament of holy Baptism, and was named Don Giouanni, and his
wife Donna Eleonora, The K. and Q. of Congo Christened.
after the names of the king and Queen of Portingall, and the Church it self
entitled and dedicated to S. Savior. The Church of S. Saviors.


But here it is to be noted, that all these stirs and rebellion of the people
aforesaid, arose by the cunning slight and instigation of the Devil, and not
of the poor souls themselves, that dwell in those Islandes of the Great Lake:
The Latin history of the Indies does report amiss of this rebellion*
(as it is written in the first book of the histories of the Indies lately set
forth in latin). For the Lake is distant from the confines of the City of
Congo, about two hundred miles, neither had the inhabitants thereaboutes any
knowledge of Congo, but only by hearesay in those days, and very little they
have of it as yet, at this day. And besides that, the book is faulty in the
name of that people that rebelled: for it calls them Mundiqueti, whereas in
deed the Portingalles do rightly call them Anziqueti.

The same day, wherein the king was baptized, diverse other Lords following his
example were baptized likewise, Diverse Lords baptized.
having first learned certain principles of the Christian Faith. The K. goes
in person against the rebels, and discomfiteth the^*
And when all this was done, the king went in person to dispearse the
turbulent attemptes of his adversaries, against whom he found the Prince his
son, and the Lord of Batta already fighting with a formal Army. But at the
arriual of the king, the enemies yielded, and submitted themselves to the
obedience which before they performed: and so he returned in triumph to the
City of Congo, and the Prince his son with him, who presently was desirous to
become a Christian, and was christened by the name of the first Prince of
Portingall, Mani-Sundi christened and many other with him.
called Alfonso: and with him also were christened many gentlemen and
Caualieros, and other of his servants, that came with him out of his Province.

But see the Devil once again, the utter enemy of Christian Religion, how
he prosecuted his former intent to hinder Christianity among these people.
For when he perceived that he prevailed nothing by these wars, he incensed
the mind of the Kings second Son, that he would not agree to receive the new
Keligion which his Father, Mani-Pango resists the Gospel.
his Mother, his Brother so many other Lords had embraced, sowing his Cockle
and Darnel not only in him, but also in many other Lords that favored him,
who being addicted rather to the sensuality of the flesh, then the purity of
the mind, resisted the Gospel, which began now to be preached, especially in
that Commandment, wherein it is forbidden that a man should have any mo wives
but one. A matter that among them was more hard and difficult to be received,
then any other Commandment whatsoever, because they were used to take as many
wives as they would. And thus the two brethren being divided between
themselves, either of them did stiffly maintain his several opinion. The
eldest brother Don Alfonso, did with great feruencie, defend Christianity,
and burned all the Idols that were within his Province. The second brother
(called Mani-Pango, because he was Governor of the Country of Pango) did
resist it mightily, and had gotten the greatest part of the principal Lords
of Pango to be on his side. For there were diverse of the new christened
Lords, whose Ladies seeing themselves separated, and forlorn of their
Husbande-Lordes by force of the Christian Law, did take it as a great injury
and scorn done unto them, and blasphemed and cursed this new Religion beyond
all measure. These Lords united themselves together with others, Mani-Pango and
his accomplices accuse Mani-Sundi to his father.
and began to plot treachery against Don Alfonso, hoping that if they could
rid him out of the world, the Christian Faith would utterly cease of it
self. And therefore Mani-Pango and his accomplices gave intelligence to his
Father, that the Prince Don Alfonso favored the Christian faction, only to
the end that under the color of his countenance and favor they might raise an
insurrection and rebellion against him, and so drive him out of his kingdom.

The king gave credit to their informations, The K. depriueth Mani-Sundi of
his government,
and deprived his son of the Government wherein he was placed: But the
providence of God which reserved him for a greater matter, did relieve him by
the good mediation and counsel of his friends, who entreated the King his
Father, that he would not be moved to anger, before he had examined the
answers and reasons of the Prince his son. Wherein the King was especially
persuaded by Mani-Sogno, who (as we told you) was before christened,
Mani-Sogno makes intercession for his brother.
and called Don Emanuel, and by good hap was in Court at that present. This
man (being the auncientest Courtier and Lord of that time, singularly well
beloved of the king and all his people) did with sound reasons and dexterity of
wit, procure the king to revoke the sentence that was given against the Prince
Don Alfonso, so that the King being afterward thoroughly informed both of the
honest mind and actions of his son, perceived that the accusations plotted
against him, were false and malicious, Mani-Sundi restored.
and thereupon restored him again to his former government, with a special
charge, that he should not proceed with such rigor against the Gentiles, for
the propagation and exaltation of the christian Religion. But he being full of
fervent charity, and godly spirit, ceased not (for all that) to advance the
faith of the Gospel, and to put the commandments of God in execution.

Whereupon his adversaries who never rested from their former attempt, were
continually at the Kings elbowe, and sought by all cunning shifts and secret
devises, to destroy that which the good prince had builded, especially when
they saw that the Prince of Sogno was departed from Court, and returned into
his Government. So that no body being now leaft to protect and defend the
Christian Religion, The K. wauereth in Religion, and calls Mani-Sundi to
account, of purpose to deprive him.
the King began to doubt of the faith, which with so great zeal he had before
embraced: and therefore sent to his son, that he should come again to the
Court, to make account of those Revenues that he had gathered within the
Country of his Government, with a full intent and meaning indeed to deprive
him, when his accountes should be finished. But he being illumined by his
good Angel, and discovering the treacheries of the enemies of God and
himself, delayed and delayed the matter so long, that in the mean while, his
Father being an old man, The K. dies.
did by means of a natural infirmity depart out of this life. And his mother
who always perseuered constant in the Catholic Faith, The Queen Mother
sends in all have for her son Mani-Sundi.
louinge her eldest son most entirely, concealed the Kings death for the
space of three days, being therein aided and assisted by some of her trusty
friends, and gave it out, that the King had taken such order as no man might
come unto him to trouble him. In the mean season she did secreatly signify to
her Son the death of his father, which she would keep close till his
coming, and charged him without any delay, and in all haste to speed him to
the Court. This she did by certain Runners, that from place to place in
convenient distaunces and iourneyes, are always ready like Posts to conueigh
the precepts and commandments of the King over all the Realm. Whereupon he
presently caused himself to be carried Post both day and night, by certain
slaves according to the use of that Country, and in one day and two nights,
with most exquisite diligence accomplished the journey of two hundred miles,
and so arrived at the City, before he was expected.

Chap. 3. Don John, the first Christian King being dead, Don Alfonso his son
succeeded. Of his wars against his Brother. Of certain miracles that were
wrought, and of the Conversion of those people.
NOw together with the death of the king, The funeral of K. John, celebrated
by K. Alfonso.
there was also published the succession to the Crown of Don Alfonso, being
then present, who in his own person did accompany the corpse of his dead
Father to the burial, withal the Lords of the Court, and all the Christian
Portingalles, which was solemnised after the manner of Christendom, with
service and prayers for the dead, and all this with such funeral pomp, as was
never seen before among those people. But they which heretofore were
adversaries to this new King, doubting of their own safety if they should
remain in the Court, united themselves with Mani-Pango, who was now departed
into the Province of his own Government, Mani-Pango rebelleth against his
brother.
and while his father lived, was wholly employed in fighting against the
Mozombi, and certain other people that had rebelled against him. When he heard
of the death of his Father, and understood that his brother was already placed
in the Seat Royal, he took truce with his enemies, and gathering together a
great army began to go in arms against his Brother, and lead with him
almost all the whole Realm, which in deed favored him, to the number of two
hundred thousand men. King Alfonso awaited his coming at the Royal City,
with a very small number, saving that he was directed, advised and assisted by
the good ancient Lord Mani-Sogno, who uniting himself unto him in the
strength and virtue of the holy Christian Faith, The Kings power both slender
and timorous.
and making a list of all those armed friends, that he had to defend him against
so great an enemy, found by computation that they did not amount to the number
of ten thousand, among which there were but about one hundred Christians,
natural of that Country, besides some few Portingalles, which by chance
arrived there at that time.

All these people were indeed too few for such an encounter, and therefore not
very resolute to abide any attempt, but became very doubtful and timorous, by
reason of the great power, that Mani-Pango brought with him. But the king
trusting confidently in his strong faith, and in the Celestial aid and
assistance: comforted and strengthened his soldiers by all the means he
could, and so did the good old Lord his uncle, who ceased not, both night and
day, with words and deeds to encourage that small number, which they had, to
expect and endure the assaults of their adversaries, with all manhood and
courage, assuring them, that God would be their help and succor. Thus while
they attended the procedinges of their enemies, Mani-Pango and his forces set
forwards to the besieging of the City, with so great a noise of warlicke
instruments, and cries, and shoutinges, and terrible threatninges, that the
poor few, which were in the City, as well Christians as others, fainted in
their hearts, and failed in their courage, and came and presented themselves
before the king, saying, that he had not power enough to resist so power-full
an enemy, and therefore they thought it better for him to grow to some
concord and composition, and to abandon the new Religion, which he had lately
begun to profess, to the end he might not fall into the hands of his cruel
adversaries. The king to his soldiers.
But the king being resolute, and full of religious constancy, reproved their
cowardice, and called them dastardes, and base people, and willed them, if they
had any mind or desire to forsake him, and go to the enemy, that they should
so do: As for himself and those few that would follow him, he did not doubt
but assuredly trust, though not with the possibility or strength of man, yet
with the favor of God, to vanquish and overcome that innumerable multitude.
And therefore he would not request them either to join with him, or to put
their lives in hazard against his adversaries for his sake, but only they
might rest themselves and expect the issue that should follow thereon.

But they for all this speech became never a whit the more courageous, The
Kings Soldiers depart from him.
but rather waxed more timorous, and were utterly determined to forsake the
king, and to save themselves. Now they were scarce out of the City, and on
their way homewardes, when by great good fortune, they met with the good old
Lord Mani-Sogno, who with some few of his followers had been abroad to
surueigh the enemies Camp, Mani-Sogno meets with them.
and to make provision for such things as were necessary in such an action: To
him they declared all that they had before declared to the King, That they
thought it to be a point of express madness, to put their lives and goods in
danger with so few people against an infinite multitude, and that without all
doubt it were a safer way to compounde with the enemy, and so save themselves.
The good Lord with great piety and Christian valor answered them, that they
should not so quickly fall into despair; but (as the king had told them
before) they should look upon Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, whose
faith and religion they had so lately and with so great zeal gained and
purchased: who also most assuredly and undoubtedly would succor and defend
those that were his. And so entreated them, that they would not like rash
headed people change their minds from that holy doctrine, which they had with
such feruency of late received, adding moreover, that they had not to fight
with a strange nation, nor with a people that came from far Countries, but
with their own kinsmen and countrymen, so that they might always have
opportunity (if need so require) to yield themselves, and in all friendship and
kindness to be embraced. Behold I pray you (says Mani-Sogno) mine age now
arrived to a hundred years, and yet I bear arms for the zeal and defense of
the Religion that I have entered, and for the homage and honor that I owe to my
king. And you that are in the flower of your years, do you show your selves to
be so base and fearful, and unfaithful to your own narurall king? If algates
you be not minded to fight your selves, yet encourage your vassals and
subjects, and do not dismay them. Let us expect the first encounter of the
enemy, and thereupon we shall not want fit occasion to take some other course
and provide for our safety.

With these comfortable words, The Fugitives return and ask the King
forgiveness.
the Lords recovered their spirits that were quailed, and returned back with
him to seek the king, who was in the Church at his prayers, beseeching God to
send him help and succor. They waited for him until he came forth, and then
kneeled down upon their knees before him, requesting pardon for their fault
and want of duty, which they had showed unto him being their Prince, in that
they would have forsaken him when he was in this extreme danger, and
promising that they would put on a new and constant courage for the defense of
him, and of the law and religion which they had received, and that they would
fight for the same even until death. The K. gives thanks to God.
But the king who perceived well that this comfort and help came from God
himself, first gave him hearty thanks secretly from the bottom of his heart,
and vowed that he would sacrifice himself for the maintenance of his faith and
Gospel. And then with a cheerful countenance he said. I do believe (Lord)
that thy greatness is infinite, and that thou can do all things, and can
make of little much, and of much little, whenever it pleases thee. Neither
do I any thing doubt, but that thou will yield aid to this my weakness, and
assist the same with thine invincible force, so that through thy gracious
favor, with these few and weak persons I shall become the conqueror not
only of this army, but also of a far greater, if it should come against me.
And I promise thee (O my God) besides that which I have already spoken, that I
will all the days of my life promote and exalt thy true faith, thy holy name,
and thy most wholesome doctrine. The King erecteth a Cross of a great length.
In testimony and memory of which his confession, he did presently cause a
Cross to be planted, and erected in the midst of the market place right
against the Church, which his father had builded: This Cross was of a
wonderful length, for it was fourscore span long, and the Crosse-barre in
proportion aunswerable thereunto. Now the eternal God, who knew the faith
from whence this vow of the good king did proceed, vouchsafed to comfort him
with a celestial vision, which was a very clear and admirable light. At the
shining whereof, A vision appeared to him
he cast himself upon his knees, and wept, and lifted up his hands and eyes
to heaven, but spoke not a word, for that he was overcome with tears, and
sighs, and wholly ravished in spirit. But that which he himself saw, was
seen of no body else, neither would he ever publish the same to any man. All
those that were in his company did even as he did, and for a while lost the
sight of their eyes: and by reason of that miraculous light remained in a
trance. The Arms of the King of Congo.
At the last every man lifted up his eyes, and perceived that there were
imprinted on him five Swords, very bright and clear, which for the space
almost of an hour continued immovable (as it were) in a circle, but all they
could neither understand nor expound what was the meaning thereof. The five
Swords the King took for his arms, as is to be seen in his Signet Royal,
which has been used ever sithence that time, yea even by the King that now
lives and reigns. The Cross also, that was thus planted by vow, is to be
seen in the same place, wherein it was erected, at the front of the Church,
which Church was called Saint Crosses, of the Cross there planted, and of the
miracle that there appeared. This Cross the last King, that dead is, Don
Aluaro father to the King that now is, renewed and made another of the same
bigness that the first was of, in remembrance of such a miracle. For the old
Cross was in time decayed and consumed, and quite fallen down.

The aforesaid vision did greatly confirm the minds of the Citizens, which
before were quailed, and did wonderfully appall and fully terrify the enemies,
when they understood the news thereof. The proud message of Mani-Pango to the
King.
Notwithstanding Mani-Pango sent unto the King, and signified unto him and to
all the rest that were with him, that if they did not incontinently yield
themselves, and deliver the City unto him, and create and swear him for
their King, and withal abandon and relinquish their new Christian Religion,
he would put them all to the edge of the sword: but if they would so do, he
would freely pardon them. Hereunto the Lords that stood on the Kings part
answered, The Kings answer.
that they were most ready to die in defense of their Prince, and of the
Christian Faith. But in particular the King sent him this message, that he
nothing feared his terrible threats, but rather as his kind brother was very
sorry, even from his heart, to see that he walked in darkness, and strayed out of
the way of light: that the kingdom did by law belong unto him, and was not
fraudulently usurped by him: And that the Religion, which he had received, was
assuredly delivered him from God, who no doubt would protect and maintain him
therein: And withal besought him, that he would estraunge himself from his
false belief and worshipping of the Devil, wherein he had been nourished and
brought up, and that he would be baptized, for so he should become the child
of God, and mertie the Glory Celestial. The King rewards his followers.
Then the King sent to fetch his iewelles and other rich ornaments of
household, which he had at home, and the better to encourage these Lords, that
took his part, he most graciously distributed them amongst them all:
wherewith they remained very greatly satisfied, and bound themselves to
prosecute his enterprise and to follow his ensign with a most ardent courage.

This being done, the very same night, the one half almost of the base people
that were in arms, Certain timorous fugitives run to the Camp of Mani-Pango.
being surprised with a very great fear did secretly fly into the Camp of
Pango, and having thus revolted, gave Mani-Pango to understand, that the King
and all the rest of his retinue were utterly dismayed and discouraged, that
every man was devising with himself how he might escape, and that they had
none other mean to save themselves but only by taking the lane that leads
down to the River, which (as we have told you) was distant from the City
about the space of a mile. At the end of which lane, A stratagem of Mani-Pa^go.
between the River and the hill, there was a little Moore about two foot deep
on the right hand, and on the left hand were the mountains, and the garrisons
of Pango, that had besieged and beset the hill, so that there was none other
issue for them to escape, but only by passing over the Moore, which was in
length as far as the shot of an Arcubuse could reach, and as much in
breadth, and then to come to the River. Mani-Pango believing all this, that they
had related unto him, sent presently to stop that passage, with planting sharp
stakes in the bottom of the Moore, which were covered with water, to the end
that if his enemies should fly in the dark of the night because they would
not be seen, they should be all staked and taken therein. All that night he
with all his army remained in great joy, and awaited the fresh morning, that
he might give the assault upon the City, bethinking himself in the mean
while, what course might be most easy and convenient for him to attempt the
same.

But Don Alfonso on the other side, having confessed himself, Mani-Pango
assaulteth the City.
and consulted with all the most faithful and loyal friends that he had,
expected his enemy, who assuring himself of the victory, and having now
granted all the Citizens goods, and all the states and Gouernementes of the
kingdom, to his great Lords about him, very early in the morning with a
furious violence gave assault to the City, on that side which is toward the
North, where the great and wide plain restrayning it self into a narrow
strait, enters (as it were) into a round circle, naturally compassed about
with certain hills, and then makes a large way, as broad as a man may
shoot with a Gunne, until you come to the site or place where the City
stands, which is a little plain of two miles compass, wherein (as it has
been told you) the City and the Church, and the Lords houses and the kings
court are situate. In this place did Don Alfonso, with those few that he had
with him, settle himself against the Pagans, Mani-Pango discomfited without
any fight.
and against his Enemy Brother, who before he could confront the King, was
utterly discomfited, dispearsed and put to flight. Whereupon the king
perceiving that he was overthrown and driven to run away, was wonderfully
amazed, not knowing himself how this matter came to pass, seeing that he had
not joined battle, nor fought with his enemies, and therefore must needs
think, that it so fell out by some hidden and secreate means to him unknown.
Notwithstanding the day following Mani-Pango returned to the assault in the
same place, Mani-Pango the second time discomfited in like manner.
but he was in the same manner once again discomfited and constrained to fly:
whereby he knew assuredly that this his loss and overthrow was not occasioned
by the valor of his enemies, but only by some miracle. So that the people of
the City mocking and scorning those Idolaters, and taking stomach unto them,
for these two victories thus happened, began now to make no reconing of
them, and would with all violence have run upon them. To whom their
adversaries made this answer, Tush you are not the men that have thus
vanquished us, but it was a certain fair Lady all in white, which with her
admirable brightness had blindeded us, and a Knight riding upon a white
palfrey, that had a red Cross upon his breast: and he it was that fought
against us, and turned us to flight. Which when the King understood, he sent
to tell his brother, that of those two, the one was a Virgin, the Mother of
Christ, whose faith he had embraced: and the other was S. James, who both were
sent from God to succor and relieve him, and that if he also would become a
Christian, they would likewise show great grace and favor unto him. Mani-Pango
assaulteth the Cittieon both sides at once.
But Mani-Pango would not accept of this message, but all the night following
did put himself in a readiness to besiege the City upon both sides at once,
the one with one part of his Army at the strait above mentioned, and the
other with another part of his people, himself in his own person compassing
about by the lane that ascends from the river, and so in a place utterly
unprovided of either watch or ward, he thought to attempt the victory. Those
that were above at the strait did first join battle, and were quite
discomfited and overthrown: and Pango himself, hoping to have thrust forward
on the other side, while his enemies were wholly occupied in defending
themselves at the strait, found himself greatly deceived: for his people were
already put to flight by those of the City* who perceiving the great noise,
that Pango and his troops made in ascending the hill on the other side, ran
with all speed to meet with that danger, and driving him and all his people
back again, put them in disarray, and then so vexed and molested them with
such a fury of darts and other weapons, which they threw among them, that
Pango being overcome with fear and danger ran away, The stratagem of
Mani-Pango turns to his own destruction.
and fell into the snares and nets which he himself had laid for the
Christians. For lighting among the foresaid stakes, he was with one of them
thrust into the body, and so being surprised with an evil death, he finished
his life, as it were in a rage. For you must understand that the sharp ends of
the said stakes were envenomed with a certain poison, The death of Mani-Pango.
which taking hold of the blood, and entering somewhat into the flesh, would
kill without all cure or remedy.

By this victory and death of his brother did the king remain in security and
liberty, wiihout all contradiction, and then thinking with himself, that his
people and subjects were in a great doubt and quandarie, and durst not for
fear present themselves before him, by reason of the error that they had
committed against him, like a good Prince he sent to signify unto them, that
he would pardon their former faults, and receive them into his grace and
favor. Whereupon they came and yielded themselves unto him with all obedience,
The Rebels yield to the kings mercy.
all saving the Captain General, whose name was Mani-Bunda. For he feared
greatly to appear before the king, for very shame of his disloyalty and
villainy: but yet at the last he obtained his pardon, with a certain penance
enjoined him, that he should go and serve in the building of the Church:
whereupon he became afterward so humble and devout a Christian: that when the
King would have eased him of that travel, he would not by any means give
over his labor, until such time as all the Church was wholly built and
finished.

The Kingdom being thus pacified, and all things well established, the king
Don Alfonso took order, that they should presently go in hand with the
fabric of the principal Church, The building of the Church called Saint
Crosses.
called S. Crosses, which was so named of the Cross that was there planted (as
we told you before) and also because upon the feast day of the Holy Cross
the first stone was laid in the foundation thereof. Moreover he commanded
that the men should bring stones, and the weomen should fetch sand from the
River, for the furthering of this work. The king would needs be the first
Porter himself, and upon his own shoulders brought the first basket of
stones, which he cast into the foundation, and the Queen her basket of sand
likewise, thereby giving an example to the Lords and the Ladies of the Court
to do the like, and to encourage and harten the people in so holy an action.
And so this fabric being furthered by so good worke-maisters and workmen, in
a very short time was fully finished, and therein were celebrated Masses, and
other divine service, with great solemnity, besides a number of Lords and
others that were there baptized and christened: so that the multitude of such
as came to be partakers of the Holy Baptism abounded so greatly, that there
were not Priests enough to execute that office.

After this the king dispatched away the Portingall Ambassador, K. Alfonso
dispatcheth the Portingal Ambassador, and mother of his own into Portingall*
who till this time had remained at the Court, by reason of these troubles: and
with him he sent also another Ambassador of his own, called Don Roderico,
and diverse others that were of kin both to himself and to his Ambassador,
to the end that they should learn both the doctrine of the Christians in
Portingall, and also their language, and further declare unto the King all
these accidents that had happened.

Moreover he caused the Lords of all his provinces to be assembled together
in a place appointed for that purpose, The K. commands all Idolles to be
brought in, and all other things that are contrary to Christian Religion.
and there publicly signified unto them, that whosoever had any Idols, or any
thing else that was contrary to the Christian Religion, he should bring them
forth and deliver them over to the Lieuetenantes of the Country: Otherwise
whosoever did not so, should be burned themselves without remission or pardon.
Which commandment was incontinently put in execution. And a wonderful thing
it is to be noted, that within less then one month, all the Idolles, and
Witcheries and Characters, which they worshipped and accounted for Gods, were
sent and brought unto the Court. And certainly the number of these toys was
infinite: for every man adored and reverenced the thing that best liked him,
without any order, or measure, or reason at all, so that there was among them a
huge multitude of Deuilles, in sundry strange and terrible shapes. Many there
were, that carried a devotion to Dragons with wings, which they nourished and
fed in their own private houses, giving unto them for their food the best and
most costly viandes that they had. Others kept Serpents of horrible figures:
Some worshipped the greatest Goats, they could get, some Tygres, and other
most monstrous Creatures, yea the more uncouth and deformed the beasts were,
the more they were honored. Some held in veneration certain unclean fowls
and night-birdes, as Backs, Owls and Schritche-Owles, and such like. To be
brief, they did choose for their Gods diverse Snakes, and Adders, and Beasts,
and Birds, and Herbs, and Trees, and sundry Characters of wood and of
stone, and the figures of all these things above rehearsed, as well painted in
colors, as graven in wood and in stone, and in such other stuff. Neither did
they only content themselves with worshipping the said creatures when they
were quick and alive, but also the very skins of them when they were dead,
being stuffed with straw.

The act of this their adoration was performed in diverse sorts, Their devout
worshipping of Idols.
all wholly addressed and directed to express their humility, as by kneeling
on their knees, by casting themselves groueling upon the earth, by defiling
their faces with dust, by making their prayers unto their Idols in words and
in actions, and by offering unto them the best part of the substance which
they had in their possession. Witches
They had moreover their Witches, which made the foolish people to believe,
that their Idols could speak: and so deceived them: and if any man being in
sickness or infirmity would recommend himself unto them, and afterward that
man recovered his health, the Witches would persuade him that the Idol had
been angry with him, but now was appeased and had healed him. And this is in
part that which was used among the Moci-Conghi concerning their Religion,
before they had received the Water of Holy Baptism, and the knowledge of the
living God.

Now the King having gathered together all these abominable Images, The K.
burned all the Idols.
and put them into diverse houses within the City, and commanded, that to the
same place, where a little before he had fought and vanquished his brothers
Army, every man should bring a burden of wood, which grew to be a great
heap, and when they had cast into it all the said Idols, and pictures, and
whatsoever else the people before that time held for a God, he caused fire to be
set unto them, and so utterly consumed them. When he had thus done, he
assembled all his people together, and in steed of their Idols which before
they had in reverence, he gave them Crucifixes and Images of Saints, which
the Portingalles had brought with them, and enjoined every Lord, that every one
in the City of his own Government and Regiment should build a Church, The
king commands every Lord to build a Church in the City of his own
government.
and set up Crosses, as he had already showed unto them by his own example.
And then he told them and the rest of his people, that he had dispatched an
Ambassador into Portingall to fetch Priests, that should teach them Religion,
and administer the most holy and wholesome Sacraments to every one of them, and
bring with them diverse Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother, and of other
Saints to distribute among them. In the mean while he willed them to be of
good comfort, and to remain constant in the faith. But they had so lively
imprinted the same in their hearts, that they never more remembered their former
belief in false and lying Idols.

He ordained moreover, that there should be three Churches builded. The K.
builds 3. Churches One to Saint Savior.
One in reverence of our Savior, to give him thanks for the victory which he
had granted unto him, wherein the Kings of Congo do lie buried, and whereof
the City Royal took the name, (for as it was told you before, it is called
S. Saviors.) The second Church was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, The second
to our Lady of Help.
the Mother of God, called Our Lady of Help, in memory of the succor which
he had against his enemies: And the third was consecrated to S. James: The
third to S. James*
in honor and remembrance of the miracle, which that Saint had wrought by
sighting in the favor of the Christians, and showing himself on horseback in
the heat of the battle.

Not long after this, The ships return from Portingall with Friars, and
Priests.
the ships arrived from Portingall, with many men that were skifull in the
holy scriptures, and diverse religious Friars of the orders of S. Frauncis, and
of Saint Dominike, and of Saint Austine, with sundry other Priests, who with
great charity and feruencie of spirit, sowed and dispearsed the Catholic
Faith over all the Country: which was presently embraced by all the people of
the kingdom, who held the said Priests in so high reverence, that they
worshipped them like Saints, by kneeling unto them, and kissing their hands,
and receiving their blessing, as often as they met them in the streets. These
Priests being arrived into their several Provinces, did instruct the people in
the faith of Christ, and taking unto them certain of the naturalles of the
Country, they taught them the true heavenly doctrine, whereby they might the
better declare the same to their own Countrymen in their own proper
language. So that in process of time the Catholic Faith was rooted over all
those Countries in such sort, as it perseuereth and continues there even
till this day, although it has endured some small hinderance, as in convenient
place we shall show unto you.

Chap. 4. The death of the King Don Alfonso, and the succession of Don Piedro.
How the Islande of Saint Thomas was first inhabited, and of the Bishop that was
sent thither. Other great accidents that happened by occasion of Religion. The
death of two Kings by the conspiracy of the Portingalles and the Lords of
Congo. How the Kings lineage was quite extinguished. The banishment of the
Portingalles.
WHile these matters were thus in working for the service of God, and that
Christianity was now begun and increased with so happy success, King Alfonso
dies.
it pleased God to call away to himself the King Don Alfonso, who at the time
of his death yielded great signs, which beautified and exalted his former
life, For he dyed in great faith, declaring that his hour was now come, and
discoursed of the Christian Religion with so great confidence and charity, as
it evidently appeered that the Cross and Passion, and the true belief in our
Savior Jesus Christ was imprinted in the root of his heart. Don Piedro
succeeds him.
To Don Piedro, his son and successor he did especially and principally
recommend the Christian doctrine, which in deed following the example of his
father, he did maintain and uphold accordingly.

In his time, there began to sail into these quarters a great number of
vessels, The Isle of S. Thomas begins to be inhabited.
and the Islande of S. Thomas was inhabited with Portingalles, by the Kings
commandment. For before those days it was all waste and desert within land,
and inhabited only upon the shore by a few sailors that came from the
countries adjoining. But when this Islande in process of time was well peopled
with Portingalles, The King of Portingall sends one to be Bishop of the Isle
of S. Thomas, and of Congo.
and other nations that came thither by license of the King, and became to be
of great traffic, and was tilled and sowed, the king sent thither a Bishop,
to govern the Christians that were in that Islande, and those also that were
in Congo: which the said Bishop did accomplish presently upon his arrival,
and afterward in Congo, where he took possession of his Pastoral charge.
When he was come into the kingdom of Congo, it was a thing incredible to see,
The entertainment of the Bishop in Congo.
with how great joy he was entertained by the King and all his people. For
from the sea side even unto the City, being the space of a hundred and fifty
miles, he caused the streets to be made smooth and trim, and to be covered
all over with Mattes, commanding the people, that for a certain space
severally appointed unto them, they should prepare the ways in such sort,
that the Bishop should not set his foot upon any part of the ground which
was not adorned. But it was a far greater wonder, to behold all the country
thereaboutes, and all the trees, and all the places that were higher then the
rest, swarming with men and weomen that ran forth to see the Bishop, as a man
that was holy and sent from God, offering unto him, some of them lambs, some
kiddes, some chickins, some Partriches, some venison, and some fish, and other
kinds of victuailes in such abundance, that he knew not what to do withal,
but leaft it behind him; whereby he might well know the great zeal and
obedience of these new Christians. And above all other things it is to be
noted for a memorable matter, that the Bishop going on his way, there met him
an innumerable multitude of men, and weomen, and girls, and boys, and persons
of fourscore years of age, and above, that crossed him in the streets, and
with singular tokens of true belief required the water of Holy Baptism at his
hands: neither would they suffer him to pass until he had given it them: so
that to satisfy their desires, he was greatly stayed in his viage, and was
feign to carry water with him in certain vessels, and salt, and other
provision necessary for that action.

But I will leave to report unto you all the welcome and entertainment, that
was made unto him in every place where he came, and the lively joy that
generally and particularly was showed for the coming of this Bishop. And now
I will tell you, that he arrived at the City of Saint Saviors, where he
was met by the Priests, and by the king, and by all the Court, and so in
procession entered into the Church, and after due thanks given to God, he was
conducted to his lodging that was assigned unto him by the king. The Bishop
foundeth the Cathedral Church of S. Crosses.
And then presently he began to reform and reduce to good order, the Church
it self, and the Friars, and Priests that dwell therein: ordayning the said
Church to be the Cathedral Church of Saint Crosses, which at that time had
belonging unto it twenty and eight Cannons, with their Chaplens, and a Master
of the Chapel, with Singers, and Organs, and Belles, and all other furniture
meet to execute divine service. But this Bishop, who labored in the Lords
Vineyard, sometimes in Congo, and sometimes in the Isle of Saint Thomas, going
and coming continually by ship, the space of twenty days, and still
leaving behind him his Vicars in the place where he himself was absent, The
Bishop dies.
at the last dyed, and was buried in the Island of S. Thomas.

After this Bishop succeeded another Bishop in Congo, being a Negro, and
descended of the blood Royal, who before had been sent by King Alfonso first
into Portingall, and afterward to Rome, where he learned the Latin tongue,
and the Christian Religion, but being returned into Portingall, and landed out
of his ship, The second B. dies.
to go and enter upon his Bishopric of S. Saviors, he dyed by the way:
whereupon the kingdom remained without a Pastor for the space of diverse
years. Don Piedro also the King aforesaid dyed likewise without children, The
K. Don Piedro dies. Don Francesco succeeds and dies.
and there succeeded him his brother, called Don Francesco, who in like manner
lasted but a while: and then was created the fifth King, named Don Diego, Don
Diego the fifth King.
who was next of all the race Royal: A man of haughty courage, and
magnificall, and witty, of a very good disposition, wise in counsel, and
above all other qualities, a maintayner of Christian Faith: and in brief so
great a warrior he was, that in few years he conquered all the countries
adjoining. He loved the Portingals very much, so that he forsook the usual
garments of his own natural country, and attyred himself after the
Portingall fashion. He was very sumptuous as well in his apparel, The K. Diego
very sumptuous.
as also in the ornaments and furniture of his palace: he was besides very
courteous and liberal, and would bestow largely both upon his own subjects
and also upon the Portingalles. With great cost would he provide and buy such
stuff as pleased him, and would often say, that Rare things should not be
in the hands of any but only of Kings. He used to wear one suite of apparel
but once or twice and then he would give it away to his followers. Whereupon
the Portingalles perceiving that he did so greatly esteem cloth of gold and
Arras, and such other costly household stuff, they brought great store thereof
out of Portingall, so that at that time, Arras-hangings, and cloth of gold, and
of silk, and such like Lordly furniture began to be of great estimation in
that kingdom.

In the time of this King, there was a third Bishop of Saint Thomas, and
Congo, by nation a Portingall, who with the usual ceremonies was entertained
both by the way, The third B. of S. Thomas, and of Congo.
and also in the Court at Saint Saviors. And now the Devil, the common
enemy of Christian Religion, being much grieved with the happy success and
promoting of the Catholic Faith, began to sow his Darnell of division
between the Friars and Priests, Dissension between the Friars and Priests,
and the new Bishop.
and their new Bishop: which sprung up and arose from the long liberty,
wherein they had now lived so many years without a Pastor, so that every man
esteemed himself not only to be as good as the Bishop, but also to be a
far better man then he was: and therefore would yield no obedience to their
Prelate, in such sort that there was raised among them so great a discord and
dissension, as it wrought a grievous scandale and wicked example among the
people. But the king like a good Catholic, and a faithful, did always
maintain the Bishops part, and to cut of these troubles and stirs he sent
some of these Priests to prison into Portingal, and others into the Isle of
Saint Thomas, and some others went away with all their substance of their own
accord: and by these means, the doctrine of these ministers, in steed of
increasing, did greatly diminish through their own default,

Neither was our common adversaries herewithal contented, but would needs
proceed further by setting discord between Kings and subjects. After the
death of K. Diego, three Princes at once challenge the Kingdom, and all three
slain.
For after the death of this King, there started up three Princes at once to
challenge the succession. The first was the Kings son, whom few of them
favored, because they desired to have another, so that he was slain
incontinently. The two other that remained were of the blood Royal: One of
them was created King by his favorites and followers, with the good lyking of
the greater part of the people, but utterly against the minds of the
Portingalles and certain of the Lords, who aimed and endeavored to set up
the other. Insomuch as the foresaid Lords, together with the Portingalles,
went into the Church to kill the King elected: making this reckoning with
themselves, that if they slew him, the other must of necessity be made King.
But at that very self same time, those of the contrary faction had slain the
King that was already made by the Portingalles, persuading themselves
assuredly, that he being dead there would be no difficulty for them to
obtain the state for their King, because there was none other least, that by
law could challenge the Scepter Royal. And thus in an hour and in two
several places were these two Kings murdered at once.

In these conspiracies and slaughters, when the people saw, The Portingalles
slain and dispearsed.
that there were no lawful persons leaft to enjoy the Royal Crown, they
laid all the blame upon the Portingals, who were the causers of all these
mischiefs: and thereupon they turned themselves against them, and slew as many
of them as they could find: Only they spared the Priests, and would not touch
them, nor any other that dwelt in other places.

Seeing therefore (as before is said) that there was none of the blood Royal
leaft to be placed in the Government, Don Henrico created king.
they made choice of one Don Henrico, Brother to Don Diego the King deceased.
And this Henrico, going to war against the Anzichi, leaft behind him in his
steed for Governor, under the title of King, one Don Aluaro, a young man of
twenty and five years of age, son to his wife by another husband. K.
Henrico dies, and Don Aluaro succeeds: and so the stock of of the ancient
Kings of Congo ceased.
But Don-Henrico dyed shortly after the war was ended, and thereupon the
said Don Aluaro was with the common consent of them all, elected King of
Congo, and generally obeyed of every man. And thus failed the Royal Stock of
the ancient Kings of Congo, in the person of Don Henrico.

But Don Aluaro was a man of good judgment and gouernenent, and of a mild
disposition, so that he did presently appease all these tumults in his
kingdom, and caused all the Portingals that by the last wars were dispearsed
over all the countries thereaboutes, K. Aluaro restores the Portingals.
to be gathered together, as well religious persons as lay men, and by their
means he was much better confirmed in the Catholic Faith then he was before.
Moreover he used them very courteously, and cleared them of all faults that
were laid to their charge, declaring unto them by gentle discourses that they
had not been the occasion of the former troubles, as every man would confess
and acknowledge: and to that effect he determined with him self to write a
large information touching al these accidents to the King of Portingall, and
to the Bishop of S. Thomas, which he did accordingly, and dispatched certain
Messengers unto them with his letters. When the Bishop of S. Thomas
understood these news, he was very glad thereof, The B. of S. Thomas returns
into Congo.
and whereas before he durst not adventure to go into the Kingdom of Congo in
the heat of all those troubles, he did now presently take ship, and sailed
thither, where he employed himself wholly with all his authority to pacify
the former dissentions, and to set down order for all such matters as
concerned the worship of God, and the office of his Priests. And a while
after he had so done, he returned to his habitation in the Isle of Saint
Thomas, The B. of S. Thomas dies*
where by means of sickness he finished his days. And this was the third time,
that those parts remained without a Bishop.

Now it came to pass, K. Aluaro lives licentiously.
that for want of Bishops, the King and the Lords, and the people likewise,
began to wax cold in the Christian Religion, every man addicting himself
licentiously to the liberty of the flesh, and especially the King, who was
induced thereunto by diverse young men of his own age, that did familiarly
converse with him. Francesco Bulla Matare an ill companion and counselor to
the King.
Among whom there was one principal man, that was both a Lord, and his
kinsman, called Don Francesco Bullamatare, that is to say, Catche-Stone. This
man, because he was a great Lord, and wholly estranged from all instructions
of Christianity, walked inordinately after his own pleasure, and did not
stick to defend openly, That it was a very vain thing to keep but one wife,
and therefore it were better to return to their former ancient custom. And
so by his means did the Devil open a gate to the overthrow and destruction
of the Church of Christ in that kingdom, which until that time with so great
pain and travail had been there established. But afterward the man did so
wander and stray out of the way of truth, that he fell from one sin to
another, and in the end quite relinquished and abandoned all true Religion.
Bullamatare dies.
Yet at the last the said Francesco dyed, and was solemnly buried like a noble
Lord, in the Churcb of Saint Crosses: although he was notoriously suspected
and spotted for his false Religion. But it fell out (and a marvelous case it
is, to confirm the righteous in their good belief, and to terrify the wicked)
that in the night time certain Spirits of the Devil uncovered a part of the
roof of S. Crosses Church, where he was enterred, and with a great and
horrible noise, which was heard all over the City, they drew him out of his
Tomb, and carried him away. And in the morning the Church doors were found
shut, the roof broken, and the grave without the body of the man. By this
extraordinary sign the King was at the first advertised of the great fault
that he had committed, and so were the rest also that followed him in his
course: but notwithstanding, because there was no Bishop in that kingdom to
give him good counsel, and the King but a young man and unmarried, although he
remained somewhat sound in the Christian Faith, yet he continued still in the
licentiousnes of the flesh, until such time as God had chastized him with
another severe discipline, as you shall hereafter understand.

Chap. 5. The incursions of the people called Giachas in the kingdom of Congo.
Their conditions and weapons. And the taking of the Royal City.
FOr not long after, What people the Giachas are: Their conditions, and weapons.
there came to rob and spoil the Kingdom of Congo, certain nations, that
live after the manner of the Arabians, and of the ancient Nomades, and are
called Giachas. Their habitation or dwelling is about the first Lake of the
River Nilus, in a province of the Empire of Moenemugi. A cruel people they are
and a murderous, of a great stature, and horrible countenance, fed with man's
flesh, fierce in battle, and valorous in courage. Their weapons are Pauises or
Targates, Darts and Daggers: otherwise they go all naked: In their fashions
and daily course of living they are very savage and wild: They have no King to
govern them, and they lead their life in the forest under cabbins and
cottages like shepheardes.

This people went wandering up and down, destroying, and putting to fire and
sword, and robbing and spoiling all the countries that they passed through,
till they came to the Realm of Congo, The Giachas spoil the province of Batta
which they entered on that side where the Province of Batta lies. Those that
first came forth to make resistance against them, they overthrew, and then
addressed themselves toward the City of Congo, The Giachas come to the
Royal City of Congo.
where the King remained at that time in great perplexity, for this victory
that his enemies had gotten in the Country of Batta: yet some comfort he
took to himself, and went out against his adversaries with such soldiers as
he had, and in the same place, where in times past Mani-Pango fought with the
King Don Alfonso, he joined battle with them. In which encounter the King
being half discomfited, retired into the City, wherein when he perceived
that he could not remain in good safety, being utterly forsaken of the grace
of God by reason of his sins, and not having that confidence in him, that Don
Alfonso had, he thought good to leave it for a pray to his adversaries, and to
betake himself io an Islande within the River Zaire, called Isola del Cauallo,
that is to say, K. Aluaro flies into the Isle of Horses.
the Isle of Horse, where he continued with certain Portingall Priests, and
other principal Lords of his Kingdom. The Giachas surprise the City, and
rule over all the kingdom.
And thus were the Giachi become Lords and masters of the City Royal, and
of the whole Realm. For the natural inhabitants fled away, and saved
themselves in the mountains, and desert places: but the enemies burned and
wasted, City, and Churches, and all, and spared no man's life, so that having
divided themselves into several armies, they ruled and governed sometimes in
one Province, and sometimes in another over all the kingdom.

With this persecution did God generally afflict and chastize all the
inhabitants of the said Kingdom of Congo, the King himself, the Lords, the
people, the Portingalles, and their Clergy, every one in their degree, and
calling. As for the poor people, they went wandering like vagabondes over all
the Country, The King and those that followed him, plagued with an extreme
famine.
and perished for hunger and want of necessaries: And for the King with those
that followed him, and had saved themselves in the Islande, they also because
the Isle was very little, and the multitude great, were oppressed with so
terrible a scarsitie of victuailes, that the most part of them dyed by famine
and pestilence. For this dearth so increased, and meat arose to so excessive a
rate, that for a very small pittance (God wot) they were feign to give the
price of a slave, whom they were wont to sell for ten Crowns at the least.
So that the Father was of necessity constrained to sell his own son, and
the brother, his brother, and so every man to provide his victuailes by all
manner of wickedness. The persons that were sold for the satisfying of other
men's hunger, were bought by the Portingal Merchants, that came from S. Thomas
with their ships laden with victuailes. Those that sold them, said they were
slaves, and those that were sold, justified and confirmed the same, because
they were desirous to be rid of their greedy torment. Many of the blood
Royal sold for slaves to the Portingalles.
And by this occasion there was no small quantity of slaves, that were borne in
Congo, sold upon this necessity, and sent to the Isle of S. Thomas, and to
Portingall, among whom there were some of the blood Royal, and some others,
principal Lords.

By this affliction, the King did manifestly learn and know, that all these
great miseries and adversities abounded for his misdeedes: and although he was
not much punished with hunger, King Aluaro falls into a Dropsy.
because he was a King, yet he did not escape the cruel infirmity of the
Dropsy, that made his legs to swell exceedingly, which disease was engendered
partly by the air, and very ill diet, and partly by the moystnesse of the
Islande, and so it accompanied him even until his death. But in the mean
while, being stricken to the heart with these misfortunes and calamities, he
converted and turned to God, requiring pardon for his offenses, and doing
penance for his sins: and then was counseled and advised by the
Portingalles that he should send to request succors of the King of
Portingall, K. Aluaro sends to the K. of Portingall for succor.
by certain Ambassadors, that might recount unto him all the mischiefs which
had lighted upon him. This Embassage was accordingly performed, at the same
time that the K. Don Sebastiano began his reign, Don Sebastian the King of
Portingal sends succor unto him.
who with great speed and kindness sent him succors by a Captain, called
Francesco di Gouea, a man well exercised in diverse wars, both in India, and
also in Africa, who lead with him six hundred Soldiers, and many Gentlemen
Adventurers, that did accompany him.

Chap. 6. The King of Portingall sends aid, and an Ambassador to the King
of Congo. The knowledge of the Metal mines, which abound in Congo, is denied
the King of Portingall. At the same time the King of Congo dispatcheth
Ambassadors to the King of Spain, to request Priests of him, and what befell
unto them. He sends diverse proofs of the Mettalles. The vow of Odoardo Lopes.
THis Captain Francesco di Gouea, Francesco di Gouea restores the King, and
drives the Giachas out of Congo.
carried with him a commandment from his King, that the Islande of Saint
Thomas should provide him ships, and victuails, and whatsoever else was
requisite for this enterprise. And with this provision he arrived at the last
in the Isle of Horse, where the King of Congo was resident. In whose company
the Portingalles departing from thence, and gathering together all the men of
war in that Country, with all speed possible, put themselves onwardes
against their adversaries, and fought with them sundry times in plain battle,
so that at the end of one year and a half, they restored the King into his
former estate. Which victory they achieved in deed by the noise and force of
their Arcubuses (for the Giachi are exceedingly afraid of that weapon) rather
then by the valor and strength of their soldiers. And so they were in spite
of their teeth driven out of the Realm of Congo, and but few of them there
were that returned home again to see their friends. Francesco di Gouea, after
four years returns into Portingal with letters for mo Priests.
But the Portingall Captain stayed there for the space of four years to
settle the King in his Kingdom, and then returned into Portingall with letters
of request to his King, that he would send over some more Priests to uphold
and maintain the Christian Religion. Howbeit a number of Portingalles, that
came by ship with him, remained behind him in these Countries, and are at
this day become very rich and wealthy men. And the King being thus
established in his former degree, and the Kingdom all in quiet and peace,
became a very good Christian, and married the Lady Catarina, The K. becomes
a good Christian, and marieth.
who is yet alive: by whom he had four daughters, and by certain
Maide-seruants which he kept, two sons and one daughter. And because in those
regions the weomen do not succeed: there remained as heir of his kingdom
his elder son, called also Don Aluaro, who lives at this day.

During the time, The K. of Portingal sends to make search in Congo for
metal Mines.
that the foresaid Captain stayed in Congo, the King of Portingall Don
Sebastiano understanding, that there were in that Kingdom diverse Caves and
Mines of Silver, of Gold, and other Mettalles, sent thither two persons that
were cunning and skilful in that Art, (for therein they had served the
Castilians in the West) to make search for them, and to draw some profit
thereof. But the King of Congo was by a certain Portingall, Francesco Barbuto
disswadeth the King from making the search, and auoydeth it by policy.
called Francesco Barbuto, that was his Confessor and great familiar,
persuaded to the contrary, that he should not in any case suffer those Mines to
be discovered: signifying unto him, that thereby peradventure the free enjoying
and possession of his Kingdom might by little and little be taken quite from
him, and therefore advised him that he would cause these skillful Masters to
be led and guided by some other ways, where he knew there were no
Mettall-Mynes to be found, which he did accordingly. But assuredly, it grew
afterward to a great mischief, that the King would not suffer this Art of
digging and melting of mettalles, The inconvenience of not suffering the
metal mines to be dug and melted.
so greatly esteemed over all Europe, to be exercised in Congo. For thereupon
began the great trade and traffic in that Country to cease, and the
Portingall Merchants did not greatly care for venturing thither, or dwelling
there any more: and so consequently very few Priests resorted among them. So
that as well upon these occasions, as also for other such causes before
rehearsed, the Christian Religion waxed so cold in Congo, that it wanted very
little of being utterly extinguished. But the King Don Aluaro (as it has been
told you) after all these mighty afflictions laid upon him by the hand of God,
for the punishment of the sins which he had committed against Religion, had
acknowledged his error, and became a good Christian, cherishing the
Portingals, whom he called his Sons, The K. sends new Ambassadors into
Portingall for mo priests
and doing them all the pleasure he could. Especially and above all things
he ceased not, still to send new Ambassadors into Portingall, with earnest
request that he might have more Priests, and such as were skilful in the holy
Scriptures to maintain the Catholic Faith, which was now almost utterly
forgotten in that Realm, only for want of religious persons, that should
teach the people and administer the Sacraments, and not for any fault of their
good wills: for they were meruellously well inclined and affected to the Holy
Faith.

After that the aforesaid Captain was arrived in Portingall, The Portingal K.
delayeth to send mo Priests.
and had presented the requests of the King of Congo to his King, (who was
also but a young man) he had none other answer from him but words and
promises, that he would have a care of the matter that was demanded: but in the
mean while he provided neither Priests, nor Divines to be sent for Congo.
Whereupon the King of Congo dispatched again another principal Ambassador,
being his kinseman, called Don Sebastiano Aluarez, The King of Congo sends
Don Sebastiano Aluarez to entreat for Priests, and to redeem certain of his
nobility that were in Saint Thomas Isle, and in Portingall.
together with a Portingall, to bear him company and entreat for more
Priests, and withal to redeem certain slaves borne in Congo, that were in
the Isle of S. Thomas and in Portingall, and were sold upon mere necessity,
as we have told you before. Some of them would needs remain still in
voluntary servitude, and many were raunsomed and brought home into their
Country. By whose good labor and means, and especially by the paineful
industry of such as were Lords, and borne of noble blood, (for some there were
of that dignity among them,) the King of Congo restored the Christian
Religion, which was almost lost: and some of them he used for Counselors, and
Officers of the Realm, as men that were well practiced and experienced in the
world, by reason of this their long captivity. To this Ambassador, the King
gave a gracious answer, and told him that he should be satisfied according
to his request: Don Sebastiano was feign to return into Congo without any
Priests.
But yet for all that, he was feign to return home again into Congo, without
any Priests or Religious persons to go with him.

Three years after, Antonio de gli Oua sent by the Portingall King to be
Bishop of S. Thomas, and Congo.
the King Don Sebastiano dispatched a certain Bishop (called Don Antonio de
gli Oua, being a Castilian borne) principally to the Islande of S. Thomas: but
withal he gave him also a commission to visit the kingdom of Congo: who
being arrived at S. Thomas, fell at jar with the Captain there, and so
sailed into Congo, where he was also persecuted by the said Captain and his
friends that he had there: He is persecuted by the Captain of S. Thomas
For they informed the King, that he was an ambitious man, of a haughty
spirit, and very obstinate, and thereby did utterly discredit him with the
King and all his Court: Whereupon being induced thereunto by these accusations,
He is honorably received by the K. of Congo.
the King forbad him at the first to enter within his Realm, but afterward
he received him with great honor, and sent his son to entertain him, and to
accompany him to the City. There he stayed about eight months, and then
departed again, somewhat before the King of Portingall passed into Africa, and
leaft behind him in Congo, two Friars, and four Priests. Don Sebastian K. of
Portingal overthrown in Africa, and Don Henrico the Cardinal succeeds.
The Bishop being thus gone, and the King overthrown in Africa, there was
exalted to the Crown of Portingall, Don Henrico the Cardinal, to whom the
King of Congo did write, with great instaunce, and earnest request; that he
would send him some religious persons, and Preachers: but he could obtain
nothing at his hands, because the Cardinal lived but a short time in that
Government.

After Don Henrico succeeded Phillip King of Castile, Philip K. of Spain
succeeds the Cardinal* K. Philip sends Sebastiano di Costa to Congo to
signify his arrival to the Crown of Portingall.
who sent aduertisementes to the Captain of Saint Thomas, that he was invested
in the Crown of Portingall, and letters also to the King of Congo, to the same
effect. Whereupon the Captain did presently dispatch one Sebastiano di Costa,
that with the title of Ambassador, should carry these news and letters unto
the said King. When these letters were presented, and all complementes
performed, The King of Congo offers K. Philip of Spain the discovery of the
Metal mines in Congo, with request for Priests.
the king of Congo returned him again to the Court to king Phillip, with
answer of his letters, and therein proffered to discover unto him the metal
mines, which heretofore had been concealed from all the other kings his
predecessors, and withal sent him diverse trialles of them: Beseeching him
especially with all affectionate entreatie, that (as soon as possibly he
could) he would furnish him with some store of Priests: declaring also unto
him the miserable state and condition, whereinto his people were fallen, Costa
dies by the way, and his message known by letters that were found.
by reason of the troubles that had happened about the Christian Religion. But
Costa died by the way, the vessel wherein he sailed being cast away upon the
shore of Portingall, and every man drowned that was in it: and the naughty
news were known by the contents of the Letters, that were found in a little
chest, which was driven on land by the waves of the sea: and by a brief note
of such Commissions, as he had in charge to deliver to the king. The King of
Congo sends Odoardo Lopez to the King of Spain, and to the Pope with letters
of credence, and instructions.
When the king of Congo heard of this accident, he did not cease, but still
continued and perseuered in his godly purpose, and would not suffer
Christianity to be utterly extinguiwed in his Kingdom, as it was very likely
to be. And therefore he determined yet once again to send a new Ambassador of
his own to the King of Spain. But forasmuch as there arose some difficulties
and differences among some Lords of the Court, that desired this honor, the
king because he would not displease any of them, by preferring one of them
before another, made choice of one Odoardo Lopez a Portingall borne, from whose
mouth Pigafetta took this present report, and put it in writing. This man had
dwelt now a good time in those Regions, and was well experienced in the
affairs of the world, and being by good chance at that time in the Court, he
was thus employed with the good favor and countenance of the king: who
delivered unto him in writing very ample instructions, for all matters whereof
he was to treat, as well with his Catholic Majesty in Spain, as also with
his Holiness at Rome: together with very earnest letters of credence, and
authority, and commodity to them both, and safe conductes, and exemptions in
all liberties, both within and without, besides his effectual recommendations
of him to all other Christian Princes, with all such other privileges and
declarations, that might show how dearly the king esteemed his person, as to an
Ambassador in such causes appertains.

The sum of his Embassage was this: The Embasage of Odoardo Lopez to the K.
of Spain
That he should present his Letters to the King Don Phillip, and at large
discourse unto him the state, wherein the kingdom of Congo stood touching
matter of Religion, by the reason of the former wars, and scarcity of
Priests, and thereupon request his Majesty to provide him a competent number
of Confessors, and Preachers, that might be sufficient to maintain the
Gospel in those remote Countries, being but lately converted to Christianity.
Moreover that he should show unto him the sundry trialles of Mettalles, which
he had made, and many other matters, which were worthy to be known: and
withal that he should proffer unto him in his name, free and liberal traffic
of them, which heretofore was ever denied to his Predecessors. His Embassage to
the Pope.
Touching the Pope, That he should likewise on his behalf kiss his feet,
deliver unto him his letters, and recount the miserable trouble and detriment
that his people had suffered for the Christian Faith. That he should reco^mend
those poor souls to his Holiness, and beseech him as the Universal Father of
all Christians, to have compassion upon so many faithful persons, who because
they had no Priests to deliver the holy Faith unto them, and to administer the
wholesome Sacraments, were by little and little falling into everlasting
perdition. And being thus dispatched, he departed from the Court, and went
about certain services for the King, wherein he spent about eight Months: So
that in January, being then Summer time in Congo, he embarked himself in a
vessel of a hundred Tun burden, which was bound with her lading for Lisbone.

Now as he sailed, he came to the sea of the Islands of Cape Verde, Odoardo
Lopez at the Islandes of Cape Verde.
where the vessel being somewhat old, began to take in much water, at a leake
that was open in the foreship. So that the wind blowing very lustely and
strongely before, and the Sailors being not able either to reach the Islandes
aforesaid, or to gain the firm land of Africa, much less (though they
would never so feign) to follow on their voyage, by sailing on with the half
ship, and to strain the vessel that leaked so much, the Pilot thought it
better to turn his course, and taking the wind in the poope, to go and save
themselves in the Islandes of Noua Hispania. And so after terrible storms, and
extreme dangers of drowning, and of perishing with hunger for want of all
kind of meat, The Isle of Cubagoa.
they arrived with much adoo at a little Islande, called Cubagoa, and situate
over against the Isle of Saint Margarete, The Isle of S. Margarete.
where they fish for Pearls. From thence, when they had in some haste amended
their ship, and somewhat refreshed themselves, they sailed with a short cut
to the firm land, and took haven in a Port called Cumana, or (as it is
called by another name) The new kingdom of Granado in the West Indies. Cumana
or the new kingdom of Granada in the West Indies The ship sunk in the haven.
This battered and wetherbeaten vessel was no sooner arrived in this safe
harbor, but it sunk presently to the bottom, but the persons that were in
her were all saved, although afterward they fell sick to the death by reason
of the great grief, which they had endured in hunger, in thirst, and in want
of all other sustenance, and chiefly by the horrible storms of that
tempestuous Ocean.

While the foresaid Ambassador endeavored in this place to recover his
former health, Odoardo Lopez stays in Cumana a year and a half.
the company of ships which is called La Flotta, that is to say, the Fleet,
and uses every year to sail from the coast for Castile, departed from
thence, so that he was constrained to stay for a new Navy, and so consumed a
whole year and a half without doing any good. In this mean time the King of
Congo, having never received any tydinges of this his Ambassador Odoardo, but
accounting him for dead, and not knowing that he was driven by tempest into the
West Indies, continued still constant in his former purpose, to procure some
remedy for Christianity in his kingdom. The King of Congo sends Don Piedro
Antonio, and Gaspar Diaz a Portingal, with the same Embassage which he sent by
Lopez.
And therefore he sent another Ambassador, with the self same commandments,
called Don Piedro Antonio the second person in all his Realm, and with him
one Gasparo Diaz, a Portingall borne, a principal man and very rich, and an
ancient inhabitant in that Country, to the end that he should accompany
the said Don Piedro, and suffer him to want nothing, and in any case join his
good help to procure, that the request, which he hoped to obtain of the king
of Spain, might be fully effected: with a further express commandment, that
if they did meet with the said Signor Odoardo, they should deal in their
business with his advise and counsel. Don Piedro taken by the English, and by
misfortune drowned, and his son with him.
But an unfortunate end had this Ambassador, for he was taken at sea by
Englishmen, and his ship also, which being drawn toward England, when it
was near unto the Coast, by great misfortune it ran athwart the shore, ane
there Don Piedro Antonio and his son were both drowned: but the Portingal and
some few others with him escaped, Gaspar Diaz escaped and arrived in Spain:
but returned into Congo without doing any thing at all.
and arrived in Spain, at such time as the said Odoardo was come to the Court,
and had entered upon the charge of his Embassage. And therefore this Gasparo
wrote to Odoardo, that he was minded to return home into Congo, and not to
go to the Court at all: whether it were for the death of the Cardinal, or for
any other respect, I cannot tell, but home he returned in deed, as he said he
would.

In the time that our Signor Odoardo remained in the West India, which is
situate under the same sky, and under the same climate, and of the same
temperature of air, that Congo is subject unto: he noted that the color of
the skins of the inhabitants in both countries was far different: The
blacknes of a man's skin, is not caused by the heat of the sun.
For in Congo, they are generally and for the most part black, and in India
almost white, that is to say, of a middle color, between white and black,
which the Spaniardes call Mulato, Brown, or Darke-Tawney. Whereby he would
signify, that it is not caused by the Sun, as it has been recorded of long
time, but that it comes of nature it self, who works it by some secreat
reason, which never yet to this day, either by ancient Philosopher, or new
writer, has been fully set down or understood.

When he had recovered his health, Odoardo Lopez sayleth to San Domingo.
he sailed to the Port of the City of San Domingo in the Island of
Hispaniola, that there at the first passage he might take some ship that went
toward Castilia: and by good chance he found a Portingall vessel, among the
rest of the Navy, which was minded to join with the Fleet of ships, that
passed from the firm land to Castilia, and so to go in good company and
better safety. Lopez in a Portingal ship comes with the fleet to Terzera,
to S. Lucar, to Siuile, and so into Portingal.
All these ships being thus united together, they arrived by the help of a
very good wind, at Terzera, which is one of the Islandes called Azores, that
is to say, the Sparre-Haukes. and from thence to San Lucar di Barameda, which
is a haven in the mouth of the River Guadalchibir, and so to Siuile: from
whence he took his journey into Portingall to see his friends, and to furnish
himself with all things necessary for his business, Lopez goes to the
Spanish Court in Madrill.
and at the last he rode to the Court, which was at that time in Madrill.
There he was courteously entertained by his Catholic Majesty, to whom he
propounded the contents of his Commissions. But diverse great accidents there
happened, and many difficulties that crossed him, and altogether hindered the
course of those affairs, which he had to accomplish in the name of the King
of Congo. For first he heard the dolorous news of the Kings death, Aluaro
King of Congo dies
that sent him on this message: and then the King Don Philip was wholly busied
about the conquest of England, K. Philip busied about the conquest of England.
so that this business went nothing forwards, but was delayed from time to
time: neither did he see any means of dispatch, but rather he was given to
understand, that for that time they could not intend to harken unto him.

Now the foresaid Odoardo, being afflicted with so many adversities, Odoardo
Lopez changes his kind of profession.
began to call to mind the innumerable perilles that he had passed, and the
deadly infirmity wherewith he was plagued, after that long, and horrible
navigations. He saw that he was sometimes cast down, and sometimes exalted: and
knew that in this world there was none other rest or quiet, but in God
Almighty. He was greatly oppressed with heart grief, which he did daily and
continually endure, because he could not relieve the necessities wherewith the
people of Congo were vexed and troubled, and manifestly perceived, that those
poor souls incurred the extreme danger of falling into the utter darkness
of hell. He considered the great expenses, that every day must be defrayed at
the Court for the maintenance of himself and his family. Lastly, he was
wholly deprived of all hope, that he should ever be able to bring that matter
to effect, which the king of Congo had imposed upon him. And therefore he made
choice of another course, that was not only profitable for him, but also most
wholesome for his soul. For the good Angel had touched his heart, and caused
him with a manly courage to abandon the Sword, and to take the Cross upon him:
and thereupon he renounced the world with all the deceitful pomp and glory
thereof; and in Madrill apparelled himself in a graye course habit, Lopez
goes to Rome* where he was kindly entertained by the Pope.
and so went to Rome, to declare to Sixtus Quintus the Pope the tenor and
Commission of his Embassage, because he would not altogether neglect the good
intent and meaning of the King, that had sent him, although he were now
descended into a better life. He was kindly welcomed and received by his
Holiness, to whom he discoursed the miserable estate, wherein the Christian
people of the Realm of Congo did stand, for want of the worship and service of
God, and also the small number of Priests, that were there to instruct them in
the doctrine of the Gospel, and to deliver unto them the Sacraments of the
Church, especially the multitude in that country being (as it were)
innumerable, that every day resorted together, to be baptized, instructed,
confessed and communicated. Moreover he made a vow and resolved in his mind,
The vow of Odoardo Lopez to erect a Seminary, and an Hospital in Congo.
that with such store of wealth, as God had blessed him withal in Congo (which
was not very small) he would build a house, wherein for the service of God,
there should dwell certain learned men, and sundry Priests, to instruct the
youth of those Countries in all good languages, and in the arts liberal, and in
the doctrine of the Gospel, and in the mysteries of our salvation. Out of
which house, as it were out of a holy School, there might come forth from time
to time, many learned men and well studied in the law of God, that should be
able in their own natural Country tongue, to awaken and raise again the
Faith of Christ, which was now asleep, and dried up in those Regions: and
thereby in process of time there would spring up many fruits of blessing, and
vigilant souls in the Christian Faith. Hereunto he meant also to add an
Hospital, that might be a recourse and harbor for Gods poor, which coming and
sailing out of strange Countries should have relief and entertainment in that
Hostelry, and there be cured and restored of their infirmities and necessities.
With this purpose therefore he went to Rome, to obtain of his holiness a
license to erect this Seminary and Hospital, and to beseech him also that he
would grant him Iubilies, Indulgences, and other Dispensations, that for such
Christian and wholesome works are requisite, especially to the use and benefit of
those Countries, which are so remote from Christendom. He presented himself
to the Pope, and delivered unto him his letters of credence, and then declared
unto him at large the tenor of his Commissions, The Pope remitteth the whole
matter to the K. of Spain.
wherein he had a gracious audience. But when the Pope did understand that the
kingdom of Congo belonged to the king of Spain, he remitted that matter
wholly unto him.

Chap. 7. Of the Court of the King of Congo. Of the apparel of that people
before they became Christians and after. Of the Kings table, and manner of his
Court.
Hitherto we have manifestly discovered the beginning of Christian Religion in
Congo, The ancient apparel of the King of Congo and his Courtiers.
and consequently the strange accidents that happened therein. And now it is
time to discourse and lay open the manners and fashions of that Court, and
other customs and conditions appertayning to that Realm. In ancient time
this King and his Courtiers were apparelled with certain cloth made of the
Palm Tree, (as we have told you before) wherewith they covered themselves
from the girdlesteed downewardes, and girded the same straight unto them with
certain girdles made of the same stuff, very fair and well wrought. They
used also to hang before them, like an apron, certain delicate and dainty
skins, of little Tygres, of Ciuet-Cattes, of Sabelles, of Marternes, and of
such like creatures for an ornament: and for a more glorious pomp and show,
they did wear upon their shoulders a certain cape like a Whoode. Upon their
bare skin they had a certain round garment like a Rotchet, which they call
Incutto, reaching down to their knees, made after the manner of a net, but the
stuff of it was very fine cloth of the said Palm Tree, and at the skirtes
there hung a number of threede-tasselles, that made a very gallant show. These
Rotchets were turned up again, and tucked upon their right shoulder, that they
might be the more at liberty on that hand. Upon that shoulder also they had
the tail of a Zebra, fastened with a handle, which they used for a kind of
bravery, according to the most ancient custom of those parts. On their
heads they wore cappes of yellow and read color, square above and very
little, so that they scarcely covered the tops of their heads, and worn
rather for a pomp and a vanity, then to keep them either from the air or
from the Sun. The most part of them went vnshodde: but the King and some of
the great Lords did wear certain shoes of the old fashion, such as are to
be seen in the ancient Images of the Romans, and these were made also of the
wood of the Palm Tree. The ancient apparel of the maaner sort.
The poorer sort and the common people were apparelled from their middle
downewardes, after the same manner, but the cloth was courser: and the rest of
their body all naked. The women used three kinds of trauerses, or (as it
were) aprons: beneath their girdlesteed. One was very long and reached to their
heels: the second shorter then that, and the third shorter then both the
other, with fringes about them, and every one of these three was fastened about
their middle, and open before. From their breasts downewardes, they had
another garment, like a kind of dublet or iacket, that reached but to their
girdle: and over their shoulders a certain cloak. All these several
garments were made of the same cloth of the Palm Tree. They were accustomed
to go with their faces uncovered, and a little cappe on the head, like a man's
cappe. The meaner sort of weomen were apparelled after the same manner, but
their cloth was courser: Their Maid-seruantes and the basest kind of women were
likewise attyred from the girdle downward, and all the rest of the body naked.

But after that this kingdom had received the Christian Faith, Their new kind
of apparel.
the great Lords of the Court began to apparel themselves after the manner
of the Portingalles, in wearing cloakes, Spanish Capes, and Tabards or wide
Iackets of Scarlet, and cloth of Silk, every man according to his wealth and
ability. Upon their heads they had hats, or caps, and upon their feet Moyls or
Pantoffles, of Velvet and of Leather, and buskins after the Portingall fashion,
and long Rapiers by their sides. The common people, that are not able to make
their apparel after that manner do keep their old custom. The women also
go after the Portingall fashion, saving that they wear no cloakes, but upon
their heads they have certain veyles, and upon their veyles black velvet
cappes, garnished with iewelles, and chains of gold about their their necks.
But the poorer sort keep the old fashion: for only the Ladies of the Court
do bedecke themselves in such manner as we have told you.

After the King himself was converted to the Christian Religion, The Court of
Congo now imitateth the Court of Portingall.
he conformed his Court in a certain sort after the manner of the King of
Portingall. And first for his service at the table when he dines or suppeth
openly in public, there is a Throne of Estate erected with three steps,
covered all over with Indian Tapistrie, and thereupon is placed a Table, with a
chair of Crimzen Velvet, adorned with bosses and nails of Gold. He always
feeds alone by himself, neither does any man ever sit at his table, but the
Princes stand about him with their heads covered. He has a Cupborde of Plate
of Gold and Silver, and one that takes assay of his meat and drink. He
maintains a guarde of the Anzichi, and of other nations, that keep about his
palace, furnished with such weapons as are above mentioned: and when it
pleases him to go abroad, they sound their great instruments, which may*
be heard about five or six miles, and so signify that the King is going
forth. All his Lords do accompany him, and likewise the Portingalles, in whom
he reposeth a singular trust: but very seldom it is that he goes out of his
palace.

Twice in a week he gives audience publicly, yet no man speaks unto him
but his Lords. The custom; and laws of Congo.
And because there are none, that have any goods or lands of their own, but
all belongs to the Crown, there are but few suites or quarelles among them,
saving peradventure about some words. They use no writing at all in the Congo
tongue. In cases criminal they proceed but slenderly, for they do very
hardely and seldom condemn any man to death. If there be any riot or
enormitie committed against the Portingals by the Moci-Conghi, (for so are the
inhabitants of the Realm of Congo called in their own language,) they are
judged by the laws of Portingall. And if any mischief be found in any of
them, the king confineth the malefactor into some desert Island: for he
thinks it to be a greater punishmente to banish him in this sort, to the
end he may do penance for his sins, then at one blow to execute him. And if
it so happen that those which are thus chastized, do live ten or twelve
years, the King uses to pardon them, if they be of any consideration at all,
and does employ them in the service of the State, as persons that have been
tamed and well schooled, and accustomed to suffer any hardenesse. In Civil
disagreements there is an order, that if a Portingall have any suite against a
Moci-Congo, he goes to the Judge of Congo: but if a Moci-Congo do impleade a
Portingall, he cites him before the Consul or Judge of the Portingalles: for
the King has granted unto them one of their own nation to be Judge in that
country. In their bargains between them and the Portingalles, they use no
writings nor other instruments of bills or bonds, but dispatch their
business only by word and witness.

They keep no histories of their ancient Kings nor any memorial of the ages
past, because they cannot write. They measure their times generally by the
Moons. They know not the hours of the day nor of the night: but they use to
say, In the time of such a man such a thing happened. They reckon the distances
of countries not by miles or by any such measure, but by the iourneyes and
travel of men, that go from one place to another, eyether laden or unloaded.

Touching their assembling together at feasts, Their manner of assemblies.
or other meetinges of joy, as for example, when they are married, Their
instruments of Music.
they sing Verses and Ballades of Love, and play upon certain Lutes that are
made after a strange fashion. For in the hollow part and in the neck they
are somewhat like unto our Lutes, but for the flat side, (where we use to carue
a Rose, or a Rundell to let the sound go inward) that is made not of wood,
but of a skin, as thin as a bladder, and the stringes are made of hayres,
which they draw out of the Elephantes tail, and are very strong and bright:
and of certain threedes made of the wood of Palm Tree, which from the
bottom of the instrument do reach and ascend to the top of the handle, and
are tied every one of them to his several ringe. For toward the neck or
handle of this Lute, there are certain rings placed some higher and some
lower, whereat there hang diverse plates of Iron and Silver, which are very
thin, and in bigness different one from another, according to the proportion
of the instrument. These ringes do make a sound of sundry tunes, according
to the striking of the stringes. For the stringes when they are stricken, do
cause the rings to shake, and then do the plates that hang at them, help them
to utter a certain mingled and confused noise. Those that play upon this
Instrument, do tune the strings in good proportion, and strike them with their
fingers, like a Harp, but without any quill very cunningly: so that they make
thereby (I cannot tell whether I should call it a melody or no, but) such a
sound as pleases and delights their senses well enough. Besides all this
(which is a thing very admirable) by this instrument they do utter they
conceits of their minds, and do understand one another so plainly, that
every thing almost which may be explaned with the tongue, they can declare with
their hand in touching and striking this instrument. To the sound thereof
they do dance in good measure with their feet, and follow the just time of that
music with clapping the palms of their hands one against the other. They
have also in the Court, Flutes and Pipes, which they sound very artificially,
and according to the sound they dance and move their feet, as it were in a
Moresco, with great gravity and sobriety. The common people do use little
Rattles, and Pipes, and other instruments, that make a more harsh and rude
sound, then the Court-instruments do.

In this kingdom, Their Physic.
when any are sick, they take nothing but natural physic, as Herbs, and
Trees, and the barks of Trees, and Oils, and Waters and Stones, such as
Mother Nature has taught them. The Ague is the most common disease that
reigns among them: and plagueth them in Winter by reason of the continual
rain, that brings heat and moisture with it more then in Summer, and besides
that the sickness which here we call the French disease, and Chitangas in the
Congo tongue, is not there so dangerous and so hard to be cured, as it is in
our Countries.

They heal the Ague with the poulder of a wood, Their medicine for an Ague.
called Sandale, or Saunders, whereof there is both read and gray, which is
the wood of Aguila. This poulder being mingled with the oil of the
Palm Tree, and having anointed the body of the sick person two or three
times withal from the head to the foot, Their medicine for the headache, and
other griefs of the body, is letting of blood.
the party recouereth. When their head aketh, they let blood in the temples,
with certain little boxing horns: first by cutting the skin a little, and
then applying the Cornets thereunto, which with a suck of the mouth, will be
filled with blood: and this manner of letting blood is used also in Aegipt.
And so in any other part of a man's body, where there is any grief, Their
medicine for the French pocks.
they draw blood in this fashion and heal it. Likewise they cure the
infirmity called Chitangas, with the same unction of Saunders: whereof there
are two sorts, one read (as we told you) and that is called Tauila: the other
gray, and is called Chicongo: and this is best esteemed, for they will not
stick to give or sell a slave for a piece of it. Their Purgations.
They purge themselves with certain barks of trees, made into powder, and
taken in some drink: and they will work mightily and strongly. When they take
these purgations, they make no great account for going abroad into the air.
Curing of wounds.
Their wounds also they commonly cure with the juice of certain herbs, and
with the herbs themselves. And the said Signor Odoardo has affirmed unto me,
that he saw a slave, which was stabbed through with seven mortal wounds of
an Arrow, and was recovered whole and sound, only with the juice of certain
herbs, well known unto them by experience. So that this people is not
encumbred with a number of Phisicians, for Surgery, for Drugges, for Sirruppes,
for Electuaries, for Playsters, and such like Medicines, but simply do heal
and cure themselves with such natural Plants as grow in their own Country.
Whereof they have no great need neither: for living (as they do) under a
temperate clymate, and not ingorging themselves with much variety of meats to
please their appetites, nor surcharging their stomachs with wine, they are not
greatly troubled with those diseases, that commonly are engendered of meats and
drinks that remain undigested.

Chap. 8. Of the Countries, that are beyond the Kingdom of Congo toward the
Cape of Good-Hope: and of the River Nilus.
NOw that we have seen the Kingdom of Congo, and the conditions both of the
Country and people that dwell therein, and also of the nations thereunto
adjoining, it remains that we discourse a little further, and that with all
brevity, of the rest of Africa, toward the Cape of Good-Hope, all along the
Ocean, whereby they use to sail into India even as far as the red sea: and
then we will return back again into the Inlande, and treat of the River
Nilus, and of Preti-Gianni, and of all his kingdoms: to the end, that so
far, as our matter will bear, we may make a perfect relation of those
Regions, which hitherto have not so well and so rightly been conceived of every
man. Beyond the Kingdom of Congo, we have signified unto you, that there are
other countries belonging to the King of Angola, and beyond that toward the
Cape of Good-Hope, The kingdom of Matama.
a King called Matama, who rules over diverse Provinces, which are called
Quimbebe. This Realm (as we told you) from the first Lake and the confines of
Angola, contains all the rest of the country Southwardes, till you come to
the River of Brauagul, R. Brauagul* R. Magnice. The mountains of the Moon.
which springs out of the mountains of the Moon, and joins with the River
Magnice, and that springs out of the foresaid first Lake: These mountains
are divided by the Tropicke of Capricorn, toward the Pole Antarctike, and
beyond this Tropike lies all the Country and borders of the Cape of
Good-Hope, which are not ruled and governed by any one King, but by diverse and
sundry several Princes. In the midst between that Cape and the Tropike, are
the said Mountains of the Moon, so famous and so greatly renowned among the
ancient writers, who do assign them to be the original head and spring of
the River Nilus: which is very false and untrue, as the situation of the
country does plainly show, and as we a little hereafter will discover unto
you. This Country is full of high and rough mountains: it is very could, and
not habitable: It is frequented and haunted with a few persons that live after
the manner of the Arabians, under little cabbins in the open fields, and
apparelled with the skins of certain beasts. It is a savage and a rusticall
nation, without all faith and credit, neither will they suffer any strangers
among them. Their furniture is Bows and Arrows. They feed upon such fruits,
as the land breeds, and also upon the flesh of beasts.

Among these Mountains of the Moon, there is a Lake called Gale: The Lake Gale.
a very little one it is, and lies somewhat toward the West. Out of this
Lake there issues a River called Camissa, Camissa 1. The sweet River.
and by the Portingalles named The sweet River, which at the point of the Cape
of Good-Hope voydeth it self into the sea, in that very place that is termed
The False Cape. The False Cape.
For the ships of the Indies sailing that way, do first discover another
greater Cape, which is called The Cape of the Needles, and then afterward
this lesser Cape: The Cape of the Needles.
Whereupon they call it The False Cape, because it is hid and covered with
the true and great Cape. Between these two Capes or Promontories, there is the
distance of an hundred miles, containing the largeness and breadth of this
famous Cape: which being divided into two points, as it were into two horns,
it makes a Gulf, where sometimes the Portingall ships do take fresh water,
in the River that they call the Sweet River.

The inhabitants of this coast, which dwell between these two points, Another
note, That the color of black in men's skins does not proceed from the heat
of the Sun.
are of color black, although the Pole Antarctike in that place be in the
elevation of thirty and five degrees, which is a very strange thing: yea the
rude people that live among the most cold mountains of the Moon are black
also. This I write of purpose, to advise and move the Philosophers and such as
search the effects of nature, that they would fall into their deep
contemplation and speculation, and thereupon teach us, whether this black
color be occasioned by the Sun, or by any other secret and unknown cause:
Which question I for this time do mean to leave undecided.

Now forasmuch as this Promontory of Good-Hope, is the greatest Cape of all,
The Cape of Good-Hope very dangerous.
and stretches out into the Sea farther then any other in the whole universal
world, and is very dangerous to pass (as all Promontories are:) and for that
also the sea is there most terrible, and from the land there blow most
horrible winds, which cause that Ocean to be exceedingly tempestuous and
stormy, so that many Portingall ships of admirable burdens, have been cast
away therein: and lastly, because the ancient Historiographers did never know
it, no not so much as by hearesay, and it is not long ago since the King of
Portingalles Fleetes did first discover the same: It shall not be impertinent,
but rather a matter of great conuenience in this place to decipher the measure
thereof, and to make so manifest a declaration of it, as may serve also to
understand, how great the navigations is from Portingall into India, by
compassing the Coast of the Cape of Good-Hope only, almost the space of six
thousand miles, as a little hereafter it shall be showed unto you,

For from the River of Ferdinando Poo, where the said Cape begins to iut-out
into the sea, This is a Point of the Cape of Good-Hope.
as far as to the Point, which we call the Point of Needles, there is
contained upon the shore more then two thousand and 200. miles from the
North, to the South, and on the contrary side, from the said Point to the Cape
of Guarda-Fuy, right over against the Islande of Socotora, they reckon more
then three thousand and three hundred miles by the coast from the South to the
North. So that from Lisbone, compassing about the shoares of Africa, and all
the Cape of Good-Hope, unto the kingdom of Goa, there are more then fifteen
thousand miles. And from thence afterward to Malaca, and to China, and so
forwards, there remains so long a journey, that never yet in any time
hitherto has there been so great and so dangerous a navigations undertaken
and performed, as this of the Portingalles, neither with great vessels nor
with small. Why it is called the Cape of Good-Hope.
It is called the Cape of Good-Hope, because all such as sail that way, as well
in going forth, as in returning home, do especially and principally aim at
this mark, that they may pass and get beyond this Promontorie; which when
they have done, they account themselves to be out of all danger, and as it
were to have performed their journey. And upon this their general desire, they
gave it the name of the Cape of Good-Hope.

Now to return to our purpose, and to talk further of the Coast of Africa,
beyond the Cape or Point of the Needelles, there are many competent
harboroughes and havens, Seno Formoso. Seno del Lago.
the principal whereof is Seno Formoso, The fair Bay: and Seno del Lago, The
Bay of the Lake: For there the sea makes a certain Gulf, wherein are sundry
Islandes and Ports: and somewhat beyond there runs into the sea the River
of S. Christopher, River of Saint Christopher.
and at the mouth thereof there lie three pretty Islettes. A little further
forwards, the Coast runs all along by a Country, Terra do Nadal.
which the Portingalles call Terra do Natal, the Land of the Nativity, because
it was first discovered at Christmasse: Capo della Pescheria.
and so reaches to the Cape called Della Pescheria. Between which Cape and
the River Magnice, R. Magnice. The Kingdom of Buttua.
within the Land is the Kingdom of Buttua. whose Territories are from the
roots or bottom of the mountains of the Moon, until you come to the river
Magnice toward the North, The Kingdom of Monomotapa R. Brauagul.
where the country of Monomotapa stands, and westwardes from the River
Brauagul toward the sea all along the banks of the River Magnice. Store of
Gold Mines.
In this kingdom there are many mines of Gold, and a people that is of the
same qualities and conditions, that the people of Monomotapa is, as hereafter
shall be showed unto you. And so going along the shores of the Ocean, you come
to the River Magnice, which lies in the very entrance of the Kingdom of
Sofala, and the Empire of Monomotapa.

Chap. 9. Of the Kingdom of Sofala.
THis Kingdom begins at the River Magnice, which springs out of the first
Lake of Nilus, The original of the River Magnice.
and conueyeth it self into the sea in the midst of the Bay, between the
point Pescheria and the Cape called Capo delle Correnti, situate in twenty and
three degrees and a half of the Pole Antarctik under the Tropike of
Capricorn. With this River near unto the sea, Three Rivers run into Magnice.
there join three other notable rivers, the principal whereof is by the
Portingalles called Saint Christophers, because upon the day of that Saints
feast it was first discovered, 1. R. Nagoa.
but by the inhabitants it is named Nagoa. 2. R. Margues.
The second took the name of one Lorenzo Margues, that first found it. These
two Rivers do spring originally from the mountains of the Moon, so greatly
renowned among the ancient writers, but by the people of the country they are
called Toroa: out of which Mountains they did think that famous Nilus took
also his beginning: but they were utterly deceived. For (as we have already
told you) the first Lake arises not out of those Mountains, Nilus arises
not out of the Mountains of the Moon.
but lies a great way distant from it: and between it and them is there a
very great and a huge low plain. Besides that, the streams that flow from the
said mountains do run toward the East, and bestow their waters upon other
great Rivers, so that it is not possible for them to pass into the foresaid
Lake, much less into Nilus, considering especially that the River Magnice
springs out of that first Lake, and by a far different course from the
course of Nilus, runs toward the East, and so joins it self with the two
Rivers aforesaid. 3. R. Arroe.
The third is called Arroe, and arises on another side out of the Mountains
of the Gold-Mines of Monomotapa: and in some places of this River there are
found some small pieces of Gold among the sand. These three Rivers enter into
the great Magnice near unto the sea, and all four together do make there a
great water, in a very large channel, and so discharges it self into the
Ocean. From the mouth of this river all along the sea coast, The R. of Cuama.
stretches the kingdom of Sofala unto the River Cuama, which is so called of
a certain castle or fortress that carries the same name, and is possessed by
Mahometans and Pagans: but the Portingalles call it, The mouths of Cuama:
because at the entry into the sea, this river divides it self into seven
mouths, where there are five special Islandes, besides diverse others that
lie up the river, all very full and well peopled with Pagans. This Cuama comes
out of the same Lake, and from the same springs from whence Nilus flows. And
thus the Kingdom of Sofala is comprised within the said two Rivers, Magnice
and Cuama upon the sea coast. The kingdom of Sofala.
It is but a small Kingdom, and has but few howses or towns in it: The chief
and principal head whereof, is an Islande that lies in the river called
Sofala, which gives the name to all the whole Country. It is inhabited by
Mahometans, and the King himself is of the same sect, and yields obedience
to the Crown of Portingall, because he will not be subject to the Empire of
Monomotapa. And thereupon the Portingalles there do keep a Forte in the mouth
of the river Cuama, and do trade in those Countries for Gold, and Iuory, and
Amber, which is found upon that Coast, The commodities of Sofala Gold, Iuory
and Amber.
and good store of slaves, and in steed thereof they leave behind them
Cotton-Cloth, and Silks that are brought from Cambaia, and is the common
apparel of those people. The Inhabitants of Sofala
The Mahometans that at this present do inhabit those Countries are not
naturally borne there, but before the Portingals came into those quarters, they
trafficked thither in small barks from the Coast of Arabia Foelix. And when
the Portingalles had conquered that Realm, the Mahometans stayed there still,
and now they are become neither utter Pagans, nor holding of the sect of
Mahomet.

From the shoars and Coast, that lies between the two foresaid rivers of
Magnice and Cuama, The Empire of Monomotapa full of Gold-Mines.
within the land spreads the Empire of Monomotapa, where there is very great
store of Mines of Gold, which is carried from thence into all the regions
thereaboutes, and into Sofala, and into the other parts of Africa. And some
there be that will say, that Salomons Gold, Salomons Gold.
which he had for the Temple of Jerusalem, was brought by sea out of these
Countries. A thing in truth not very unlikely: For in the Countries of
Monomotapa, there do remain to this day many ancient buildings of great work
and singular Architecture, of Stone, of Lime, and of Timber, the like whereof
are not to be seen in all the Provinces adjoining.

The Empire of Monomotapa is very great, and for people infinite. The people of
Monomotapa.
They are Gentiles and Pagans, of color black, very courageous in war, of a
middle stature, and swift of foot. There are many Kings, that are vassalles
and subjects to Monomotapa, who do oftentimes rebel and make war against
him. Their weapons are bows and arrows, and light darts. This Emperor
maintayneth many Armies in several Provinces, The K. of Monomotapa maintains
many Armies.
divided into Legions, according to the use and custom of the Romans. For
being so great a Lord as he is, he must of necessity be in continual war,
for the maintenance of his estate. And among all the rest of his soldiers, the
most valorous in name are his Legions of women, whom he esteems very highly,
and accounts them as the very sinews and strength of his military forces.
These women do burn their leaft pappes with fire, Left Handed Amazons.
because they should be no hinderaunce unto them in their shooting, after the
use and manner of the ancient Amazones, that are so greatly celebrated by the
Historiographers of former profane memories. For their weapons they practice
bows and arrows: They are very quick and swift, lively and courageous, very
cunning in shooting, but especially and above all venturous and constant in
fight. In their battelles they use a warlike kind of craft and subtlety: For
they have a custom to make a show that they would fly and run away, as
though they were vanquished and discomfited, but they will diverse times turn
themselves back, and vex their enemies mightily with the shot of their
arrows. And when they see their adversaries so greedy of the victory, that
they begin to dispearse and scatter themselves, then will they suddenly turn
again upon them, and with great courage and fiercenes make a cruel slaughter
of them. So that partly with their swiftnes, and partly with their deceitful
wiles and other cunning shifts of war, they are greatly feared in all those
parts. They do enjoy by the Kings good favor certain Countries where they
dwell alone by themselves: and sometimes they choose certain men at their own
pleasure, with whom they do keep company for generations sake: So that if
they do bring forth Male-children, they send them home to their fathers
housen: but if they be female, they reserve them to themselves, and breed them
in the exercise of warfare.

The Empire of this Monomotapa lies (as it were) in an Islande, The situation
of the Empire of Monomotapa.
which is made by the Seacoast, by the River Magnice, by a piece of the Lake
from whence Magnice flows, and by the River Cuama. It bordereth toward the
South upon the Lords of the Cape of Good-Hope before mentioned, and Northwarde
upon the Empire of Moenemugi, as by and by shall be showed unto you.

But now returning to our former purpose, that is to say, The kingdom of
Angoscia.
to run forwards upon the seacoast, after you have passed over some part
of the River Cuama, there is a certain little Kingdom upon the sea called
Angoscia, which takes the name of certain Islandes there so called and lie
directly against it. It is inhabited with the like people, both Mahometans and
Gentiles, as the Kingdom of Sofala is. Marchaunts they are, and in small
vessels do traffic along that coast, with the same wares and commodities,
wherewith the people of Sofala do trade.

A little beyond, The kingdom of Mozambique.
suddenly starteth up in sight the Kingdom of Mozambique, situate in fourteen
degrees and a half toward the South, and takes his name of three Islands,
R. Meghincate
that lie in the mouth of the River Meghincate, where there is a great haven
and a safe, and able to receive all manner of ships. The Realm is but small,
and yet abounds in all kind of victuailes. It is the common landing place for
all vessels that sail from Portingall, and from India into that Country. In
one of these Isles, which is the chief and principal, called Mozambique, and
gives name to all the rest, as also to the whole kingdom, The Island of
Mozambique.
and the haven aforesaid, wherein there is erected a Fortress, guarded with a
garrison of Portingalles, whereupon all the other Fortresses that are on that
Coast do depend, and from whence they fetch all their provision: all the
Armadas and Fleetes that sail from Portingall to the Indies, if they cannot
finish and perform their voyage, will go and winter (I say) in this Island of
Mozambique: and those that travel out of India to Europe, are constrained of
necessity to touch at Mozambique, to furnish themselves with victuailes. This
Island, when the Portingalles discovered India, was the first place, where they
learned the language of the Indians, and provided themselves of Pilots to
direct them in their course. The inhabitants of Mozambique.
The people of this kingdom are Gentiles: Rusticall and rude they be and of
color black. They go all naked. They are valiant and strong Archers, and
cunning Fishers with all kind of hooks.

As you go on forwards upon the foresaid coasts, there is another Islande
called Quiloa, The kingdom of Quiloa.
in quantity not great, but in excellency singular: For it is situate in a
very cool and fresh air: It is replenished with trees that are always
green, and affords all variety of victuailes. It lies at the mouth of the
River Coauo, which springs out of the same Lake from whence Nilus flows,
and so runs about sixty miles in length, till it comes near to the sea,
and there it has a mighty stream, and in the very mouth of it makes a great
Islande, which is peopled with Mahometans and Idolaters, and a little beyond
that toward the Coast on the West you may see the said Island of Quiloa. This
Islande is inhabited with Mahometans also, The Island of Quiloa, and the
inhabitants thereof.
which are of color something whitish. They are well apparelled, and trimly
adorned with cloth of silk and Cotton: Their women do use ornaments of Gold,
and Iewelles about their hands and their necks, and have good store of
household stuff made of silver. They are not altogether so black as the men
are: and in their limbs they are very well proportioned. Their houses are made
of Stone, and Lime, and Timber, very well wrought and of good architecture,
with gardens and orchardes full of herbs and sundry fruits. Of this Islande
the whole Kingdom took the name, which upon the Coast extends it self
from Capo Delgado, (the Cape Delicate, that bordereth Mozambique and Quiloa,)
and is situate in nine degrees toward the South, and from thence it runs
out unto the aforesaid River of Coauo. In old time the Kingdom of Quiloa was
the chiefest of all the Principalities there adjoining, and stood near to the
sea: but when the Portingalles arrived in those countries, the King trusted so
much to himself, that he thought he was able with his own forces not only to
defend himself against them, but also to drive them from those places which
they had already surprised. The King of Quiloa overthrown by the Portingals,
and driven out of the Island.
Howbeit the matter fell out quite contrary. For when it came to weapons, he
was utterly overthrown and discomfited by the Portingals, and so fled away.
But they took and possessed the Island, and enriched themselves with the great
spoils and booties that they found therein. They erected there also a
Fortress, which was afterward pulled down by the commandment of the King of
Portingall, because he thought it not necessary, considering that there were
others sufficient enough for that Coast.

And here we may not leave behind us the Isle of S. Laurence, The commendation
of the Isle of S. Laurence.
so called by the Portingalles, because they did first discover it upon that
Martyrs feast day. It is so great, Historia della China. Part. 3. Cap. vltimo.
La grand' Isola di S. Lorenzo lunga 275. leghe and larga 90. id est,
that it contains in length almost a thousand miles, and stands right over
against the coast which we have described, beginning directly at the mouths of
the River Magnice, which are in twenty and six degrees of the South, and so
going forwards to the North, it ends right against the mouths of Cuama in
the kingdom of Quiloa. The great Island of S. Laurence is in length 275.
leagues, and in breadth 90. leagues. The last Chapter of the history of the
Kingdom of China, printed in Macao, the first Latin book that ever was
printed in China makes mention of this Island by the name of Madagascar, in
these words Madagascar trecentas fere leucas comprehendit, id is it, Madagascar
contains almost 300. leagues.
Between this Island and the firm land there is (as it were) a channel,
which at the entry Westwarde is three hundred and forty miles broad, in the
midst where it is narrowest over against the Islande of Mozambiche an hundred
and seventy miles, and for the rest it enlarges it self very much toward
India, and contains many Isles within it. The ships that go from Spain into
India, or return from India to Spain, do always for the most part pass
and sail in and through this channel, if by time or weather they be not
forced to the contrary. And surely this Islande deserves to be inhabited with
a better people, because it is furnished with singular commodities. For it has
many safe and sure havens. It is watered with sundry Rivers that cause the earth
to bring forth fruits of diverse kinds, as Pulse, and Ryce, and other grain,
Oranges, Limons, Citrons, and such like fruit. Flesh of all sorts, as Hens
etc. and venison, as wild Boar and Dear, and such like, and all this of a
very good taste and relish, The inhabitants of the Isle of Saint Laurence.
because the soil is very fat: their fish also is exceeding good. The
inhabitants are Pagans, with some of the sect of Mahomet among them. They are
of the color which the Spaniardes call Mulato, Their weapons
between black and white. Very warlicke they are and given to their weapons,
which are bows and arrows, and darts of very light wood, strengthened with
Iron, whereof they make the heads of their darts, which are crooked like
hooks: and these they will cast and throw most slightly and cunningly. They use
also Targattes and Iackes that are made of certain beasts-skins, wherewith they
save themselves in fight from the blows of their enemies. This Islande is
divided among several Princes, that are at enmity one with another: for they
are in continual wars, and persecute one another with Arms. There are
diverse mines of Gold, of Silver, of Copper, of Iron, and of other Mettalles,
The savage people do not use to sail out of the Island, but only from one
side to the other they go coasting along the shoares, with certain barks that
are made but of one stock of a tree, which they hollow for that purpose. The
most part of them do not willingly entertain strangers, neither will they
consent that they should traffic or converse with them. Notwithstanding in
certain ports, the Portingalles do use to trade with the Islanders for Amber,
Sundry Islands in the channel
Wax, Silver, Copper, Rise, and such other things, but they never come upon
the land. In the channel before mentioned there are diverse Islandes, some
greater, and some less, inhabited with Mahometans. The chief of them is the
Isle of Saint Christopher, and then of Santo Spirito: and another called
Magliaglie, and so the rest, as the Isles of Comoro, The kingdom of Mombaza
rich in Gold and Silver, and Pearl.
Anzoame, Maiotto, and some other.

But let us return to the sea side, and prosecute the Coast of the kingdom of
Quiloa where we leaft. Next unto it, is the kingdom of Mombaza, in the height
of three degrees and a half toward the South, which takes the name from an
Islande inhabited with Mahometans, which is also called Mombaza, where there is
a fair City, with houses that have many Sollers, furnished with pictures
both graven and painted. The king thereof is a Mohammedan, The city of Mombaza
spoiled as Quiloa was.
who taking upon him to resist the Portingalles, received the same success
that happened to the king of Quiloa, so that the city was ransacked and spoiled
by his enemies, who found therein good store of Gold, and Silver, and Pearl,
and Cloth of Cotton, and of Silk, and of Gold, and such other commodities.
This kingdom lies between the borders of Quiloa, and Melinde, and is
inhabited with Pagans and Mahometans, and yields obedience to the Empire of
Mohenemugi.

A little beyond, The kingdom of Melinde.
is the Kingdom of Melinde, which being likewise but a little one, extends
it self upon the sea coast as far as the River Chimanchi, and lies in the
height of two degrees and a half: and up the stream of that river it reaches
to the Lake Calice, the space of an hundred miles within land. Near unto the
sea along the banks of this river, there is a great deal of Country
inhabited by Pagans and Mahometans, The tail of a sheep in Melinde wayeth
commonly 25. or 30. pound.
of color almost white. Their houses are built after our fashion. But there is
one particularitie to be admired, that their Muttons or Sheep are twice as
great as the Sheep of our country: for they divide them into five quarters,
Leo Aser affirms that he has seen tails of Egyptian Sheep, that weighed
50. l. a piece, and sometimes 120. l. a piece.
(if a man may so call them) and reckon the tail for one, which commonly
wayeth some twenty and five, or thirty pound. The women are white and
sumptuously dressed after the Arabian fashion, with cloth of Silk. About their
necks and hands, and arms, and feet, they use to wear iewelles of Gold,
and Silver: When they go abroad out of their houses, The women and inhabitants
of Melinde.
they cover themselves with Taffata, so that they are not known but when they
list themselves. In this Country there is a very good haven, which is a
landing place for the vessels that sail through those seas. Generally, the
people are very kind, true and trusty, and converse with strangers. They have
always entertained and welcomed the Portingals, and have reposed great
confidence in them, neither have they ever offered them any wrong in any
respect.

In the sea between these two Capes of Mombaza, Three Isles 1. Monsie. 2.
Zanzibar* 3. Pemba.
and Melinde there are three Isles: The first is called Monsie, the second
Zanzibar, and the third Pemba, all inhabited only with Mahometans, that are
of color white. These Isles abound in all things as the others do, whereof we
made mention before. These people are somewhat enclyned to arms: but they are
in deed more addicted to dress and manure their ground: For there grows much
Sugar, which in small barks they carry away to sell into the firm land with
other fruits of that Country.

Besides these three realms last described, Quiloa, Melinde, and Mombaza,
within the Land is the great Empire of Moenemugi, toward the West. It
bordereth upon the South, The Empire of Mohenemugi.
with the kingdom of Mozambique, and with the Empire of Monomotapa to the
river Coauo, upon the West with the river Nilus, between the two Lakes; and
upon the North it joins with the Empire of Prete Gianni. Toward the sea,
this Emperor stands in good terms of peace with the foresaid kings of
Quiloa, Melinde, and Mombaza, by reason of their traffic together, and the
better to secure the intercourse and trade by sea: by means whereof they have
brought unto them much cloth of Cotton, and cloth of Silk from diverse
Countries, and other marchandises that are well esteemed in these parts: and
particularly certain little balls, that are made in the kingdom of Cambaia,
of a kind of Bitumen or clammie Clay, like unto glass, but that it is (as it
were) of a red color, which they use to wear about their necks, like a pair
of beads in steed of necklaces. It serves them also in steed of Money, for
of Gold they make none account. Likewise with the silks that are brought unto
them, they do apparel themselus from the girdle downewardes. In exchange and
barter of all these commodities, they give Gold, Silver, Copper and Iuorie.

But on the other side toward Monomotapa, there are continual wars, yea
and sometimes so blooddy, that it is hardely discerned who has gotten the
victory. For in that border there meet together two of the greatest and most
warlike powers and forces that are in all those regions: that is to say, on the
party of Monomotapa there came forth into the field the Amazones, of whom we
told you before, and on the party of Mohenemugi are the Giacchi, (as the
Moci-Conghi do call them) but in their own tongue they are called Agagi, The
Giaechas, or Agagi.
who did sometime so greatly afflict the kingdom of Congo, as you may
remember. Neither are these people less courageous or strong then the
Amazones, but are of a black complexion, and presumptuous countenances. They
do use to mark themselves above the lip upon their cheeks with certain
lines which they make with Iron instruments and with fire. Moreover, they have
a custom to turn their eye liddes backewardes: so that their skin being all
black, and in that blacknes showing the white of their eyes, and those marks
in their faces, it is a strange thing to behold them. For it is in deed a very
dreadful and devilish sight. They are of body great, but deformed and live
like beasts in the field, and feed upon man's flesh. In fight they show
themselves exceedingly courageous, and do utter most horrible shouting and
crying, of purpose to daunte and affray their enemies. Their weapons are
Darts, and Pauises of Leather that cover all their whole body, and so defend
themselves therewith. Sometimes they will encampe together, and stick their
Pauises in the ground, which are unto them in steed of a trench: Sometimes
they will go forwards in the battle, and shrowde themselves under them, and
yet annoy their adversaries with the shot of their darts. And thus by warlike
policy they do ordinarily plague their enemies, by endeavoring with all
subtlety to make them spend their shot in vain upon their Targettes: and
when they see that they have made an end of shooting, then do they renew the
battle a fresh, and driving them to flight, make a cruel slaughter of them
without all mercy. And this is the manner which they use against their
enemies, The Amazones*
and the Amazones. But the Amazones on the other side, which are very well
acquainted herewithall, do fight against them with other military stratagems
(as we have above declared) and do overcome the forces of their adversaries
with their swiftnes and great skill in matters of war. For they do assure
themselves, that if they be taken they shall be devoured: and therefore with
doubled courage they fight for life, that they might overcome, and in any case
save their lives from that fierce and cruel nation. And in this sort do they
maintain continual war, always with great mortality on both sides. These
Agags dwell at the beginning of the River Nilus, (where it runs Northwardes
out of the Lake,) upon both the banks of the River, till it come to a certain
limite, wherein they are bounded, and then Westwardes all over the banks of the
said Nilus, even to the second Lake, and to the borders of the empire of
Prete-Gianni. Touching these Agags, I thought it convenient in this place to
add all this, which before I had omitted. Between the confines of this
Moenemugi, and Prete-Gianni, there are sundry other petty Lords, and people
that are of a white color, and yield obedience sometimes to one of these two
Princes, and sometimes to the other. They are men of a far greater stature
then all the rest of the people in those Countries.

Chap. 10. The rest of the Coast of the Ocean to the red Sea. Of the Empire
of Prete Gianni, and the Confines thereof. Of the famous River Nilus, and the
original spring thereof.
ANd now to return to our former treatise of the coast, beyond the Realm of
Melinde, toward the Cape of Guarda-Fuy, there are many places inhabited with
Mahometans, all along the sea side, of color being white. Upon this shore
there are diverse good havens, Many good havens.
where the ships of sundry countries do traffic with the foresaid
marchaundises. The first of these places is called Patee, the second Braua,
the third Magadoxo, the fourth Affion, The Cape of Guarda Fuy.
and the last is the famous Promontory and Cape of Guarda-Fuy: which because it
is very great, and iutteth out a good way into the sea, is well known to all
sailors that come from India, and from Ormuz, and from Arabia Foelix. It is the
place and harborough where the Portingalles are wont to attend, and yearly
with their nauies to watch for the vessels of the Mahometans, that being
laden with precious marchaundises, do sail into those parts without their
license, they being the Lords of the traffic and trade for spicery and all
other commodities that are brought from India. So that every year the
Portingall Fleet does take great prises of Merchants ships in that place,
as the English and the French do at Cape Saint Vincent.

After you have compassed about the foresaid Cape of Guarda-Fuy, Diverse Ports
on the sea coast toward the Red Sea.
toward the red sea, you shall come to other Towns and havens of the
Mahometans. The first of them is called Methe, and another beyond that called
Barbora. And this is the furthest place, wherein you shall find any people
with white skins: for here the men begin to be all black. Then there is
Ceila, and Dalaca, and Malaca, and Carachin: and all this Coast is called in
that Country language Baragiam. The people that inhabit therein are all
black, valiant in arms, and apparelled from the girdle downwards with cloth
of Cotton: but those that are of the best account among them do wear upon
their shoulders certain cloakes with whoodes, called Bernussi, such as the
old Romans used, and were termed Saga Romana. It abounds in Gold, and in
Iuory, and in Mettalles, and in victuailes of all sorts.

Then follow the mouths or entrances into the red Gulf, The Red Sea.
otherwise called the Red Sea, well known to every man. In number they are
two, caused by an Islande that lies between them, and is called Babelmandel.
The one of them toward the West is fifteen miles broad, The two entrances
into the red sea.
and has a deep channel, and through this do all the great ships enter:
the other is a little one, and contains in breadth but five miles, and yet is
full of shallowes and shelfes of sand, and some Rocks: so that the whole
mouth is but thirty miles in all. The one Cape on the side of Africa is called
Rosbel, and the other toward Arabia Foelix, is Ara. From this place all the
Western Coast of the said Gulf runs up to Suez, The length of the red sea,
1200, miles.
which is the farthest town thereof Northwardes, and is distant from these
mouths twelve hundred miles. All this Gulf, both on the one side and on the
other near to the banks, is much pestered with Islettes and shelfes that are
very shallow, and affords free and safe navigations but only in the midst.
For the sea following the motion and stream of the Ocean, with great swiftnes
does keep the channel and the bottom in the middle, very clean and neat, by
casting up the filth and sand upon the banks on both sides.

And now forasmuch as we are to speak of the Empire of Prete Gianni, The
Empire of Prete Gianni.
who is the greattest and the richest Prince in all Africa, let us tell you in
brief, that his State and Government at this day reaches from the two
mouths of the red sea, unto the Island of Syene, which is under the Tropike
of Cancer, excepting the Coasts of the said sea. For about fifty years ago
he lost them by negligence, and suffered the Turk to take them from him. So
that the Confines of his estate are these, viz. toward the North-East, and the
East, the greater part of the Red Sea: toward the North, Egypt: toward the
West, the Deserts of Nubia, and toward the South the country of Mohenemugi:
and so in a gross and general account, the Empire of this Christian King may
happily be in compass some four thousand miles. The principal City, where
he most remains and keeps his Court, Bel-Malechi his chief City.
is called Bel-Malechi. He rules over many Provinces that have their several
Kings. He is very rich*
His estate is very rich, and abounds in Gold, in Silver, in precious
stones, and in all sorts of mettalles. His people are of diverse colors, as
white, black, and a middle color between both: they are of a very good
stature, and have good countenances. His Courtiers and Lords are apparelled
with cloth of Silk, and adorned with Gold and sundry Iewelles. There is among
them a law for apparel, A law for apparel.
according to the several degrees of men. For certain persons there are, for
whom it is not lawful to wear any other garment, but such as are made of
dressed skins.

These people are in a manner Christians. His people are Christians.
For they do observe certain ceremonies of the Law of the Hebrews. A great
solemnity upon the feast of the Assumption of our Lady.
Upon the Feast day of our Lady in August, all the Kings and principal
Lords assemble themselves together in the City aforesaid, to celebrate that
feast, every man bringing with him his tribute that he owes to the King, and
the people coming from all parts in pilgrimage to perform this their
devotion. They have a very solemn procession, and out of the Church, from
whence they walk, they carry with them an Image of the Blessed Virgin the
Mother of God, which is as big as any common person, and all of Gold. This
Image has for the eyes two very rich and great Rubies, all the rest of the
body is garnished and adorned with jewels and curious works: and it is
carried upon a frame made of Gold, of a wonderful and admirable
workmanshippe. In this procession also, there comes abroad in public show
Prete Gianni, himself, either upon a Chariot of Gold, or else upon an
Elephant, all garnished and trimmed with iewelles, and such rare and precious
things, and covered all over with cloth of Gold. The multitude of people that
runs to see this Image, is so great, that many are stiffled in the press
and die thereupon.

This King is called by a corrupt term Prete Iani, The right name of Prete
Gianni.
for the right name is Bel-Gian. Now Bell signifies that which is chiefest,
perfectest, and excellentest in anything, and Gian is a Prince, or a Lord, and
is applied to every man that has a Government and jurisdiction, and therefore
Belgian is as much to say, as The Chiefest Prince: and being so joined together
in one word, it appertains to the King alone, and to no man else. He bears
also the surname of David, as the Emperors of Rome do use the name of Cesars.

Now it remains that we do discourse of the river Nilus, The River Nilus.
which does not spring in the Country of Bel-Gian, much less out of the
mountains of the Moon, nor (as Ptolomie writes) out of the two Lakes,
Ptolemie disproued.
which he sets down in Parallele, from the East to the West, with a
distaunce of about four hundred and fifty miles between them. For in the
altitude of the same Pole, wherein the said Author places those two Lakes,
lies also the kingdom of Congo and of Angola toward the West, and and on the
other side Eastward is the Empire of Monomotapa, and the Kingdom of Sofala,
with a distaunce from sea to sea of twelve hundred miles. Now within all this
space, as Signor Odoardo affirmed unto me, there is but one only Lake to be
found, which lies in the confines of Angola and Monomotapa, and contains in
Diameter an hundred ninety and five miles. Of the Western side of this Lake,
the people of Angola do give sufficient information, and of the other side
Eastwarde, those of Sofala and Monomotapa. So that there is a full and perfect
knowledge of this one Lake, but of any other thereabouts, there is no mention
at all made: And therefore it may well be concluded, that there are none other
to be found in that altitude of degrees, True it is in deed, that there are
two Lakes, but they are situate in places quite contrary to that which Ptolemie
writes. For he (as it has been told you) places his Paralleles from West to
East: but these are situate from the South to the North, as it were in a direct
line, with the distance of about four thousand miles between them. Some that
dwell in those countries do hold an opinion, Nilus does not hide him self
under the ground, and then arise again, as some say.
that Nilus after it is issued out of the first Lake, hides it self under the
ground, and afterward rises again: but others do deny that it is so.
Signor Odoardo did justify it to me, that the true history and certainty of
this matter, is that Nilus does not hide it self under the ground, but that
it runs through monstrous and desert valleys without any settled channel,
and where no people inhabiteth, The true spring of Nilus is out of the first
Lake*
and so (they say) it sinketh into the bottom of the earth.

From this first Lake in deed does Nilus spring, which lies in twelve degrees
toward the Pole Antarctike, and is compassed about like a vault, with
exceeding high mountains, the greatest whereof are called Cafates upon the
East, The second Lake.
and the hills of Sal-Nitrum, and the hills of Silver on another side, and
lastly with diverse other Mountains on the third part. This River Nilus
runs for the space of 400. miles directly toward the North, and then
enters into another very great Lake which the inhabitants do call a Sea. It
is much bigger then the first, for it contains in breadth two hundred and
twenty miles, and lies under the line Equinoctial. Of this second Lake the
Anzichi, who are near neighbors to Congo, do give very certain and perfect
information, for they traffic into those parts. The people that dwells
about the second Lake.
And they report that in this Lake there is a people, that sayleth in great
ships, and can write, and uses number, and weight and measure, which they
have not in the parts of Congo; that they build their houses with stone and
lime, and that for their fashions and qualities they may be compared with the
Portingalles. Whereupon it may be well gathered, that the Empire of
Prete-Gianni cannot be far from thence.

From this second Lake the river Nilus runs forwards to the Islande of
Meroe, The Island of Meroe.
for the space of seven hundred miles, and receives into it sundry other
rivers. The R. Coluez.
The principal of them all is the river Coluez, so called, because it issues
out of a Lake of the same name, and situate in the borders of Melinde. After
that Nilus is come to Meroe, it deuideth it self into two branches, and so
compasses about a good high Territory, which is called Meroe* Upon the right
hand whereof toward the East, there runs a River named Abagni, The R.
Abagni*
that springs out of the Lake Bracina, and crosses over the Empire of Prete
Gianni till you come to the said Islande: and on the other side Westwarde there
are diverse other Rivers, The R. Saraboe.
among which Saraboe is one. When Nilus has thus received these rivers into
it, and has compassed the Islande with both his arms, he waxes greater then
he was before, and meets again in one channel, and by Aethiopia (which is
called Aethiopia above Egypt) runs to the Falls (as they call them) which
lie in a very low valley, that is very narrow and strait, and shuts the
river within a very little channel, The Isle of Syene.
so that it falls from aloft downwards with a most horrible noise, near to
the Isle of Syene. And from thence watring all Egypt, it disgorgeth his
streams into the Mediterranean sea, The two branches of Nilus falling into
the Mediterranean sea.
(which lies directly over against the Islande of Cyprus) by two of his
principal branches, the one called at this day, the Mouth of Damiata on the
East, and the other, the Mouth of Rossetto on the West.

And forasmuch as we are now come to the very end of this discourse
concerning Nilus, it will be very convenient, The cause of the increase of
Nilus.
that we touch in brief the occasion of his increase. As we have told you
before, the principal cause of the increase of Nilus, is the great quantity of
waters, that rain from heaven at such time as the spring begins here in
these countries, but there with them in winter, which may be (to speak
generally) about the beginning of April. This water falls not, as the water
falls in these Regions of Europe, but it falls most abundantly, and
comes down not in small drops like our rain, but is powered down (as it were
with pailes and buckets.) So that because it falls with so great violence and
in so great a quantity, the earth cannot suck it up, nor drink it in: for the
ground being ragged, and somewhat bending downward, the water scowreth away
with an exceeding fury, and running into the rivers causes them to swell and
to rise in a marvelous manner, and so ouerflowe the country: You must
herewithall consider especially, that they have these continual raines for the
space of five whole Moons together, that is to say in April, May, June, July,
and August, but principally in May, June and July: for then are the waters in
their greatest pride. And hereupon it comes to pass, that the Country being
full of mountains and very high hills (as has been told you) and
consequently replenished with diverse brooks, and rillets, and Lakes, they all
joining and meeting together in the channelles of the greater Rivers, do make
them so great and so large, that they contain and carry more water, then all
the Rivers of the universal world: and the Lakes grow to such an excessive
compass and widenes, that it is a wonder: as may be seen in the discourse
touching the Cape of Good-Hope, and all these kingdoms of Congo, and the
Countries there adjoining, where there are Lakes of so extraordinary a
bigness, that in the languages of those Regions, they are not called Lakes,
but Seas.

And thus you see how the River Nilus, in the times and seasons before
mentioned, The several courses of sundry great Rivers.
on the one side does run most furiously from those Countries, into the
North to water Egypt, and the River Zaire, and the River Nigir on the other
side Westwarde and Eastwarde: and toward the South, other huge and monstrous
Rivers, which at certain determined and limited times do never fail to
increase as Nilus does. And this is the effect of them, which is ordinarily
seen every year, especially in Cairo, and over all Egypt, where Nilus
begins to rise about the end of June, and continues his rising till the
twentieth of September, as I have seen my self. But the occasion and cause of
this increase has been until this present time very secret and obscure:
(...). 1. The River that falls from head. Hom. Odis. 4.
and although the ancient writers, beginning even at Homere, have after a sort
and in general terms leaft in writing, that Nilus does increase by rain,
yet have they not so distinctly and plainly discoursed thereof, as Signor
Odoardo has done, and testified the same by his own view and knowledge. For
some there were, that have assigned the cause of this ouerflowing, to be the
rain that comes from the Mountains of the Moon: Others have attributed it
to the snowes that are melted in those Mountains, and yet Nilus does not swell
or rise any thing near to the Mountains of the Moon, but a great way from
them toward the North: and besides that the season of winter does rather
breed Snow, then yield any heat to melt it.

And now that I have with good diligence enquired of Signor Odoardo these
matters above written, The conclusion of this book.
upon such points as I had before plotted to my self, and he also
propounding the rest unto me of his own mere motion, like a man of high
conceit (as in truth he is) and satisfying me with such aunsweres, as are set
down in this discourse: yet I do assure my self, that every man will not
rest fully contented and satisfied herewith, especially such as are curious,
and practiced in matters of the world, and skillful in the Sciences. The
Geographer would peradventure desire to understand more, and the Phisician,
and the master of Mineralles, and the Historiographer, and the Merchant, and
the Mariner, and the Preacher, and some others that are different from these
in respect of their profession. But Signor Odoardo has promised with as much
speed as possible he may to return to Rome from Congo, whether he sailed,
presently after he had finished this treatise, which was in May 1589. with very
ample informations and further instructions, for the supplying of that which
here wants touching Nilus, and his original, and such other matter. In the
mean time, that little which is contained in these few leaves, is not very
little. But yet if perhaps there be any thing found therein, that may be either
profitable, or strange, or delightful, or fit to pass away the time, and to
drive away Melancholy, let it be wholly ascribed to the right noble and
Reverend Father, my Lord Antonie Migliore, Bishop of San Marco, and
Commendador of Santo Spirito, who was the author of this work to be published
for the common benefit.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in the first Book of The Report of the
Kingdom of Congo.
THe journey by Sea from Lisbone to the Kingdom of Congo. Chap. I. fol. 1. Of
the temperature of the air of the kingdom of Congo, and whether it be very
cold or hot: whether the men be white or black: Whether are more or less
black, they that dwell in the hills, or those that dwell in the plains: Of
the winds and the raines, and the snowes in those quarters, and of what stature
and semblaunce the men of that Country are. Chapter II. fol. 13. Whether the
children which are begotten by Portingalles being of a white skin, and borne
in those Countries by the women of Congo, be black or white, or tawney like a
wild Olive, whom the Portingalles call Mulati. Chap. III. fol 18. Of the
circuit of the kingdom of Congo, and of the borders and confines thereof. And
first of the Western Coast. Chap. IIII. fol. 20. Of the North coast of the
Kingdom of Congo, and the confines thereof. Chap. V. fol. 30. Of the East
coast of the Kingdom of Congo, and the Confines thereof. Chap. VI. fol. 38 Of
the Confines of the Kingdom of Congo toward the South. Chap. VII. fol. 43.
Of the circuit of the Kingdom of Congo possessed by the King that now is,
according to the four borders above described. Chap. VIII fol. 58. The six
Provinces of the Kingdom of Congo, and first of the Province of Bamba. Chap.
IX. fol. 60. Of the Province of Sogno, which is the Country of the River
Zaire, and Loango. Chap. X. fol. 94. Of the third Province ealled Sundi, Chap.
XI. fol. 96. Of the fourth Province called Pango. Chap. XII. fol. 99. Of the
fifth Province called Batta. Chap. XIII. fol. 100. Of the sixth and last
Province called Pemba. Chap. XIIII. fol. 104
A Table of the Chapters contained in the second Book.
OF the situation of the Royal City of the Kingdom of Congo. Chap. 1. fol.
107 Of the Original beginning of Christendom in the Kingdom of Congo, and
how the Portingalles obtained this traffic. Chap. II. fol. 118. Don John, the
first Christian King being dead, Don Alfonso his son succeeded. Of his wars
against his brother. Of certain miracles that were wrought, and of the
conversion of those people. Chap. III. fol. 133. The death of King Don Alfonso,
and the succession of Don Piedro. How the Island of S. Thomas was first
inhabited, and of the Bishop that was sent thither. Other great accidents that
happened by occasion of Religion. The death of two Kings by the conspiracy of
the Portingalles, and the Lords of Congo. How the Kings lineage was quite
extinguished. The banishment of the Portingals. Chap. IIII. fol. 150. The
incursions of the people challed Giachas, in the Kingdom of Congo. Their
conditions and weapons. And the taking of the Royal City. Chap. V. fol. 159.
The King of Portingall sends aid, and an Ambassador to the King of Congo.
The knowledge of the Metal Mines, which abound in Congo is denied the King of
Portingall. At the same time the King of Congo dispatcheth Ambassadors to the
King of Spain, to request Priests of him, and what befell unto them. He
sends diverse proofs of the mettalles. The vow of Odoardo Lopes. Chap. VI.
fol. 163 Of the Court of the King of Congo. Of the apparel of that people
before they became Christians and after. Of the Kings Table, and manner of his
Court. Chap. VII. fol. 177 Of the Countries that are beyond the Kingdom of
Congo toward the Cape of Good-Hope* and of the River Nilus. Chap. VIII. fol.
186 Of the Kingdom of Sofala. Chap. 19. fol. 192 The rest of the Coast of the
Ocean the red sea. Of the Empire of Prete Gianni, and the Confines thereof.
Of the famous River Nilus, and the original spring thereof. Chap. X. fol. 215.
FINIS.



