The treaty of Thassociation made by the Prince of Condee, together with the
Princes, Knights of thorder, Lords, Capitaines, Gentlemen, and others of al
estates which be entered, or hereafter shall enter into the said Association,
for to maintain the honor of god, the quiet of the Realm of France, and the
state and liberty of the King under the governance of the Queen his Mother who
is authorized thereunto and establyshed by the Estates.

ANNO. 1562.

The association made by the Prince of Condee.
WE hereunder written, having nothing in more estimation next to the honor of
God, then the service of the King and preservation of his croune, now in his
tender years, under the governance of the Queen his mother, therein
established and authorized by the estates. Saying the boldenes, rashness and
ambition of some of our said lords subjects, co^temning his youth, to have been
so great, that they have been so presumptuous, not only to assemble them
selfs, and too enter into arms against the edicts, and with the-same, too
put too death a great number of his poor subjects, neither sparing age nor
sick, without any other cause at all, but for that they were assembled to serve
God, according to the liberty granted by the edictes, but also not being able
too be brideled by any law of God or manne, with the said force, have gotten
the possession of the persons of the King and the Queen, and of the Duke of
Orleans. And forasmuch as we can not upon such and so rash an enterprise,
(...) ought elies, but an as,+sured determinacion under pretense of the Kings
authorite^ ^ho is in custody and captyue, to subuerte together with religion,
the most part of the nobilite and of the third estate, and generally all
those which make profession, and be of the Kings most faithful and obedient
subjects, which should be a very means to abandon the croune of France to
the spoil.

We for these causes desiring, according to our power, too restore his majesty
and his croune too surety, and the Queen too her authority, and also too
preserve the poor faithful people of this realm, in that liberty of
conscience, which it has pleased the King to grant them by his edictes,
made by thaduise of the princes of the blood, of the lords of the Kings
cou^sayll, and most notable men assembled out of all the courts of
parlaments of this Realm, and by the determination of the most part of the
states, which ought to remain infringed, duringe the minority of our said
sovereign: We have been like good and faythefull subjects, forced and
constrained to enter into arms, which is the mean that God has put in our
hand; against such violence, tyranny, and oppression.

And hereupon, after invocation of the name of God, as me^ well advised and
counseled, by commune and deep aduiseme^t, we have of one commune accord and
frank and willing consent, promised and sworn, in the name of the living God,
a fellowship from henceforth of a holy company one toward another, touching
tharticles following: which we swear and promis before God and his Angels, to
keep and observe infalliblye, and from point too point, as follows, through
the grace and mercy of God our hole and only hope.

First we protest that we do not carry with us in this holy alliance, any
particular passion of mind, nor regard of our persons, goods or estimations,
but that we have nothing before our eyes, but the honor of God, the
deliverance of the kings and Queens majesty's of justice, thobseruation of
the edicts and ordinances by them made, and lastely the dew punishment and
reformation of the neglectors of the same, and for these causes and none others,
as we swear and promise every man for him self, to employ our bodies, goods,
and all that we may make, even to the very last drop of our blood.

And this present fellowship and alliance shall continue in full force unbroken,
until the King be of full age, that is to say, until that his majesty
being of age, shall have taken upon him self, the governance of his realm,
and then wholly to submit our selfs too the perfect obed^ence and submission
of his own will and pleasure.

At which time we trust to give unto him so good reckenyng of the said
fellowship (as we will also do, as many and as often times as it shall please the
Queen, she being at liberty) as men shall know, that it is not a league or
a monopoly, turninge of things to our own commodities that we mainteyne, but
a faithful and dew obedience for thimportant service and preservation of
their majesty's.

Secondely, too the end that all men may understand, that this present
felowshippes made with such intent as is rehearsed and in all pureness of
conscience, and fear of the name of God, whom we take for the head and
defendor of the same: We do mean and swear that we will not suffer in our
companyes, any thing too be done, which may derogate the commandments
of God, or the King, as Idolatries, supersticions, and blasphemies, hoordomes,
violences, enforcementes, spoylinges, breakynges of Images, ra^sakings of
Churches, by pryuate authority, and generallye all other like things
forbidden, by God or by the Kings last Edict, set forth in Ianuarye. Of
which faults, contrary wise we will endeavor our selves to see
punishmente and justice executed.

And because we are guyded under thobedience of the word of God, we purpose
in our assemblees to have good and faithful ministers of the glory of our
God, which shall teach us his will, too whom we will give such audience as
apperteineth.

Thyrdely we do name for the chief and conductor of the hoole company my lord
the prince of Condee, a prince of the blood, and therefore a Counsaylor born and
one of the protectors of the croune of France, whom we swear and promise to
attend upon, and to render toward him, all dew obedience, touching that
which shall concern the effect of this present assembly. Submittinge our selfs
(in case of rebellion or negligence) too such his correction and
chastisemente, as he shall order. And the case happeninge that the said lord
the prince, thoroughe wantte of health or otherwise cannot supply the said
charge, then he whom he shall name, shall be wholly obeyed and followed as him
self* And the said Lord the Prince declaring the zeal which he bears to
the glory of god, and to the kings service, has accepted y^ charge as
before, with promise to all the company that through the help of God, he will
with all diligence and readiness do the true office of a head and conductor,
according to the tenor of all the conditions of the said fellowship.

Fourthly we have comprehended and joined unto us in this present treaty, of
all such as be of the kings cou^sayll, exceptinge those which be in arms
against their duty, to keep under and restrain the king and Queen of their
will and pleasur, which force, if they will not lay down and retire them
selfs, and yield account of their doing in all subjection and obedience, when
it shall please the Queen to call them by just occasion, we hold them giltye
of treason, and dysquietoures of the common tranquillity of this realm.

And to proceade to the intent and accomplishmente of this hole fellowship,
which we protest not to be done, but for maintenau^ce of the honor of God, the
state and liberty of the King, under the government of the Queen his mother:
Each of us to his particular, from the lowest to the highest do swear and
promise before God and his Aungelles, to be in a readiness with all that which
shall be in our power: as with money, armure, horses for service, and all other
things necessary therewith, and too present our selfs as soon as we shall be
first commanded by the said lord the prince, or any other, being ordained by
him, furnished and prepared to follow him where as he shall command us, and
faithfully to serve him, for the purposes aforesaid, and observe our duty, in
body and goods, so far forth as our life will stretche. And if it happen
yt in any place or quarter of this Realm, we shall understand that any man
comprehended in this present fellowship receive any oultrage or violence by the
persons aforesaid or others contrary to the Kings edict in Ianuarye last
paste, we do whollye swear and promise spedely to succoure them, and too
endeavor our self to the end that the said wrong may be so repaired, as if
the dommage and hurt were particular too every one of us: and this too be done
in such sort as we shall be commanded by the said lord the Prince, or any
other deputed thereunto by him.

Furthermore, if hereafter it happen (which God forbid) that any of us,
forgettinge his duty and oath, should have any intelligence with thennemyes,
or should by any manner or means commit any thing dishonestly or
traitorously, or else show him self too resist that which is spoken of
before: We swear and promise by such part as we look to have in Paradys, to
open the same foorthewith to the said lord the prince, or other to whom it
shall apertaine, and too take and use him as an enemy, traiterous, and
unfaithful person. For thus has it ben accorded amongst us of a free
consent, not too be revoked.

Made, determined and publisshed at Orleans, the year of our Lord 1562.
the.xi. of April.

Thus signed. LOVIS OF BOVRBON* with other Princes, knights of thorder,
Lords, Capitaines Gentlemen, and a great number of others of all the Estates,
and of all the Countrees of the Realm of France, as it appears by the
Register signed by them, remaining with the said Lord.

VV. S.


