The Lovers delight! OR, A pleasant Pastoral Sonnet To a new Court Tune.

COme love, lets walk into the spring,
where we will hear the blackbird singe;
(...) Robin Redbrest, and the Thrush,
the nightingale on thornie bush,
Their music sweetly Carcowling,
that to my love Content may bring.
In yonder dale there are sweet flowers,
with many pleasant shadie bowers;
^^^^ling brook with silver streams,
all beautified with Phoebus beams:
I stood behind a tree for fear,
To see Dyana bathe her there.
(...) where the nymph, with all her train
comes tripping ore the Pack a maine:
In yonder grove there will they stay
at barlie-breake to sport and play:
Where we will sit us down and see
fair beauty mixed with Chastitee.
The ^uthfull shephard with delight
Will tune a pleasant often pipe:
(...) with heavenly note
will stretch and strain her vary throat;
(...) and clear their nimphs will sing
that hills and valleys all will ringe.
The shepherd Stephan with his friend
the faithful Elayes will attend
My play before the Queen, to prove
who best deserves Vranias love:
A most strange sight there shall you see
rivalls of love and amity.
Menalcas and Amyntas young,
brave Coridon, and Thersis strong
Your minds would unto pleasure move
to have them plead for Phillis love:
Judge of these tryumphs who shall be
but the fair Queen of chastity?
Under the shade of yonder pine
you see a Royal throne devine
Prepared for the Judge to sit,
the Queen of beauty and of wit,
Wise Pallas in her Majesty
the pavid Judge is chose to be.
The Queen of love is banished there
For fear that Phaebe take offense;
Her wanton son must not come there,
nor Cylharea once appear:
It grieves my heart to think that she
from this aspect exempt must be.
For if the Queen of love should spy
the splendor of thy heavenly eye,
She should persuade her winged Son
to wound thy heart as he has done.
My silly breast with dread and fear,
but O the chaince, she is not here.
See where the wood-Nimphs rankt do stand
with each a garland in her hand,
Compact of mix and sweet bays;
for who deserved the chiefest praise
In pleading of their passions here,
the Laurel Crown away must bear.
Upon this (...) of vyolets blew
a seat most (...) for lovers true:
Here may we sit us down and see
love triumph is his Majesty:
By the sweet (...) that are sung,
we shall (...), who suffered wrong.
But stay, the Judges comes to sit,
the (...) of chastity and wit:
The (...) all are ready here
in comely habits to appear.
All wrongs here righted we shall see
by the fair Queen of chastity.
The second part, To the same tune.

SWeet heart come tell me whose soft lays
in your conceit deserves most praise?
Or who did set forth passions best?
how Cupid wounded his breast
I know you hade noted all that is past,
from the first m^^ unto the last.
Me thought it great content did bring,
to hear the Shepherds carrowling,
To Crown Cilra^^, made her choice,
Menalcas for his (...) voice;
Which glory did small pleasure move,
since Coridon had Phillis love.
To wrestle and throw bars of length;
all men gave place to Thersis strength:
His steadfast footing none could move,
yet for all this he lost his love
No strength or harmony of voice
could Phillis move to make her choice.
If it had rested in my power,
there to have chose a paramour:
He whom I thought deserved most grace,
was young Amyntas; whose sweet face,
And nimble feet could not be matched.
the Deities I fear were caught.
Did you not note how Pallas swore
the like she never saw before?
Had Meliager made such have,
Athlanta had the wager lost:
In token of deserved praise,
she crowned him with lasting bays.
Then Phaebe unto Phillis said,
to make thy choice be not afraid,
For if I were the Nymph to choose,
Amyntas I would not refuse:
But all in vain they did exhort,
for Corridon had Phillis heart
Both Pallas and Diana chaste,
did almost strain with breathles have:
Who could their praises farther heap,
on young Amyntas and his sheep,
His person, gesture, and his grace
they did applaud, and his sweet face.
But tell me love the reason, why
(...) Phillis with the Crystal eye,
Did all the youthful swains refuse,
and Corridon a love did choose?
Since they in beauty did excel,
and for each praise did hear the bell.
It seems the beauty of the mind,
did in this case strike Phillis blind:
His eloquence of tongue and wit,
in place whereas the Judge did sit
Was his chief gain, and their foul loss,
Ulysses so had Ajax cross.
But one thing much does make me muse,
why sweet Urania did refuse,
Her two beloved Ryvalls there?
in whom such friendship did appear,
That still they wil'd her with one voice,
in friendly wise to make her choice.
How prettily they laid the ground,
how she at first their heart did wound,
When she by them her Neat did keep,
and leaving the man half a sleep,
Her bird out of her pocket run,
and unto Strephans hand did come.
The pretty neatresse did awake.
heareing her fluttering bird escape,
And unto Strephans hand did hye,
he did restore imediatly
Her bird, and eke his heart she got,
and in her snow white bosom put.
The silly bird but for his love
his passions could in no ways move.
(...) for himself nor his true friend,
as it appeared in the end,
That neither party should grow wroth,
she most unkind refused them both.
And now me thinks the sun grows low.
If you be (...), your friends will know
(...) you and I have been alone,
which to (...) bring you home,
To part it is a second hell,
loath to depart (...) farewell.
FINIS.
Printed at London for Francis Coules.


