ARTICLES made and published by the King of France, touching the
re-establishment and re-appeale of the Jesuits to their Liberties in France.
With A Sentence or Decree made and published against them, by the Court of
Parliament in Paris, the 23. day of December last past, 1611.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold in Pope's Head Palace.
1612.

ARTICLES made and published by the King of France, touching the
re-establishment and re-appeale of the Jesuits to their liberties in France:
With a Sentence or Decree made and published against them, by the Court of
Parliament in Paris, the 23. day of December last past. 1611.
HENRY, by the grace of God King of France and Navarre:
To al men to whom these presents shall come greeting.
These are to let you and every one of you, to know and understand, that
desiring to hearken unto and to grant the request made unto us, by our Holy
Father the Pope, concerning the reestablishment of the Jesuits in this our
Realm of France, and for certain good and great considerations us thereunto
moving. We have caused these our letters pattents to be made, signed with our
own hand, and of our special grace, full power and authority Royal, do give
and grant unto all the society and company of Jesuits free liberty and power
to dwell and reside in such places where at this present they find them selves
to be established within this our Realm of France, that is in the Towns of
Tholoze, Again, Rhode, Londem, Perigeux, Linoges, Tournon, Le pois, Aulenat,
Beziers and besides these places at the request of his said holiness and in
regard of the singular affection which we bear unto him, we have further
granted, and permit them to place and reestablish themselves in our Towns of
Lion, Dijon, and particularly in our house of La Flesche in Aniou? There to
continue and establishe their residence, nevertheless upon these conditions
and prohibitions following.

1 First, that they shall not erect any Colleges nor places of Residence in any
Town or place of this our Realm, Countries, or Lands, and Seigniorie, under
our obedience, unless it be by our express license and permission, vpn pain
to forfet and lose the benefit of these their letters pattents of the said
reestablishment. 2 That all those that are of the said Society within our said
Realm, as also their Rectors, and Prouisors, shall be natural French men
borne, and that no stranger shall be admitted to be amongst them, or to have
any place within their Colleges and Residencies, without our said license and
permission. And if there be any such at this present amongst them, they shall be
bound within three months after the publication of these presents, to withdraw
themselves into their own Countries. Nevertheless we do by these presents let
you know, that we in this word Stranger, comprehend not the Inhabitants of the
Town and County of Auignon. 3 That the said society of Jesuits shall
ordinarily have one of their said fellowshippe, sufficiently authorized by
them, to be our Preacher and to make account unto us of the proceedings of
their said Society, upon occasions ministered touching them. 4 That all those
that at this present are within this our Realm, and that hereafter shall be
admitted and received into the said Society, shall take their oaths before
our officers of the places where they are resident, nor to undertake, nor do
any thing, contrary to our obedience, nor the public peace and tranquillity
of this our Realm, without any exception or reservation whatsoever. And that
our said Officers, shall sed the acts and process of their said oaths word
for word unto our right dear and trusty Chancellor. And if any of them, that
are now at this present admitted, or those that hereafter shall be permitted,
do, or shall refuse to take the said oath, they shall be forced, and presently
constrained to go out of this our Realm of France. 5 That from henceforth,
all those of the said Society, as well they that have made simple vows only,
as the rest of them neither shall, nor may not get, nor procure unto themselves
within this our Realm of France, any moveable goods, and chattels, either by
buying, gift, or otherwise, without our special license and permission. 6 They
shall not take nor receive any succession, either direct, or collateral, no
more then other religious persons, nevertheless if it fall out hereafter, that
they are licenced by the said company, they may receive into their Rites, as
before. 7 They shall neither take nor receive any immovable goods or lands, of
those that from henceforth shall enter into their Societies, but they shall be
reserved unto their heirs, or to those to whom they shall have disposed the
same, before their entrance into the said Society. 8 They shall also be
subject in all things, and in every point unto the laws of our Realm, and
punishable by our Officers, in such manner, as all other ecclesiastical and
religious persons are subjects unto them. 9 They shall not undertake, nor do
any thing (either spiritual or temporal) to the prejudice of any Bishops,
Chapters, Cures, and Universities, nor of any other religious persons, but
shall conform them selves to the common Law. 10 They shall not preach
administer the holy sacraments, nor hear any man's confession, but only of
those that are of their own Society, if they be not permitted thereunto by the
Bishops of those places, of the Courts of Parliament where they are
established, that is at Bordeaux, and Diion, (Nevertheless the said permission
is not to be understood of the Parliament of Paris,) unless it be in the Town
of Lion, and La Flesche, wherein they are permitted to reside and exercise
their functions, as in the other places which are granted unto them. 11 And to
the end that those of the said Society, which are at this present
re-established, may have means to maintain them selves and to live in their
Colleges and residencies, we have permitted and by these presents do permit
them to enjoy their rents and revenues both present, and also that which
heretofore they have had and enjoyed, and if the same has been seized upon to
our use, it is our will and pleasure, that they shall be fully and freely
restored unto them again, without any let or interruption.
And to that end we will and command all our well-beloved and faithful Subjects,
and servants of our Court of Parliament, to allow of these our Letters
Pattents, and to cause them to be read, published, and recorded, and that the
said company and Society of Jesuits, may freely enjoy and use their
privileges in the said Letters Pattents, specified and set down, and to cause
al Roules and Empeachments touching the same to end, and to be left off, for
such is our pleasure, and to the end that it may continue and remain firm,
and stable for ever, we have hereunto put our seal, reserving unto our selves,
our own right and pre-eminence as well in this as otherwise.

Given at Roan, in the month of September, Anno 1603. and in the 15 year of
our Reign. Signed HENRY:
and underneath by the King sealed with the great Seal in green wax and
silk strings. Registered. The Kings attorney general being here, after most
humble declaration made by him, unto the said Lords of the Parliament of Paris.

The second of January. Signed Voisin.



The Sentence or Decree made by the Court of Parliament of Paris, against The
Jesuits, upon the 23. day of December last past.
THe Court of Parliament, upon the inrouling of the said Letters Pattents,
ordain that their Counsel shall correct, and amend their Bills, and add
thereunto whatsoever they shall think convenient within eight days, and that
they shall produce and give contradictions and exceptions within the said time
prescribed, and then to receive sentence.

They further ordain, that the provincial and the rest of his company
demandants in the case, and his assistants shall presently subscribe unto the
Submission, made by their provincial, to conform themselves unto the Doctrine
of the Sorbonists, specially in that which concerns the preservation of the
Kings most sacred person, the maintaining of their authority Royal, and the
liberties of the Church of France, which has always and most anciently been
observed, and kept within this Realm of France, that being seen and
communicated unto the Kings Attourny general and the Counsel on both sides they
may have justice as Law and reason requires. In the mean time, they have and
do make defense and straight prohibitions unto the said Society, not to
innouate, do, or undertake any thing contrary or to the prejudice of their
Letters Pattents of reestablishement, nor of the decree or sentence of the
verification of the same, as also not to meddle or take upon them either by
them selves or by any other persons appointed by them, to teach children within
the City of Paris, in any wise whatsoever, neither yet to exercise the function
of Scholars, upon pain of forfeiture of their Letters Pattents of
reestablishment, reserving cost and charges. Pronounced the 23 of December,
1611.

The King of France Letters of commandment to the Court of Parliament, for the
verification of the said Letters Patents, and Articles aforesaid.
HENRY, by the grace of God King of France: and Navarre.
To our well-beloved and faithful Subjects, the Officers of our Court of
Parliament of Paris, greeting.
About a month since, we granted our Letters Pattents in manner of an edict, for
the reestablishme^t of the Jesuits in certain places of this our Realm, with
certain exceptions and conditions therein mentioned, for verification whereof,
according to our good will and pleasure, it is our will and desire that you
shall content your selves, with the demonstrations and reasons which we have
set down, and considered of, with the best advice and counsel which may be
given by such persons as are altogether led and provoked thereunto with a good
and entire affection, besides that for our own parts we have such pregnant
reasons that move us thereunto, that they ought not in any wise to be debated.
We see and know better then any other, what course we are to hold, and seeing
that it has pleased God by his grace to give us the means, to preserve this
vessel from the storms and tempests past, we mean still to guide the Ruther,
that it may sail the happelyer by the aid and help of God. We have not
granted them this reestablishment but upon very good and material
considerations, from whence we cannot swerve, without a most notable interest
and prejudice to the good of our estate: for this cause therefore we will, and
expressly command and enioine you by these presents, signed with our own hand,
that presently and without delay, you shall ratefie and confirm those our said
Letters Pattents of edict, according to the form and tenure thereof, without
any refusale prolongation, moderation or difficulty whatsoever, or without
attending or looking for any other or more express commandment therein,
either by word of mouth, or writing, then these presents, which shall serve you
for the first second and final Commission, which you may expect to have from
us, without referring your selves unto the reasons which have moved you, to
make the said declaration unto us, or which hereafter may move you to do the
like, which we have well considered, but notwithstanding the said declaration,
and without any respect thereof. It is our will and pleasure, that you shall
proceed to the said verification, for such is our pleasure.

Given in Paris the 27 of December, in the 15 year of our reign, signed HENRY:
and a little lower by the King, sealed with the privy Seal in yellow wax,
Registered. The Kings Attorney general, being here upon most humble
declaration, made unto the said Lords of the Court of Parliament in Paris the 2
of January.

Signed Voisin.



FINIS.

