November the 29.

THE TRVE ORIGINAL EDICT OF NANTS, as it was enacted by Henry the third, and
confirmed by the last French King Henry the fourth of famous memory.

And reestablished by Lewis the thirteenth, for the better assurance of those
of the Reformed Religion, as appears by the Kings Edict of Peace, dated in
the Camp at Mompellier the ninteenth of October 1622. and proclaimed
throughout all his Dominions for a final ending of all civil troubles.

Cum Priuilegio.

LONDON, Printed by R. F. for William Garrat. 1622.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
THe powerful God of Armies, who only gives true strength unto the arm, and
courage unto the heart, to fight the battles of his holy name and truth, even
in the midst of hopeless perils, has in all ages stood for the miraculous
deliverance of his afflicted Church, when preposterous and maleuolent minds
urged the final ruin and extirpation thereof. This cannot in any thing more
evidently appear, then in the bloody and fearful agitations of the French
Church, under the troublesome reigns of Henry the third and Henry the fourth,
of indelible memory: when private massacres and open hostility had almost
extinguished the chief Nobility and gentry of France, and yet in the very
instant of despair, God with his mighty finger touched the Kings heart the
third Henry, and opened the eyes of his royal understanding, which produced
this happy Edict of Nants now here published, for a fair pacification of all
former troubles and combustions. Yet was not this fire so clear extinguished
(omitting the deuastations of arms, during the reign of the last renowned
Henry) but that the opposite spirits of these times found out some unquenched
sparks, whereof to kindle a new flame of cruel war and bloodshed, even in
the young and ambitious years of this present Lewis the thirteenth, the which
notwithstanding after some sensible feeling of his heavy hand and displeasure,
it has pleased God to moderate and qualify, by informing his Princely mind,
that an external union and formalitie of Religion, cannot supplant the seeds
of thirsty and insatiable ambitions, which do but attend civil and intestine
dissentions, the better to propagate their haughty and imperious designs. As
proceeding from one and the self same cause, these instant French troubles
have been accorded with one and the like effect, the Articles of this present
Peace being drawn and extracted from the model and frame of the former Edict
of Nants in this Treatise diuulged, which being at least more large and
copious, by diligent comparing the one with the other, the best understandings
may more absolutely judge, both of the form and substance of the present
conditions. And to this end only (courteous Reader) I have with some charge
caused this original Edict of Nants to be translated and published, being
desirous herein to gratify thee, as he that expects no other reward then thy
acceptance and love, and that thou will join with me, and all those well
affected to Religion, in hearty desire and prayer, that this happy accord may
stand firm and permanent. And thus I recommend my travel and labors to thy
love, and remain as I will ever persevere,

Thy very loving and well affected: W. G.

THE KINGS EDICT, AND A DECLARATION UPON THE PRECEDENT Edicts of Pacification.
Henry by the grace of God, King of France and of Navarre, To all those
present or hereafter to come, greeting. Amongst those infinite graces which it
has pleased God to impart unto us, this is one most notable and remarquable,
that he has given us the constancy and power, not to be shaken with those
terrible confusions, troubles, and disorders, which were on foot at our
coming to this kingdom, the same being divided into so many partialities and
factions, that the same most lawful, was as it were the least in power: and
yet nevertheless we bore up so stiffly in the midst of all this storm, as in
the end we overcame it, and are now entered into the harbor of safety and
repose within this State. The absolute and whole glory whereof were downd
only to him, and the grace and bounden duty therefore to us, in that he was
pleased to make use of our labor and travail, for the performance of this so
good a work: wherein it has been apparent to the whole world, whether we have
not discharged therein, not only our duty and power, but further something
more also, then in some other season had been correspondent to the dignity we
hold; the which we have not been afraid to hazard and expose, seeing we have so
mauy times so freely adventured, and endangered our own life. And in this
great concurrence of so weighty and perilous affairs, not being able to
compound them all at one time, we were tied to observe therein this order:
first to undertake those differences which could not be determined otherwise
then by force; and rather to defer, and hold in suspense the other for a
certain time, which were or might be discussed by equity and justice: such as
were the general differences between our good subjects, and the particular
aggrieuances of the more sound parts of our State, which we supposed might more
easily be cured by removing the principal cause thereof, which was the
continuance of the civil war. Wherein (by Gods special grace) having had
good and happy success; and hostility and arms being laid apart in all the
interior parts of the kingdom, we hope it will succeed no worse also in other
affairs which yet remain to be compounded: and that by this means we shall
obtain the establishment of a good peace, and quiet repose, which was ever the
butt and aim of all our vows and intentions, and the only prize and reward
we look for after such wonderful travail and pains wherein we have passed
the course of our life. Among the said affairs which required our patience,
and one of the most principal, was the complaints we daily received from many
of our Catholic Provinces and Towns, in that the exercise of the Catholic
Religion was not generally reestablished, as the Edicts heretofore made for the
Pacification of troubles through the occasion of Religion imported. As also the
Supplications and Remonstrances exhibited unto us by our subjects of the
pretended reformed Religion, both for the execution of that accorded unto them
by the said Edicts, as further for that they desired there might be added for
the practice of their said Religion, the the liberty of their consciences, and
the security of their persons and goods: presuming they had just occasion of
new and more fearful apprehensions, by reason of these last commotions and
insults, the principal pretext and foundation whereof was for their ruin.
Wherefore not to ouercharge our selves with too many businesses at one instant,
and likewise that the fury of Arms might not interrupt the establishment of
laws, how good or behoouefull soever, we deferred from time to time the
provision and care hereof. But now since it has pleased God to give a
beginning for our enioyance of some better repose and quiet, we esteem that we
cannot better employ it, then in prosecuting and intending that which
concerns the service and glory of his holy Name, procuring that it may be
adored and prayed unto by all our subjects: and though it yet stand not with
his pleasure, that this should be under one and the same form of Religion,
notwithstanding that it might be at least with one intention and meaning, and
with such government that no vprores or tumults might accrue between them: and
that our selves and this kingdom might always deserve and preserve the
glorious title of Most Christian, which was purchased so long time since, and
with so many worthy demerits: and so by the same means to supplant the cause
of all molestations and troubles which might ensue hereafter upon the point of
Religion, which has ever been the most preualent and penetrant of all others.
For the same occasion, observing this affair to be of such high consequence,
and worthy of deep and weighty consideration, after a reuoluing of all
Registers of the complaints of our Catholic subjects, and having also
permitted our said subjects of the said pretended reformed Religion, to
assemble by deputies for the exhibiting of their aggrieuances, and for reducing
together all their said Remonstrances: and having conferred with them diverse
times upon this point, and reuiewed the precedent Edicts; We have thought is
convenient to enact at this time generally for all our subjects a Law
universal, clear, plain, and absolute, by which they shall be limited and
governed in all differences that have heretofore grown between them in these
points, or that may hereafter happen, and wherein both the one and the other
may remain satisfied, according as the quality of the present times does
permit: Our selves being entered into this deliberation, for no other end but
out of the zeal we bear to the service of God, and that from this time
forward there may be ratified and confirmed between our said subjects a firm
and perpetual Peace. Wherein we both inuoke and attend from his divine
Majesty, the same protection and favor which he has ever most evidently
conferred upon this Kingdom from the erection thereof, and during the many
ages it has continued: and that he will bestow the grace upon our said
subjects, truly to apprehend, that in the observation of this our ordinance and
Decree, (next to their immediate duties toward God and Our selves) consists
the maine foundation of their union and concord, tranquillity, and repose, and
the restoration of this whole Estate to her original splendour, opulencie, and
power. Even as We on our part promise to procure it most exactly to be
performed, without permitting it in any sort to be disanulled or broken. For
these reasons, having by the advice of the Princes of our blood, of other
Princes and Officers of the Crown, and of other eminent and remarquable
persons of our Counsel and Estate near about us, maturely and diligently
wayed and considered this whole business: by this perpetual and irreuocable
Edict we have denounced, declared, and ordained, and do denounce, declare, and
ordain.

I.
First, that the memorial of all things passed, both of the one side and the
other, from the begnning of the month of March 1585. till Our coming to the
Crown, and during the other precedent troubles, or by means of them, shall
remain extingushed and razed out, as matters that never had happened. And it
shall not be permitted nor lawful for our Procurors general, neither for any
other persons whosoever, public or private, at any time or upon any occasion
whatsoever, to make mention thereof, or to commence any process or suit
thereupon in any Courts or Jurisdictions wheresoever.

II.
We forbid all our subjects, of what estate or quality soever they be, to
renew any memory, to assail, urge, iniurie', or provoke one another by way of
reproach for what is past, upon any cause or pretext soever: to debate
thereupon, to contest, quarrel, outrage, or offend either in word or deed: but
to forbear and live peaceably together, as brethren, friends, and fellow
citizens: upon penalty, for the delinquents to be punished as breakers of the
peace, and disturbers of public quiet.

III.
We Enact, that the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Religion, shall be
reestablished and restored in all the places and parts of this our Kingdom and
country under our obedience, where the exercise thereof has been interrupted,
there to be peaceably and freely put in practice, without any hinderance or
disturbance. Forbidding expressly all persons, of what estate, quality, or
condition soever they be, upon the penalty above mentioned, no ways to
trouble, molest, or disturb Ecclesiastical persons in the celebration of
divine Service, the enioyance or taking of tithes, the fruits and revenues of
their benifices, with all other rights and inmunit^^s to them appertaining; and
that all they who during the troubles seized on the Churches, houses, goods, or
revenues belonging to the said persons Ecclesiastical, or that detain and
possess them, shall surtender unto the said Ecclesiastickes, the entire
possession and peaceable enioyance thereof, with such title, liberties, and
security, as they had before they were disseized thereof. We also expressly
forbid those of the said pretended reformed Religion, to make any Sermons, or
perform any other exercise of the said Religion in the Churches, houses, or
habitations of the said Ecclesiastickes.

IIII.
It shall remain at the choice of the said Ecclesiastickes, either to buy such
houses and buildings erected in places profane whereof they were disposessed
during the troubles, or else to constrain the owners of the said buildings to
purchase the ground, even conformable to the valuation made thereof by
experienced men, which both the parties shall bring together: and in case they
do not agree, the Judges of the places shall give order herein: reserving ever
unto the said possessors their peculiar remedy to whom soever it shall belong.
And where the said Ecclesiastickes shall constrain the possessors to purchase
the ground, the estimate money shall not be put into their hands, but the said
possessors shall remain charged with it, to yield profit therefore after the
twentieth penny while it has been thus let out for the benefit of the Church:
and this shall be in the compass of a year. And the same term being past,
if the purchasor will no longer continue the said rent or profit, he shall be
thereof discharged, by assigning over the money to the party to whom it is due
by order and course of Justice. And for sacred places course shall be taken by
the Commissaries that are ordained for the execution of this present Edict,
being by us constituted for the same end.

V.
Notwithstanding no ground nor places occupied for the reparation and
fortification of towns, and places within our kingdom, nor the materials
therein used, can be challenged or recovered by the said Ecclesiastickes, or any
other public or private persons, but then only when the said reparations and
fortifications shall be demolished by our Ordinances.

VI.
And that there may remain no occasion of difference or contention betweeue
our subjects, we have and do permit those of the said pretended reformed
Religion, to live and reside in all the towns and places of this our Kingdom
and country under our obedience, without being urged, molested, troubled, or
constrained to perform any thing in matter of Religion contrary to their
conscience: neither by reason thereof to be searched or sought after in houses
or places where they would inhabit, in all other things bearing themselves
according as it is comprehended in this our present Edict.

VII.
We have also permitted all Lords, Gentlemen, and other persons, as well
inhabiters within the Kingdom, as others making profession of the pretended
reformed Religion, enjoying within our Kingdom and the country under our
obedience, high Title (or full fee of the Halbard) as in Normandy, being in
propriety, or Vse-fruict, in the whole, or in the moyetie, or Like our tenor
of knights service.
for a third part, to have in any such of their houses or manors of high
Title, or fee of the Halbard above specified, which they shall be bound to
deliver before our Baylifes and Stewards, every one within his limits for
their principal habitation, the exercise of the said Religion, while they are
there resident; and in their absence, their wives or their family, or any part
of the same. And though the right of Justice in this case, or the full fee of
the Halbart be yet in controversy, yet the exercise of the said Religion may
there be performed, provided that the aboue-named be then in actual possession
of the said high Justice or Title, though our Procuror general be departed. We
permit them also to have the said exercise in their other houses of this high
Justice, or fees above mentioned of the Halbart, while they are there present
and not otherwise; the whole, as well for themselves, their family and people,
as also for others that would repair thither.

VIII.
In the houses of such infeoffed or those of the said Religion, they shall not
have the said high Justice or fee of the Halbart, neither shall they perform
the said exercise but only for their family. And yet we do not mean that if
any other persons chance to come in, to the number of thirty above their
proper family, whether it be by occasion of baptism, visitation of their
friends, or otherwise; that they should be prosequuted or sought after: so in
like manner; that the said houses be not within any Towns, borroughes, or
villages, belonging to any Chatholicke Lords, high Iusticers, besides our
selves, wherein the said Lords Catholic have their mansions. In which case
those of the said Religion shall not within the said Towns, borroughes, or
villages perform the said exercise, except by permission and leave of the said
high Lords, high Iusticers, and not otherwise.

IX.
We permit also those of the said Religion, to discharge and continue the
exercise of the same in all the Towns and places under our obedience, where it
was established and performed by them publickely sundry and diverse times, in
the year a thousand five hundred fourscore and sixteen, and in the year a
thousand five hundred fourscore and seventeen, till the end of the month of
August; notwithstanding all Decrees and judgments to the contrary.

X.
The said exercise in like manner may be established and reestablished in all
the Towns and places where it has or might be established by the Edict of
Pacification made in the year threescore and seventeen, the particular
Articles and conferences of Ne^ac, and Flex: without that the same
reestablishment shall be disturbed in the places within the Demaine granted by
the said Edict, Articles and Conferences, for places of Bailiwickes, or that
hereafter shall be, though they have been since alienated to Catholic
persons, or hereafter shall be. And yet we intend not that the said exercise
shall be reestablished in the parts and places of the said Demaine which have
been heretofore possessed by those of the said pretended reformed Religion,
whither it shall have been brought in consideration of their present persons,
or by reason of the privilege of their fees, if the said fees at the said
present be possessed by people of the Catholic, Roman, Apostolic Religion.

XI.
Moreover in every one of the ancient Bailiwickes, Stewardships, and
Governments holding the place of a Bailiwicke, having mere reference and
without mediation to the Courts of Parliament: We ordain and constitute, that
in the suburbs of a Town, besides those accorded unto them in the said Edict,
particular Articles, and Conferences, and where there are no great Towns, in a
borrough or village, that the exercise of the said pretended reformed Religion
may publicly be performed for all such as will thither repair, though in the
said Bailiwickes, Stewardships, and Governments there may be many places where
the said exercise is at this present established: ever excepted for the said
place of Bailiwicke newly granted by the present Edict, the Cities wherein
reside any Archbishop, or Bishop: and yet those of the said pretended reformed
Religion shall not for all this be deprived of the mean to demand and nominate
for the said place of the said exercise, the Borroughes or villages near to
the same Cities: excepted also places and Seignories belonging to
Ecclesiastical persons, where we do not intend, that the said second place of
Bailiwicke may be established; we having by special grace and favor reserved
and excepted them. We conceive and understand under the title of ancient
Bailiwickes, those which were in the time of the late King Henry, our most
honorable Lord, and father in law, held for Bailiwickes, Stewardships and
Governments, having immediate reference to our said Courts.

XII.
We mean not by this present Edict to derogate from the Edicts and Accords
heretofore made for the reducing of any Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and
Catholic towns under our obedience, in that which concerns the exercise of
the said Religion, the which Edict and Accords shall be entertained and
observed for this respect, according as it shall stand with the instructions of
such Commissaries as shall be appointed for the execution of this present Edict.

XIII.
We expressly forbid all those of the said Religion to perform any exercise
thereof, either in the behalf of the Ministry, Government, Discipline, or
public instruction of children and others in this our Kingdom and country
under our obedience, in that which concerns Religion, in any other places,
but those permitted and granted by this present Edict.

XIIII.
As also to perform any exercise of the said Religion in our Court or
Attendance, nor likewise in our lands or countries which are beyond the
mountains, neither in our City of Paris, nor within five miles of the said
City: notwithstanding those of the said Relion remaining in the said lands and
countries beyond the mountains, and in our said City, and five miles about
the same, shall not be searched nor sought after in their houses, nor
constrained to do any thing in respect of their Religion against their
conscience: bearing themselves in other matters according as is comprehended in
this present Edict.

XV.
Neither shall the public exercise of the said Religion be performed in
Armies, but only in the quarters of such Chieftaines as make profession
thereof, nevertheless, not where our proper person shall belodged.

XVI.
Conformable to the second Article of the Conference of Nerac, we permit those
of the said Religion to build places for the exercise thereof, in towns and
places accorded upon: and those shall be restored to them they have heretofore
built, or the soil and ground of them in the same estate it is in at this
present, that is to say, the places where the same exercise is not instantly
permitted, except they have been converted into some other nature of edifices.
In which case, there shall be given them by the possessors of the said
edifices, places and buildings of the same price and value that they were of
before they were built, or the just estimation of them, by the judgment of men
expert in those things. Reserved always for the said proprietaries and
possessors, their remedy against whomsoever it shall lie.

XVII.
We prohibit all Preachers, Lecturers, and others that teach publickely, to
use any words, speech or discourse which may tend to excite the people to
sedition: but contrariwise we have and do enjoin them to contain and bear
themselves modestly, and to utter nothing which shall not be for the
instruction and edification of their auditors, and to the maintenance of that
tranquillity and peace by us estableshed within our said Kingdom; upon the
penalties enacted by our precedent Edicts: Most expressly enioyning our
Procurors general and their substitutes, to inform out of their office against
those who shall herein offend, upon penalty of answering for it in their
proper and peculiar persons, and by the privation of their offices.

XVIII.
We also forbid all our subjects, of what quality or condition soever they be,
to draw by force or any other manner of induction against the parents consent,
children of the said Religion, to cause them to be baptized or confirmed in the
Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church: as likewise the same prohibition is
made to those of the said pretended reformed Religion, and that under penalty
of suffering exemplarie punishment,

XIX.
Those of the said pretended reformed Religion shall no ways be constrained,
nor remain bound by reason of any abiuration, promise or oath formerly made,
or cautions by them given, concerning the practice of the said Religion,
neither shall they hereupon be molested or troubled in any sort whatsoever.

XX.
They shall also be bound to observe all festival days bidden and diuulged in
the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church, neither shall they work on those
days, sell no^ retaile in open shop, neither shall trade or handicrafts men
work out of their shops, or in close chambers or houses on festival days and
other prohibited days, in any profession or mystery, the noise whereof may be
heard without by neighbors or those passing along: which nevertheless shall
not be sought or looked into, but only by officers of Justice.

XXI.
Neither shall the books touching the said pretended Religion be imprinted or
publicly sold, but in Towns and places where the public exercise of the
said Religion is permitted. And for other books which shall be printed in other
places, they shall be viewed and perused, as well by our officers as by
divines, as our Ordinances therein do import. We expressly forbid the impression,
publication, and vent of all books, libels, and defamatorie writings, upon the
penalty set down in our Ordinances, enioyning all our Judges and officers to
have a special care therein.

XXII.
We enact, that there shall be no difference or distinction made in respect of
the said Religion, to entertain scholars to be instructed in Universities,
Colleges and schools, and the sick and poor in hospitals, guest-houses, and
public alms houses.

XXIII.
They of the pretended reformed Religion shall be bound to observe the laws of
the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church received in this our kingdom, in
the point of marriages contracted and to be contracted, within the degrees of
consanguinitie and affinity.

XXIIII.
In like manner those of the said Religion shall pay the rights of entry, as
has been accustomed for the charges and offices appointed for their use,
without being urged to be present at any ceremonies contrary to their said
Religion: and being cited by oath, they shall be bound to do it no otherwise
then by lifting up their hand, by swearing and promising unto God that they
will speak the truth, neither shall they be constrained to dispense with the
oath by them made in passing of contracts and obligations.

XXV.
We will and ordain, that all those of the pretended reformed Religion and
others who have followed their party, of what estate or quality soever they
be, shall be bound and obliged by all due and reasonable means, and under the
penalties comprehended in the Edicts hereupon made, to pay and clear the
tenthes to Curates and other Ecclesiastical persons, and to all others to whom
they appertain, according to the use and custom of the places.

XXVI.
All disinheriting and priuations, whether by disposition of those living, or
testamentaries, made only in hatred, or by reason of Religion, as well for the
time past as that to come, shall take no place.

XXVII.
The better to reunite the wills of our subjects according to our intention,
and to prevent all complaints hereafter to come, we denounce all those that do
or shall make profession of the said pretended reformed Religion, capable to
hold and discharge all estates, dignities, offices, and public charges
whatsoever, Royal, Lordly, or of the Cities, Lands, Countries, and Seigniories
within our obedience, notwithstanding all oaths to the contrary, and to be
indifferently admitted thereunto: and our Courts of Parliament and other Judges
shall be pleased to enquire and take notice of the life, manners, Religion, and
honest conversation, of those who are or shall be invested into offices, as
well of the one as of the other Religion, without taking any other oath of
them, then well and faithfully to serve the king in the discharge of their
functions, and to observe the Ordinances as they have been observed in all
times. And when any vacancie of the said estates, places, and offices shall
happen, for those that lie in our disposition, we will indifferently furnish
them, and without any distinction, with persons capable, as a thing that
concerns the union of our subjects. We intend also, that they of the
pretended reformed Religion shall be admitted and received to all counsels,
deliberations, and functions which depend on the above said matters; without
that for cause of Religion they be rejected or hindered from enjoying this
privilege.

XXVIII.
We ordain, for interring of the dead of those of the said Religion within all
the Towns and places of this Kingdom, that in each place (by our Officers and
Magistrates, or by the Commissaries whom we shall depute for the execution of
this present Edict) there be as commodious a place allotted them for this
purpose as may be. And such Churchyards as heretofore they had, and whereof
they were deprived by reason of the troubles, shall be restored them, except
they be at that present built upon, of what quality soever they be, in which
case they shall be provided of others at free cost.

XXIX.
We most expressly enjoin our said officers to have a care, that at the said
interments no scandal be committed: and they shall be bound within fifteen
days after request made, to provide those of the said Religion of a commodious
place for their said burials, without using any delay or protraction therein;
under penalty of five hundred crowns, to be seissed on their proper names and
persons. The said officers also as well as all others are prohibited to execute
nothing for the conueyance of the said dead bodies, upon penalty of severe
punishment.

XXX.
To the end that justice may be yielded and ministered to our subjects without
any partiality, hatred, or favor, as being one of the principal means to
maintain them in peace and concord: we have and do ordain that in our Court
of Parliament of Paris shall be established a Chamber or Counsel of estate,
consisting of one President and sixteen Counselors of the said Parliament,
which shall be called and entitled the Chamber of the Edict: and it shall
examine not only the causes and processes of those of the said pretended
reformed Religion which shall be within the jurisdiction of the said Court, but
also of those depending on our Courts of Normandy and Brettaine, according to
the immunitie conferted upon it by this present Edict; and this to go current
until in each of the said Parliaments there be established a Chamber to
minister justice in their proper precincts. We also ordain, that of the four
offices of Counselors in our said Parliament of Paris, being of the last
erection by us made, there shall be presently received and entertained into the
said Parliament four of those of the said pretended reformed Religion,
sufficient and capable, who shall be thus distributed; the first received into
the said Chamber of the Edict, and the other three in order as they have been
received into three of the Chambers of Inquests: and moreover that of the two
first offices of lay Counselors of the said Court which by the death of any
one shall grow vacant, they shall be furnished with two of the said pretended
reformed Religion, and they thus received to be distributed into the two other
Chambers of Inquests.

XXXI.
Besides the chamber heretofore established at Castres for a reference to our
Court of Toulouse, which shall continue in the estate it now stands, we have
and for the same consideration do ordain, that in each of our Courts of
Parliament both of Grenoble and Bourdeaux, there shall be likewise a Chamber
consisting of two Presidents, the one a Catholic, and the other of the
pretended reformed Religion, and of twelve Counselors, whereof six shall be
Catholics, and the other six of the said Religion: which Presidents and
Catholic Counselors shall be selected and chosen by us out of the body of
our said Courts. And as for those of the said Religion, there shall a new
creation be made of a President and six Counselors for the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, and of a President and three Counselors for that of Grenoble: who
with the three Counselors of the said Religion which are at that present in
the said Parliament, shall be employed in the said Chamber of the Daulphiney.
And the said offices of the new creation shall be liable to the same pensions,
honors, authorities, and preheminences as the other of the said Courts. And
the said Sessio^ of the said Chamber of Bourdeaux shall be in the said
Bourdeaux or at Nerac, and that of Daulphiney at Grenoble

XXXII.
The said Chamber of Daulphiney shall determine the causes of those of the
pretended reformed Religion with reference to our Parliament of Prouence,
without having need to take letters of summons or other citations then in our
Chamber of Daulphiney: as also they of Normandy and Brettaine of the said
Religion shall not be urged to take letters of summons or other citations, then
in our Chancerie at Paris.

XXXIII.
Our subjects of the Religion of the Parliament of Burgundy shall have the
election and choice to plead in the Chamber erected in the Parliament of Paris
or in that of Daulphiney. And they shall not also be tied to take letters of
summons or any other citations, but in the said Chanceries of Paris or
Daulphiney, according to their own opinion and liking.

XXXIIII.
All the said Chambers disposed as aforesaid, shall determine and judge in
sovereignty and sentence definitive, by final decree before all other, of
suites and differences moved and to be moved; in which they of the pretended
reformed Religion shall be principal parties or warranties in cases of
plaintiff or defendant, in all matters, as well civil as criminal, whether
the said process be by writ or verbal appeals: and that if it so seem good
to the parties, or that one of them requires it, before any Plea in the cause,
in respect of suit to be commenced: always excepted matters of benefices, and
the possessors of tenthes not enfeoffed, Ecclesiastical patronages, and causes
wherein the rights and Demaine of the Church are questioned: all which shall be
ended and judged in the Courts of Parliament; without that the said Chambers of
the Edict shall have any thing to do to determine therein. As also our pleasure
is, that to judge and recide criminal causes, which shall happen between the
said Ecclesiastickes and those of the pretended reformed Religion, if the
person Ecclesiastical be defendant in this case, the judgment of the
criminal cause shall belong priuatiuely to our Sovereign Courts of the said
Chambers, and where the Ecclesiasticke shall be plaintiff, and he of the said
Religion defendant, the judgment and determination of the criminal cause
shall belong, by appeal and in the last reference, to our said established
Chambers. The said Chambers also in vacation times, shall determine of matters
referred by the Edicts and Ordinances to the Chambers or Courts established in
times of vacation, each one in his proper prerogative.

XXXV.
The Chamber of Grenoble shall from this present be united and incorporated to
the body of the said Court of Parliament, and the Presidents and Counselors of
the said pretended reformed Religion entitled Presidents and Counselors of the
said Court, and held in the rank and number of them; and for these ends they
shall be first disposed of in the other Chambers, and then culled and drawn
out from them, to be employed and to serve in that which we institute anew;
with iniunction notwithstanding, that they shall be present and have a voice
and session in all deliberations made, and Counsels assembled; and shall enjoy
the same pensions, preuiledges, and preheminences which the other Counselors
and Presidents of the Court do.

XXXVI.
Our meaning and pleasure is, that the said Chambers of Castres and Bourdeaux
should be reunited and incorporated into those Parliaments in the same manner
as the others, when need shall be, and that the causes which have moved us to
make any establishment thereof, may cease and have no more place among our
subjects: and the Presidents and Counselors of the same for these ends, being
of the said Religion, shall be held for Presidents and Counselors of the said
Courts.

XXXVII.
There shall be also newly created and chosen in the Chamber ordained for the
Parliament of Bourdeaux, two Substitutes of our Procuror and Advocate General,
whereof he in deputation to the Procuror shall be a Catholic, and the other
of the said Religion: who shall discharge the said offices for competent
pensions.

XXXVIII.
Neither shall the said Substitutes take upon them any other quality then of a
Substitute, and when the Chambers ordained for the Parliament of Toulouse and
Bourdeaux shall be united and incorporated into the said Parliaments, the said
Substitutes shall be provided of Counselors places in the same.

XXXIX.
The expeditions of the Chancerie of the Chamber of Bourdeaux shall be
performed in the presence of the two Counselors of the same Chamber, whereof
the one shall be a Catholic, and the other of the said pretended reformed
Religion, in the absence of one of the master of Requests of our Hostell, and
one of the Notaries and Secretaries of the said Court of Parliament of
Bourdeaux, shall make residence in the place where the said Chamber shall be
established, or else one of the ordinary Secretaries of the Chancerie, to
seal the expeditions of the said Chancerie.

XL.
We will and command, that in the said Chamber of Bourdeaux there be two
Co^mitties of the Greffier of the said Parliament, the one civil the other
criminal, which shall exercise their charges by our Commissions, and shall be
called Committies of the Greffe Civil and Criminal, and therefore they cannot
be revoked nor displaced by the said Griffiers of the Parliament: and yet they
shall be tied to yield the emoluments of the said Griffiers to the said
Griffiers, the which Committies shall be hired by the said Griffiers according
as it shall be advised and arbitrated by the said Chamber. Besides there shall
be ordained certain Catholic Deputies: which shall be appointed by the said
Court or otherwhere according to our good pleasure: besides which there shall
be newly erected two of the said Religion, and freely hired: and all the said
deputies shall be governed by the said Chamber, both in the execution and
discharge of their places, as in the profits they do receive. A Commission also
shall be dispatched for a payer of pensions, and a receiver of fines for the
said Chamber, to be provided therein as shall be pleasing to us, if the Chamber
be established in any other place then in the said City. And the Commission
heretofore agreed upon to the Payer of pensions of the Chamber of Castres,
shall take full authority and commission: and the Commission for the receipt of
fines in the said Chamber, shall be enjoined to the same charge.

XLI.
There shall be provided sufficient Assignements for the pensions of the
Officers ordained by the said Edict.

XLII.
The Presidnts, Counselors, and other Catholic Officers of the said
Chambers, shall be continued as long as possibly may be, and as we shall find
it most expedient for our service, and the good of our subjects: and in
dismissing some, others shall be constituted in their places before their
departure; and they shall not depart during the time of their service, nor
absent themselves from the said Chamber, without their leave, which shall be
judged by the procedings of the Ordinance.

XLIII.
The said Chambers shall be established within six months, during which (if
the establishment continue so long a settling) the su^es moved or to be moved,
wherein those of the said Religion shall be party, from the authority of our
Courts of Parliaments of Paris, Roan, Dion, and Rhemes, they shall be called to
the Chamber established presently at Paris by virtue of the Edict of the year
a thousand five hundred three score and seventeen, or else to the grand
Counsel at the election and choice of those of the said Religion, if they
demand it: those that are of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, into the Chamber
established at Castres, and into the said grand Counsel at their choice: and
those that are of Prouence into the Parliament of Grenoble. And if the said
Chambers be not established within three months after presentation there made
of this our present Edict, he of our Parliaments that makes refusal, shall be
prohibited to judge or determine of causes touching those of the said Religion.

XLIIII.
Suits not yet determined hanging in the said Courts of Parliament and grand
Council of the quality aboue-mentioned, shall be returned, in what state
soever they stand, into the said Chambers, each cause to his Court of
reference, if one of the parties of the said Religion require it, within four
months after the establishment thereof: and as for such as shall be
discontinued and are not in state to be judged and determined, the
aboue-mentioned of the Religion shall be bound to make a declaration to the
first intimation and signification of the pursuit which shall be made unto
them: and the said term being once past, they shall no more be admitted to
demand the said Returns.

XLV.
The said Chambers of Grenoble and Bourdeaux, as also that of Castres, shall
observe the form and style of Parliaments in the precincts where they shall be
established, and they shall judge in equal number both of the one and other
Religion, except the parties agree on the contrary.

XLVI.
All Judges who are sought unto for the execution of judgments and commissions
of the said Chambers, or letters obtained out of the Chanceries thereof: and
also all Officers and Sergeants shall be bound to put them in execution, and
the said Officers and Sergeants to perform all their executions in every part
of our Kingdom, without demanding placet, visa, ne pareatis, upon penalty of
suspension of their places, and paying the damages, charges, and interests of
the parties: the censure whereof shall belong to our said Chambers.

XLVII.
No reuocation of causes shall be agreed upon, the trial whereof is referred
to the said Chambers, except in the case of Ordinances, the reuocation whereof
shall belong to the nearest Chamber established according to our Edict: and the
issues of suits of the said Chambers shall be tried in the next Chamber,
observing the proportion and form of the said Chambers from whence the
process proceeds: except for the Chamber of the Edict in our Parliament of
Paris, where the processes depending shall be disposed of in the same Chamber,
by the Judges which by us shall be nominated by our particular letters to this
effect, except the parties had rather attend the renouation of the said Chamber
or Court. And if it happen that the same process be commenced in all the
Chambers separately, the issue thereof shall be returned to the said Chamber of
Paris.

XLVIII.
Refusals brought in against the Presidents and Counselors of the Chambers
distinctly, may be determined by the number of six, to which number the
parties shall be restrained, otherwise it shall go forward without any regard
had to the said Refusals.

XLIX.
The examination of Presidents and Counselors newly chosen in the said
Chambers by equal numbers, shall be made by our privy Counsel, or by the said
Chambers, each one within its precinct, when they are met in sufficient number:
and yet the accustomed oath shall by them be exhibited in the Courts where the
said Chambers shall be established, and upon their refusal, in our privy
Counsel; except those of the Chamber of Languedoc, who shall take their oath
from the hands of our Chancellor, or in the said Chamber.

L.
We will and ordain, that the reception of our Officers of the said Religion,
shall be judged in the same several Chambers by the plurality of voices, as
is usual in other judgments, not being requisite that the voices should
differ two thirds, according to the Ordinance, the which in this respect
remains abrogated.

LI.
All propositions, deliberations, and resolutions, pertaining to public
peace, and for the particular estate and policy of Towns, shall be made in
the said several Chambers, and in the said Towns where the said Chambers
reside.

LII.
The article of the jurisdiction of the said Chambers ordained by this present
Edict, shall be followed and observed according to form and tenor thereof,
especially in that which concerns the execution, omission, or violation of
our Edicts, when those of the said Religion shall be parties.

LIII.
The subalternate royal Officers or others, the reception of whom belongs to
our Courts of Parliaments, if they be of the same pretended reformed Religion,
may be examined and received in the said Chambers: that is to say, those of the
dependant Courts of the Parliaments of Paris, Normandy, and Brettaine, in the
said Chamber of Paris: those of Daulphiney and Prouence, in the Chamber of
Grenoble; those of Burgundy in the said Chamber of Paris or Daulphiney, at
their choice: those of the Precincts of Toulouse, in the Chamber of Castres;
and those of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, in the Chamber of Guyenne; and no
other to oppose their admissions or make parties, but our Procurors general
and their Substitutes, and those placed in the said offices: yet nevertheless
the accustomed oath shall by them be exhibited in the Courts of parliaments,
which shall have no jurisdiction in their said receptions: and upon the refusal
of the said Parliaments, the said Officers shall minister the oath in the said
Chambers; which being so ministered, they shall be bound by some Clerk or
Notarie, to present the act of their receptions to the Greffiers or Registers
of the said Courts of Parliaments, and to leave a compared copy thereof with
the said Greffier or Register: who are enjoined to register the said acts upon
penalty of paying all the charges, damages, and interests of the parties; and
if the said Registers refuse to do it, it shall be sufficient for the said
Officers to bring the act of the said reception drawn by the said Registers or
Notarie, and to cause the same to be registered in the greffe or roll of their
jurisdictions, there to be viewed when need shall require, upon penalty of
annihilating their proceedings and judgments. And as for those Officers whose
reception was not accustomed to be made in our said Parliaments, in case they
whom it concerns make refusal to proceed in the said examination and
reception, the said Officers shall repair to the said Chambers, to be
furnished as they ought.

LIIII.
The Officers of the said pretended reformed Religion which shall hereafter be
chosen to serve within the bodies of our said Courts of Parliaments, Grand
Counsel, Chamber of Accounts, Court of Aids, Receivers for the Treasurers
general of France, and other Officers of the Exchequers, shall be axamined and
received in the places where they use to be: and in case of refusal and
denial of justice, they shall be constituted in our privy Council.

LV.
The reception of Officers made in the Chamber heretofore established at
Castres shall remain in force, notwithstanding all Judgments or Ordinances to
the contrary: the reception also of Judges, Counselors, and other Officers
of the said Religion made in our privy Counsel shall be validious, or those
chosen by Commissaries by us ordained upon the refusal of our Courts of
parliament, of the Aids, or Chambers of Accounts, even as if they had been
made in the same Courts and Chambers, and by the other Judges to whom such
receptions appertain; and their pensions shall be allowed by the Chambers of
Accounts without scruple: and if any have been dismissed, they shall be
reestablished without any further command then this present Edict, and the said
Officers shall not stand bound to present any other reception, notwithstanding
all Decrees passed to the contrary, which shall remain inualidious and of no
effect.

LVI.
Until means be procured to defray the expenses of the Justice of our said
Chamber out of the moneys of fines or confiscations, we will assign a valuable
and sufficient proportion to discharge the said expenses, without leuying
monyes out of the goods of those condemned.

LVII.
The Presidents and Counselors of the said pretended reformed Religion
heretofore received into our Court of Daulphiney, and into the Chamber of the
Edict, incorporated into the same, shall continue, and hold their Sessions and
places there, that is to say, the Presidents, as they have and do enjoy at this
present, and the Counselors according to the Judgments and Decrees which
they have obtained in our privy Counsel.

LVIII.
We further declare, that all sentences, Judgments, Decrees, Seizures, Vents,
and Orders set down and established against those of the pretended reformed
Religion, as well living as dead, since the departure of the late King Henry
the second our most honorable Lord and Father in law, by reason of the said
Religion, troubles, and tumults since happened, together with the execution of
the same Decrees, from this present to be razed, revoked, and nullified. We
ordain that they shall be razed and wiped out of our Registers of the Stewards
of Courts, as well sovereign as inferior: as likewise our pleasure is, that
all marks, footsteps, and monuments of the said executions, books, and Acts
defamatorie to their persons, memorial and posterity, shall be removed and
defaced: and that the places where upon these occasions, any ruins, or
demolitions have been made, shall be restored in the same condition they were,
to the proprietaries of the same, to enjoy and dispose of them at their
pleasure. And generally we have revoked, cashiered, and annihilated all
proceedings and informations made for any enterprises whatsoever, pretended
crimes of treason, or others: notwithstanding the which proceedings,
Judgments, and Decrees, comprehending, reunion, incorporation, and
confiscation, our meaning is, that those of the Religion, and others who have
followed their party, and their heirs, shall reenter into the real and
actual possession of all and each of their goods.

LIX.
All procedings made, Judgments an decrees given during the troubles against
those of the said Religion that have borne arms, or withdrawn themselves out
of our Realm, or within the same, into towns and countries by them held for
some other occasion then that of Religion and the troubles, together with all
exemptions of instances, prescriptions, as well legal and conuentionall, as
those usual and customarie, and feodall seizures accrewing during the said
troubles, or by lawful impediments arising thereof, and whereof the censure
remains in our Judges, shall be esteemed as not performed, happened, nor
granted, and such we have and do declare them to be, and have and do
annihilate, and the parties shall have no aid nor authority herefrom: but
they shall be restored to the same estate wherein before they stood,
notwithstanding the judgments and executions of them, and the possession shall
be restored to them wherein they were, for this respect. That above mentioned
shall likewise take place, in respect of others who have followed the party of
those of the said Religion, or that have absented themselves out of the
Kingdom by reason of the troubles. And for the younger children of those of the
condition above mentioned, which died during the troubles, we restore the
parties to the same estate wherein they were before, without paying charges, or
being bound to bring in any forfaites: but yet we do not mean, that Judgments
denounced by Presidentall Iudgdes or other inferior Judges, against those of
the said Religion, or that have followed their party, should remain
inualidious, if they have been denounced by Judges keeping their Sessions in
towns by them held, and whither they had free access.

LX.
The Judgments denounced in our Courts of Parliament, in matters the decision
whereof belongs to the Chambers ordained by the Edict of the year 1577. and
the Articles of Nerac and Flex, in which Courts the parties procecded not
voluntarily, that is to say, they have alleged and propounded ends
declinatorie, or which have been denounced through defaut or misprision, as
well in matters civil as criminal, notwithstanding the which ends, the said
parties have been constrained to go forward, shall likewise be annihilated and
of no worth. And in respect of Judgments given against those of the said
Religion, who have proceeded voluntarily without propounding declinatorie
ends, those Judgments shall remain in force: and yet without prejudice to
the execution of them, they may if they think good, take some course by way of
civil request before the Chambers ordained by this present Edict, and the time
run set down by the Ordinancies, shall be no prejudice to them: and until
the said Chambers and their Chanceries be established, verbal Appeals, or
those by writing, propounded by those of the said Religion, before the Judges,
Registers, or Committies, executors of Sentences and Judgments, shall take the
same effect as if they had been procured by letters patents.

LXI.
In all inquiries made upon what occasion soever, in civil causes, if the
Inquisitor or Commissarie be a Catholic, the parties shall be bound to
appear with one consent: and if they appear not, one shall be taken by virtue
of his Office by the said Inquisitor or Commissarie, who is of the said
pretended reformed Religion: and the like course shall be taken, when the
Commissarie Inquisitor is of the said Religion, for the party which shall be
Catholic.

LXII.
We will and ordain, that our Judges shall determaine of the validity of
Testaments, wherein those of the said Religion shall be interessed, if they
demand it, and the Appeals of the said Judgments may be taken out of the said
Chambers, ordained for pocesses of those of the said Religion, notwithstanding
all customs to the contrary, yea even those of Brettaine.

LXIII.
To prevent all differences which may happen between our Courts of Parliament
and the Chambers of those Courts ordained by our present Edict, we will set
down an ample and plain order between the said Courts and Chambers, and such
as those of the pretended reformed Religion shall have entire benifite of by
the said Edict, which order shall be ratified in our Courts of Parliament, and
observed and kept, without having respect to those precedent.

LXIIII.
We prohibit and forbid all our sovereign Courts and others within this
Kingdom, to determine or Judge the civil or criminal causes of those of the
said Religion, the trial whereof by our Edict is referred to the said
Chambers, so any return be demanded, as was expressed in the fourth Article
above mentioned.

LXV.
Our will also is, by way of care and circumspection, and till we have
otherwise ordained, that in all suits moved or to be commenced, wherein those
of the said Religion shall stand as plaintifes or defendants, parties
principal, or warranties in civil causes wherein our Officers Presidentall
tribunes have power to Judge for a last trial, they be permitted to dema^d
that two of the Chamber where the cause is to be tried, abstain from the
Judgment of them, who without alleging any cause, shall be bound in this case
to abstain, notwithstanding the Ordinance by which the Judges cannot be
excepted against without just cause, there remaining unto them besides this,
Refusals of right against the others: and in matters criminal wherein also the
said Presidents and other royal Judges subalternate, judge with peremptory
trial, the conuented being of the same Religion, may demand that three of the
said Judges abstain from judgment of their causes, without any expression of
cause. And the Prouosts of the Marshals of France, Vicebailifs, Vicemarshals,
Lieutenants of the short Robe, and other Officers of such like quality, shall
judge according to the Ordinances and Rules heretofore set down in respect of
vagabonds: and as for householders charged and ceased with maintenance of
Prouosts, if they be of the said Religion, they may demand that three of the
said Judges abstain from judgment of their causes; and they shall be bound to
abstain, without any expression of cause, except when in the company where
the said causes shall be judged, there be to the number of two in matters
civil, and three in matters criminal of the said Religion, in which case they
shall not be permitted to refuse without allegation of cause: the which shall
likewise be common and reciprocal to Catholics in manner and form above
mentioned, in respect of the refusal of Judges, where those of the said
pretended reformed Religion shall be in greater number. But yet we do not
mean, that the said Presidentall Tribunals, Prouosts of Marshals, Vicebailifs,
Vicemarshals, or other which judge with absolute trial, should take upon them
by virtue of that which has been said, the judgment of tumults and troubles
past: and as for crimes and insolences growing upon other occasions then about
matters of the troubles, from the beginning of the month of March in the year
a thousand five hundred fourscore and five, till the end of the year 1597. in
case they do proceed in trial of them: Our pleasure is, that they may have an
appeal from their Judgments before the Chambers ordained by this present
Edict, as shall in like manner be observed to Catholic accomplices, wherein
those of the said pretended reformed Religion shall be parties.

LXVI.
We also will and ordain, that from this time forward, in all instructions
other then criminal processes in the Stewardships of Thoulouse, Carcassonne,
Rouergue, Loragais, Beziers, Montpellier, and Nismes, the Magistrate or
Commissarie deputed for the said instruction, if he be a Catholic, shall be
bound to take an Associate of the said pretended reformed Religion, whereupon
the parties shall meet; and if it so fall out that they cannot meet, one by
authority shall be taken of the said Religion by the above named Magistrate or
Commissarie: as in like manner, if the said Magistrate or Commissarie be of the
said Religion, he shall be bound in the form above mentioned, to take a
Catholic Assistant.

LXVII.
When any occasion of criminal trial grows by the Prouosts of the Marshals
or any of the Lieutenants, against any one of the said Religion an householder,
who shall be charged and accused of any public crime, the said Prouosts or
their Lieutenants, if they be Catholics, shall be bound to call to the
proceeding of such a matter, an Assistant of the said Religion: the which
Associate shall also judge in judgment of the offense, and in the judgment
definitive of the matter: which offense shall not be tried in any other place
but at the next Presidentall Tribunal, in open assembly, by the principal
Officers of that circuit who are then in place, on pain of being put out of
office, except the conuented require to have the said offense tried in the
Chamber or Courts ordained by this present Edict: in which case, for those
inhabiting in the Provinces of Guyenne, Languedoc, Prouence, and Daulphiney,
the Substitutes of our Procurots General in the said Chambers, at the request
of those inhabitants, shall cause the inditements and informations made against
them to be brought in, to discern and try whether the matters be liable to
Prouosts courts or not, that afterward according to the quality of the crimes,
they may be returned to the ordinary, or Prouostall Judges, as they ought to
do by reason, in observing the contents of this present Edict. And the
Presidentall Judges, Prouosts of Marshals, Vicebailifs, Vnderstewards, and
others that have definitive authority to judge, to obey respectively, and
observe the commandments imposed on them by the said Chambers: even as they
used to do in the said Parliaments, upon pain of forfait of their estates.

LXVIII.
The outcries, public sales by writing, and vendition A custom in France.
of inheritances by the Spear, shall be performed in the places and at the
hours accustomed, if it may be, according to our Ordinances, or else in the
open market places, if in the place where the same inheritances be seated there
be a market place, and where there is none, they shall be made in the next
market place within the precinct of that Session where the judgment should be
passed: and the paper of notice shall be fastened on a post in the said market
place, and at the entry of the Auditorie of the same place: and so by this
means the said public outcries shall be good and validious, and so to go
forward to the interposition of a Decree, without depending on such nullities
as may be alleged in this respect.

LXIX.
All titles, papers, instructions, and informations that have been taken, shall
be rendered and restored of the one side and the other, to those to whom they
appertain, although the said papers, or the Castles or houses wherein they
have been reserved, were taken and seized upon, whether it were by special
Commission from the late last King deceassed, our most honorable Lord and
father in law, or the commandments of the Gonernours and Lieutenants general
of our Provinces, or by authority of the Heads of the other part, or under what
pretext soever it were.

LXX.
The children of such as have retired themselves out of our Kingdom, since the
death of the late King Henry the second, our most honorable Lord and father
in law, by reason of Religion and the present troubles, though the said
children were borne out of the Kingdom, shall be held for true French men, and
subjects, and such we have and do declare them to be: and they shall not need
to sue out letters of naturalitie, or other warranties from us then this
present Edict; notwithstanding all constitutions to the contrary, the which we
have and do abrogate, upon condition that the said children borne in foreign
Countries, shall be bound within ten years after the publication of this Edict
to come and reside within the Kingdom.

LXXI.
Those of the said pretended reformed Religion, and others that have followed
their party, who shall have farmed before the troubles, any Offices or other
Demaines, customs, foreign impositions, or other prerogatives to us
appertaining, the which they could not peaceably enjoy by reason of the same
troubles, shall remain discharged, as we discharge them, of that which they
have not received out of the said farms, or that without fraud they have paid
otherwise then into the Receipts of our Exchequers, notwithstanding all
obligations entered into by them in this respect to the contrary.

LXXII.
All places, Towns, and Provinces of our Realm, Countries, Lands and
Seignories under our obedience, shall use and enjoy the same privileges,
immunities, liberties, enfranchisements, faires, markets, jurisdictions, and
seats of Justice, which they did before the troubles begun in the month of
March in the year 1585. and others preceding; notwithstanding all letters to
the contrary, and the removing of the said seats, so they were made only by
reason of the troubles, which seats shallbe restored and reestablished in the
Towns and places where before they were.

LXXIII.
If there be any prisoners yet detained by authority of Justice or otherwise,
yea even in the Galleys, by reason of the troubles, or of the said Religion,
they shall be enlarged and set at free liberty.

LXXIIII.
Those of the said Religion shall not hereafter be surcharged nor oppressed
with any charges ordinary or extraordinary more then the Catholics, and
according to the proportion of their goods and substance: and the parties that
pretend themselves to be surcharged, may have remedy before the Judges to whom
the ordering thereof belongs: and all our subjects, as well of the Catholic
Religion, as of the pretended reformed, shall be indefferently discharged of
all charges that have been imposed on the one party and the other during the
troubles, upon those that were of the contrary party, and not cohering
together, of debts credited and not paid, and expenses disbursed without their
consents: but so, not to recover those profits which have been employed in the
payment of those charges.

LXXV.
Neither do we mean, that they of the said Religion, and others who have
followed their parties, nor the Catholics who dwelt in the Towns and places
by them occupied and detained, and who have contributed to them, shall be
prosequuted for the payment of taxes, aids, grants, increase, sessments,
wastes, reparations, or other impositions and subsidies, accrewing and imposed
during the troubles happened before and since our coming to the Crown,
whether it were by Edicts and commandments from the late Kings our
Predecessors, or by the counsel and advice of the Governors and States of
Provinces, Courts of Parliament and others, whereof we have and do discharge
them, forbidding our Treasurers general of France, and of our Exchequers, and
Receivers general and particular, their Committies, Intermedlers, and other
Ouer-seers and Commissaries of our Exchequers, to seek after them, neither to
molest or trouble them, directly or indirectly, in any sort whatsoever.

LXXVI.
All Commanders, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Officers, corporations of Towns
and Communalties, and all others who have aided and succored them, their
widows, heirs and successors, shall be quitted and discharged of all moneys
which by them and their Ordinances have been levied and taken up, as well
royal debts to what sum soever they amount, as of Towns and Communalties,
and the particulars of rents, revenues, plate, Vents of Ecclesiastical
moveable goods, and other woods of high growth, whether of Demaine or other
forfeitures, booties, ransoms, or moneys of any other nature, by them raised by
means of the troubles begun in the month of March, a thousand five hundred
fourscore and five, and other precedent troubles, till our coming to the
Crown: neither they, nor those by them authorized for the levy of the said
moneys, or that have given and furnished them by their Ordinances, shall be any
ways troubled for it, either now or hereafter: and both they and their
Committies shall be discharged of all the managing and disbursements of the
said moneys, bringing in for a full discharge within four months after the
publication of this present Edict made in our Court of Parliament of Paris,
acquittances duly taken from the Heads of those of the said reformed Religion,
or from those who by them shall be deputed to the heating and clearing of
Accounts, or from the Communalties of the Towns which had authority and power
during the said troubles. They shall in like manner be quitted and discharged
of all acts of hostility, leuies and conducts of men of war, enhauncing and
raising of moneys, raised according to the Ordinance of the said Heads; the
melting and taking of artilleries and munitions, making of powder, and
saltpeeters, surprisals, fortifications, dismantellings and demolitions of
Towns, Castles, boroughs, or villages; of any enterprise upon them,
combustions, and ruining of Churches or houses, establishments of Justice,
judgments and executions by them, whether in matter civil or criminal, of
any policy or government instituted amongst them, of voyages and
intelligences, of negotiations, Treaties, or any Contracts made with all
foreign Princes or Communalties, and introduction of the said strangers into
Towns or any other part of our Kingdom, and generally of whatsoever has been
done or negotiated during the said troubles, from the death of the late King
Henry our most honorable Lord and father in law, for those of the said
Religion, or others who have followed their party, though it be not
particularly specified nor expressed.

LXXVII.
Those also of the said Religion shall be discharged from all general and
Provincial assemblies by them called or held, as well at Mants as since
elsewhere till this present; likewise of Counsels by them established, and
ordained in the Provinces, of deliberations, Decrees, and Ordinances made in
the said Assemblies, and Counsels, of the establishment or augmentation of
garrisons, assemblies of armed men, leuies and taking up of our moneys, whether
in the hands of our Receiners general or particular, Collectors of Parishes,
or otherwise in what manner soever, the custom of salt, the continuation or
new erection of treaties, impositions, and receipts thereof: that is to say, at
Roan, and upon the rivers of Charante, Garonne, of Rosne and Dordone, fights
and incounters by sea, and of all accidents and violences happening in
procuring the payment of the said treaties, and taxes, and other moneys, of
fortifications of Towns, Castles and places, of the impositions of moneys and
tolles, receipts of the said moneys, of the supplantation of our Receivers,
Farmers and other Officers, of the establishing of others in their places, and
of all unions, negotiations and dispatches made, as well within as without the
Realm: and generally of whatsoever has been done, deliberated, written, and
enacted by the said Assemblies and Counsel: and they who have given their
advice, sealed, executed, or caused to be sealed and executed the said
Ordinances, Orders and deliberations, shall not be questioned herein, nor their
widows, heirs, nor successors, at this present nor hereafter, as well as if
the particularities were here amply set down and declared. And perpetual
silence shall be imposed every where upon our Procurors general, their
Substitutes, and all those who may challenge any interest therein, in what
manner and form soever it be, notwithstanding all Sentences, Decrees,
Judgments, Informations, and proceedings made to the contrary.

LXXVIII.
We further approve, allow, and authorize the accounts which have been taken,
cleared and examined by the Deputies of the said Assembly. We will, that they
together with acquittances and several discharges which have been brought in
by the accomptants, be brought into the Chamber of the Accounts of Paris three
months after the publication of this present Edict, and committed to the
hands of our Procuror general, to be delivered to the custody of him that
keeps the books and Registers of our Chamber, there to be consulted with
upon any necessity whatsoever: and the said accounts never to be reuiewed, nor
the accomptants bound in any appearance or rectifications, but in case of
omission of receipt, or false acquittances; we imposing silence on our said
Procuror general, for the surplussage which might be alleged as defective, or
that formalities were not well observed: forbidding all men of our accounts, as
well in Paris as in other provinces where they be established, to take any
notice thereof, in what manner or form soever.

LXXIX
And as for those accounts which have not yet been broughtin, our pleasure is,
they shall be heard, cleared, and examined, by the Commissaries which by us
shall be thereunto deputed; who without difficulty shall pass and allow of
the said parcels paid by the said accomptants, by authority of the Ordinances
of the said Assembly, or others having power and force.

LXXX.
All Collectors, Receivers, Farmers, and all others well and duly discharged
of all the sums of money which they have well and truly paid to the said
Committies of the said Assembly, of what nature soever they be, until the
last day of this month, we will have them all passed and allowed in our
Accounts, which shall be given up in our Chamber of Accounts, simply and
sincerely by virtue of the acquittance brought in and delivered, and if any
were afterward dispatched or delivered, they shall remain void, and those who
shall deliver or accept of them, shall be condemned in a penalty of false
demeanor and cheuisance. And if there be any accounts already brought in, by
which there remains any reckonings or charges due in this respect, we have
accquitted and cleared them, we have and do reestablish the same parties
absolutely by virtue of these presents, they being no ways required for any
thing above mentioned, to obtain particular letters, or any other testimony
of discharge, then the copy of this present Article.

LXXXI.
The Governors, Captains, Consuls, and persons authorized for the gathering in
of monyes to pay the garrisons held by those of the said Religion, whom our
Receivers and parochial Collectors shall have furnished by way of lone upon
their bills and obligations, whether by constraint, or to obey the commandments
imposed on them by the Treasurors General, the necessary moneys for
entertainment of the said garrisons till the publication of that which was
inferred in the Proclamation, we caused to be dispatched in the beginning of
the year 1596. and the addition thereunto by us granted, shall be held
acquitted and discharged of that which was paid for the effect above mentioned,
although in the said bills and obligations express mention be made thereof,
which shall be returned to them as void. And to give satisfaction herein, the
Treasurers General in each generality, shall cause the said Collectors to
have quittances from the particular Receivers of our taxes, and so from the
Receivers General quittances to pass to the Receivers particular: for
discharge of which Receivers General, the sums which they have to demand by
way of account, as formerly was said, shall be endorsed upon the mandates
presented by the petty Treasurer of the wars, under the names of the
Treasurers General extraordinary of our wars, for the payment of the said
garrisons. And if the mandates amount not to so much as our Proclamation and
addition of the year 1596. imported, We ordain that for the supplying of the
same, new mandates shall be dispatched, to furnish what is wanting for the
discharge of our accomptant, and restitution of the said promises and
obligations, so that nothing may hereafter be demanded of those that passed
them, and that all letters of allowance requisite for the discharge of the
accomptants be granted, by virtue of this present Article.

LXXXII.
They also of the said Religion shall desist and give over from this present,
all practices, negotiations and intelligences, as well within as without our
kingdom, and the said Assemblies and Counsels established in the Provinces
shall presently dissolve, and all leagues and associations made or to be made
under any pretext whatsoever, to the prejudice of this our present Edict, shall
be void and annihilated, We expressly forbidding all our subjects to make
hereafter any collections or leuyings of money without our permission, any
fortifications, enrolement of men, congregations or assemblies, other then such
as are permitted them by our present Edict, and that without arms: the which
we absolutely prohibit, and forbid them, upon pain of being severely punished,
and as contemners and infringers of our commandments and Ordinances.

LXXXIII.
All prizes which have been taken during the troubles, by virtue of licenses or
letters of Mart, and those that have been taken by land from them of the
contrary party, and which have been examined by Judges and Commissaries of
the Admiraltie, or by the Heads of those of the said Religion or their
Counsel, shall lie dead by the benefit of this present Edict, and no
prosecution thereof to be made, neither the Captains and others that have
taken the same reprisals, or boot, their pledges, and the said Judges, their
widows or heirs, shall not be troubled or molested in any sort whatsoever,
notwithstanding all Decrees of our privy Counsel and the Parliaments, and all
letters of rapine and seizures hanging in question, and not being decided,
whereof we would have them to be fully and clearly discharged.

LXXXIIII.
Neither shall they of the said Religion be molested or troubled for
oppositions or disturbances by them made heretofore, yea though since the
troubles, upon the execution of sentences and Decrees diuulged for the
reestablishment of the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Religion.

LXXXV.
And as for that which has been done or taken during the troubles, either with
or besides the way of hostility, against the public or particular Orders of
the Heads, or of the communalties of Provinces who had authority, it may be
prosecuted by course of Justice.

LXXXVI.
But nevertheless, in respect that if the same which was performed against the
Orders both of the one part and the other, be indifferently reserved and
excepted out of the general abolition inferred by our present Edict, and is
subject to be called in question, there is not a soldier which may not be
brought within the compass of it, whereupon tumults and troubles may be
renewed. For this cause, We will and ordain, that only execrable cases shall
be excepted out of the said abolition: as rauishing and enforcing of women and
maids, combustions, murders, and thefts felloniously acted by lying in privy
waits, besides the courses of open hostility, and to compass particular
reuenges, contrary to the proceedings of war, breaking up of Passeports and
safe conducts, with murders and pillages, without any iniunction or command, in
respect of those of the Religion and others who have followed the party of the
Heads, who had authority over them, grounded upon particular occasions, which
moved them to command and ordain such things.

LXXXVII.
We also ordain, that punishment be inflicted for crimes and delicts,
committed between persons of the same party, except it be in actions
commanded by the Heads of the one part and of the other, according to the
necessity, laws, and orders of war. And as for leuies and exactions of
moneys, bearing of arms, and other exploits of war, performed out of private
authority, and without auouchment, it shall be prosecuted by way of Justice.

LXXXVIII.
In towns dismanteled during the troubles, the same ruins and dismantelings
may by our permission, be reedified and repaired by the inhabitants at their
expense and charge, and the provisions heretofore set down in this respect
shall hold and take place.

LXXXIX.
We will, ordain, and are pleased, that all the Knights, Gentlemen, and
others, of what condition or quality soever, being of the pretended reformed
Religion, and others who have followed their party, may reenter and really
enjoy all and each of their goods, rights, titles, claims, and actions,
notwithstanding the Judgments denounced during the said troubles, and by
reason of them: the which sentences, seizures and Judgments, and all that
ensued thereof, we have to this end declared and do declare void and of no
effect nor value.

XC.
The purchases which they of the pretended reformed Religion have made, and
others upholding their party, under the prerogative of any other then of the
late Kings our predecessors for stable possessions belonging to the Church,
shall take no place nor effect: but we both will and ordain, and are well
pleased, that the said Ecclesiastics reenter incontinently and without delay,
and that they shall be maintained in the actual possession and enyoiance of
the said goods so alienated, without being bound to restore the price of such
sales; and this notwithstanding the contracts of vendition and sale, the which
for this effect we have abrogated and made void: and that the said purchasors
shall have no remedy against the Heads by whose authority the said goods have
been sold. And yet nevertheless for the disbursement of moneys by them truly
and without faud laid out, letters patents of permission shall be granted to
those of the said Religion, to sesse, and equally lay the said sums upon
them, whereunto the said sales shall amount: and the said purchasors shall not
pretend any action for their damages and interests for defaut of enioyance,
but they shall be contented for the disbursement of those moneys by them
furnished for the price of the said acquisitions or purchases: making good upon
the same price the fruits and benefits by them received, in case that the same
vent and sale was made at too mean and unequal a price

XCI.
And to the end that as well our Justices and Officers, as other our subjects,
may be clearly and with all certainty advertised of our will and intention,
and to remove all ambiguities and doubts which may be cast by means of the
precedent Edicts, by reason of the diversity of them, we have and do clear
all precedent Edicts, secret articles, declarations, moderations, restrictions,
interpretations, Judgments, Registers, as well secret as other deliberations,
heretofore by us or the Kings our predecessors made in Courts of Parliaments or
otherwhere, touching the matter of the said Religion, and troubles happened
within our said Realm, to be of no effect and validity: the which, and all
abrogations therein contained, we do by this our present Edict annihilate and
abrogate, and and from this present, as then, we do revoke, cashire, and
annihilate, declaring expressly how our pleasure is, that this our Edict shall
remain firm and inviolable, to be observed and held not only by our said
Justices and Officers, but also by other subjects, without depending or having
respect to whatsoever may be derogant or contrary to the same.

XCII.
And for the greater assurance of the observation and keeping thereof, which we
aim at, we will and ordain, and it stands with our pleasure, that all the
Governors and Lieutenants of our Provinces, Bailiffes, Stewards, and ordinary
Judges of the Towns within our said Realm, incontinently after the receiving
of this Edict, shall swear every one within their peculiar jurisdictions to
observe and keep it: as also Mayors, Shiriffes, Deputies and Consuls, and
Jurors of the Towns, whether annual or perpetual. We further enjoin our
said Bailiffes, Stewards, or their Lieutenants and other Judges, to cause the
inhabitants of the same Towns both of the one and other Religion, to be sworn
to the embracing of this present Edict, presently after the publication
thereof; taking all those of the said Towns into our protection and safeguard,
and one to the protection and safeguard of another: charging them mutally, and
by public acts, to answer in comely manner to all oppositions that shall be
made within the said Towns to this our said Edict, by any of the inhabitants
of them, or else to commit into the hands of Justice the said opposites.

We command our faithful and beloved, those that keep Courts of Parliament,
Chambers of Accounts, and Courts of Aides, that presently after this Edict
received all things cease; and upon pain of annihilating the acts they shall
otherwise perform, to minister the like oaths as above mentioned, and to
cause our said Edict to be published and enrolled in our said Courts, according
to the form and tenor of it, plainly and sincerely, without using any
qualifications, restrictions, declarations, or secret Registers, nor attending
any other iniunction or command from us: and so we will our Procurors general
presently and without delay to require and prosecute the said publication.

In like manner we impose our command upon the said people keeping our Courts
of Parliament, Chambers of our accomtps, Courts of aides, Bailiffes Stewards,
Prouosts, and other our Justices and Officers to whom it shall appertain, and
their Liuetenants, that they cause to be read, published, and enregistred this
our present Edict and Ordinance, in their several Courts and jurisdictions,
and the same to embrace, observe and keep, from point to point, and to cause
all such whom it any ways concerns, fully and peaceably to enjoy the benefit
of the contents thereof, ceassing and causing to cease, all lets and
hindrances to the contrary. For so our pleasure is. In witness whereof, we
have sealed these presents with our own hand: and to the end it may ever
continue for a firm and stable Act, we have set and put to our Seal. Given at
Nantes, in the month of April, the year of our Lord a thousand five hundred
fourscore and eighteen. And of our reign the ninth.

Signed, HENRY.
And underneath, By the King sitting in Counsel. FORGET. And on the side.
VISA. And sealed with the great Seal, in green wa^^, upon labels of red and
green silk.

