THat the Statute of 17. Edwardi 4. made to prevent the abuses in making of
Tyles, not providing sufficient remedy against the great mischiefs arising by
the great increase of building. And there being no Law at all touching the
making of Brickes.

Thereupon Queen Elizabeth Anno 10. did incorporate the Mr. Keepers, or
Wardens of the Tylers and Brick-layers of LONDON, and to have the government
and ordering of that Art and Mystery, and all things pertaining thereunto,
within LONDON, or fifteen miles compass thereof, with power to make
Ordinances: which Charter is sithence confirmed by his Majesty.

The Master and Wardens (among other things) did ordain that it might be
lawful for them twice every year, or oftener, to enter into any place, where
any earth or clay shall be dug, within fifteen miles compass of LONDON, to
make any Tyles or Brick; or where any Chalk or other stone shall be dug,
to be used with the laying of Brick or Tile, or for making of Lyme, to view
the same to be good and well done. And whether every Brick intended for sale,
be in length nine Inches, in breadth four Inches and a quarter, in thickness
two Inches and a quarter; every plain Tyle in length ten Inches and a half,
in breadth six Inches and a quarter, in thickness half an Inch and a quarter;
every Roofe-Tyle in length thirteen Inches, in thickness one Inch, with
convenient depth; every Corner-Tyle or Couer-Tyle, in length ten Inches and a
half: That every Sand-Cart should contain eighteen Bushels at the least, and
every Lime-Sacke a Bushel of burned lime, being knit together, and that it be
well burned; with diverse other Ordinances: All which were confirmed by Sir
Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seal; William, Marquis of
Winchester, Lord Treasorer of England; Sir Robert Catline Knight, Lord chief
Justice of England, under their Hands and Seals.

But seeing the abuses of this kind increase ^^ily, to the great labor and
expense of the said Master an^ Wardens: They humbly pray,

And that the Master and Wardens, or their Deputies, may enter and search for
any defaults and offenses, and finding any, to make entry thereof, and of the
certainetie thereof, in some Court of their Company, to be held within one
Month after.

And that every person offending in making, selling, or offering to put to sale
any Brick, Tyle, Lime or Sand, contrary to the said Ordinances, shall forfeite
as follows ( viz.) for every 1000. of Bricks iijs. iiijd. For every 1000. of
plaine-tyle iijs. iiijd. For every 100. of Roofe-tyle xiid For every 100. of
Gutter-tyle, or corner-tyle, xijd. For every Load of Sand iiijd. And for every
100. of Lyme ijs. vjd.

And that in lieu of their great pains in searching and viewi^g, they may have
for Brickes, Tyles, Lyme and Sand, put to sale in LONDON or ^^^^hin fifteen
miles compass as follows ( viz.) for every 1000. of Brick jd. For every
1000. of Tyles jd. For every Load of Sand ob. For every 100. of Lyme jd.

And that they may distraine for the same. The one moyetie to the King, the
other to the Master and Wardens: And they to pay the Kings moyetie yearly in
Michaelmas Tearm^ into the Exchequer.


