ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT MADE BETWEEN the French KING and those of Rochell, upon
the Rendition of the Town, the 24. of October last. 1628.

According to the French Coppies Printed at Rochell and at Roan.

ALSO A Relation of a brave and resolute Sea Fight, made by Sr. Kenelam Digby
(on the Bay of Scandarone the 16. of June last past) with certain Galegasses
and Galeasses, belonging to the States of Venice, to his great Commmendation,
and to the Honor of our English Nation.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Butter. 1628.

THE ARTICLES WHICH the French KING has agreed to his Subjects of the City
of Rochell, upon the Reduction of the said place under his Obeisance.
Translated out of the French Copy, which is Printed at Rochell by P. Forment,
ordinary Printer of the King. 1628.

With Privilege of his Majesty.

THE Mayor, Aldermen, Peers, Burgers, and Inhabitants of the City of
Rochell, represented by John Berne Esquier, Lord of Dangoulin, Peter Viette
Esquier, Alderman, Daniel de la Goutte, Jacques Riffaut Peers, Elias Moquay,
and Charles de la Cost Burgers, having charge, and being appointed by the
body of the said City, acknowledging the great fault which they have
committed, not only in resisting the just wills of the King, as they have
done a long time, in lieu to submit themselves, and to open him the gates of
his City of Rochell, as they were bound to do, but moreover to have adhered
to strangers which have borne Arms against this State, beseeching his
Majesty, with all humility, to pardon them the Crime which they have
committed in governing themselves in such a manner, and to receive for
satisfaction of the same the present obeisance which they will yield unto him,
in opening to him the Gates of his City, which they shall actually deliver
into his hands to dispose of it as it shall please him, and to prescribe them
such manner of life, as he shall think most fit for the time to come, without
any other condition then that which his Majesty shall be pleased to give them
through his bounty, which they implore and crave with humility, beseeching
him to use them as his Subjects which henceforth will live and die in the most
perfect obeisance which has ever been yielded to any Sovereign.

The King having respect to the repeuance of his Subjects the Inhabitants of
the City of Rochell, and to the protestations which they make to live
henceforth as they are bound by their birth, which they shall show accordingly
two days hence, namely, on Monday, which is the thirtieth day of this present
Month, opening the Gates of the said City of Rochell to his Majesty, that
he may dispose of it as it shall please him, he has commanded and given charge
to the Lords of Marillac and Hallier, Marshals of his Camps, and Armies, to
promise them in his name that which follows.

I.
THe pardon of their fault, and rebellion committed since the last Commotion,
with all assurance for their lives. The free exercise of their pretended
reformed Religion within Rochell.

II.
That they shall enjoy all their goods, both mooveables, and immooveables, of
whatsoever nature they may be, notwithstanding all condemnations, gifts, and
confiscations, which perhaps have been made by reason of their crime of
Rebellion, excepting the enjoying of the revenues of their Lands, mooveables,
cut wood, and debts which hitherto have been received actually, and without
any fraud.

III.
That all the Soldiers and warlike men which are Subjects of the King, that
are now in the City of Rochell, not being Burgers, and Inhabitants of it,
shall enjoy the said graces, and the chief Commanders, Captains, and
Gentlemen, shall go out of the said City with their Swords on their sides,
and the Soldiers with a white stick in their hands and above all things their
names and surnames shall be recorded, and shall swear, that they shall never
bear Arms against the Kings service, upon pain to be bereft of the present
grace. And concerning the English Captains and Soldiers which shall be found
in the said City they shall by Sea be carried into England, without doing any
displeasure unto them.

IIII.
They of Rochell as well the Inhabitants as warlike men, shall likewise be
discharged of all acts of hostility, and generally of all negotiations in
foreign Countries, and all others for which they are not to be questioned,
unless it were in case of execrable things, which are excepted by the Edicts,
and such as may concern the person of the King.

V.
Likewise, they of Rochell shall be discharged, and cleared of their casting of
Ordnance, coining of money, arrests, and takings of moneys, as well Royal,
Ecclesiastical, as others in the said City: As likewise of the Leavyings,
and Contributions which have been made for the entertainment of the warlike
men, and of the constraints decreed against the absent, yea, even by
demolitions of their houses, and of all other employments concerning the
affairs of the said City.

VI.
Likewise, as well the said Inhabitants as warlike men shall be discharged of
all Judgments, sentences, and arrestes, which perhaps were given against them
by reason of their rebellion during these last Commotions.

VII.
That all Judgments, as well Civil as Criminal, given in the Counselles,
which have extraordinarily been kept in the said City, the Judges,
Counselors, or Commissaries, which have assisted them, may not be questioned
for it, nor likewise the parties for whose profit they have been given in
matters concerning prises, or booties, and above all things there shall be
imposed silence to the Procurator General, (or the Kings Attorney General)
and his Substitutes.

VIII.
That the Judgments, Penalties, Condemnations, Suspensions, and Inter
dictions, which have been appointed and given by the Judges, and Presidents,
as well against the Majors of the said City, as against them which have
assisted him, shall be annullated, as if they had never been done: as likewise
the proceedings made thereupon against some of the Iud. ges, shall be
annullated, so that none which have been imploed either on the one, or the
other side, may be questioned about them.

IX.
The Sentence for the death of Turnay, shall likewise stand, and those which
are charged by the said sentence, shall not be questioned therefore.

X.
All the Contents of the above mentioned points, shall be ratified by the
Mayor, Aldermen, Burgers, and Inhabitants of the said City of Rochell; And
the said ratification shall be brought to morrow at two of the clock in the
after noone, in a good and authentike form, whereupon it shall please the King
to deliver to the said Deputies or Commissioners his letters of declaration,
which shall approve, and ratify that which is contained here above.

XI.
And the said ratifications being delivered, the gates of the said City shall
be opened, and delivered into the hands of those whom it shall please his
Majesty to appoint, to the intent that thereupon, He in person may make his
entry into it, when, and in such manner as it shall please him. His Majesty
promising through his bounty, to take such course, and give such order about
the entry, and lodging of his Soldiers in the said City, that none of the
Inhabitants of the same, neither women, nor children receive any displeasure
neither in their persons, nor goods.

Done, and concluded in the Castle of Sanssay, the 28. day of October, 1628.
Was signed Louis de Marillac, Francois de l'Hospital Le Hallier, John Berne,
Peter Viette De la Goutte, De la Cost, Riffault, Moquay.

Articles accordez par le Roy a ses Subjects de la ville de la Rochelle, sur la
reduction de la place a son obeisance.
LEs Maire, Eschevins, Pairs, Burgeois, et habitants de la ville de la
Rochelle, representez par Iean Borne Escuier, Signeur Dangoulin, Pierre Viette
Escuier, Eschevins, Daniel de la Goutte, Iacques Riffault, Pairs, Elie Moquay
et Charles de la Cost, Bourgeois, ayons charge et deputez par le Corpse de la
dite ville, Recognistans l'extreme fault qu'ilz ont commiz, non seulement en
resistant aux Iustes volontez du Roy, comme ilz ont faict depuis long temps, au
lieu de se soubsmettre, et luy ouurir les Ports de sa ville de la Rochelle,
ainsi qu'ilz et oient obliges, Mais en oultre davoir adhere aux Estrangers, qui
ont prins les arms contre c'est Estat, supliant avec toute humilite S. M. de
leur pardonner le Crime qu'ilz ont commis en se governant de la sort, et
recevoir pour satisfaction d'uelluy l'obeysance present qu'ilzluy desirent
render, luy ouurant les ports de sa ville qu'ilz remetteront actuellement
enter ses mains pour en diposer ainsi qu'il luy plaira, et leur proscrire
tellefacon de vivre qu'il estimera plus a propos ^ que celle, ^ S. M. ^
laquelle ilz (...), la suppliant de les traiter comme ses Subjects qui voulent
a I advenir vivre, et mourir en la plus parfaict obeisance qui ayt jamais este
(...) a aucun Souverain.

Le Roy ayant esgard a la repentance de ses Subjects ^ et aux protestations ^ y
font obligez par leur naissance, ce qu'ils (...) des apres demain Lundi
trentiesme du presant Mois ouurant les Ports de la dite ville de la Rochelle,
a sa M. pour quil luy plaise disposer comme bon luy semblera, a command et
done charge aux Signeors de Marrillac, et du Halliet, Marechaux de ses champs,
et annecs de leur promettre en son nom ce qui s'en suit.

1. LE pardon de leur fault and rebellion commis depuis ce dernier mouuement,
auec toute seurte pour leur vie. L'exercice libre de leur Religion pretendue
reformee dans la Rochelle.

2. Qu'ils seron restablis en tous leurs biens, meubles and immeubles de
quelque nature qu'ils puissent estre, nonobstant toutes condamnations, dons and
confiscations qui en pourroient auoir este faictes a cause du crime de
rebellion, fors and except la iouissance du reuenu de leurs terres, les
meubles, bois couppez, and debtes qui auroient este actuellement and sans
fraud, receus iusques a present.

3. Que touts les Gens de guerre Subjects du Roy, qui se trouueront maintenant
dans la Ville de la Rochelle, non Bourgeois and Habitants de la Ville d'icelle,
iouiront des Graces exprimees cy-dessus: Et les Chefs, Capitaines and
Gentils-hommes sortirons de ladite Ville l'espee au cost, and les Soldats le
baston blanc a la main. Et de touts sera fait estat de leurs noms and surnoms,
Et seront serment de ne porter iamais les arms contre le service de sa
Majesty, sur peine d'estre d' echeus de la present Grace. Et quant aux
Capitaines and Soldats Anglois qui se trouueront en ladite Ville, ils seront
conduits par mer en Angleterre, sans qu'il leur soit fait aucun desplaisir.

4. Seront aussi lesdits de la Rochelle, tant Habitants que Gens de guerre,
deschargez de touts acts d'hostilite generalement quelconques, negotiations es
Pays Estrangers, and de touts autres, sans qu'ils puissent estre recherchez,
fors pour le regard des cas execrables exceptez par les Edicts de ceux qui
peuuent concerner la person du Roy.

5. Comme semblablement demeureront lesdits de la Rochelle, deschargex de
Fontes de Canon, Fabrications de Monnoyes, Saisies and Prises de deniers, tant
Royaux, Ecclesiastiques que autres en ladite Ville. Ensemble des Contributions
ordonnees pour l'entretenement des Gens de guerre, and contrainte decernee
contre les absens, mesme par demolition de leurs maisons, and de tous autres
employs aux chooses susdites en ladite Ville.

6. Demeureront pareillement tous les Habitans and Gents de guerre, deschargez
de touts Iugements, Sentences and Arrests qui pourroient auoir este donnes
contre eux a l'occasion de leur rebellion pendant ces mouuements.

7. Que de touts Iugements tant ciuils que criminels donnez dans les Conseils
tenu extraordinairement en ladite Ville, les Iuges, Conseillers and
Commissaires qui y auroient assiste, n'en pourront estre recherchez, ny mesme
les particuliers, au profit desquels ils auroient este donnez pour ce qui
concern les Prises and Butin. Et sur tout sera impose silence au Procureur
General and ses Substituts.

8. Que les Iugements, Amandes, Condamnations, Suspensions and Interdictions
do^nees par les Presidiaux, tant contre les Maires de ladite Ville, que ceux
qui les ont assistez, demeureront nuls, and comme non aduenus semblablement les
Procedures faites en suitte contre aucuns desdits Iuges, demeureront nulles
sans qu aucuns de ceux qui ont este employez de part and d'autre en puissent
estre recherchez.

9. Demeurera aussi le Judgment pour la mort de Tournay, Et ceux qui en sont
chargez par ledit Judgment, n'en pourront estre recherchez.

10. Tout le contenu cy. dessus sera ratify par les Maire, Pairs, Escheuins
and Habitans de ladite Ville, and ladite ratification sera apportee dans demain
deux heures apres midy, en bonne and authentic form. Apres quoy il plaira au
Roy fair deliurer aux susdits Deputez, Lettres de Declaration qui approuuent
and ratiflent ce que dessus.

11. Et lesdites ratifications estants deliurees, les Ports de la Ville seront
ouuertes, and mises en la possession de ceux qu'il plaira a sa Majesty
ordonner, afin qu'en suitte elle y puisse fair son entree en person, quand
and ainsi qu'il luy plaira. Promettant sa Majesty par sa bonte, fair apporter
un tell order a l'entree and logement des Gents de guerre en ladite Ville qu'
aucuns Habitants d'icelle, femmes and enfans n'en reacoiuent aucun deplaisir,
soit en leurs persons, soit en leurs biens.

FAICT and arreste au Chasteau de la Saussaye le vingt-huictieme Octobre, mil
six cens vingt-huict. Ainsi sign, LOVIS. DE MARILLAC, and Ieane de Berne,
Pierre Viette, Rifant, De la Goutte, De la Cost and Mocquay.

A Letter written from abord the Admiral of Sir Kenelme Digbie.
THe tenth of June 1628. we lay at Hull all night in sight of Cape Congier,
which is ten leagues from Scanderon, and sent a boat to descry the Road. The
next morning she brought us word that there were at Ancor there two Venetian
Galleazzes, two of their Galleons, two English ships and four French vessels.
We then provided our selves to come into that place, and had fitted our selves
in most ample manner, both for offense, defense and freeing of vessels if we
should be hard set, the name of Gallegrezes was a formidable thing, but after a
short speech made to our men, they expressed much desire to adventure in, and
gave assurance that they would not fail in performing their duties; Indeed
they kept their words, for never men behaved themselves more bravely. About ten
of the clock that day (then) we had a fine gale which brought us within a
league of Scanderone by two of the clock in the afternoon; and we had sent
the Sattie in before to deliver Letters to the General of the Venetians, as
also to the English Captains there. Therein acquainting them how we came forth
upon a voyage of warfare, with his Majesty's Commission under the great Seal
of England, and assuring them of all due respect and friendlinesse unto them as
became us. Upon the receipt of this Letter the Venetians wayed anchor, and
treating our men very discourteously would not permit them to go deliver our
Letters aboard the English ships; the Galleasses have between 30. or 40.
brass guns in each of them of incredible bigness, some of 9000. weight, they
have six or 700. men in them a piece; the Galleons were of above 800. tuns, one
had 40. the other had 30. great brass Ordnance. As soon as they were within
shot of us the Admiral Galleasse shot a bullet within half a ships length
of us, which we understood as a salute (for we had given them no cause to the
contrary) therefore saluted them with a piece from them wards and did so to
all the other vessels which likewise shot at us after 7. or 8. shots (some of
which did hit some of our ships.) They shot at our flag and at the same instant
our Satties boat came aboard us, and told us how hardly the Venetians had
treated them, and in return to our respective Letter they sent this message.
That if we did not immediately depart out of sight of the Road, they would
sink our vessels. We then endeavored the best we could to let them see our
long forbearance was to make our quarrel a just one and not through
apprehension of their much famed vessels. For we gave them 3. or 4. broad sides
in a very short time, which (they being near) did them spoil, upon this they
grew more cautious and fought at a further distance whilst in the mean time we
laid so well at the Galleons that the men stowed themselves in their holds, and
left their vessels to their own fortunes without guidance. The Galleasses
coming up to help them received so rude a welcome from us, that they rowed
amayne away, and sheltred themselves under the English ships that were in the
Road; which saved of them near 100. shot out of our ship; for we were all
commanded to be very cautious in that point rather to miss an opportunity of
hurting the Enemy, then to endanger our Countrymen. In this time whilst the
Eagle Vice Admiral and Rere-admirall were hot in fight with the Galleasses and
Galleons, the Hopewell and the Sattie were sent upon the French men, one of
them had 16. Pieces of Ordnance, all the other had some guns, 3. of their
vessels they took presently, the fourth ran a ground; at our beginning the
fight, she had a 100000. pieces of Eight Rials in her, but before we could
board her, she had sent all the money ashoare in her boats. Toward evening it
blew a fresh gale with yare working of our ships, it fared ill with the
Venetians, and they sought to avoid us as much as they could. And we followed
them close, our great guns going off in swiftness rather like Muskets then
Pieces of Ordnance, the truth is our men did exceed belief in good
performance. And if our powder had not been very bad, for we had none but
Dutch Powder, and the day calm, we had soon ended the quarrel with them: By
this time they were much maimed in their oars, and had received many dangerous
shots. Then they procured the English Vice-consull here, (who was aboard them)
to come to our Admiral to mediate their peace; who would not consent to it upon
any other terms but that they should quit the Frenchmen wholly to our devotion;
and acknowledge their error expressing to be sorry for it. To these conditions
they gladly assented, and the General sent his Chancellor to us with such a
Letter as was desired and expected from him. Then the Vice Consul represented
to our Admiral what prejudice it might be to the Merchants of Aleppo; if we
carried away the French vessels, and after ransacking, finding there was
nothing worth carriage in them (for they had landed althings during the fight,
and sunk most of their Gunnes) we only took their Flags out of them and some
Brasse-bases to serve our beats-head, besides what our Saylors pillaged (which
was some good quantity of money all that was left.) And sent for our men of
from them that night and returned them the next day to their owners, assuring
them of quiet possession in this fight which lasted near three hours, we made
near 200. shot out of our ship playing but one side of it for the calm
permitted no other, and about 500. out of our Fleet, and they as many or more
at us: they killed us never a man but hurt some few (thanks be to God) and
spoiled us some Masts, Sails, rigging and shot some of our ships through but
in no dangerous places. By their acknowledgement afterward we killed them
nine and forty men outright besides a great number hurt. Their vessels were
much spoiled, about which they were at work, repayring them all the while, we
staid in the Road and brought their vessels upon the Careene to stop their
leakes betwixt wind and water. In evidence how much they had lost of their
former pride. We saw the next day a Frigot coming into which we mand out our
boat, and she took her within 4. boats length of the Admiral Galleasse, and
our Sattia in chase of that Frigot sailed within a boats lenght round about the
other Galleasse to which the Frigot betook her self for aid, Instead of
presenting this they sent us very courteous salutations by our men who brought
the Frigot to us. And whereas formerly they did set their Watch with much
ceremony with Drums, Trumpets and Gunnes, and so like wise discharged it,
now they pass their time with much silence. Whilst we perform duly all the
rites that belong to them that have the superiority in a Road.

Scanderone Road the 16. of June 1628.

FINIS.

