The prices of Fares and passages to be paid unto watermen from London to
Grauesende, and like wise from Grauesende to London, and to every common place
between. And also between London Bridge and Windesoure, and so to every common
place of landyng between London Bridge and Wyndesoure.
IN Primis that no owner or occupier of the common fare of Grauesende barge,
shall take of any person from London to Grauesende, or contrary above two
pence for every person, so as the same sum of two pence for every person
amount to the sum of iiij. s. Item, that no owner or occupier of any tylte
boat with iiii. ores and a steresman, take for his fare from London to
Grauesende, to or fro above four pence the person, so as the same four pence
a man do amount to vi. s viii. d. and for every ore above four ores to have
xii. d. an ore.vj. s. viij. d Item, that every owner or occupier of a whirrey
from London to Grauesende to or fro, shall not take any more for his whole
fare, if he be required, then ij. s. Item, that the owner or occupyer of a tide
boat from London to Grenehyue or grayes Thorrock, or to any place of like
dystaunce, shall not take of any one person to or fro above a penye, so as
the whole fare mount to xij. d. Item, for a tilte boat with four ores and a
sleresman to and fro not above.vi. s. and for every ore above four ores xii.
d. an ore.vj. s. Item, that no whyrrey with two ores take from London to Grene
hyue, Greyes Thorock, or like distaunce to or fro above xx. d. Item,that no
owner or occupyer of any tide boat from London to Purflete or like distaunce,
to or fro, shall take of any one person above a penye, so as the hole fare
may amounte unto, x. d. Item, for a tilte boat with four ores and a
steresman from London to Grith or Purflete, or like distaunce, to or fro, not
above five shyllynges for his whole fare.v. s. Item, that no whyrryman with two
ores take from London to Purflet or like dystaunce to or fro, above xviij. d.
Item, that no owner or occupyer of any tide boat from London to Rayneham or
Erith, or like distaunce to or fro do take above a penny of any one person.
Item, for a tylte boat with four ores and a steresman to or fro not above
five shyllynges for his whole fare.v. s. Item, that no whyrrymanne with two
ores take from London to Rayneham, or Erith, or like distaunce above.xvj. d.
Item, that no owner or occupyer of any tide boat from London to Wolwich, or
like distaunce, to or fro, take of any person above a penny. Item, that no
whyrryman with two ores take for his fare from London to Wolwich to or fro,
above.xij. d. Item, that none of the occupiers of any of the common tide botes
before rehearsed, shall take of any person, that shall come aborde of any of the
said boats by the way between London and Grauesende above the price for the
same boat limited. Item, that no whyrryman with a pair of ores, shall take
for his whole fare from London to Grenewich to or for above.viij. d. with the
tide, and against tide.xiid Item, no whyrrymanne with a pair of ores, shall
take for his fare from Ratcliffe to Grenewich, or contrary above. iiij. d.
with the tide, and against tide.vi d Item, that no whyrryman with a pair of
ores, take for his fare from Lodon to Ratcliffe or Limehouse or like distaunce
to or fro above iiij. d. with the tide, and against tide.vi d Item, that from
Lion keye, or Saint Oliffes, to. S. Katherine or Radriffe, or like distaunce,
no whyrryman take for his fare above ij. d. Item, that no whyrryman with a pare
of ores, take for his fare from the old Swanne, P^per Alley, Saint Mary
Oueries or the three cranes, to Westminster, Lambeth, Whitehall, or like
distaunce to or fro above.iiij. d. Item, that no whyrrymanne with a pair of
ores, take for his fare, from Pawles wharfe, Queen hithe, Parish garden or ye
black Friars to Westminster, or White hal, or like distau^ce to or fro above
iij. d. Item, that no whyrryman with two ores, take from the White Friars, or
temple bridge, to white Hal, or Westminster, to or for above ij d. Item, the
like price from White Friars, or Temple bridge, to Saint Marye Oueryes, Pepper
Alley or three cranes to or fro. Item, that no whyrrye take for his fare from
the old Swanne, Pepper Alley, Sayncte Marye Oueryes stayres, the three Cranes,
or Queen hirh, to or fro Lambeth above. iiij. d.
Item, that no whyrrey take fro Pawles Warfe, Parish Garden the Black Friars,
or White Friars, to Lambeth to or fro above.iij.d. Item, that no whyrrey with a
pare of ores, do take for his fare, cross over the water between London
bridge and Westminster. not above.j.d. Item, that no skuller take cross over the
water, with a pare of sculles for his fare above. o^ Item, that no whyrryman
with a pare of ores take for his fare from london to Chelsey, or like distaunce
to or fro above.vj.d. Item, that no whyrrey man with a pare of ores take of
any person from London to Putney, Fullam, or Barnelmes to or fro for his whole
fare above.x.d. Item, that no owner or his deputy of any tilte boat with
four ores, and a steresman take for his fare from london to Chelsey or like
distaunce to and fro, so that the boat do go and come in a day, or else to agree
with the owner or occupyer thereof not above five shillings and for every ore
above four ores, twelve pence an ore.v.s. Item, that no owner or his deputy
of any tylte boat, with four ores and a steresman, take for his fare from
london to Putney or like distaunce, so that the boat do go and come in one
day, not above vi.s and for every ore above four ores to have twelve pence an
ore.vj.s. Item, that no whyrrey with a pair of ores, take of any person,
from london unto Cheswicke or Mortlake, or like dystaunce for his whole fare to
or fro above.xvj.d. Item, that no owner or his deputy of any tilte boat with
four ores and a steresman, take for his fare from London to Cheswicke or
Mortlake or like distaunce to or fro (so that the boat do go and come in one
day) not above vi.s. and for every ore above iiii. ores.xii.d. an ore.vj.s.
Item, no whyrryman with a pare of ores to take of any person from london unto
Brayneford, Thistelworth, Richmond bancke, or Twyckenham for his fare to or fro
above..xviij.d. Item, that no owner of a tylte boat or his deputye, with
four ores and a steresman, do take for his fare from london to Breineford
Thistelworth, Rychmonde Bancke, Twighnam, Tuddington, and Kingston, or like
distaunce, to and fro (so that the boat may goo and come in one day) nor
above.vi.s.vii.d. and for every ore above four ores to have twelve pence an
ore.vj.^ viij d. Item, the common tilte boat of Kinston not to take of any
one person from thense to london or contrary above four pence a peace. Item,
no whyryman with a pair of ores to take for his whole fare from london to
Toddington or kingston to or fro above.xx.d. Item, no whyryman with a pare of
ores to take for his whole fare from London to Hampton Court, to or fro
above.ij.s. Item, no owner or occupyer of any tylte boat shall take for his
fare from london to Hampton town, with iiii. ores, and a steresman above
viii.s. and for every ore above iiii. ores xii.d. an ore.viij.s. Item, no
whyrriman to take for his whole fare from London to Otelandes, or or fro
above.iij.s. Item, that no owner or his deputy of any tylte boat, with four
ores and a steresman take for his fare from london to Sonbery, Wilto^,
Sheperton, Maybrydge, Otelandes, Chersey, or Stanes, to or fro, not above nine
shyllynges, and for every ore above iiii. ores twelve pence an ore.ix.s. Item,
that no whyryman take for his fare from london to wyndsoure above.iiij.s. Item,
that no owner or his deputy, of any tylte boat with four ores, and a
steresman, take for his fare from London to Wyndesoure, not above.x.s. and for
every ore above.iiii. ores.xii.d. an ore.x.s.
God save the Queen. Bacon. C.S. Penbroke. E. Rogers. VV. Peter. VV.
Northamton. E. Clynton. F. Knolles. Ri. Sackefyld. F. Bedforde. VV. Havvarde.
VV. Cissell. N. Wotton.


Imprinted at London in Powles Churcheyarde, by John Cawood, Prynter to the
Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The Rates and Pryces that every pertyculer person owes to pay for his fare
or passage unto Watermen or Whirreymen from London Bridge to Wyndesoure, and
likewise from Wyndesoure to London Bridge, and to every common landyng place
between the same two places hereafter is breifely declared.
From thold swa^ Peper ally s. mary oueries, or ye three Cranes. THe hole fare
of a whyrrey with.ii. ores. to Westminster, Lambeth, Whitehall, or other places
of like distaunce to or fro. iiii.d from poules wharfe quenehith parish garden
or ye Black Friars. The hole fare of a whyrrey with two ores to Westmynster,
or Whytehall, or other place of like dystaunce. iii. d. From ye white friars or
Temple Brygde. The hole fare of a Whyrrey with two ores to Whythall or
Westminster to or fro. ii.d. From ye white friars or Temple Brygde. The hole
fare of a whyrrey with two ores to Saint Mary Ouereys, Pepper Alley, or the
iii. cranes to or fro..ii.d. from paul's wharfe, parish garden the black
friars or whitefryers. The hole fare of a whyrrey with two ores to or fro
Lambeth. iii.d Crossynge the River. A whyrrey with two ores for crossynge over
the River between London Bridge and Westmynster. i.d A Sculler for the like
labor. ob. From London Bridge to chelsey to and fro. The hole fare of a
whyrrey with ores. vi.d From London to putney, Fulham or barnelmes to and fro.
The hole fare of a whyrrey with ores. x.d From london to chelsey or a like
distau^ce to and fro The hole fare of a Tylte boat with.iiii. ores and a
Steresman for one day. v.s From london to Putney or like distau^ce to and fro
The hole fare of a tylte bote with four ores and a steresman for one day.
vi.s. From cheswike or Mortlake or like dystaunce to or fro. The hole fare of a
whyrrey with ores. xvi.d Of a tylte boat with iiii. ores and a steresman for
one day. vi.s. From london to brayneford thistelworth rychmond bank, or
twyckenham, to and fro. The hole fare of a whyrrey with ores. xviii.d. And of a
tylte boat with.iiii. ores and a steresman to or fro the said places and also
to or fro Todingto^ and Kingston for one day. vi.s.viii.d From london to
kingston or tuddington to and fro The fare of one person in the common tylte
boat of the said town. iiii.d. From london to hamton Court to and fro. The
hole fare of a whyrrey with ores. xx.d. From london to otela^ds to and fro. The
hole fare of a whyrrey with ores. ii.s. From london to Sonbery Wilto^
sheaperto^, Way bridge, Otela^ds chartseye or stanes to or fro. And of a tylte
boat with iiii. ores and a steresman. viii.s The hole fare of a whyrrey with
ores. iii.s From london to Windesoure to and fro. The hole fare of a tylte
boat with iiii. ores and a steresman. ix.s The hole fare of a whyrrey to or
fro with ores. iiii.s. And of a tylte boat with iiii. ores and a steresman.
x.s. Item, that no owner or occupyer of any tide boat from London to
Rayneham or Erith, or like distaunce to or fro do take above a penny of any one
person. Item, for a tylte boat with four ores and a steresman to or fro not
above five shyllynges for his whole fare. v. s. Item, that no whyrrymanne with
two ores take from London to Rayneham, or Erith, or like distaunce above. xvj.
d. Item, that no owner or occupyer of any tide boat from London to Wolwich,
or like distaunce, to or fro, take of any person above a penny. Item, that no
whyrryman with two ores take for his fare from London to Wolwich to or fro,
above. xij. d. Item, that none of the occupiers of any of the common tide
botes before rehearsed, shall take of any person, that shall come aborde of any
of the said boats by the way between London and Grauesende above the price
for the same boat limited. Item, that no whyrryman with a pair of ores, shall
take for his whole fare from London to Grenewich to or for above. viij. d. with
the tide, and against tide.xiid Item, no whyrrymanne with a pair of ores,
shall take for his fare from Ratcliffe to Grenewich, or contrary above. iiij.
d. with the tide, and against tide* vi d Item, that no whyrryman with a pair
of ores, take for his fare from Lodon to Ratcliffe or Limehouse or like
distaunce to or fro above iiij. d. with the tide, and against tide* vi d Item,
that from Lion keye, or Saint Oliffes, to. S. Katherine or Radriffe, or like
distaunce, no whyrryman take for his fare above ij. d. Item, that no whyrryman
with a pare of ores, take for his fare from the old Swanne, Peper Alley, Saint
Mary Oueries or the three cranes, to Westminster, Lambeth, Whitehall, or like
distaunce to or fro above. iiij. d. Item, that no whyrrymanne with a pair of
ores, take for his fare, from Pawles wharfe, Queen hithe, Parish garden or ye
black Friars to Westminster, or White hal, or like distau^ce to or fro above
iij. d. Item, that no whyrryman with two ores, take from the White Friars, or
temple bridge, to white Hal, or Westminster, to or for above ij d. Item, the
like price from White Friars, or Temple bridge, to Saint Marye Oueryes, Pepper
Alley or three cranes to or fro. Item, that no whyrrye take for his fare from
the old Swanne, Pepper Alley, Sayncte Marye Oueryes stayres, the three Cranes,
or Queen hirh, to or fro Lambeth above. iiij. d. Item, that no whyrrey take fro
Pawles Warfe, Parish Garden the Black Friars, or White Friars, to Lambeth to
or fro above. iij.d. Item, that no whyrrey with a pare of ores, do take for
his fare, cross over the water between London bridge and Westminster. not above.
j.d. Item, that no skuller take cross over the water, with a pare of sculles
for his fare above. o^ Item, that no whyrryman with a pare of ores take for
his fare from london to Chelsey, or like distaunce to or fro above. vj.d. Item,
that no whyrrey man with a pare of ores take of any person from London to
Putney, Fullam, or Barnelmes to or fro for his whole fare above. x.d. Item,
that no owner or his deputy of any tilte boat with four ores, and a
steresman take for his fare from london to Chelsey or like distaunce to and
fro, so that the boat do go and come in a day, or else to agree with the owner
or occupyer thereof not above five shillings and for every ore above four
ores, twelve pence an ore. v.s. Item, that no owner or his deputy of any tylte
boat, with four ores and a steresman, take for his fare from london to Putney
or like distaunce, so that the boat do go and come in one day, not above vi.s
and for every ore above four ores to have twelve pence an ore. vj.s. Item,
that no whyrrey with a pair of ores, take of any person, from london unto
Cheswicke or Mortlake, or like dystaunce for his whole fare to or fro above.
xvj.d. Item, that no owner or his deputy of any tilte boat with four ores
and a steresman, take for his fare from London to Cheswicke or Mortlake or like
distaunce to or fro (so that the boat do go and come in one day) not above
vi.s. and for every ore above iiii. ores.xii.d. an ore. vj.s. Item, no
whyrryman with a pare of ores to take of any person from london unto
Brayneford, Thistelworth, Richmond bancke, or Twyckenham for his fare to or fro
above. xviij.d. Item, that no owner of a tylte boat or his deputye, with
four ores and a steresman, do take for his fare from london to Breineford
Thistelworth, Rychmonde Bancke, Twighnam, Tuddington, and Kingston, or like
distaunce, to and fro (so that the boat may goo and come in one day) nor
above.vi.s.vii.d. and for every ore above four ores to have twelve pence an
ore. vj.^ viij d. Item, the common tilte boat of Kinston not to take of any
one person from thense to london or contrary above four pence a peace. Item,
no whyryman with a pair of ores to take for his whole fare from london to
Toddington or kingston to or fro above. xx.d. Item, no whyryman with a pare of
ores to take for his whole fare from London to Hampton Court, to or fro above.
ij.s. Item, no owner or occupyer of any tylte boat shall take for his fare
from london to Hampton town, with iiii. ores, and a steresman above viii.s.
and for every ore above iiii. ores xii.d. an ore. viij.s. Item, no whyrriman to
take for his whole fare from London to Otelandes, or or fro above. iij.s. Item,
that no owner or his deputy of any tylte boat, with four ores and a
steresman take for his fare from london to Sonbery, Wilto^, Sheperton,
Maybrydge, Otelandes, Chersey, or Stanes, to or fro, not above nine shyllynges,
and for every ore above iiii. ores twelve pence an ore. ix.s. Item, that no
whyryman take for his fare from london to wyndsoure above. iiij.s. Item, that
no owner or his deputy, of any tylte boat with four ores, and a steresman,
take for his fare from London to Wyndesoure, not above.x.s. and for every ore
above.iiii. ores.xii.d. an ore. x.s.

God save the Queen. Bacon. C.S. Penbroke. E. Rogers. VV. Peter. VV.
Northamton. E. Clynton. F. Knolles. Ri. Sackefyld. F. Bedforde. VV. Havvarde.
VV. Cissell. N. Wotton.


Imprinted at London in Powles Churcheyarde, by John Cawood, Prynter to the
Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


