THE Pleasant History of the Conquest of the VVeast India, now called new
Spain, Achieved by the worthy Prince Hernando Cortes Marquis of the valley
of Huaxacac, most delectable to Read:

Translated out of the Spanishe tongue, by T. N.

Anno. 1578.

printer's device of Henry Bynneman: McKerrow, 97

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary
to the Queens most excellent Majesty, and one of her highness most Honorable
privy Counsel.
Whilst I abode (right Honorable) in the Isle of Palma, in affairs of
merchandise for the worshipful Thomas Lock deceased, and his company, time
then permitted me, to have conference with ancient gentlemen which had
served in the Conquest of the west India, now called nevve Spain, under the
princely Captain Hernando Cortez. By whom as present vvitnesses at many of
the acts herein contained, I was credibly informed, that this delectable and
worthy History is a most true and just report of matter paste in effect:
wherefore I did the more willingly turn over and peruse the same, which is
a Mirror and an excellent president, for all such as shall take in hand to
govern nevve Discoueries: for here they shall behold, how Glory, Renown,
and perfect Felicity, is not gotten but with great pains, travail, peril
and danger of life: here shall they see the wisdom, courtesy, valor and
policy of worthy Captains, yea and the faithful hearts which they ought
to bear unto their Princes service: here also is described, how to use and
correct the stubbern and mutinous persons, and in what order to exalt the
good, stout and virtuous Soldiers, and chiefly, how to preserve and keep
that bevvtifull Dame Lady Victory when she is obtained. And where it was
supposed, that the golden metal had his beginning and place in the East and
VVeast India, near unto the hot Zoane, (as most learned vvriters held
opinion) it is now approved by the venterous trauellour and worthy captain
Martin Frobisher Esquire, yea and also through the great pains, procurement,
and first invention of the worshipful Mychaell Lock Merchaunt, that the
same golden metal does also lie incorporate in the bovvelles of the
Norvveast parties, enuironned with admirable Towers, Pillars and Pynacles, of
Rocks, Stone, and Ise, possessed of a people both strange, and rare in
shape, attire and living, yea such a Country and people, as all Europe had
forsaken and made no account of, except our most gracious Queen and her
subjects, whom undoubtedly God has appointed, not only to be supreme
Princess over them, but also to be a mean that the name of Christ may be
known unto this Heathenish and Savage generation.

Not long since (right Honorable) I happened to travail from the famous City
of Tolledo in Spain, tovvarde high Castile, and by fortune ouertooke an
ancient Gentlemen, vvorshipfully accompanied, unto vvho^ I was so bold as to
approach, beseching his worship to advertise me of his journey: who (after he
had beheld my white head and beard) ansvvered fulgentlely, that his intent was
to travail unto the king of Spaynes Court, and vvelcomed me unto his company.
In short space that we had iourneyed together, and communed of each other his
Country, it pleased him to say as follovveth: My good friend, if you knevv my
suit unto the Kings majesty, you would judge that I were a mad man, and
therefore to shorten our way, I will declare my attempted suit unto you. You
shall understand, that I am a Gentleman of lxx. years of age, and sometimes I
served in the civil vvarres of Pirru, where I was vvounded in diverse parts
of my body, and am now thereby lame in one of my legs and shoulder. I have
neither Wife nor child, and at this present (God be praised) I have in the
Contractation house in the City of Civil, in gold and plate, the sum of
thirty thousand Duckates: and I have also in Pirru in good lands and
possessions, the yearly rent of twelve thousand Duckates, which rentes
and ready money is sufficient to mainteyne a poor Gentleman. But all this
notvvithstanding, I do now sue unto the Kings Majesty, to have license and
authority to discover and conquer a certain part of India, which
adioyneth with Brazile, and is part of the Empire of Pirru, I pray you now
declare what you think of my suit. By my troth sir (quoth I) I trust your
worship will pardon a rash and sudden judgment, which you now demand at my
hand: yea truly (quoth he) say what you list. Then (quoth I) my opinion is,
that you are not well in your wit, for what would you have? vvil not reason
suffice you? or else would you now in your old days be an Emperor, considering
that your Sepulcher attends for you, Now truly I thank you (quoth he) for
of your judgment are most men: but I say unto you, considering that all flesh
must finish, I seek for no quiet rest in this transitory life: yea the wise
and Christian Doctors do teach and admonish, that every true Christian is
borne, not for his own private wealth and pleasure, but rather to help and
succoure others his poor breethren. Likewise do I consider the great number
of Gentlemen, younger brethren, and other valiant persons, who through want of
living, do fall into many disorders. Wherefore to accomplish my duty tovvard
God and my Prince, and to relieve such poor Gentlemen, do I now attempt this
journey, with the adventure of my body and goods, and for that purpose I
have in readiness four tall Ships, well furnished in the port of Saint
Lucar de Barrameda, hoping assuredlye, that before the life depart from my
body, to hear these valiante young Gentlemen (whom now I mean to have in my
company) say, oh happy day, when old Zarate (for so is my name) brought us
from penury, yea and from a number of perils that we were like to fall into.
I hope also, that the royal estate of my Prince shall be by my pains and
poor service enlarged: believe you me, this is the only sumptuous Tumbe that
I pretend to build for my poor carkas. But yet I know there are some, unto
whom I may compare the Bore that lies vvallovvyng in his Stye, who will
not let to say, what need we any other world, honor, or Kingdoms? let
us be contented with that we have: who may easily be answered, Sir
glutton, your paunch is full, and little care you for the glory of God, honor
of your Prince, neither the need and necessity of your poor neyboures.
With this conclusion the Gentleman ended his tale, the judgment whereof I
leave to noble Gentlemen his peers to be determined.

And where our Captain Hernando Cortez, of whose valiant acts this
history treats, has deserved immortal fame, eue^ so doubtless I hope,
that within this happy Realm is now living a Gentleman, whose zeal of
travail and valiant beginnings does prognosticate great, marvelous, and
happy success: for perfection of honor and profit is not gotten in one day,
nor in one or two voyages, as the true histories of the East and West
Conquests by Spanyardes and Portingalles do testifye. And calling to
remembrance the great zeal and good will which your honor has alvvayes
extended to good and profitable attemptes, and especially in the proceedings of
the new discovery, your honor has not only used liberality in your
adue^tures, but also taken great pains in Court, to advance and further the
voyage, a number I say of Gentlemen, Mariners, and other artificers, shall
have great cause to pray for your honor. And where I for my part have tasted
of your honors goodness sundry vvayes, I am now most humbly to beseech
your honor to accept this poor gift, the which I have translated out of
the Spanish tongue, not decked with gallant couloures, nor yet fyled with
pleasant phrase of Rhetorike, for these things are not for poor Merchant
travelers, but are reserved to learned VVriters: yet I trust the Author will
pardon me, because I have gone as near the sense of this History, as my
cunning vvoulde reach unto. I also crave, that it may please your honor, when
your great and weight business will permit, to behold this work, and
that shall be for me an encouragemente to take in hand the translation of the
East India, which is now enjoyed by the King of Portingall. Thus I end,
beseeching the Almighty to preserve your honorable estate. (?)

Your honors most ready at commandment Thomas Nicholas.

To the Reader.
I Thought it good gentle Reader, to advertise thee to consider in readyng this
history, that Hernando Cortes was not the first that did discover the new
Spain, for after the Islands of Santo Domingo and Cuba were discovered,
conquered, and inhabited by the Spaniards, Hernando Cortes was then a dweller
in the Island of Santo Domingo, and at that time was gouernoure in the Island of
Cuba one James Velasques, who had understanding (by others) that near unto
those Ila^ds stood a firm land, rich of gold and plate, whereupon the same
Velasques prepared certain Ships, and in them sent for General a kinsman
of his called John de Grijalua, who with one Francisco Hernandez de Cordoua,
discovered the said firm land in trafike of merchandise, and for things of
little value, he brought great treasure, as shall appear in an Inventory
placed in this history.

This Grijalua pretended not to conquer, nor yet to inhabit, but only to fill
his hungry belly with gold and silver, for if he had pretended honor, then
Cortez had not enjoyed the perpetual fame which now is his, although his
corpse be clothed in clay.

In this history does appear the simplicity of those ignorant Indians in
time past, yea and how they were deluded in worshipping Idolles and wicked
Mamon, their bloody slaughter of men in sacrifice, and now the great mercy of
Jesus Christ extended upon them in lightning their darkness, giving them
knowledge of the eternity, and holy trinity in unity, whereby they are now
more devout unto heavenly things than we wretched Chrystians, (who presume of
auntiente Christianity) especially in Charity, humility, and lively works
of faith.

And now (gentle Reader) I do for my part but only crave, that it may please
thee to accept these my pains taken, in good part, for other benefyte I seek
not. Farewell.

(T. N.)

Stephan Gosson in praise of the Translator.
THe Poet which sometimes has trod awry,
and song in verse the force off fvry love,
When he beholdes his lute with careful eye.
Thinks on the dumpes that he was wont to prove.
His groaning spright yprickt with tender ruth,
Calls then to mind the tollies of his youth.
The hardr mind which all his honor got,
In blouddy field by fruit of deadly jar,
When once he hears the noise of thirsed shot.
And threatnyng trumpet sound the points of war.
Remembers how through pykes he lovde to run,
When he the price of endless glory won.
The traveler which near refus^e the pain,
To pass the danger of the streightes he found,
But hoysted sail to search the golden vain,
Which natures craf^e has hidden in the ground.
When he perceyues Don Cortez here so pearte,
May well be mindful of his own deserte.
Then yield we thanks to Nicholas for his toil,
Who strings the Lute that puts us in mind,
How doting days have given us all the foil,
Whilste learned wits in forrayne lands do find.
That labor bears away the golden ^^ccce,
And is rewarded with the ^ower of Greece.
Lo here the trumpe of everlasting fame,
That rendes the air in sunder with his blaste,
And throws abroad the praises of their name,
Which often in sight have made their foes aghast.
Though they be dead, their glory shall remain,
To rear alofte the deeds of haughty Spain.
Lo here the traveler, whose paynefull quill,
So lively payntes the Spanish Indies out,
That English Gentlemen may view at will,
The manly prowess of that gallant toute.
And when the Spaniarde vaunteth o^ his gold,
Their own renown in him they may behold.
FINIS.
In Thomae Nicholai occidentalem Jndiam St. Gosson.
SOrdescant Croesi radiantia tecta Pyrope,
Et iaceat rutili pompa superba Mydae.
Aurea foelici voluuntur secula cursu,
Pactoli assidue flumina verae tument.
Terra ferax pandit, sua viscera plena metallis
Praegnans, diuitias parturit illa suas.
India luxuriat, locupleti prole triumphat,
Pingue solum gemmis, fundere gestit opes.
O vos qui patriae cupitis fulci^e ru^^am,
Et dare mella bonis ^urea, mentis ^p^.
Cortezi hos animo cupide lustrate labores,
Postque, reluctanti credit vela Salo.
The Conquest of the Weast India.
The Birth and lynage of Hernando Cortez.
IN the year of our Savior, 1485. being kings of Castill and Aragon, the
Catholic princes Fernando and Isabell his wife, was borne Hernando Cortez in a
town called Medellin, situated in the province of Andulozia: his Father was
named Martyn Cortez de Monroy, and his mother was called Lady Katherin Pisarro
Altamirano, they were both of good birth, and proceeded from four principal
houses, that is to say, the house of Cortez, the house of Monroy, the house of
Pisarro, and the house of Altamirano, which four houses are ancient, noble
and honorable: yet these parents but poor in goods, but rich in virtue and
good life, for which cause they were much esteemed and beloved among their
neighbors. His mother was of inclination devout, but somewhat hard: his
father was charitable and merciful, who in his youth applied himself to the
wars, and was Liuetenant to a company of horsemen. Hernando Cortez in his
childehood was very sickely, so that many times he was at the point of death:
And when he came to.xiiij. years of age, his parents sent him to the
University of Salamanca, where he remained two years, learning Grammar, and
then returned to Medellin werie of his study, yea possible for want of money:
yet his parents were much offended with him for leaving his study, for their
only desire was to have had him a student at law, which is a faculty both
rich and worshipful, considering their son to be of a good wit and
ability: Yet he caused much strife in his Fathers house, for he was a very
unhappy ladde, high minded, and a lover of chivalry, for which cause he
determined with himself to wander abroad to seek adventures. And at that
instant happened two journeys fit for his purpose and inclination. The one of
them was to Naples with Gonsalo Hernandez of the City of Cordoua, who was a
worthy man, and named the great captain. And the other journey was to the
Weast India, with the Lord Nicholas de Ouando, a knight of the order of Larez,
who was then appointed for governor of those parties. And musing with himself
which way to take, determined to pass into India, chiefly because the
governor was of his acquaintance, and such a one as would have care of him.
And likewise the great desire of gold made him to covet that voyage more than
the Journey unto Naples. Now in the mean while that ye fleet was preparing for
India, it chanced, Hernando Cartez pretended to go unto a certain house in
the night season to talk with a woman, and clyming over a Wall which was of
weak foundation, both he and the Wall fell together: So that with the noise of
his fall, and rattling of his armoure which he ware, came out a man newly
married, and findyng him fallen at his door would have slain him, suspecting
somewhat of his new married wife, but that a certain old woman (being his
mother in law) with great persuasions stayed him from that fact. Yet with the
fall he fell into a grievous Ague, and continued sick for a long season, so
that he could not proceed upon his voyage with the governor Ouando. And when
he had obtained and fullye recovered his health, he minded to pass into Italy,
And so took his way toward Valentia, wandering here and there almost a whole
year with much necessitye and penury, and then returned home again to
Medellyn, with determination to proceed upon his pretended voyage of India:
Whereupon his father and mother waying their sons estate, desired God to
bless him, and gave him money in his purse for his journey.

The age of Cortez when he passed into India.
HErnando Cortez was of the age of ninteene years, in the year of Christ
1504. and then he went toward India, and agreed for his passage and victual
with Alonso Quintezo who went in company of other four ships laden with
merchandise, which navy departed from saint Lucas de Barramedo, with
prosperous navigations, until they arrived at the Island of Gomera one of the
Cauarie Islands, where they did provide themselves of all things necessary for
so long a voyage as they then had in hand.

Alounso Quintezo, being greedy of his voyage, and desirous to come to the
Island of Saint, Domingo before his fellows, hoping to sell his commodity the
better, departed from Gomera in the night season without knowledge giving unto
his company. But incontinent after he had hoysed up his sails, arose up so
great a wind and tempest, that his maine mast brake, whereby he was forced to
re^ourne back again to the Island of Gomera. And he made earnest request to
them of the other ships to stay for him, until he had mended his Mast,
who friendlye and neyghbourlye granted his desire, and departed altogether,
sailing in sight the one of the other certain days: yet the said Quintero,
seeing the weather steadfast, and harpyng upon gaynes, flewe from his fellows
again. And where as Frances Ninio de Guelua his pilote was not expert in that
Navigations, they knew not where they were at length: the Mariners did give
sundry Judgments: the Pilote was in great perplexity and sadness, their
passengers lamented, and bewailed their unfortunate success: the Master of the
ship laid the fault to the Pilote, and the Pilote likewise charged the
Master, for it did appear that they were fallen out before. In this mean time
their victual wared skant, and their fresh water wanted, so that they
prepared themselves to die. Some cursed their fortune, others asked mercy at
Gods hand, lookyng for death and to be eaten of the Cariues. And in this time
of tribulation came a Dove flying to the ship, being on good Friday at Sun
set, and satte him on the ship top: whereat they were all comforted, and
took it for a miracle and good token and some wept with joy, some said yt God
had sent the Dove to comfort them, Comfort of God.
others said that land was near, and all gave hearty thanks unto God,
directing their course that way that the Dove flew: and when the Dove was out
of sight, they sorrowed again, but yet remained with hope to see shortly
land and on Easterday they discovered the Island of Santo Domingo, which was
first discried by Christopher Z^rso, who cried, land, land, a cheerful
voice to the sailors. The Pilote looked out, and knew that it was the point,
or cape of Semana, and within four days after they arrived in the port of
Santo Domingo, which was long wished for, and there they found the other
ships of their company arrived many days before.

The time that Cortez abode in Santo Domingo.
Soon after that the Gouernoure Ouando was in his regimente and office, Cortez
arrived at Santo Domingo, and the Gouernoures Secretary, called Medina,
received and lodged him, and also informed him of the estate of the Island, and
advised him what was needful to do, wishing that he would be a dweller
there, and that he should have a plot to build upon, with certain ground for
husbandry. But Cortez his thought was clean contrary, for he judged, that as
soon as he came thither, he should lade with gold, whereby he did little
esteem his friend Medina his counsel, saying, that he had rather go to
gather gold, than to travel in husbandry. Medina yet persuaded him, that he
should take better aduisement, for to find gold, was doubtful, and very
troubesome. This talk ended, Cortez went to kiss the Governors hands, and
to declare the cause of his coming, with other news from Estremadure the
Governors Country. The Governor friendly welcomed him, and also persuaded
him to abide there, the which council he accepted, and shortly after went to
the wars, whereof was Captain Iaymes Velasques, in the province of Anigua
Iaqua, and Guaca Iarima, and other Lordships which were not as yet pacifyed
with the late rebellion of Anacoana widdowe, who was a gentlewoman of great
living. Ouando gave unto Cortez certain Indyans in the Country of Daiguae,
and also the office of public notarie in Azua, a town which the Governor
had builded, and there dwelt Cortez five or six years, and began to play the
good husband. Now in this mean season he would have gone to Veragua, which
was reported to be marvelous rich, with the Captayn Iaymes de Nicuesa: but
because of an empostume that he had under his right knee, he went not, and as
it happened, he was therein fortunate, for that thereby he escaped great
perils and troubles, which happened to them that went on that voyage and
journey.

Things that happened to Cortez in the Island of Cuba.
THe Lord James Colori being Admiral and chief Governor of the new India,
sent one Iaymes Velasques to conquer the Island of Cuba, in the year. 1511.
And gave unto him men, Armor, and other things necessary. And then Hernando
Cortez went to that conquest as a Clearke to the Treasorer called Michaell de
Passamontes, for to keep the accounts of the Kings fiftes and revenues, being
so entreated and required by the same Iaymes Velasques, because he was holden
for a man both able and diligente. And it followed, that in the repartition of
the lands conquered, Iaymes Velasques gave unto Cortez the Indians of
Manicora^, in coniunct company with his brother in law called Iuan Xuarez,
whereupon Cortez did inhabit in Saint James de Barucoa, which was the first
place of habitation in that Island, whereas he bredde and brought up Kine,
Sheep, and Mares, and was the first that had there any heard or flock, and
with his Indians he gathered great quantity of gold, so that in short time he
wared rich, and joined in company with one Andres de Duero a Merchaunt, and
put in two thousand Castlins for his stock. He was also highly esteemed with
Iaymes Velasques, and put in authority to dispatch business, and to give
order for edifices. In his time be caused a money house to be built, and also
an Hospital. At that time one Iuan Xuarez natural of the City of Granada,
carried to the I Will of Cuba his mother and three sisters, which came to the
Island of Santo Domingo, with that vicequeene the Lady Mary of Toledo, in Anno.
1509. hoping to marry them there with rich men, for they were very poor. And
the one of them named Cathelina was wont to say, That she should be a great
Gentlewoman: it was either her dreams and fantasies, or else some Astronomer
had made her believe so, but her mother was reported to be very cunning. The
maidens were beautiful, for which cause, and also being there but few
Spanishe women, they were much made of, and often feasted. But Cortez was woer
to the said Cathelina, and at the end married with her: Although at the first
there was some strife about the matter, and Cortez put in prison, because he
refused her for his wife, but she demanded him as her husband by faith and
troth of hand: wherein Iaymes Velasques did stand her friend, by reason of an
other sister of hyrs which he had, but of an evil name. It so fell out that one
Baltazar Bermudez, Iuan Xuares, and the two Anthony Velasques, with one
Villegas accused Cortez, that he ought to marry with Cathelina, yet those
witnesses spoke of evil will many things, as touching ye affairs committed to
his charge, alleging yt he used secret dealing with certain persons. The
which causes although they were not true, yet they carried great color thereof.
For why? many went secretly to Cortez his house, complaining of Iaymes
Velasques. Some because they had not just repertitio^ of the conquered India^s,
and other some not according to deserte. Contrariwyse James Velasques gave
credit to his talebearers, because Cortez refused to marry with Cathelina
Xuarez, and used discourteous words unto him in ye presence of many that stood
by, and also commanded him to ward. And when Cortez saw himself in the
stocks, he feared some process of false witness, as many times does happen in
those parties. At time conueniente he brake the lock off the stocks, and
laid hand upon the Sword and Target of the keeper, and brake up a window,
escaping thereby into the street, and took the Church for Sanctuary. But when
Iaymes Velasques had notice thereof, he was greatly offended with Christopher
Lagos the Iayler, saying, that for money he had losed him: wherefore he
procured by all means to pluck him out of the Sanctuary. But Cortez having
intelligence of his dealing, did resist and withstand his force. Yet
notwithstanding one day Cortez walking before the Church door, and being
careless of his business, was caught by the back with a Serieant called John
Esquier and others, and then was put aboorde a Ship under hatches. Cortez was
well-beloved among his neighbors, who did well consider the evil will that the
Governor bare unto him. But now Cortez seeing himself under hatches,
despaired of his liberty, and did verily think, that he should be sent
prisoner to the Chancerie of Santo Domingo, or else to Spain, who being in
this extremity, sought all means to get his foot out of the chain, and at
length he got it out, and the same night he changed his apparel with a ladde
that served him, Cortez escapes.
and by the Pump of the Ship he got out, not heard of any his keepers,
climbing softly along the Ship side, he entered the Skiffe and went his way
therewith, and because they should not pursue after him, he losed the Boat of
another Ship that road by them. The Current of Macaguanigua a river of
Barucoa, was so fierce, that he could not get in with his Skiffe, because he
had no help to row, and was also very werie, fearing to be drowned if he should
put himself to the land, wherefore he stripped himself naked, and tied a
nyghtkerchiefe about his head, with certain wrytings apperteyning to his
office of Notarie and Clearkshippe to the Treasourer, and other things that
were against the Gouernoure James Velasques, and in this sort swamme to land,
and went home to his own house, and spoke with John Xuarez his brother in
law, and took Sanctuary again with Armor. Then the Gouernoure James
Velasques sent him word, that all matters should be forgotten, and that
they should remain friends, as in time past they had bin, and to go with
him to the Wars against certain Indians that had rebelled. Cortez made
him no answer, but incontinent married with mistress Catalina Xuarez
according to his promise, and to live in peace. James Velasques proceeded on
his journey with a great company against the Rebels. Then said Cortez to
his brother in law John Xuares, bring me (quoth he) my Lance and my Crosbowe
to the Towns end. And so in that evening he went out of Sanctuary, and
taking his Cross bow in hand, he went with his brother in law to a
certain Farm, where James Velasques was alone, with his householde
servants, for his army was lodged in a Village thereby, and came thither
somewhat late, and at such time as the Gouernoure was perusing his Book of
charges, and knocked at his door which stood open, saying: Here is Cortez
that would speak with the Gouernoure, and so went in. The Gouernoure was
sore afraid.
When James Velasques saw him armed, and at such an hour, he was maruellously
afraid, desiring him to rest himself, and also to accept his Supper: No Sir
(quoth he) my only coming is, but to know the complayntes you have of me,
and to satisfye you therein, and also to be your friend and seruitor. They
then embraced each other in token of friendship. And after long talk, they
lay both in one bed, where James de Orrelano found them, who went to carry
news to the Gouernoure, how Cortez had fledee. After this sort came Cortez
again to his former friendshyppe with James Velasques, and proceeded with him
to the Wars, but afterward at his return, he was like to have bin drowned
in the sea: For as he came from the Caves of Bani to visit certain of his
Shepheardes and Indians that wrought in the Mines of Ba^r^^^oa where his
dwelling was, his Canea or little boar overthrew, being night, and half a
league from land, with tempeste, whereby he was put to his shifts, and forced
to swim, and happened to espy light that certain Shepheardes had which were
at supper near the Sea side. By such like perils and dangers, run the
excellent menns their race, until that they arrive at the Haven where their
good lotte is preserved.

The discovery of new Spain.
FRaunces Hernandes de Cordoua did first discover Xucatan, going with three
Shyps for Indians, or else to barter. These Ships were set forth by
Christopher Morante, and Lope Ochoa de Saizedo, in Anno. 1517. And although he
brought home nothing at that time but stripes, yet he brought perfect
relation, how the Country was rich of gold and silver, and the people of the
country clothed. Then James Velasques Gouernoure of the Island of Cuba, sent
the next year following his kinsman, called John de Grijalua, with two hundred
Spanyardes in four Ships, thinking to obtain much gold and silver for his
Merchandise at those places, which Fraunces Hernandez had informed him: So that
John de Grijalua went to Xucatan, and there fought with the Indians of
Champoton, and was hurt. From thence he entered the river of Tauasco, which
Grijalua had so named, in the which place he bartered for things of small
value. He had in exchange gold, cloth of cotton wool, and other curious
things wrought of feathers. He was also at Saint John de Vlhua, and took
possession for the King, in the name of James Velasques, and there also
exchanged his Haberdashe wares, for Gold, and Couerlets of cotton, and
feathers: and if he had considered his good fortune, he would have planted
habitation in so rich a land, as his company did earnestly request him, and if
he had so done, then had he bin as Cortez was. But such wealth was not for him
which knew it not, although he excused himself, saying, he went not to
inhabit, but to barter only in traffike of his Merchandise, and to discover
whether that land of Xucatan were an Island, or no. And finding it a main
land, and populous, he left off for very fear. Likewise, some of his company
were desirous to return to Cuba, among whom, Men tangled in foolish love.
was one Pedro de Aluado, who was far in love with a woman of that country.
So they determined to return, with relation to the Gouernoure of such things
as had happened till that day, and sailed homewardes along the coast to
Panuco, and so came to Cuba, to the great grief of many of his company. Yea
some of them wept, with sorrow that he would not abide in that rich country.
He was five months upon his voyage homewarde from land to land, and eight
months till his return to the City. But when he came home, the Gouernoure
having heard of his proceedings, would not look upon him, which was his
just reward.

The Inventory of the treasure that Grijalua brought for his wares.
John de Grijalua bought of the Indians of Potonchan, Saint John de Vlhua, and
other places of that coast, such things as made his fellows far in love
with the Country, and loath to depart from thence. The workma^ship of many of
the things that they bought, was more worth than the thing it self, as this
Inuentory perticularly does show.

The Inuentory.
A Little Idol of gold hollow. A greater of gold, with horns and hear,
with a string of beadestones about his neck, and a Flyeflappe in his hand,
and a little stone for his navel. A piece of gold, like the patent of a
Challice, garnished with stones. A Skull of gold, with two horns, and black
hear. Two and twenty earerings of gold. Two and twenty pieces of an other
fashion. Four bracelettes of gold very broad. A pair of beads of gold,
the stones hollow, with a Frogge of gold hanging at the same. Another pair,
with a Lion of gold. A great pair of earerings of gold. Two little Eagles of
gold hollow. A little Saltseller of gold. Two earerings of gold with Turkey
stones. A collar to hang about a woman's neck, of twelve pieces, with four and
twenty stones hanging thereat. A great collar of gold. Six little collers of
gold thin. Seven other collers of gold with stones. Four earerings of
golden leaf. Twenty fishing hooks of gold. Twelve grains of gold, waying
fifty Ducke^s. A headlace of gold. Certain thin planches of gold. I Potedge
pot of gold. In Idol of gold hollow. Certain thin brouches of gold. Nine
beade stones of gold. Two pair of g^^t beads. One pair of wodden beads
guilt. A little cup of gold, with eighte purple stones, and twenty three
stones of an other color. Four belles of gold. A little sauser of gold. A
little box of gold. Certain small collers of gold of small value. A hollow
apple of gold. Forty hatchets of gold mixed with copper, valued in two
thousand five hundred Ducats. A whole harne^s or furniture for an armed man of
gold thin beaten. An other whole armor of wood with leaves of gold,
garnished with little black stones. A certain piece made like unto a feather,
of an hyde and gold jointly wrought. Four pieces of armor of wood made for
the knees, and covered with golden leaf. Two targets covered with feathers of
many and fine colors. Diverse other targets of gold and feathers. A tuffe of
feathers of sundry colors, with a little byrd in the midst, very lively. A
wing of gold and feathers. Two flyflappes of feathers. Two little chamberpottes
of Allabatter, beset with many trim stones, and some fine, and among them
there was one esteemed at two thousand Ducats. Certain beads of tin. Five
pair of wooden beads rounds and covered with a lease of gold very thin. A
hundred and thirty hollow bead stones of gold. Many beads of woodde gilt. A
pair of Sissers of wood gilt. Two gilt vissors. A vissor of strange gesture of
gold. Four vissors of wood guilt. Four dishes of wood covered with golden
leaf. A dogs head of gold beset with stones. An other beasts head garnished
with gold. Five pair of rush shoes. Three red hides. Seven rasors of flint
stone, for to cut up men that were sacrifised. Two painted dishes of wood with
an Ewer. A garment with half sleeves of feathers of exceeding fine colors. A
couerlet of feathers. Many couerlets of cotton very fine. Many other couerlets
of cotton course. Two kerchiefs of good cotton. Many perfumes of sweet odor,
much of that country fruits. They also brought a gentlewoman that was given
the^, and other prisoner Indians. And for one of them was offered his weight in
gold, but Grijalua would not take it.
They also brought news that there were Amazons women of war, in certain
Islands, and many gave credit, being amazed at the things that they had
brought bartered for things of a vile price: as here-vnder appears the
Merchandise that they gave for all the aforesaid Jewels.

The Inventory of the Spanish Merchandise.
Six course shirts. Three pair of Maryners breeches of lynnen. Five pair of
women's shoes. Five broad leatherne girdels wrought with colored thread, with
their purses. Many purses of sheep skin. Six glasses a little gilt. Four
brouches of glass. Two thousand beadstones of glass green. A hundred pair
of beads of diverse colors. Twenty wooden combs. Six pair of Sissers.
Fifteen knives great and small. A thousand taylers nedels. Two thousand pinnes
of sorts. Eight pair of corded shoes. A pair of pinsers and a hammer. Seven
red night cappes. Three coats of colors. A freese coat with a cap of the
same. An old green velvet coats. An old velvet cappe.
The determination of Cortez to prepare a Navy for discovery.
Because John de Grijalua was absent a longer season than was Francisco
Hernandez de Cordona, before his return, or giving advise of his proceedings,
the gouernoure Valasques prepared a Caruel, and therein sent one Christofer de
Olid, for to seek Grijalua with succor if need were, and gave Olid great
charge, that he should return with news from Grijalua with all speed: But
this messenger tarried but a small while upon his voyage, and saw but little of
Yucatan, and not fynding Grijalua, he returned back again to Cuba, which
return happed not well for the governor nor yet for Grijalua. For if he had
proceeded for the on his way to Saint John de Vlhua, he had then met with
whom he sought for, and likewise caused him to have inhabited there. But he
excused him self, alleging that he had lost his ankers, and was therefore
forced of necessity to return.

And as soon as Olid was departed on that voyage, Pedro de Aluarado returned
to Cuba, with full relation of the discovery, and brought many things with him,
wrought in gold, with strange colored feathers, and cotton wool. The governor
James Valasques rejoiced much to behold those principles: And all the
Spaniardes of Cuba wondered thereat, and likewise to hear the whole relation of
the journey. Yet the governor feared the return of his kinsman, because some
of his company that came sick and diseased from those parties, said that
Grijalua meaned not to inhabit there; and that the people and land was great,
and also how the same people were warlike: likewise the governor feared the
wisdom and courage of his kinsman. Whereupon he determined to send thither
certain ships, with soldiers and armor and other trifling things, thinking
chiefly to enrich himself by barter, and also to inhabit by force. He
requested one Baltazer Vermudez to take that voyage in hand, who accepted the
offer, but he demanded three thousand ducats for his furniture and provision.
Their governor hearing this demand, answered, that in such sort the charges
would be more than the profit: And so for that time left off the matter,
because he was covetous, and loath to spend, thinking to provide an army at
other men's cost, as he had done before, when Grijalua went first on that
voyage, for at that time one Francisco de Montezo did furnish one ship. And
also certain gentlemen called Alaunso Ferna^dez, Porto Carero, Alaunso de
Auila and James de Ordas with many others, went with Grijalua at their proper
costs and charges. It followed that the governor brake the matter to Cortez,
and required that the voyage should be set forth betwixt them, knowing that
Cortez had two thousand Castlyns of gold in the power of one Andres de Duero, a
merchaunt, and also that Cortez was a man diligent, wise, and of stout
courage. Cortez being of haughtye stomach, accepted both the voyage and the
charges, thinking the cost would not be much. etc. So that the voyage and
agreemente was concluded, whereupon they sent one John de Sanzedo to the kings
counsel and chauncery, resident in the Island of Santo Domingo, who were then
religyous persons) to have and obtain of them license, freelye to go and
traffike into those parties of ^ new discovery, and also to seek for John de
Grijalua, for they imagyned that without him small traffic would be had,
which was, to exchange trifles of Haberdashe for gold and silver. The chief
rulers of gouernemente at that time in ye kings counsel there, were these
following, Sogniour Alou^so de Sa^to Domingo, Segniour Luys de Figuer^a, and
Segniour Barnardo de Munsaned^, who granted the license, and appointed
Hernando Cortez for captain General of the voyage, and setter forth in
company of James Velasques. They also appointed a Treasurer, and Surueyour to
procure for the kings portion or part, which was according to custom one
fifte part. In this mean season Cortez prepared himself for the Journey, and
communed with his especial friends to see who would bear him company: And
he found three hundred men that agreed to his request. He then bought a
Caruell and Vergantine, and another Caruell that Pedro de Aluarado brought
home. An other Vergantine he had of James Valesques: he provided for them
armor, artillery, and other Munition: he brought also wine Oil, Beans,
Pease, and other victuals necessary: he took up also upon his credit, of one
James Sauzed^ much Haberdashe, to the value of seven hundred Castlyns in
gold. The governor Velasques delivered unto him a thousand Castlyns which
he possessed of the goods of one Pamfil^ de Naruaiz in his absence, alleging
that he had no other money of his own proper. And being in this manner
agreed, the Articles and Conenauntes were drawn and set down in writing, The
coming home of Grip^ua.
before a Notary, called Alounso de Escalantes, the three and twenty day of
October Anno. 1518.

In this mean time arrived at Cuba, John de Grijalua, upon whose arrival, the
governor changed his purpose and pretense, for he refused to disburse any
more money, nor yet would consent that Cortez should furnish his Navy. For the
only cause was, that he meant to dispatch back again his kinseman and his
army. But to behold the stout courage of Cortez, his charges, and liberality
in expenses, it was strange, The goue^ nour an old enemy.
and to see how he was deceived. And also to consider, the flattery and
deceit of his adversary, yea what complaints were made to the Lord Admiral,
saying that Cortez was subtle, high minded, and a lover of honor, which were
tokens that he would rebel, being in place convenient, and that he would
revenge old griefs. Also it grieved Vermudez that he had not accepted ye
voyage, unto who^ it was once offered, seeing the great treasure that Grijalua
had brought, and what a rich land the country newely discovered was. Also he
pretended that ye governor would be chieftain of ye fleet, although his
kinesman were not fit for ye room. The governor also thought yt he being
slack, Cortez would also be slack. But yet he seeing Cortez earnestly
proceed, he sent one Amador de Larez a principal man, to entreat him to leave
off ye voyage (considering ye Grijalua was returned) and yt he would pay him al
ye costs and charges yt he had laid out. Cortez understanding the governors
mind, made answer unto Larez, yt he would not leave of the Journey, for very
shame, nor yet break the agreement made. Courage of Cortez.
And also if Valasques would send a Navy for his own account, he would be
content, for (quoth he) I have already my license and dispatch of the fathers
and governors. And the^ be conferred with his friends, to know their minds
if that they would favor and bear him company, at whose hands be found both
ready help and friendship. He sought then for money, and took up upon his
credit four M. Castlyns in gold, of his friend Andreas de Duero, and of Pedro
de Xerez and others. With yt which money he bought two ships, 6. horses, and
much apparel, and began to furnish a house and keep a good table for co^mers
and goers: he went also armed like a captain, and many waiting and atte^ding
upon him, whereat diverse murmured, saying that he was a Lord without rent.
In this mean while came Grijalua to the City of Saint James de Cuba: but
his kinseman the governor would not look upon him because he had lest and
forsaken so rich a land. Also it grieved him inwardlye that Cortez proceeded
thitherward so strong and mighty, and could by no means disturb or let
him, and to see the great train that waited upon him with many of them that
had been the other voyage with Grijalua: yea if that he should disturb him,
blood shed would follow in the City. So that he was forced to dissemble his
sorrow. Yet (as many affirm) he commanded that he should have no victuals
sold unto him. Now Cortez departed from thence, proclayming himself for
General, and that the governor Valasques had nothing to do with his Navy,
requesting his soldiers to enbarke themselves with such victuals as they had.
He also bargayned with one Fernando Alfonso for certain Hogs and Sheep that
were prepared for the shambles, and gave unto him a chain of gold and
brouches for payment, and also money, to pay the penalty that the butcher fell
into for not providing the City. And so he departed from Saint James de
Baracoa the eighteenth of November, with about three hundred Spaniardes in six
ships.

The navy and men that Cortez carried with him to the Conquest.
COrtez departed from Saint James de Barocoa with small provision of victuals
for such a number of men, and also for the navigations which as yet was
uncertain. And being out of that part, he sent Pedro Xuarez Gallinato with a
Caruell to I^ymaica for vittailes, commanding him, that those things which he
should there buy, to go therewith to Cape de Corrientes, or to S. Anthonies
point, which is the farthest part of that Island Westward. And he himself went
with his company to Macaca, and boughte there great quantity of bread, and
some Hogs, of one Taymaio. Then he proceeded to the Trinity Island, and
there boughte an other Ship of one Alonso Guillen. And of perticulare persons
he bought three Horses, and five hundred bushels of Corn. And being there at
road, he had advice, that John Nonez Sedenio passed that way with a Ship
laden with victuals, for to make sale thereof at the Mines. Whereupon he sent
James de Orda^, with a Caruel well armed, for to take him, and to bring him
unto S. Anthonies point. Ordas went and took him at the Channel de Iardines,
and brought him to the place appointed. Sedenio brought the register of his
merchandise, which was great store of bread, Bacon, and Hens: Cortez gave
him chains of gold, and other pieces for payment, and a bil for the rest. In
consideration whereof, Sedenio went with him to the Conquest. In the Trinity
Island Cortez gathered together two hundred men more, who had bin in Grijalua
his company, and were dwellers in that Island, and in Matancas, Carenias, and
other Villages, and sending his ships forward, he went with his men by land to
Hauana, which was then inhabited on the South side in the mouth of the river
called Onicaxinall, but there they would sell him no provision, for fear of
the Governor Velasques. But yet one Christopher Galsada rentgatherer to the
Bishop, and receyuer for the Popes Bulls, sold to him great store of Bacon
and bread of that Country called Maiz, and other provision, whereby his fleet
was reasonably provided. etc. And then he began to distribute his men and
vittayles aboorde each vessel in good order. Then came Aluarado with his
caruell, with his other friends Christopher de Olid, Alonso de Auila,
Francisco de Monteio, and many others of Grijalua his company, who had bin to
talk with the Gouernoure Velasques. And among them came one Garnica so called,
with letters for Cortez from Velasques, wherein he wrote, desiring him to abide
there, for that he meant to come himself, or else to send unto him, to treat
of matters profitable for them both.

Also, the said Governor sent other secret letters to James de Ordas and
others, requiring them to apprehende and take prisoner Cortez. Now Ordas did
inuit Cortez to a banquet aboorde his Caruel, A snare lay de for Cortez.
thinking by that means to catch Cortez in a snare, and so to carry him
prisoner to the City of Saint James de Barocoa, but Cortez understood the
matter, and feigned himself to be very sick, and also fearing some uproar, he
went aboorde his Ship Admiral, and shot off a piece of Ordinance, giving
warning to his Navy to be in a readiness to make sail, and to follow him to
Saint Anthonies point, which was done with expedition, and there in the Town
of Guani Guaniga he mustered his men, and found five hundred and fifti^
Spanyardes, whereof fifty were Mariners. He divided them into eleven
companies, and appointed these persons following for Captains, that is to say,
Alonso de Auila, Alonso Fernandez Porto Carrero, Iaimes de Ordas, Francisco de
Monteio, Francisco de Morla, Francisco de Salzeda, John de Escalante, John
Velasques de Leon, Christopher de Olid, and one Escouar, and he himself as
General took one Company. He made these many Captains, because his whole
fleet was eleven sail, and that each of them should severally be Captain,
both of Ship and men. He also appointed for chief Pilote Antonio de
Alamines, who had taken charge before with Francisco de Hernandez de Cordoua,
and Grijalua. etc. He carried also 200 Indians, borne in ye I Will of Cuba, to
serve and to carry baggage, and also certain Negros with some Indian women,
and sixteen Norses and Mares, with great provision of Bacon, corn, biscuit,
hens, wine, oil, pease, and other fruits, with great store of Haberdash, as
Belles, necklaces, beads of glass, collers, points, pinnes, purses, nedels,
girdels, thredde, knives, sissers, pinsars, ha^mers, hatchets, Shirts, Coyses,
headkerchiefes, handkerchiefs, breeches, coats, clokes, cappes, Mariners
breeches, all yt which Mercha^dise he divided among his navy. The Ship Admiral
was of the burden of a hundred Tons. Other three Ships of the burden of
eighty Tons the piece. All the residue were small without ouerloppe, and
vergan ines. The device of his enfigne or aunciente, was flames of fire in
white and blewe, with a red cross in the midst, and bordred round with
letters, in the Lattine and Spanishe tongs, which signified this in effect:
friends, let us follow the Cross, and with lively faith with this standerde we
shall obtain victory. The premises (as ye have heard) was the furniture
that Cortez provided for his journey, and with so small a thing he conquered so
great and mighty an Empire, and strange Countries, unknown at that time.
There was never Captain that did with like army overcome so infinite a people,
and bring both the^ and their country under subjection. He carried no money to
pay his soldiers, but was rather much indebted to others at his departure. And
to say the truth, there needed any money to make pay to those soldiers that
went to the Conquest, for if they should have served for wages, they would have
^one to other places near hand. But in India, every on^ prete^deth ye state of
a noble man, or else great riches. Now all ye fleet being in readiness (as ye
have heard,) C^rtez he ga^an exhortation to his company as follows.

The Oration that Cortez made to his Soldiers.
MY loving fellows and dear friends, it is certain that every valiant manne
of stout courage, does procure by deeds to make him self equal with the
excellent men of his time, yea and with those that were before his time. So it
is that I do now take in hand such an entarprise, as godwilling shall be
heereaster of great fame, for my^e heart does pronosticate unto me, that we
shall win great and rich Countries, and many people, as yet never seen to
any of our nation, yea and (I believe) greater Kingdoms than those of our
Kings. And I assure you, that the desire of glory does further extend, than
treasure, the which in forte, mortal life does obtain. I have now prepared
Ships, Armor, Horses, and other furniture for the wars, with victual
sufficient, and all things that are used as necessary in Conquestes. I have but
at great costs and charges, wherein I have not only employed mine own
goods, but also the goods of my friends, yet me thinks that the
employmente thereof does increase my treasure and honor. We ought (loving
fellows) to leave off small things, when great matters do offer themselves.
And even as my trust is in God, even so greater pr^^^e shall come to our kings,
and a nation of this (...), than has heretofore of any other. I do not^^^^s
how acceptable it will be to God our savior, for whose (...) I do chiefly and
willingly hazard my goods and travel. I will not now it ^t of the perils and
danger (...) I have passed (...) good men do rather (...). We dot now attempt
and beg^^ (...) good and just, and the almighty God in whose name and holy
faith this voyage is begone, will assuredly grant unto us victory, and the
time will show the end of things well begone. Therefore we will now have an
other manner in our proceedings, than either Cordoua or Grijalua had, whereof
I mean not now to dispute, for the present time does hasten us away, but at
our arrival, we will do what shall seem unto us convenient. Here dear
friends do I lay before you great gaynes, but wrapped in great travel, yet
Virtue is an enemy to idleness. etc. Therefore if you will accept hope for
Virtue, or Virtue for hope, and also if ye forsake me not, as I will not
forsake you, I will with Gods help make you in short time the richest men that
ever passed this way. I do see you are but few in number, but yet such men of
haughty courage, that no force or strength of Indians can offend. Likewise
we have experience, that Christ our savior has always favored our nation
in these parties. Therefore my dear friends, let us now in Gods name depart
joyful, exspecting good success, according to our beginning. etc.

The entrance of Cortez into the Island of Acusamill.
WIth the aforesaid communication, Cortez. gave great hope to his company of
weighty matters, yea and great admiration of his person, so that all his
company had an earnest desire to proceed on that ioyney. And Cortez likewise
rejoiced, to see his men so willing: and incontinente, they embarked
themselves, and after their prayers made unto God, hoysed up their sails, and
with fair wind departed the eighttenth day of February Anno 1519. And being
at Sea, he willed all his navy (as the use is) to have S. Peter for their
patron, warning them always to follow the Admiral (wherein he went) because
he carried a light for the night season to guide them the way, which was
almost East and West from S. Anthonies point, being the nerest part of Cuba to
Cape de Cotoche, which is the first la^d point of Yucatan, whither they were
bound, so yt being there, they might run alo^g the coast, between the North
point and the West. The first night ye Hernando Cortez began to pass over the
gulf between Cuba and Yucatan, being little above lx. leagues, the wind rose
up at Northeast with much force, so yt all the Fleet were separated without
sight ye one of the other: yet by the account that their Pilots kept, they
arrived all saving one at the Island of Acusamil, although not at one time, and
those that last arrived, were the Admiral, and Captain Morla his Ship, who had
lost his Ruther, but by shoting off a piece, Cortez: understood his necessity,
and came vering to him, and amayned his sails to succor him, being in ye
night season. Yet when the day appeared, it pleased God yt the rage of the
tempest ceased, and being clear day, they found again their Ruther, and
trimmed the Ship, and made sail, and sailed that day and the next following,
without sight of land, or any of the Fleet. But the third day they arrived at
a cape or point of land, called Women's cape. Cortez commanded Morla to follow
him, directing his course to seek the residue of his Fleet, and arrived in
this forte at the Island of Acusamil, and there found all his navy except one,
whereof they heard no newe^ in many days after. The people of that Island
beholding such a strange sight, The fear of the Indians of Acusamil.
were in great fear and admiration, so that they gathered their stuff and
went up into the Mountains. Cortez caused a certain number of his me^ to go
a land to a Town which was near the place where they were arrived, and they
found the town wrought with Masons work, and good building, but they found
no creature therein, yet in some houses they found cloth made of cotte^ woll,
and certain Jewels of gold. Also they entered into a high tower made of
stoneworke, near the sea side, and there they found nothing but Idols of
earth and stone. With this news they returned to Cortez, and informed him what
they had seen, and also many fair sowe^ fields of Maiz, and great store of
hiues of Bees, and many trees of fruits, and also presented unto him the gold
and other things that they had found. Cortez rejoiced with ye news, but yet
marvelled that the people were fled, considering that when Grijalua was
there, they had not so done, whereby he judged, that his navy being greater,
caused them to fear and fly, and likewise he feared least a snare were
prepared for him. Then he commanded to vnship his Horses for three causes: the
one to discover the Country: and the other to fight if need were: and also to
grase the^, having there abundance. Also he unshipped his me^ of war, and
sent them to discover the land. How the people were found
And in the thickest of the Mountains, they found four women, and three
children, whom they brought to Cortez so that not understanding their
language, by signs and tokens they ymagined that one of the^ was the mother to
the children, and mistress to the other women. The pore creatures bewailed
their captivity. Cortez made much of them, and apparrelled the mistress as
well as he might with Spanish attire: and to her scruants he gave loking glasses
and sissers: and to the little children other toys to play withal, using no
dishonestie toward the^. And the^ he determined to send one of the wenches to
call her master, and to inform him how well they were entreated. In this
mean season came certain spies lurking a far off, by the commandment of
their Lord, who was called Calachuni, to bring news of his wife, and what else
passed. Cortez received them ge^tly, and gave unto them certain trifles, and
sent others to their Lord, and returned the^ with embassage on his behalf and
his wives, to desire him to come unto him, and to see those folk from whom he
had fled, promising, that neither his person, nor none of his country should
receive any molestation of him, nor of any of his company. Calachuni
understanding this friendship, and also with the love he bare to his wife
and children, came the next day following with all the Townsmen, in whose
houses ye Spaniards were lodged, who would not permit that their guestes
should give place. And the Lord commanded, that they should be well
entertained, and from that day forward provided them of bread, fish, honey,
and fruit. Calachuni spoke and saluted Cortez with great humility and
ceremony, and even so was he lovingly received, and well entertained. Cortez
did then declare unto him the commodity that would ensue unto him by that
nation. And also presented unto him and his company many toys, which were unto
the^ of small valewe, but much esteemed among them, yea more than gold. A
fact worthy of praise.
And moreover Cortez commanded, that all the gold and other things that his
men had taken in the Town, should be brought before him, and placed it so,
that every Indian knew his own, and was restored unto them, whereat they were
not a little joyful, wondering at the liberality of the strangers, and
departed both merry and rich with their strange gifts, and went throughout
all the Island, showing to their fellows their presents, commanding them in
the name of Calachuni their Lord, to return every man to his house, with their
wives and children, commending highly the honest and gentle nature of the
strangers. With this news and commandment, every man returned to his house
and Town from whence he had fled. And after this sort their fear was past,
and they provided the Camp abundantly of honey, bread, wax, fish, and fruit,
all the time that they abode in that Island.

The Indians of Acusamil gave nevves to Cortez of certain bearded men.
NOw Cortez seeing these Indians quiet and well pleased, and also very
serviceable, he did determyne to take away their Idols, and to give them a
remembrance of Jesus Christ borne of the Virgin Mary, by one Melchior a
fisherman and very rustical, who had bin there before with Francisco Hernandez
de Cordoua, who declared unto them, that Cortez his Lord and captain would
inform them of a better god, and better laws, than those which they
maintained. The Indians answered, that they were contented therewith, and went
with them unto their temples, and there brake down their Idols, and celebrated
divine service, teaching them to adore and worship Christ crucified, so that
they were very attentive to the doctrine, and ceased sacrifise of men which
they were wo^t to use. These Indians did wonder much at the ships and horses,
yea and marueyled as much at our color and beardes, Nevves of bearded men.
so that many times they would come and feel them, and signified unto them by
signs and tokens toward Yucatan, that there were five or six bearded men.
Then Cortez considering how profitable it would be to have an interpreter to
understand and to be understood, he besought Calachuni that he would appoint a
messenger to carrye a letter to the bearded men, who were in the power of a
great Lord and Tyrant, and Calachuni found none that durst take that journey in
hand, fearing that they should be slain and eaten. Cortez seeing this,
entreated with fair words, three of the Indians that served him to accept the
journey, and gave the^ rewards for their labor: yet the Indians excused them,
saying that they should be slain, notwithstanding with fair promises and
rewards, they accepted the voyage, so that Cortez wrote with them this letter
following.

WOrshipful sirs, I departed from Cuba with cleuen sail in my fleet,
furnished with five hundred and fifty Spaniardes, and I arrived here at
Acusamil from whence I write you this letter. The people of this Ila^d have
certifyed me, that there is in that country five or six bearded men, and in all points like unto us: they can not here inform me of any other signs or
tokens, but hereby I do conjecture, and certainly believe that ye be Spaniards.
Both I and these gentlemen of my company do come to discover and inhabit this
land, we heartily pray you yt within six days after the receite hereof, ye come
unto us, without any excuse or delay, and if ye so do, al we of this navy will
gratifye your gentleness and good service yt ye shall do unto us. I do send you
a Vergantyn wherein you may come, and two ships for your safeconduct.

Hernando Cortez.
THis letter being written, there was found an inconvenience, which was, they
knew not how to carrye the letter so secretly yt it might not be seen, and
they taken for espies, whereof the said Indians stood in great fear. The^
Cortez bethought him, yt the letter would pass wrapped in ye hair of the head
of one of the^, for ordinarily the Indians wear lo^gheare, and on their solemn
feasts and in wars they use their hair platted and bound about their forheads.
And he appointed captain of the Vergantine wherein ye messe^gers went, John de
Escalante, and James de Ordas for captain of the other two ships, with fifty
men if any need should happen. So shortly after she ships arrived at the place
appointed, Escalante set a land his messengers, and abode there eight days they
return, although he promised the^ to abide there but six days. And the^
seeing that they came not, he surmysed yt they were either slain or taken
captives: and so returned back again to Acusamill without his messe^gers,
whereof all the army were sorrowful, and chiefly Cortez, thinking that the Indians
had wrong informed him. Now in this mean season they trymmed their ships of
the hurt received by the late tempest, and at the return of the two ships and
Vergantyne, they hoysed up sails and departed.



A miraculous chance how Geronimo de Aguilao came to Cortez.
CAlachuni and all his subjects were full of heaviness (as it seemed) with the
departure of the Christians, because they were well used at their hands. From
Acusamil the fleet sailed to get the coast of Yucatan tothe cape called Women's
point, with prosperous weather, and there Cortez came to an Anchor, desirous to
see the disposition of the land, and the manner of the people: but it liked
him not, so that ye next day following being shrouetuisday, he departed, meaning
to double the said cape, and so to pass to Cotoche and to view it. But
before they had doubled the point, Peter de Aluarado shot off a piece, in
token that he was in great peril, whereupon the other ships drew near to
know what had happened: And when Cortez understood that Aluarados ship
was in so great a leake that with two pumpes they might not empty the water,
he found no other remedy but to return back again to Acusamil with all his
fleet. The Indians of ye Island came incontinent to ye water side very joyful,
and to know whether they had left any thing behind the^. The Christians
informed the^ of their mishap, and came a shore, and in short time found the
leake and amended it. The Saturday following they took shipping again, all the
army except Hernando Cortez, and fifty of his company, then the wind arose
contrary, and so much, that they could not depart that day: and the fury of
the wind endured all that night, but in the morning it waxed calm, so that
they might proceed on their voyage. But for as much as that was the Sabbath
day, they determined to hear divine service, and after dinner to make sail.
When their service was ended, and Cortez fitting at his meat, there was news
brought him that a little vessel called a Canoa, came under sail toward the
ships, which seemed to come from Yucatan: with that news Cortez arose from
his meat, to behold whether the Canoa went, and perceiuyng that she left the
way toward the ships, he sent Andrew de Tapia with certain others, as
secret and closely as might be devised, to lie in ambushe for their coming a
shore. The Canoa arrived in a calm place, out of the which came four men all
naked, except their privy members, and the hear of their heads platted and
bound about their foreheades like unto women, with bows and arrows in their
hands: three of them which were Indians, were afraid when they saw the
Spaniards with their drawn swords, and would have fled again to their Canoa,
but the Christian feared not, and desired his fellows in the Indian tongue to
abide with him. And then he began to speak in the Spanish tongue in this wise:
Masters are ye Christians, yea (quoth they) and of the Spanish nation. Then he
rejoiced so much, that the tears fell from his eyes, and demanded of them
what day it was, although he had a Primer wherein he daily prayed.

He then besought them earnestlye to assist him with their prayers and
thanksgiving unto god for his delivery, and kneling devoutly down upon his
knees, holding up his hands, his eyes toward heaven, and his face bathed with
tears, made his humble prayer unto God, giving most hearty thanks, that it
had pleased him to deliver him out of the power of Infidels and infernal
creatures, and to place him among Christians and men of his own nation. Andrew
de Tapia help him up, and took him in his arms, The coming of Aguilar to
Cortez.
and so did al ye others embrace and lovingly salute him. Then he commanded
the other three Indians to follow him, and went talking with his friends,
where Cortez aboade, who received him joyfully, and gave unto him such apparel
as he needed, and with great pleasure having him in his company, he demanded
the estate of his misfortune, and what was his name, who answered before them
al, saying, Sir my name is Geronimo de Aguilar, I was borne in the City of
Esifa in the Andolozia, and by misfortune I was lost after this sort. In the
wars of Darien and in the time of the contentions and passions of James de
Nicuessa, and Vasco Nonez Balboa, I came with Captain Valdinia in a little
Caruell, toward Santo Domingo, to give advice to the Admiral and governor, of
the troubles which had happned, and my coming was for men and victuals: and
likewise we brought twentye thousand Duckettes of the kings in Anno. 15 11. And
when we apported at Iamayca, our Caruel was lost on the shallowes which were
called the Vipars, and with great pain we entered (about twenty persons) into
the boat, with out sail, water or bread, and weak provision of oars: we thus
wander thirteen or fourteen days, and then the current, which is there very
great and runs always weastward, cast us a shore in a province called Maija,
and traueling on our way, seven of our fellows died with hunger and famine.
And captain Valdinia and other 4. were sacrifised to the ydols by a cruel and
cursed Cacike, that is to say, a Lord in whose power we fell, etc.

And after the sacrifice, they were eaten among the Indians for a solemn
banquet: and I, and other six were put into a Cage or coupe, to be fatned for an
other sacrifice. And for to escape such abominable death, we brake the prison
and fled through certain mountains: So that it pleased God that we met
with another Cazike who was enemy to him that first took us, his name was
Quinqus, a man of more reason and better condition, he was Lord of Xamansana:
he accepted us for his captives, but shortly after he dyed, and then I abode
with Taxmar his heir. Then deceased other five of our fellows, so that there
remained but only I and one Gonsalo Guerrer, a maryner, who now abides with
Nachancan the Lord of Chetemal, and he married with a rich gentlewoman of that
country, by whom he has children, and is made a Captain, and well esteemed
with the Cazike for the victories yt he has had in the wars against the other
Lords. I sent unto him your worships letter, desiring him that he would come
with me having so fit a passage, but he refused my request, I believe for very
shame, because he had his nose full boared of holes, and his ears sagged, his
face and hands painted according to the use of ye country, or else he abode
there for the love he bare to his wife and children. All those which stood by
and hard this History, were amassed, to hear Geronimo de Aguilar report how
those Indians did sacrifise and eat man's flesh. They also lamented the misery
and death of his fellows, and highly praised God, to see him free from his
bondage and from such cruel and barbarous people, and to have likewise so good
an enterpreter with the^, for undoubtedly it seemed a miracle y^ Aluarados ship
fell into a leak, for with ye extremity they returned back again to that Island,
whereas with contrary wind they were constrained to abide ye coming of
Aguilar. And certainly he was y^ mean and speech of al their proceedings. And
therefore have I bin so prolixious in ye rehearsal of this matter, as a notable
point of this history. Also I will not let to tell how the mother of Geronimo
de Aguilar, became mad. etc.

When she hard ye her son was captive among people ye used to eat ma^s flesh,
and ever after when she saw any flesh spitted or roasted, she would make an
open outcrie, saying, oh I miserable woman, behold this is the flesh of my
dear beloved son who was all my comfort.

The Island of Acusamil.
THe Indians natural of that country do call their Island Acusamil, and
corruptlye Cosumel. John de Grijalua was yt first Spaniard that apported there,
and named it the holy Roode, because he fell in sight thereof on holy road
day. It co^tayneth ten leagues in length and three leagues in breadth,
although some say more, some less: it stands twentye degrees on this side
the equator, and five leagues from the wome^s cape: it has three villages, in
ye which lives nere; thousand me^. The houses are of stone and brick, and
covered with straw and bows, and some with tile. Their temples and towers are
made of lime and stone very well built: they have no other fresh water but out
of wells and rain water. Calachuni is their chief Lord: they are brown
people and go naked: and if any wear cloth, it is made of cotton wool only to
cover their privy members: they use long hear platted and bound about their
foreheads: they are great fisherme^, so ye fish is their chiefest food and
sustenance, they have also Maiz which is for bread: also good fruits: and
honey, but somewhat sour: and plots for bees, which contayn. 1000 hiues. They
knew not to what use wax served, but when they saw our me^ make ca^dels thereof,
they wo^dred thereat. Their dogs have Fox faces and bark not, these they
gelde and fatten to eat. This Island is full of high mountains, and at the
feet of them, good pastures, many Dear, and wild Boares, Connyes and Hares,
but they are not great. The Spaniardes with their handguns and crossebowes
provide them of that victual, fresh salt and dried. The people of this Island
are Idolaters, they do sacrifice children, but not many. And many times in
stead of children they sacrifice dogs. They are poor people, but very
charitable and loving in their false religion and belief.

The religion of the people of Acusamil.
THe temple is like unto a square Toure broad at the foot, and steps round
about it, and from ye midst upward very straight: the top is hollow and
covered with straw: it has four windows with frontals and galleries. In yt
holow place is their chapel, whereas their Idols do stand. The temple that
stood by the sea side was such a one, in the which was a marvelous strange
Idol, A strange Idol.
and differed much from all the rest, although they have many and of diverse
fashions. The body of this Idol was great and hollow, and was fastened in that
wall with lime: he was of earth. And behind this Idols back was the
Vesterie, where was kept ornaments and other things of service for ye temple.
The priests had a little secret door hard adjoining to ye Idol, by which door
they crept into ye hollow Idol, and answered the people yt came with prayers
and peticio^s. And with this deceit ye simple souls believed al yt the Idol
spoke, and honored ye god more tha^ all the rest with many perfumes and sweet
smelles, and offered bread and fruit, with sacrifice of Quayles blood, and
other birds, and dogs, and sometime man's blood. And through the fame of this
Idol and Oracle, many Pilgrims came to Acusamil from many places. At the
foot of this Temple was a plotte like a Churchyard, well walled and garnished
with proper pinnacles, The God of rain.
in the midst whereof stood a Cross of ten foot long, the which they
adored for God of the rain, for at all times when they wanted rain, they
would go thither on Procession deuoutely, and offered to the Cross Quayles
sacrificed, for to appease the wrath that the God seemed to have against them:
and none was so acceptable a sacrifice, as the blood of that little bird. They
used to burn certain sweet gu^me, to perfume that God withal, and to be
sprinckle it with water, and this done, they believed assuredly to have rain.
Such is the Religion of those Indians of Acusamil. They could never know the
original how that God of Cross came amongst them, for in all those parties of
India, there is no memory of any Preaching of the Gospel that had bin at any
time, as shall be showed in another place.

The Battle and vvinning of Potenchan.
COrtez proceeded with his Fleet very joyful, because he had found one of his
Ships which he thought had bin lost, and aported at the river de Grijalua,
which in the Indian tongue is called Tauases, and anckred at the rivers mouth,
fearing to enter in with the bigger vessels over the bar: and incontinente
came many Indians to gaze at them and their Ships, who were armed with
feathers, and such like armor as they use, seeming a far off trim
fellows. They wondered not much to see our Ships and men, because they
had seen before John de Grijalua in the same River. The behavior of that
people, and situation of the Country, liked Cortez very well, so that
leauyng sufficient guard in his Ships, he manned his Vergantynes and Boats,
and carried with him certain pieces of Ordinance, and with force of oars he
entered the River against the stream, which was very great, and having
rowen little more than half a league, they espied a great Town walled with
Timber, and the houses made of mudwall, covered with straw. The Town wall was
very strong, with loope holes to offend withal. And before our men came
near the Town, they met with many little Boats, which the Indians call
Tahucup, full of armed men, showing themselves desirous of battle. Cortez
proceeded forwards, and made unto them signs of peace, declaring unto them by
his interpreter, that his coming thither was not to molest or disquiet them,
but only to take fresh water, and to buy victuals, as men that traveled by
Sea, and stood in need thereof, promising good paymente for any thing that
they should take. The Indians hearing their request, promised to show their
message to the Townsmen, and would also return with their answer and
vittayles, and so departed. In short space they returned again, and brought
bread and fruit, and eight Turki^ Cocks, and presented it franckely unto
them. Cortez gave them thanks, Poli^ie.
but (quoth he) the provision that ye have brought, is very little, for the
need that I and so many persons which I have within yonder great vessels
locked and shut up, therefore I pray you to bring me more vittayles, or else
to permit and suffer me and my folks to come unto your Town to seek our^
remedy.

The Indians demanded one nyghtes space to do the one and the other, and
departed toward the town. Cortez also went to a little Island that stands in
the river, to abide their answer, so that each pretended to deceive the
other, for the Indians demanded that time, to the intent to carry that night
away their goods, and to put in safety their wives and children in the
Mountains, and likewise to gather their men of war to defend their Town.
Diligence of a good Captain.
Cortez also commanded his Hargabushiers and Crossebowmen to go a land upon
the Island, and caused the River vpwardes to be sought for way, to wade over,
so that these things were done that night without any knowledge to the
contrary side. And all those which abode aboorde the Ships, came unto
Cortez, and those who went to s^eke the passage, found within less than
half a league vpwardes, a place that was of depth to the girdle of a man.
And likewise found such couerte of wooddes, that they might come near unto
the Town, and not to be seen.

This news lyked well Cortez, whereupon he appointed two Captains, whose
names were Alonso de Auila, and Peter de Aluarado, and to each of them fifty
men. The same night he sent certain Souldyers with a sea compass, to lie
in ambushe in the woodde which stood between the river and the town, for
two considerations. The one, because the Indians should see, that there were
no more Spanyardes in the Island, than were the day before. And the other was,
that his men hearing their watchword, should assault the town on the land
side. And as soon as the day appeared, came eight boats of Indians armed,
whereas our Camp was pitched, who brought a little victual, saying they
could get no more, because that the inhabitants of the Town were fled, with
fear of them, and their deformed vessels, desiring them to return aboorde
their Ships, and not to disquiet the people of that Country. The interpreter
answered, that it was against humanity to suffer them to perish with hunger,
yea and if they would hear the cause of their coming, they should shortly
see what profit would redound unto them. The Indians replied, that they would
take no counsel of strangers and men whom they knew not. Likewise, they
thought not good to lodge such guestes in their houses, for they seemed
terrible, and such as would be commanders. But if they would needs have
water, they might take river water, or else make wells on the shore, for so
did they at their need.

Then Cortez seeing that words prevailed not, he signified unto them that he
would enter their Town by force, to see it and their Country, for to give
thereof relation to the greatest Prince in the world, who had sent them
thither: requesting them to be therewith contented, considering he meante not
to disquiet them: and if they would not permit the same, he would commend
himself to his God, and to the strength and force of his men. The Indians
answered again, that they should depart, and not thus brag in other men's
land, for in no wise they would permit them to enter their Town. And if
with this warning they would not depart, they meante to kyl both him and as
many as were with him. Yet Cortez ceased not to use all humanity with those
barbarous people, according to the commandment and instructions given unto
him by the King of Castill, which was, to require those people oftentimes with
peace, before the attempting of war, or entering perforce into their Towns
and Country, so that yet again he conuited them with peace, promising them
liberty with good entertainment, assuring them of things profitable both for
body and soul, and that they might account themselves happy with the
knowledge thereof: but if now they would refuse his offer, he did then warn
them to make them ready for the evening, for before the going down of the
Sun, he did hope with the help of his God, to rest and take up his lodging in
the Town, in despite of all the inhabitants thereof, who had refused his offer.

The Indians laughed at his talk, and skorning at him, they returned to the
Town, to inform their fellows of the pride and madness that they thought
they had heard. Then the Spanyardes went to dinner, and having well
refreshed themselves, they put on their Armor, and went aboorde their Boats
and Vergantines, looking for some answer from the Indians, and seeing the
Sun decline apace, and no answer, Cortez advised the Spanyardes that lay in
ambushe in the woodde, to give assault, and he embarked himself with his
rapier and Targette, gyuyng likewise assault with near two hundred men, who
coming near the Town walls, discharged his Ordinance, and lept into the
water to the knees, and began valiantly to assault the walls and bulwarks.
The Indians seeing their enemies so nigh unto them, began to fight with
ceurage, shooting arrows, throwing of darts and stones, wherewith they hurt
about twenty Spanyardes: yea, and though the fearful noise of the Ordinance
did many times so annoy them, being things so strange, and never before seen
of them, yet they fled not from the walls, but resisted the Christians
valiantlye, and suffered them not to enter the Town that way, if they had not
bin assaulted in another place. But when the Company that lay in ambush heard
the shooting of their fellows, they began likewise their onsette. The Indians
knowing nothing what was prepared behind their backs, and having also their
hands full in defending the entrance by the River: and the Christians fyndyng
that part of the Town without resistance, entered in with a terrible noise,
killing as many as they met. Then the Townsmen understood their ouersyghte,
and would have remedyed it, and fled from the place where Cortez was gyuing
combat, whereby Cortez and his Company entered the Town at ease, without
contradiction, so that he and the other Company of his Souldyers met
together at the Markette place, and expulsed all the Indians out of the Town,
except those that were taken prisoners, and the carkases of the dead. Then
the Chrystians sought the spoil, and found nothing but Turkey Hens, and
some things wrought of Cotton wool, but very little Gold.

There was that day above four thousand Indians in fight and defense of the
Town: There was much Indian blood shed, because they fought naked, many
were wounded, and few Captive. Cortez lodged himself with his army in the
chiefest Temple of the Idolles, where was room sufficient. They kept that
night good watch, as in a house of enemies, but the poor Indians durst not
once interrupte them. After this sort was Potonchan taken, being the first
City that Cortez wanne by force in all his Conquest.

The Battle of Cintla.
AL ye night Cortez slept not, but rather occupied himself in carrying the
wounded men, and other stuff aboard ye Shyps, C^re o^^ ^oo^ ^^^p^ ^ay^^.
and also to disenbarke thirteen Horses, and the residue of his me^ yt he had
left aboard, yt which he brought to pass before the sun rising, although the
Tauascans had notice thereof. When the sun was risen, he had with his company
made unto God their prayers, and mustered his men, where were at that time in
Camp near five hundred Spanyardes, thirteen Horses, and six pieces of
ordinance: These Horses were the first that ever came into that Country,
which now is called new Spain. He planted his men and munition in good order,
and thus marched forwards toward Cintla. The Indians seeing this preparation,
began also to make ready, and to place in good order forty thousand men in
five companies: Fortye thousand Indians.
their meeting was in ploughed land among many deep lakes and pondes, very
dangerous to pass, so that our men by reason thereof were brought out of
order. And Hernando Cortez with his horsemen went to seek a better passage,
and to enclose himself among certain trees on their left hand, for to set
upon the enemies when time should serve. The footmen proceeded on, and passed
many marishe grounds, until they came to the tilled land. The Indians were
expert in those places where they began the battle, shooting with their
bows and slings, and throwing of darts. And although our me^ did some hurt
among them with their Crossebowes, ha^dgunnes, and Ordinance, when they were in
place to shoot, yet the Indians pursued our men so thick, that they could not
put them off, for by policy, the Indians of Potonchan had sought out that
place: and it is to be thought that they were not barbarous, nor of small
understanding in wars, yet notwithstanding with much pain, our men gate
out of that place, and obtained another somewhat better, and more playner
ground, whereas they might use their Ordinance, and fight with their weapons
body to body. But the Indians being so great a number, Peril of the
Christians.
drove our men to so narrow a place, that they were feign to join back to
back for their own defense, yea and for all that were in marvelous great
danger, for they had no room to use their Ordinance, nor yet Horsemen to
make them way. They being in this perplexity, and ready to fly, suddaynely
appeared a Horseman with a speckled Horse, A miracle.
whom they judged to be Captain Morla, which Horsemanne set upon the
Indians, and made them retire: and having more space than before, they set
afreshe upon the enemies, and slew some of them. In this mean time the
Horsemanne vaded away, and was not seen, and with his absence the Indians
began afreshe, and enclosed the Chrystians in the same danger that they were
in before: then the Horsemanne appeared again near our men, and made
marvelous way among the enemies, whereupon our men seeing this succoure,
gave the onset again with great courage, and slew and hurt many Indians, but
at the best season, the Horseman vanished away clean out of sight, and when
the Indians saw not the Horseman, with fear of whom they fled, thinkyng
that he had bin a Centaure, and that the Horse and man was all one
incorporate, they returned again with lively courage, and used our Christians
worse than they had done before. Then the Horseman returned the third time,
and put the Indians to flight with great hurt, whom our footeme^ pursued
with great slaughter.

Now at this instant came Cortez with all his company of horsemen, being wearied
with the travail in passing such strange lakes and wilderness, whereof the
country is replenished. Our men being joyful of his coming, they began to
inform him what wonders they had seen a horseman do, which came to succor
them, demanding of him which of their company it was. Cortez answered and
faithfully assured them, that it was none of their company, because it was not
possible for any of them to come any sooner: Then they al gave God praise,
believing that it was a help sent from heaven. Cortez said (my dear fellows)
forwards, for god is with us. Then the horsemen set upon the Indians, and with
force of lance drove them out of the marish ground, and brake their main
battle. The Indians incontinent left the field, and fled into the thick
wooden, the footmen followed them, and slew above three hundred Indians,
besides many other that were hurt. There were above seauenty Spaniardes wounded
with arrows and stones. A sudden disease


And whether it were with labor of the battle, or with excessive heat, or
with drinking the water of that place, there fell such a stitch in their loins,
that about a hundred of them fell flat upon the ground, not able to go nor
stand. their fellows being forced to carry the^ on their backs, But it
pleased god that the same night the pain went from them, being in the morning
well again. Who seeing themselves delivered from so many perils, gave most
humble thanks to the almightye god that had miraculously delivered them. They
all agreed that three times they had seen the strange horseman, with the
speckled horse, fight in their favor, as is aforesaid, believing generally it
was a miracle, as certainly it did appear, for the Christians did not alone
see this thing, but also the Indians did much note it, for the marvelous
flercenesse wherewith he came upon them, with such great murder, that they were
amassed, and almost blind with his bryghtnesse, being so trodden under his
feet. The captive Indians after the battle declared the circumstance thereof.

The Lord Tauasco submits himself to the Christians.
COrtez released some of his prisoners and sent them to their Lord, saying
that it grieved him the hurt done on both parties, but the fault was theirs.
And that god was witness of his innocence and also of his courtesy offered
unto the^. But notwithstanding all that was paste, he pardoned their error
with suck condition, That if in continent or within two days, their Lord
would come unto him, to yield satisfaction of their malice and stubbornness,
and to treat of peace and friendship, warning and aduising them, that if they
came not within the time appointed, he would enter into his country, burning
and spoiling with slaughter both great and small, armed and unarmed: with which
message the messengers departed, and Cortez returned to the town to cure his
wounded men. The next day came fifty anncient Indians to crave pardon for
their offense, The Cazike enbassadours.
and also license to bury the dead, with likewise safeconduct that their rulers
and principal persons might safely come unto the town. Cortez granted their
request, warning them to make any lies or yet to conspire again: and also if
their lords came not personally, he would not hear any more ambassadors: with
this rigorous commandment and protestation they departed. These Indians
feeling their strength would not prevail, thinking the christians to be
invincible, their Lords and chiefest persons did determine to go and visit
the christians and their captain. And according to the time appointed, the
Lord of that town and other four Lords his neighbors came unto Cortez with a
good train of their vessals and seruitours, and presented unto him, bread,
turkey hens, and fruits, with other like provision for his host, with four
hundred pieces of gold of ye value of 400. double ducats, with other small
jewels, and crrtaine turkey stones of small value. And twenty women slaves, to
serve to make bread and dress meat for ye whole army. He craved and
beseeched Cortez to pardon his former offense. And to accept and receive them
into his friendship. And in token of his obedience, he and his fellows did
willinglye deliver their bodies, lands and goods into his hands and power.
Cortez did lovingly receive them, and gave unto them certain trifles of his
wares, which they esteemed much. And those Indians hearing the horses and
mares ney, they marvelled at their neying, thinking that the horses could
speak, and demanded of the Christians what they said, (mary quoth they) these
horses are sore offended with you because ye fo^^ht with them, and would have
you corrected and chastened for your so doing. The simple India^s hearing this,
presented roses and Gynea Hens unto the horses, desiring them to eat and to
pardon the^.

Certain questions that Cortez demanded of the Cacike Tauasco.
MAny things passed between our men and the Indians: for where the Indians
understood the^ not, their behavior was much to laugh at. And using
conversation with our men, and seeing they received no hurts of them, they
brought to the town their wives and children, which were no small number. And
among many matters that Cortez communed with Tauasco by the mouth of Ieronimo
de Aguila his enterpreter:

The first question was: Whether there were mines of gold or silver in that
country, and from whence they had that small quantitye that they had
brought unto them?

The second question was: Why they denied him their friendship, more than the
other captain that had bin there the year before?

The third was: Why they being so many in number, fled from them being so few?

The fourth was: To give the^ to understand the mighty power of the king of
Castill. The answer of the Cacike.
And last of all to give them knowledge of the faith of Jesus Christ.

As touching Sir (quoth he) the Mines of gold and silver in our country, we
seek for none, for we seek not after treasure and riches, but we procure and
desire a quiet life. And that gold which we have, was found by chance: for
we know not what Mines do mean. Yet notwithstanding further within the land,
whereas the sun does hide himself, there the people do find much gold and
are given to seek the same.

And as touching the captain that was here of late, we seeing the men and
ships to be such as we had never before seen, spoke unto them and demanded
what they would have, they said that their coming was, to change their
merchandice for gold and nothing else, wherefore we granted to their request.
But now seeing greater vessels and more in number, we feared least ye came to
take our substance. And I knowing my self nothing inferior to any of my
neighbors, would not permit any injury to be offered me, and that he and his
subjects did esteem themselves the most valiant of men of war in all these
parties, and that none durst take away their goods, women, and children, to be
sacrificed by force, whereupon he thought to withstand those few Christians,
but (quoth he) I found my self deceived, seeing we could not kill any of your
company. And likewise the brightness of your weapons did blind us, and the
wounds you made were incurable.

But the noise and lightning of your ordinance did more amase us, than either
thunder-clappes or tempest: and also the great spoil that you made among us
therewith: likewise your strange horses made us greatly to wonder, to behold
their open mouths, we feared to be swallowed. And then to consider their
swiftness in running, we knew no creature could escape them. But ye first
horse that fought with us, put us in marvelous fear, being but one, but when
we espied many, then all our help was past, for we believed that the horse
and man was al one incorporate.

How the Indians of Potonchan brake down their Idols, and worshipped Christ
crucified.
WIth the relation of Tauasco Cortez saw that the country was not for
Spaniardes, nor yet he took it a thing conueniente to settle themselves where
no gold nor silver was, or other riches. And so pretended to pass forwards
to discover westward the land endewed with gold. But before his departure, he
declared to those new conquered Indians, that the Lord in whose name he and his
company had taken that journey was king of Spain and Emperor of Christians,
and the greatest Prince in the world, unto whom many kings and Princes did
homage and obey. And that his rule and gouernemente in justice proceeded from
God, being just, holy, peaceable, and sweet, and also the Monarchy of the
universal did appertain unto him. And for these causes he required them to
yield themselves as his subjects. And it they would do so, there should
ensue unto them great profit, laws and policy. And as touching their
religion, he declared their blindness and great abuses which they used in
worshipping many Gods, and in making sacrifice unto them with man's blood, yea
and thinking that those images and Idols, did or could do good or evil unto
them, being du^be, without life or soul, yea and ye work of their own hands.
He certifyed them of one god maker of heaven and earth, and all creatures whom
the Christians did worship and serve, and that all creatures ought to do the
same. In conclusion with this doctrine they brake down their Idols, and
received the cross, Cortez having first declared unto them the great miseries
that the son of God suffered on ye Cross for mankind. And in the greatest
temple of Potonchan, set up a Cross in remembrance of the death of Christ and
celebrated the feast upon their knees, and the multitude of Indians likewise,
and departed to their meat. Cortez desired them within two days to come
again to their divine service. And that day was Palm sunday. And so they did
and brought an infinite number of men women and children of other villages with
them which was strange to behold. And there generally gave their vassalship to
the king of Spain into the hands of Hernando Cortez, with protestation of
perpetual friendship with the Spanish nation. So that these were the first
vassals that the Emperor had in the new Spain. And this feast and ceremony
ended, our men took shipping with the palm boughs in their hands. In this
doing Cortez deserved no less praise than in his victory, for he used
wisdom with manhood in all his doings: he left those Indians with a new
faith, and the town free and without hurt, he took none for slaves, nor yet
any spoil nor excha^ged his merchaundice for any thing although he aboade
there twentye days. The town is called in the Indian tongue Potonchan, that
is to say, a place that stincketh, and our men named it, the victory.

The Lord (as ye have heard) was called Tauasco, and therefore the first
Spaniardes that came thither, named the river Tauasco, but Grijalua called it
after his own name, whose name and remembrance will not so soon be
forgotten. And truly all those that do discover new countries, ought to make
perpetual their own names. This town does contain near five and twentye
thousand houses (as some say) but as every house stands by himself like an
Island, it seems much bigger than it is in deed. The houses are great, made
of lime stone, and brick: others there are made of mood wall, and rafters and
covered with straw or bordes. Their dwelling is in the upper part of the house,
for the great moystnesse of the rivers and lakes, and for fear of fire, they
have their houses separated the one from the other. Without, the town they
have more fairer houses than within for their recreation and pleasure. They are
brown people, and go almost naked, and eat man's flesh sacrificed. Their
weapons are bows and arrows, slyngs, darts, and lances. The armor of the
Indians.
The armor wherewith they defend themselves, are Targets and skulles made of
woodde or bark of trees, and some of gold very thin. They have also a
certain kind of harneis made of cotton wool wrapped about their stomach.

The good entertainment that Cortez had in Saint John de Vlhua.
Captain Cortez and his company being embarked, sailed weast wards as nigh the
shore as they might. And this coast having no harbors, they found no place
where they might Anchor safely with their greater vessels, until they arrived
upon Mandie thursday at Saint John de Vlhua, which seemed a good harbor for
them. The Indians of this place call this harbor Chalchicoeca, there the
fleet came to Anchor. They were not so soon at Road, but incontinente came
two little boats named Acalles, enquiring for the General of the Fleet, who
when they came to his presence, did humble reverence unto him, and said unto
him that Teudilli the Gouernoure of that Province sent to know what people
they were, and what they would have, and whether they meante to stay there or
proceed farther. Aguillar did not well understand that language. Cortez
caused them to come aboorde his Ship, gyuyng them thanks for their pains
and visitation. He made unto them a banquet of Wine and Conserua, and said
unto them, that the next day followyng he would come alande, and talk with
the Gouernoure, whom he besoughte not to alter him not his people with his
coming a shore, for he meant not to molest him, but rather to pleasure and
profit him. To that these messengers were rewarded with certain gifts, they
eat and drank, but yet suspected evil, although they lyked the Wine well,
wherefore they desired to have thereof, and also of the Conserua, to present
unto their Lord, which was given them, and so departed.

The next day being good Friday, Cortez came alande with his Boats full of
men, and brought his Horses and artillery a shore by little and little,
with all his men of war, and two hundred Indians of Cuba, which served to
toil and labor. He planted himself in the best situation that he could
find among the Sandy banks on the Sea side, and there pytched his Camp, and
having near that place many trees, they builte them Cotages with boughs.

From a little Village that was at hand, came many Indians to gaze at things so
strange, and the like never seen unto them, and brought with the^ gold to
barter for such toys, as the two little Boats had brought from them before.
They brought also bread and meat ready dressed after their use likewise to
sell. Our men changed with them beadestones of glass, looking glasses,
sissers, knives, pinnes, and such other wares, whereof the Indians were not a
little glad, returning home to their houses, showing their neighbors. The joy
and pleasure that these simple souls took with these trifles, was so great,
that the next day they came again with other Indians lade^ with Jewels of
gold, Turkey Hens, bread, meat, and fruit, that suffised for all the Camp,
and for the same they received nedels, and beadestones of glass, but the poor
souls thought themselves therewith so rich, that they knew not where they
were with joy and pleasure, yea and they thought that they had deceived the
Strangers. Now Cortez seeing the great quantity of gold brought and
bartered so foolishly for trifles of no valewe, proclaimed throughout all his
host, that no Christian should take any gold upon great penalty, Wisdom.
and that they should all show, as though they knew not to what purpose the
gold served, and that they passed not for it, because they should not think
that the desire thereof had brought them thither, and so they did dissemble
that great demonstration of gold, to see what was meante thereby, and whether
the Indians had brought that gold, to prove whether their coming was for
that or no. On Easter day in the morning, The coming of the Governor.
came Teudilli the Governor to the Camp, from C^tosta his dwelling place,
which was eight leagues from thence. He brought attendyng upon his person
four thousand men without weapon, and the most part well clothed, some of
them with garments of Cotton, rich after their manner. And others naked, laden
with victuals in great abundance, which was strange to see. Teudilli
according to their vsance, did his reverence to the Captain, burning
frankincense, and little strawes touched in blood of his own body, A strange
salutation.
he presented unto him the victuals, and certain Jewels of gold very rich
and well wrought, and other things made of feathers very curious strange and
artificial. Cortez embraced him in his arms, and received him joyfully,
saluting all his company. He gave to Teudill^ a coat of silk, a brooche, and
a collar of glass, with many other pieces of Haberdashe wares, which was
highly esteemed of him.

The talk of Cortez with Teudilli.
ALL the former talk was had without an Interpreter, because Ieronimo de
Aguillar understood not this language, because it differed much from the
speech of the other Indians, whereas he had bin captive: for which cause
Cortez was somewhat careful, because he would largely have discoursed with
Teudilli. It chanced that among those twenty women given him in Potonchan, A
marvelous hap.
one of them stood talking with a servant of Teudilli, because she
understood them as men of her own language. Cortez espying this, called her
aside, and promised her more than liberty, so that she would be a trusty
and faithful interpreter betwixt him and those Indians, and that he would
esteem her as his Secretary. And further demanded of her of what lignage she
was, then she answered, that she was natural of the Country that bordered
upon Xalixco, and of a town called Viluta, daughter unto rich parents, and
of the kinrede of the Lord of that land. And being a little girl, certain
Merchantes did steal her away in time of war, and brought her to be sold at
the fair of Xicalanco, which is a great Town near Coasaqualco, not far
distant from Tauasco: and after this forte she came to the power of the Lord
of Potonchan. This woman was Christened Marina. She and her fellows were the
first Christians baptized in all the new Spain, and she only with Aguilar,
were Interpreters betwixt the India^s and our men.

Now Cortez being assured of his true Interpreters, he celebrated his
accustomed divine service, and Teudilli with him, and after they had dyned in
Cortez his Tente in presence of many Spanyardes and Indians, Cortez informed
Teudilli how that he was vassal to the Lord Charles of Austria Emperor of
the Christians, and King of Spain, and Lord over a great part of the
world, whom great Kings and Princes did serve and obey: and that all Princes
were glad to be his friends for his Virtue and might. And he having
aduertisemente of that Country and Lord thereof, had sent him thither to
visit him on his behalf, and to inform him of certain secret matters, the
effect whereof he had in writing. The aunsvvere of Teudilli.
Sir (quoth Teudilli,) I am very glad to hear the Majesty and Virtue of the
Emperor your master, but you shall understand, that my Lord the Emperor
Melzuma is as great and as good a Prince as he. And I do much marvel, that
there should he any so great a Prince in the whole world, but yet
according to your request, I will certifye him, and know his pleasure, for I
trust (quoth he) in the clemency of my Prince, that your news and message
shall he acceptable unto him, and you well recompensed for your pains. Cortez
then commanded al his men to set themselves in order of battle with pife and
drum, and to skirmishe before Teudilli. And that the horsemen should run,
and the ordinance shot of, to the intent that Mutezuma should be advertised
thereof. The Indians did much behold the gesture, apparel and beardes of our
men, they wdndered to see the horses run, they feared the brightness of the
swords, and at the noise of the ordinance they fell flat to the ground,
thinking that the heavens did fall. And the ships, they held opinion was the
God of the air called Quezalcoual^, which came with the temples on his back,
for they daily looked for him. Teudilli dispatched the post to Mexico, to
Mutezuma, aduising him of all that he had seen, and demanded gold of him for
to give unto the Captain of that new people. Because Cortez had inquired of
him, whether Mutezuma had gold or no, he answered (yes) mary quoth Cortez, The
disease of the Spaniardes.
I and my fellows have a certain disease of the heart, and gold helps us.
This message went from the camp to Mexico in one day and a night, which is
210, mile, and the post carried painted the horses and horsemen upon them, the
manner of their armor, and how many pieces of ordinance they had, and what
number of bearded men there were: and as for the ships he had given advise as
soon as they arrived, showing the greatness and quantity of them. All these
things aforesaid, Teudilli caused to be painted in cloth of Cotton very
lively, that Mutezuma might see it. The cause that this message went so far
in so short a space, was, they had certain places that posts attended, as we
may say horsepostes which gave always from hand to hand the painted cloth:
they do run on foot faster in this forte, then by horsepost, and is more of
antiquity than horsepost: Also Teudilli sent to Mutezuma the garments and many
other things which Cortez had given him, which things were afterward found
in the treasorie of Mutezuma.

The present and answer that Mutezuma sent unto Cortez.
AFter the message sent, and the answer promised, Teudilli took his leave,
and within two flight shoot of Cortez his camp, he caused a thousand
cotages of boughs to be made, and left there two principal men as Captains
over two thousand persons men and women, and then departed for Cotosta his
dwelling place. The two Captains had charge to provide the Christians of all
things necessary, and the women served to grynde their corn and make bread of
Maiz, and to dress their fish and flesh and other victuals, and the men
served to carry the dressed meat to the Christians ca^pe, and wood, water,
and grass for the horses and al other necessaries, and this they passed eight
days. In this mean season returned the post with a rich and gentle present,
which was many couerlets and clothes of cotton, white, and of other colors
wrought, many tuffes of feathers very fair, and some things wrought with gold
and feathers, quantity of Jewels and pieces of gold and silver, two thin
wheels, the one of silver which wayde. 25. marks with the sign of the
Moon, and the other wheel of gold which wayed a hundredth marks, made like
unto the Sun, with many leaves and beasts, a very curious piece of work:
these two things they held for Gods in that country, and gives the^ the
colors of the metal that is likest the^, every wheel was two yardes and a
half broad, and so proportionally in compass round about, this present was
esteemed at 20900. Ducates. This present should have been given to Grijalua, if
he had not so soon departed as the Indians reported. He also gave unto Cortez
this answer, that Mutezumas his Lord was very glad to know, and to be
friend to such a mighty Prince as the king of Spain was, and that in his time
should arrive in his country such new people, and the like never seen before,
and that he was ready to show them al pleasure and honor, requesting him to
see what things he stood in need of for y^ time that he meant to abide there,
as well for himself as for his ships, army and deceasse, and it should be
provided abundantly: yea and also if he could find any thing in that country
to his contentment, to present to the Emperor of Christians, he would
willingly provide it. The excuse of Matezuma
And as touching the desire that Cortez had to come to visit and to have
communication with him, he thought it impossible, because that he was sickly
and could not come unto the sea coast, and likewise for Cortez to come where he
did abide, it was hard, troublesome and difficill, as well for the many and
cragged mountains, as also the country, wild, desert and without habitation,
and should be constrained to suffer hunger, thirst, and other necessity: and
moreover the enhabitaunts of much part of the way that he should pass, were
his enemies, both cruel and cursed people, and knowing the^ to be his
friends, they should not escape with life.

All these excuses did Mutezuma by the mouth of Teudilli declare unto Cortez,
thinkyng to drive him from his purpose and pretended journey, alleging the
foresaid difficulties and perils, the Indians did also hope that with some
contrary weather they should be forced to leave that coast and country.
Notwithstanding this co^tradiction, so much the more desire had Cortez to
visit Mutezuma, who was so great a prince in that parties, and thoroughly to
discover the treasure which he imagined to be there. And having received ye
present, and also ye answer, he gave unto Teudilli a garment of his own
wearyng, and many other trifles of his Haberdash, to be sent unto Mutezuma,
saying that if it were for no other purpose but only to see so mighty and
virtuous a Prince, it should be requisite and just to travail unto his Court,
how much the more, he was of duty constrained to do the Embassage which the
Emperor of Christians had willed and commanded him to do, for otherwise he
should incur the displeasure of the King his master, wherefore he besought
Teudilli yet once again to advertise Mutezuma of his constant determination,
because he should understand that he would not leave off his pretended
purpose for any inconvenience that was objected unto him. Alleagyng moreover,
that he who had common 2000. leagues by sea, might well go 70. leagues by
land, and considering that he had many at his charge with small provision, and
likewise his ships in danger, he required that with all expedition the
messengers should be dispatched. Teudilli desired him to recreate himself, and
not to take any grief, for as much as he himself did daily advertise Mutezuma
of his proceedings, even so with all expedition the full resolution should come
from Mexico, although it were somewhat far off. And as for his victuals, he
should take no care, for abundantly he should be provided. And also desired
him for so much as he was not well placed among those sandy banks, that it
might please him, to go with him to certain towns about sire or seven
leagues from thence. Cortez refused that offer, whereupon Teudilli departed,
and he abode there ten days looking for answer from Mutezuma.

How Cortez knevv of discord and dissension to be in the Country.
IN this mean season certain Indians were esp^ed, that went lurkyng a far
of among the sandy hills. And those came not near the Indians, that served
the Spainarde, Cortez demanded what people they were, and for what cause they
went lurkyng so far off, and came no nearer unto them.

The two Captains answered, that they were husbandmen, that went about their
husbandry. Certez lyked not their answer, but suspected that they had told
him a lie: for it seemed unto him that those people desired to come among the
Christians, and that they durst not with fear the Indians of Teudilli, and so
it was in very deed. For all that coaste and main land within as far as
Mexico, was full of the news and strange things that our men had done in
Potonchan. Wherefore they all desired to see them and to talk with them, but
they durst not for fear of the Indians of Culhua, who are subjects unto
Mutezuma, whereupon Cortez sent five Spaniardes to call them with signs and
tokens of peace. This company of Indians were in number twenty, and were
glad to behold those five men coming toward them, and were desirous to
see such strange people and ships, wherefore they came willingly altogether
unto Cortez his Tente.

These Indians did differ much from all the other Indians yet seen, for they
were higher of person, and had the grystels of their noses flitte, The India^s
attire.
hangyng over their mouths, and rings of Get and Amber hanging thereat. They
had also their neither lips bored, and in the holes rings of gold and turkey
stones, which wayde so much, that their lips hanged down over their
chinnes, and their teeth remained bare: The which custom although they used
for a bravery, it seemed a foul and ugly sight in the Spanyardes eyes, and
very loathsome.

The other Indians of Mutezuma, had their lips and ears bored, with round
stones hangyng at the iagges thereof, yet they had not such foul flittes in
their noses, but they had such bored holes that a man might put any singer
of his hand through them, with rings of gold and stone hanging thereat, the
evil favored sight of their faces made our men to muse.

Cortez communed with them by his interpreter Marina, to know from whence they
were, they answered, that they were dwellers in Zempoallan, a City distant
from thence one days journey, situated upon a river side, and bordered upon
the Country of Mutezumazin, and that their Cazique or Lord had sent them, to
see what Gods were comen in those Teucallis, that is to say, Temple, saying,
also that they durst not come sooner, not knowing what people they were.

Cortez made much of them and showed a cheerful countenance unto them, for
they seemed very bestiall, he declared unto them that he was glad of their
coming, and to know the good will that their Lord bare unto him, and gave
them Haberdashe toys, and showed them the Horses and Armor, a strange sight
for them. And so they went through the army lookyng and gasing here and there
as men amazed. And in all the time they abode there, they used no
conversation with the other Indians. Cortez enquired of Maryna the cause
thereof, and she said that those men did not only speak an other
languague, but also did appertain to another Lord, who was not vassal to
Mutezuma, but by force and extortion.

Cortez was very glad of that news, for he con^ectured by the talk of
Teudilli that Mutezuma had wars and enemies, whereupon he took aside three
of those Indians which seemed most wysest, and demanded of them by Maryna
what Lords there were in that Country: they answered that Mutezuma was Lord
over all, although in every City and Province was a Lord, yet nevertheless
all in general did pay tribute and serve him as vassals, nay rather like
slaves. But yet many of them of late days did reknowledge him by force of
arms, and paid unto him such toll and tribute that they were not accustomed
to pay, of which number their Lord of Zempoallan was one of them, and other
his neighbors, who many times held him war to be free from his tyranny and
bondage, but yet said they, it prevailed not, for his host was great and his
warriers valiant.

Cortez received great pleasure to find in that country dissension and
discord among some Noble men, and at division among themselves, thynking
thereby the better to bring his purpose to pass. He gave thanks unto those
Indians for their advise, offering unto them his favor, help and
friendship, praying them to come often to his camp, and so took his leave
of them, with his commendations to their Lord, and sent him certain
presents, with advertisement, that shortly he would come and see him, yea and
also serve him.

How Cortez went to survey the Country with four hundredth men.
AT the end of ten days came Teudilli back again, and brought certain
cloth of Cotton, and other things made of feathers well wrought for recompense
of the thing sent unto Mexico. And warned Cortez to depart, for at that time
there was no remedy to see Mutezuma, and to look what was necessary for his
provision and furniture, and it should be provided, offering the same service
at any time that he should happen to come that way. Cortez would not accept
the offer, saying: That he would not depart from that country, until he had
both seen and talked with Mutezuma. The governor Teudilli yet again
replied, that he should not contend therein, and with those words departed
from him. The next night followyng be with all those Indians as well men as
women which attended to serve and provide the Spanishe camp, went from
thence: so that in the morning all the cotages were empty, where those
seruitors had been.

Cortez suspecting this alteration provided himself with preparation for
battle, and finding the matter contrary to his expectation, he deliberated to
seek a sure road or harbor for his navy, and also a good plotte or situation
to build upon, for then he fully meant to obtain perpetuity and to conquer
the land, considering yt he had found such great tokens of gold, plate, and
other riches, and there about within a whole league compass was no fit place
for ye purpose: for why? all was sandy ground, and such as tossed too and fro
with the wind, with other morish ground not meet for habitation. In
consideration whereof he sent Francisco de Monteio, with two vergantines, and
fifty men, to run along the coast, until they should find some reasonable
poart and good situation to build upon.

Monteio proceeded on his voyage, and sailed in sight of land, until he came
to Panuco, without finding any port or harbor, saving the shadow of a Rock,
which stood somewhat distant from the land a sea board, so that at three
weeks end he returned back again with the foresaid news. Having run so
little a way, he fell into such terrible currants, that although he made way
with oars and sails, yet the said Current forced him back again. Also he
brought news, that the Indians of that coast did let themselves blood,
offering the same unto them upon little strawes, in token of friendship or
deity.

The relation of Monteio contented not Cortez, yet notwithstanding he pretended
to go to the shade or succoure of the Rock, because he was informed, that
near that place, was two fair Rivers, with store of wooddes, necessary for
timber and fire woodde, great quantity of stones to build with, fair
pastures, and ground for tyllage, although the harbor was not sufficient for
his Navy and contratation, because that road was without defense, and open
upon the North, which is the wind that most rules with greatest hurt upon
that coast.

And also considering that Teudilli and his men were departed, fearing also
the want of victuals, and likewise, that his Ships might perish upon the
shore, he commanded to lade aboorde all their stuff, and he with four
hundred men, and all his Horses, followed on the high way that the Indians
had gone.

After he had iourneyed three leagues, he came to a fair vadeable River,
and passing over the River, he found a town not inhabited, for the
inhabitants thereof were fled with fear: he entered into a great house,
which seemed the place of the Lord of the Town, built with timber and earthen
walls, the foundation whereof was raised with handie work, about a fadome
high: the roof was covered with straw, but of a fair and strange
workemanshippe inwardes, with many great pertitions, some full of pottes of
honey, and Maiz, with other grain which they keep in store all the year:
other rooms had cloth of Cotton wool, wrought with feathers, gold and silver.

Cortez commanded Proclamation to be made, that none of his company should
take any thing away, upon pain of death (only victuals excepted) to the
intent to obtain the good will and friendship among the Indians.

There was in that Village a Temple, which had a little Tower with a
Chapel on the top, and twenty steps to come unto the Chapel, where
they found some Idolles, and many bloody papers, and much man's blood of those
which had bin sacrificed, as Marina did certify.

They found also the block where upon they used to cut open the men
sacrificed, and the razors made of Flint, wherewyth they opened their breasts,
and plucked out their hearts being alive, throwing them up toward Heaven as
an offering, and after this done, they anointed their Idolles, and the papers
they offered, and then burned them.

This sight put a great compassion, yea and a fear among our Spaniards, who
did behold these things. From this Village they went to other three or four,
and found none above two hundred houses, and all without people, yet well
provided with victual, as the first town was, Cortez returned from thence to
discharge his Ships, and to take order to send for more men: and with desire
to begin habitation, in these affairs he occupied himself ten days.

How Cortez rendered up his charge and office with policy.
WHen Cortes was come where his Ships were, and the residue of his company, he
began this talk, saying:

Now my loving friends and fellows, ye do see what great mercy God has
showed unto us, in bringing us safe and in health to so good and rich a
Country, as by manifest signs and tokens we have already seen, yea and how
plentiful of meat, inhabited of people, better clothed, and of more judgment
and reason, than the others which ye have seen, since your first coming:
also better buildings, fields of grain and corn; yea and it is to be
thought, that the things not yet seen, do surmount all that hitherunto ye
have plainly seen. Wherefore we ought to give most hearty thanks unto God,
and to begin our habitation here, whereas we shall enjoy the grace and
mercy of God. And to bring this matter to pass, me think best that we abide
here, until we may find a better port or situation. Also that we make a
wall or Castle for our defense, if need shou'de happen, for the people of
this land has little joy of our coming and abiding here.

It was then considered that from that place they might the sooner have
friendship and contractation with the Indians and Towns next adjoining, as
Zempoallan, and others which were enemies to Mutezuma, and being in this
order once placed, they might discharge their Ships, and send them
incontinent to Cuba, Santo Domingo, Iamayca, Borriquen, and other Islands, or
else to Spain for more men, armor and Horses, and for clothing and victuals.

Moreover, it was thought just and meet, to send relation of all their
proceedings to the Emperor their King and master, Policy.
with the demonstration of gold, silver, and other riches, which they had in
their power.

And because all these things should be done in good order, Cortez determined
as Captain general, to appoint a Counsel, Aldermen, and Judges.

And also ordeyne all other offices that should be necessary and needful to
rule and govern a City, which he then pretended to edify and erecte, the
which Magistrates should fully command, until such time that the Emperor
should otherwise provide in matters convenient for his service.

After this diligence put in ure, he solemnly took possession of all ye land,
in the name of the Emperor Charles King of Castill, with all the acts and
ceremonies, as to such a matter apperteyned. And demanded of Francisco
Fernandez notarie appointed, that he should give unto him by testimony in
writing, all the acts done therein. All his company answered, A good subject.
that they did very well allow his proceedings and praised, and also approved
his determination, besieching him to proceed accordingly, sithence they were
come to serve and obey him. Then Cortez named Judges, Aldermen, Attorney,
Serieant, Notary, and Towneclearke, and all other officers apperteyning to the
good government of a City, in the name and behalf of the Emperor his
natural Lord, and delivered incontinent to the Judges white rods to bear in
their hands in token of Justice, and named the new City to be builte, The
rich Town De la vera Crux, because that one goodfriday they had entered into
that land. After these things finished, Cortez began before ye said Notary,
another act in presence of the judges, who were Alounso Fernandez Portocarero,
and Fra^cisco de Monteio, in whose hands he made cession, and did desyst from
all rule and offices which heretofore he had received, which was his
gouernership, captaineship and general discouerer, recetued in the Chauncerie
of Santo Domingo, at the hands of the presidentes, who were there chief of
the kings counsel, and presidents, likewise be protested not to use the power
and auctority of the governor of Cuba, Admiral of India, for so much ye now
none of them had any rule or government in that Country which he and his
fellows had newely discovered, and begun to enhabite in the name of the king
of Castil, as his natural subjects. The which authority he likewise required
to be set down in record, and to have a copy of the same.

How the soudiours chose Cortez for Captain general, and chief ruler in
Justice.
ALL the new officers took possession and charge of their offices, and entered
into the town house to counsel according to the use and custom of Castill. In
the which congregation or counsel then holden, many matters were had in
question as touching the good gouernemente of the common weal. And among many
other things, they al agreed to elect Hernando Cortez for captain general
and chief Justice, and to give unto him full power and authority for all
matters appertayning to the wars and conquest, until such time as the Emperor
should otherwise provide: with this determination the next day following all the
Aldermen, Judges, and Counselors, went unto Cortez, and said unto him: Sir we
have great need of a guide and captain for the wars to proceed upon the
conquest of this country, wherefore until such time as ye Emperor shall
provide therein, they all besought him to accept that office and charge,
approving him a man most fit for the same, both to rule and govern, for ye
great experience that they had seen of his courage, wisdom, and policy, and
by Virtue of their offices, did command him to accept the same, saying, that
in so doing, God and the king should be faithfully served. And they would
thankfully gratify the same, knowing that at his hands they should be ruled
with justice, used with humility, and be preserved with diligence and strength.
And for that purpose, they had chosen him for that office, giving unto him
their full and whole authority, submitting themselves under his hands,
jurisdiction and defense. Cortez accepted ye charge at small entreating, for he
desired nothing so much.

And being in this sort elected general, the counsel said unto him. Sir you do
well understand, that until such time as we shall be better planted in this
country, we have not wherewith to maintain our selves but only with such things
as are abord our ships. Therefore it may please you to command it to be
brought a shore, and that you take thereof what shall seem good unto you, for
your household and family, and the residue may be taxed at a reasonable price,
and so to be divided among them: and for payment they would al bind themselves,
or else ye presently it should be deducted out of the stock, after that the
kings sift part were subtracted. Likewise they desired him to value his ships
and artillery, because they would make like payment for the same, and that from
thence forwards the ships should serve in common, for to pass to the Ila^ds
for bread, wine, clothes, weapons, horses, and other things which should be
needeful for the new town and army, for thereby shey might be better cheap
provided than if merchants should provide them, considering always they seek for
excessive gain, saying that if it would please him to accept this offer and
request, they would thankfully requite the same. Cortez answered, that at ye
time he made his preperation and furniture in Cuba, he meant not to sell his
provision as others used to do, Liberality
but he would and did frankely give it unto them, although he had spent his
goods and indetted himself therein. And incontinent he commanded the masters
of the ships and pursers, to bring a la^d al their victual to the town house,
requiring the Aldermen to divide it equally, to every man his part, without
making any difference of him or of any other, for (quoth he) in time of need
of victuals yt youngest has as much allowaunce as the eldest. And although I
am indetted and do owe more than seven M. Ducats, I give this victual al
franckly unto you. And as concerning the ships, I will do ye which shall be most
co^uense^t for you al. And (quoth he) I will determine nothing to be done with
the^, but will first give you aduertiseme^t of the same.

All this did Cortez for to get their love and favor, because there were many
that loved him not, although in very troth he was of his own nature liberal
and large in experiences with all his soldiers in the wars.

The receiving of Cortez into Zempoallan.
FOr as much as the situation there was not convenient to place the new work,
they determined to go from thence, to Aguiahuiztlan, which stands nere the
shadow of the rock that Monteis had informed them of, whereupon Cortez
commanded the ships to depart, for that place. And he with his four hundred
men and horses would go by land, and there mete the^, which may be about ten
leagues journey. In this order the fleet departed, and likewise Cortez with his
company toward Z^mpoallan which stood directly weastward. And after he had
iourneyed three leagues he came to the river which divided the Lordshippe of
Mutezuma and Zempeallan, and could find no passage, wherefore he was forced
to return to the seaside, where with much ado they passed over, and so
trauayled on that side of the river, and found cotages of fishermen and other
poor houses, and some sown ground, and proceeding on their journey at length
they came into very fair valleys, where was great store of dear, and still they
went along the river side, hoping to find some good town, and in short space,
they espied near twenty persons upon the ioppe of a hill, Cortez commanded
four of his horsemen to setch them unto him, willing the^ to make signs of
peace unto them, but if they fly (quoth he) then follow them, until you
overtake them, for they shall stand us in stead, as well to lead us the way as
to serve us for enterpreters.

The horsemen took on their way, and when they came to the hill top, they
made signs of peace unto them, but the poor and fearful Indians fled with
speed, yea being a^^ased and in great fear to behold such a monsterous
thing as a horseman, beleuyng assuredly, Simplicity.
that horse and man was one thing incorporate, but in their flight they were
soon overtaken, and they yielded themselves, and so were all brought unto
Cortez.

These men had in their ears and noses bored holes, with rings of gold
hangyng thereat, for so was the use of Zempoallan, they informed Cortez that
the City was near at band. Cortez demanded the cause of their coming
thither, they answered to behold and see so strange a sight, but why fled
you then (quoth he?) For fear only sir said they, of people which we knew
not. Then Cortez willed them to put all fear aside, and told them that he
with his small company would go unto their City to visit their Lord, and
to be acquaynted with him: the Indians said, that the day was far spent, and
that it was late to go that night to Zempoallan, but if it pleased him they
would conduct him to a village which stood on the otherside of the River and
within sight, and although it were but a small village, yet there was
reasonable lodging with meat sufficient for his army: their counfell seemed
well, so they went to that village, and when they were comen thither, the
Indians craved license to go and to aduertife their Lord how the strangers
abode in that place, promising to return the next day with answer. Some of
the Indians had license to do the message, the others abode there, attendyng
and providing for the new gestes, and in this order they were al lodged and
their supper abundantly provided. That night Cortez fortified himself as
strong as might be, and the next morning came a hundredth men laden with
Hens, saying that their Lord much rejoiced of their coming, and because he
was so gross and vnwealdie, he came not personallye unto him, but yet
notwithstanding he aboade in the city expecting his coming. Cortez friendly
welcomed them, and with that present, he and his company brake their fast,
and then proceeded with his guives in good order with two fauconets in
readiness, if need should happen: and from that passage of the river they had
a fair way until they came to another river, which being likewise waded over,
they discried Zempoallan, which stood a mile distant from them, all beset
with fair Orchardes and Gardens, very pleasant to behold: they used
always to water them with sluses when they pleased.

There proceeded out of the Town many persons, to behold and receive so
strange a people unto them. They came with smiling countenance, and presented
unto the^ diverse kind of Flowers, and sundry fruits, which none of our men
had heretofore seen. These people came without fear among the Ordinance,
with this pomp, triumph and joy they were received into the City, which
seemed a beautiful Garden: for the trees were so green and high, that
scarsely the houses appeared.

At the City gate stood many grave persons of nobility, as Magistrates of
the City, who solemnly welcomed the Strangers. Men's folly with a great lyr.
Six Horsemen, which had gone before the army to discover, returned back as
Cortez was entering into the City, saying, that they had seen a great house
and Court, and that the walls were garnished with silver. Cortez commanded
them to proceed on, willing them not to show any token of wonder of any thing
that they should see. All the streets were replenished with people, which
stood gaping and wondering at the horses and strangers. And passing through a
great market place, they saw on their right hand, a great walled house made of
lyme and stone, with loupe holes and towers, whited with plaster that shined
like silver, being so well burnished and the sun glistering upon it. And that
was the thing that the Spaniards thought had been walls of silver. I do
believe that with the imagination and great desire which they had of gold and
silver, all that shined they deemed to be the same metal.

Within this great house was a long rue of lodgings, and on the other side six
or seven Towers one higher than another. They proceeded on, dissimulyng the
error of the silver walls, and followed their guide until such time as they
came to the Lords lodging, who came forth accompanied with many ancient
persons, and better attired than the other Citizens were, with two Gentlemen
that led him by the arms. They saluted each other according to the use of
their countries, and then entered into the pallayce, where certain principal
men conducted Cortes and all his train to their lodgyng, and Captain Cortes
was lodged in the house which had the glisteryng walls, situated in the
markette place, which house was sufficient for him and all his company. And
when they were placed, and beheld the walls, they were ashamed of their own
folly: for where they thought those walls had been adorned with silver, they
faunde them clean contrary. Cortes divided his men, caused his horses to be
trimmed, and planted his ordinance at his door, A vigilant Captain.
making himself as strong as though he had been in camp and near his
enemies. And commanded, that none of his men should go out of, the house
without his express license vp^ pain of death. The officers of the Lorte
prepared a plenteous supper for them, and beddyng according to their use.

The talk that the Lord of Zempoallan had with Cortez.
THe next day in the morning came the Lord, to visit Cortez with an
honorable company, and presented unto him many garments wrought of Cotte^
wolle, according to their fashion, with a knot on the shoulder like unto the
Egiptian garments, and certain jewels of gold that might be worth two
thousand Ducates, besechyng both him and his company to recreate themselves
and take their rest, and at that present he meante not to trouble him with any
matters: And so took his leave for that time as he had done the day before,
willing him to demand and call for any thing that he should need. Cortez
gave him hearty thanks, and so departed.

Then came more Indians in number then were there Spaniardes, with their courses
and service of meat ready dressed, and many boughs of dainty fruits. In this
sort they were feasted and ba^keted fiftene days must ple^tuously. The next
day following, Cortez sent unto the Spaniardes certain old garments of the
Spanishe fashion, and many other trifles, besechyng him to appoint a day of
conserence at his own pallayce: word was sent again that be was ready and
very well contented. Where upon Cortez took with him fifty of his men all
armed, and left the residue at his lodgyng in a good readiness, and appointed
an under Captain to govern them. The Lord hearing of his coming, came out
of his Course into the streate to receive him. And hand in hand they entered
together into a low hall, which they use for the extremity of heat in that
country, the plotte that they build upon is raised a fadome from the ground,
so that they ascend upon steps, and the walls plaistered with very white
lime, their tile is either of straw or leaves of trees, very beautiful and
straungely wrought, and a good defense against the rain. The Lord and Cortes
satte them down upon three footed stools made all of one piece, the Lord
commanded his seruitours to stand aside, and by their interpreters they began
to common of their affairs a great space, in demaundes and answers, because
Cortes desired to be well instructed of the affairs of that country, and
likewise of that mighty king of Mutezuma.

This Cacike or Lord although he were huge and laden with flesh, yet in his
demaundes and questions seemed very wise. The sum of all Cortes his talk was
to show the cause of his coming thither, and who had sent him, even as he
had done in Tabasco to Teudilli and others.

This Cacike after he had heard Cortes attentively, he began a long
communication, making his complaynt and opening his grief in this sort.

Mighty Sir, The Indian complaynt.
my Antecessors lived a long time in great peace, liberty and quietness, but
of late years my country and City was destroyed by tyranny, because the
Lords of Mexico Tenuchtitlan with their men of Culhua did not only usurp my
City, but also my lands by force of arms, in such sort that my power could
not resist them. Under color of holiness.
And in the beginning those Princes began their usurpation by way and color
of religion and holiness, and afterward with force of arms, and with this
title became Lords over us.

And now we seeing our error, have thought it to late to prevail against them
to take away our yoke of servitude and bondage, although we have attempted it.
And as often as we have so done, still the victory was theyrs, and the
overthrow ours. Now all such as do submit themselves unto them, are taxed
with certain trioutes, and reknowlegyng them for Lords, are defended by them,
and esteemed as friends. But if after such submission made, any chance to
speak against them, or rebel, then they are terribly corrected, yea murdered,
and after Sacrifice made to the Gods of war, called Tezcatlipuca and
Vitzilepuchtli of their carcasses, then is their flesh eaten in banquet, and
those who remain alive, do serve for slaves, yea and the Fathers, Mothers and
Children, are compelled to labor and toil from the Sun rising to the Sun
setting, with confiscation of all their goods and lands. And besides all this
cruelty and vituperie, they send their officers and Serieantes to execute the
premises, who without either pity or mercy many times suffers them to
sterue with hunger. And being thus cruelly punished of Mutezuma, who now
reigns in Mexico, who would not suffer to be Vassal willingly to so good a
Prince as you informed me of the Emperor, although it were but only to be
free from such vexation and robbery which such a mighty King could do. And
with these words the tears gusshed out of his eyes, and pawsing a while, he
began to extol the strength, magnificence and situation of Mexico planted in
a great lake of water: also he exalted the riches, court, Majesty and
mighty power of Mutezuma, He said also how Tlaxcallan, Huexocinco and other
provinces thereaboute, as also the people called Totonaquez of the Mountains
were of contrary opinion to the Mexicans, yea enemies unto them, who had
intelligence what had happened in Tauasco, Yea sir (quoth he) if it please
you, I will treat such a compact with this people that Mutezuma with all his
power shall not prevail against us.

Cortes rejoiced in heart to hear this news, and said unto him. It grieueth
me to hear of the evil usage of Mutezuma toward his country and subjects.
But I assure you with Gods help I will deliver you, yea and revenge all your
injuries, for my coming hither is to take away all evil customs, and to
help the oppressed, to favor the prisoner, and comfort the afflicted, and
chiefly to abolishe tyranny. And for the good entertaynement that I have
received at your hands, I do remain yours to do you any pleasure, and to
defend you against your enemies, and the like will I do for your friends,
wherefore I pray you advertise them thereof as many as are of our confederacy.

Cortes then took his leave, saying that he had been many days there, and
that he had great need to go visit his ships and men, who much desired
his return, and abode in Aquiahuiztlan, where he meante to soiourne for a
certain season, and from thence daily they might confer of their affairs.
The Lord of Zempoallan said, that if it pleased him to abide with him he
would gladly accept it, and if his business were such that he might not,
that then he besought him to remember him.

Then the Lord commanded eight maidens to be called, who were very well
apparelled after their manner, An other g^fte.
their attire was much like the Morisca fashion, (the one of them was more
costely apparelled than the others) and said unto Cortes, all these maidens
which you here see are Gentlewomen, noble and rich, and this maiden which is
best attired, is a Lady of Vassals, and my brothers daughter, I do present
her unto you (meaning that Cortes should marry with her,) and the others you
may bestow upon the Gentelmen in your company, in a token of perpetual love
and friendship.

Cortes received the present with thanks, because he would not offend the
giver thereof. And so departed with their women ridyng behind them, with many
Indian women to wait upon them, and many Indian men to bear them company, and
to puruey all things necessary.

Things that happened to Cortez in Chiauiztlan.
THe same day that they departed from Zempoallan they came to Chiauiztlan, and
yet the ships were not arrived. Cortes marueyled at their long tarying in so
short a journey, there was a village within shot of a hargabushe from the
rock called Chiauiztlan standing upon a little hill. Cortes having little to
do, went thither with his men, and the Indians of Zempoallan, who certified
Cortes that the village was appertayning to a Lord oppressed by Mutezuma. They
came to the foot of the hill, without sight of any man of the town, except
two, that Marina understood not, and going up the hill, the horsemen to
favor their horses would alight, because the ascending was cragged and evil
way. Cortes commanded that they should not alight, because the Indians
should think that there was no place high nor low, but that these horses
should and could come unto it. So by little and little they came into the
town, and finding no creature there, they feared some deceyte, yet approchyng
further, they met with twelve ancient men, which brought with them an
interpreter who understood the languague of Culhua and the speech of that
place, which is the language of the Totonaquez, or inhabitauntes of the
Mountains, These ancient men declared that the cause of their going out of
the town, was because that they had never seen any such men as the
Spaniardes were, nor yet heard that any such had passed that way, wherefore
with fear they had fled from thence. But (quoth they) when the Lord of
Zempoallan advertised us, how you did hurt no body, but rather being a people
good and peaceable, then we were well assured who ye were, when we saw you
come toward us. And we are now comen unto you on the behalf of the Lord, to
bring you to your lodging.

Cortez gave them thanks, and went with them to a certain place where the
Lord was abydyng their coming well accompanied: he showed unto the Christians
great good will, and marvelled to see those strangers with their long beardes.

The Lord took a little chafyngdishe in his hand, A strange salutation.
and cast into it a certain gum, which sauoured in sweet smell much like unto
frankinscence. Ind with a sencer he smoked Cortez with this ceremony they use
their salutations to their gods and nobility.

This done they set them down, A stranuge hap.
and Cortez informed him of the cause of their coming into that country as he
had done in all other places where he had bin.

The Casike certifyed Cortez even as the Lord of Zempoallan had done, but he
stood in great fear least Mutezuma should be offended for receiving and
lodging him within that town, without his commandment, and being in this
communication, suddenly appeared twentye men entering where they sat, with certain
wa^ds like cudgels in their hands, which did signify yt they were rent
gatherers and in each other hand, a fly flap of feathers, the Cacike and his
company were soar afraid. Cortez demanded wherefore he so altered himself,
he answered, because those twenty Indians were collecters of Mutezuma, and that
he feared that they would complain of him, having found those Christians
there, he feared likewise cruel punishment for the same. Cortes comforted him,
saying that Mutezuma was his friend, and that he would so use the matter that
he should receive no blame at all, but rather that Mutezuma should give him
thanks for that which he had done: And if Mutezuma did not, or would not so
accept it, that then he would defend both him and his subjects, for (quoth he)
every one of my me^ is sufficient for a thousand Mexicans, as Mutezuma himself
was well informed by the late wars at Potonchan.

Yet for and notwithstanding all this talk, the Lord and all his folk were
in great fear, and meante to arise and to lodge the receyuers. Cortes would
not suffer him, and because (quoth he) thou shalt see what and and my men can
do, command thy servant to apprehend and take prisoners these receyuers of
Mexico, and I will abide here with thee, in such sort that Mutezuma with all
his power shall not offend thee.

With the courage that he received at these words, he commanded to lay hand
upon the Mexicans, and because they defended themselves, they were sore beaten,
and laid every one in a several prison, The receyuers put in prison.
and bound them to a great post whereat they were tied by the throat, feet,
and hands, and being in this sort imprisoned, they asked of Cortes whether
they should kill them. Cortes requested that they should not be slain, but
that they might remain as they were, with good watch that they might not
escape: Then they were brought into a hall in the Spaniardes lodging, and were
placed round about a good fire, but yet bound hand and foot with guard of
watchmen. Cortes also appointed certain of his men to watch the hall door, and
then went to his lodging to supper, where he and his company was well provided
at the Caziks furniture.

The messages sent by Cortez unto Mutezuma.
THe night being far spent, and the Indians that kept the watch being
asleep, Policy.
Cortes sent unto the Spanyardes that watched at the hall door where the
prisoners were, and commanded them to let go two of the prisoners, as
secretly as they might, and to bring them unto him. The Spaniardes handled the
matter so well, that they fulfilled his desire, and brought two of them to
Cortes his chamber, who looked upon them as though he had not known them, and
willed Aguillar and Maryna to demand who they were, and what they would have,
and why they had been in prison. They answered, that they were vassals of
Mutezuma, and that they had the charge to receive certain tributes, that those
of that town and province paid unto their Lord. And also (quoth they) we
know not for what cause we are now imprisoned and so euelly used. We rather
wonder to see this new custom and madness, for in time past these men were
wont to meet us and receive us with great honor and courtesy, showing all
service and pleasure. Therefore we think that the cause of this alteration is
through the favor of you and your company, who bear the name of immortality.
We also fear least our fellows which are in prison shall be slain, before
Mutezuma have knowledge thereof. Also said they, these barbarous people dwelling
in the Mountains, would be glad to rebel if they found any succor or aid,
only to put their Prince to cost and charges, as heretofore they have done.
Therefore they most humbly besought Cortes that he should not permit them
and their fellows to be slain, nor yet to abide in the hands of their
enemies wherein he should do singular pleasure to Mutesuma their lord, and
otherwise if they should perish, their Lord would be very sorrowful that his
old faithful and trusty servant should have such a reward for their good
service.

Cortez answered that it grieved him much, A wise Captain.
that Mutesuma his friend should be misvsed where he was, no nor yet his
servants evil entreated, and that he would have as much care over them as
of his own, willing them to praise the god of heaven, and to be thankful unto
him that had commanded them to be set at liberty, in the grace and
friendship of Mutesuma: he certifyed that in all haste they should be
dispatched, for Mexico with certain business therefore (quoth he) get you to
meat, and make you strong to take in hand that journey, trusting to your feet
least ye should be taken again to your great peril and danger, Iwis their
meat was soon eaten with the great have they had to be gone.

Cortez brought them out of the town and gave them victual to carry with
them. And charged for the liberty and courtesy showed unto them, that they
should signifye to Mutesuma their Lord, how that he was his assured friend,
and that after he had understanding of his fame, goodness and mighty power, he
much desired to sexue him yea and that he held himself happy, to find
himself at such a time and season to loose those his servant, and to show
therein his good will, likewise he would do all that lay in him to preserve the
honor and auctority of so great a Prince as he was, and also to defend his
subjects and to look to his affairs as his own proper, although his
highness did little esteem his friendship as appeared by Teudilli, who
departed from him without bidding him farewell, and likewise absenting all the
people of the sea coaste: yet this notwithstanding he would not let to do him
service at all times when occasion should serve, and to procure by all means
possible his grace, favor, and friendship, and that he was fully persuaded,
that his highness would not refuse his good will and friendship, considering
that with his acquaintance, God had done much for him, to meet with a
servant of the Emperoures, for thereby he might know great secrets of holy
things, and also receive great benefytes, if then he would refuse the same,
the fault should be his: but yet notwithstanding he trusted in his wisdom,
that considering the thing well, he would be glad both to see him, and talk
with him, and also to be friend and brother with the King of Spain, in whose
most happy name, both he and his company were come thither. And as touching
his servants that remained in prison, he would so use the matter, that they
should escape all peril, promising also to set them at liberty to pleasure
him, and that incontinente he would have done it, but only because he would
not offend the Lord of the Town, who had friendly entertained him with
great courtesy, for which cause he would not presume to control him in his
own house, nor yet to show himself unthankful. The messengers departed
with this message very glad and joyful, promising to accomplish faithfully yt
charge committed unto them.

The confederacy and rebellion done by the industry of Cortez.
WHen the Cazike found missing the two prisoners, he blamed much the guarde
or watch, and pretended forthwith to murder those that remained. Then came
Cortez, and requested that their death should be pardoned, for so much as
they were but officers obediente to their Lord and master, and according to
justice they had committed no offense, nor yet deserved any correction in the
fact, which was service to their King: but for so much as they shall not
flee as the other two have done, deliver them unto me, and I will take them to
my custody and charge.

Upon this request the eyghteene prisoners were delivered unto Cortez, who sent
them aboorde his Ships, and there commanded them to be put in prons. The
Lord and his counselors fearing what might follow, entered into council
what was best to do, considering that they certaynely believed that the two
prisoners which were escaped, would certify in Mexico the shame and cruel
entertaynemente done unto them. Some replied that it was just and requisite to
send unto Mutezuma his tribute, with other presents, to mitigate his anger,
and to excuse them, and accuse the Christians, who were the causes of the
apprehension of his officers, and to crave pardon of their error and
ouersighte which they had committed as mad men, in dishonor of the
majesty of Mexico. Diverse opinions in counsel.
Others answered again, that it were much better to cast off that yoke of
bondage and slavery, and to give no longer obedience to the Mexicans, who were
both cruel and wicked tyrants, and also considering that now they had on their
side those half Gods, and invincible horsemen, saying likewise that they
should not want many others their neighbors and borderers to help and succor
them.

In this sort they resolved themselves fully to rebel, and not to lose so
good an occasion, whereupon they besoughte Hernando Cortes to be their
defendor and Captain, considering that for his sake they had begun that
enterprise, and whether Mutezuma should prepare his army against them or no,
yet they on their part were fully pretended to hold him war, and to desist
from servitude.

God knows how glad Cortes was to hear this matter, for he well wayed that
it was the high way to his iourneys end: yet dissimuling the cause, he
answered that they should well look to the thing which they meant to take in
hand, because (quoth he) I understand that Mutezuma is a mighty Prince, but
if ye will valiantly proceed, I will be your Captain, and safely defend
you, for I do more esteem your friendship, than the good will of Mutezuma,
which I nothing care for: therefore let me know what number of men of war
ye are able to make. Sir (quoth they) among all our friends we are able to
make a hundred thousand men of war. I like that well quoth Cortez,
wherefore incontinente send your posts, with advise unto all your friends
in league against Mutezuma, and certify them of this agreemente and succoure
of the Christians, not (quoth he) that I stand in need of your help, for I
alone with my company are able to stand against those of Culhua, although
they were as many more, but reason required that they should be warned of
your pretense, and to be in readiness for the same, fearing least Mutezuma
might send his army upon a suddayne, and find you unprovided.

With this advise and encouragement of Cortez, and also they themselves being a
people heady and of small consideration, they dispatched incontinent their
messegers to all the Towns and Villages of neighbors and friends,
aduertising them what they had determined, exalting the strangers above the
clouds.

And by this means rebelled many Cazikes and towns, and all the whole
Mountains, so yt there was not left any collector or other officer of Mexico
in all those borders, with open proclamation of wars against Mutezuma, and
all his adherentes.

Cortez his intent was on the other side, to stir up these Indians, to get
both their goods, wills, and lands, for otherwise, he could not well bring
his matter to pass: he only caused the officers of Mutezuma, to be taken
prisoners, and to be loused again, he feigned a great love to Mutezuma, and
stirred his subjects against him, he offered to be their defendor, and left
them rebelled, to the intent that they should stand in need of him.

The foundation of the rich Town called Vera Crux.
AT this instant the Fleet was arrived at the port, then went Cortez to visit
them, and carried with him many Indians of the Rebels, both of that Town, and
also of Zempoallan, who did good service to cut down timber, and to carry
stones to the place appointed, for the building of the City, named the rich
town of Vera Crux, according to the determination, when the officers were
appointed for the same, and chosen in S. John de Vlhua, and in good order made
repertition to the inhabitants of the ground, and plottes to build upon.

They appointed also a place for the high Church, a Market place, a Town
house, a Gayle, store houses, a kay or Wharse, to lade or unlade, a butcher
row, and other places necessary to the good government and policy of a
Town. They also drew out a plot to build the Castle or Fort on, near the
road in a place conueniente, and in this sort began their work, and their
houses made with mudwall, for the earth there is good for that purpose. And
every man being this occupied in this new work, came from Mexico two kinsmen
of Mutezuma, Fmb^^^adors.
with other four grave learned men for Counselors, and many serving men that
attended upon them, as Ambassadors from Mutezuma, they presented unto Cortez
certain cloth of Cotton well wouen, and feathers co^ously and fynely wroughte,
other pieces of gold and silver wrought, and a Casket of graynes of gold, as
they were found in the Mines not molten, which wayed altogyther two thousand
and ninety Castlins, and said, yt Mutezuma had sent him the gold in the
Casket, to cure their disease, and would gladly know how they fared, giving
also unto him most hearty thanks, for loosing his two household servants,
and preserving the others from slaughter, besiechyng him to make account, that
he would do the like in any affairs of his, desiring him also to procure
the liberty of the other eyghteene Prisoners: and because those Indians had
entertained him well in their houses, he did pardon their uproar, yet
notwithstanding he knew very well that they were such a kind of people, that
in short space they would commit some other offenses, whereby they might
be chastned for all together, even as a Dog deserves stripes. And as
concerning the rest of his request, their Lord was not well at case, and also
occupied in matters of war of great importance, whereby at that present,
there was no remedy to visit each other, but in process of time his desire
should be accomplished.

Cortez welcomed them friendly and joyfully, and also lodged them in Cotages
near unto the water side, and sent forthwith for the Lord of Chiautztlan,
that had rebelled, who came at his commandment. Cortez said unto him, lo see
what troth I have used with thee, for Mutezuma dares not to send any army, no
nor yet displease any person where I am. Therefore from this day forward you
and all your lignage and friends may account your selves free and exempt
from the servitude of Mexico, without rendryng the tributes accustomed. He
requested to set at liberty the prisoners, and to restore the^ to the
Ambassadors of Mutezuma. This Cazike wylled Cortez to do what pleased him, for
said he, even as we have chosen you for our Captain, we will not exceed
one jot of your commandment: where upon he returned home to his town,
and the Ambassadors toward Mexico, all well pleased and content.

Now fame flew abroad, blasing that Mutezuma feared the Christians, whereupon
all the Totonaques prepared themselves for the wars, taking clean away from
Mexico their tribute and obedience.

The Ambassadors departed from Cortez with their prisoners, and many other
things that were given the^, of linen, woollen, skynnes, glass, and iron,
being greatly amazed at the things which they had seen.

How Cortez took by force of arms Tizapansinca.
NOt long after that these things had happened, the Indians of Zempoallan sent
unto Cortes, to desire him of succor against the garriso^ of Culhua, which
Mutezuma mainteyned in Tizapansinca, who did greatly anoy them, in spoiling,
burning, and destroying their corn in the fields, and flew their husbandmen,
and took many prisoners. The Town of Tizapansinca does confine with the
Totonaquez, and with the ground of Zempoallan, and is a good strong Town,
situated near the River, and has a fort standing upon a high rock. And
because this Town was strong, and planted among them who were always
seditious and Rebels, Mutezuma placed there his garrison, who seeing the
officers of receyuers and auditors come flying thither for help, being
persecuted of the Rebels, they went out to pacify the Rebellion, and for to
chasten them, they burned and destroyed whatsoever they found, and also had
taken many prisoners.

Cortez hearing this news, departed toward Zempoallan, and from thence in two
days journey with a great army of Indians to Tizapansinca, which stood
eyghte leagues and more from that City.

The garrison of Culhua came into the field, thinkyng to have had battle
only with those of Zempoallan, but when they saw the Horsemen and the bearded
men, they lost their courage, and began to fly as fast as they might
possible: their succoure being near, they were seen in hold: they would
have entered into their Castle, but for ye swiftness of the Horses which
stopped their way.

And when the Horses could not ascend up unto the forte, Cortes alighted with
other four of his men, and among the preasse of the Townsmen got into the
forte, The valiant courage of Cortes.
and being within, they kept the door till their company came with many
friends, unto whom he delivered the forte and Town, desiring to do no hurt
to the inhabitants, but to suffer them to depart freely without weapon and
standerde. It was a new world to those Indians, who did fulfill Cortes his
commandment in all points. This done, Cortez returned again to the Sea
coast, by the same way which he had come.

This was the first victory that Cortes had among the subjects of Mutezuma,
whereby all the Mountains remained free from the vexations of the Mexicans,
and all our men with great fame and reputation, as well among their friends,
as among their enemies, in so much that afterward when any need did happen
among the Indians, they would immediately send unto Cortes for one of his men,
saying, that one man alone of the Chrystians, was sufficient to be their
Captain and security.

This was a good beginning for the pretense of Cortes. Now when he came to Vera
Crux with his company triumphantly, he found there Francisco de Salzeda, who
was come with his caruell which he had boughte of Alonso Cauallero, a dweller
in Saint James de Cuba, and was left there to be grounded and dressed at his
departure from thence. He brought with him. 70. Spanyardes, and nine Horses and
Mares, wherewith they all maruellously rejoiced.

The presents that Cortez sent to the Emperor for his fifte.
Cortez made great have in building up the new town and the Castle, because
the Citizens and soldiers might have succoure against wind and rain, and
commodity of householde, and likewise to be assured of defense against
enemies if need should happen, pretending likewise with all expedition, to
enter within the land toward Mexico, to sisit Mutezuma, and to leave in that
new work all thing in good order, he finished many things, touching as well
the peace as the war.

He commanded to be brought a land out of his ships all the armor and
other furniture for the wars, with the Merchandise, victual and other
provision, and to deliver it to the rulers of the new City; according to his
promise. He also signified unto all his company that it was meet and
conuement, to send relation to the King of all their proceedings and dealings
in that country, with demonstration of Gold and Silver there found.

And (quoth he) to deal uprightly in this case, it is necessary to divide
equally our treasure to every man his portion, according to the use of the
wars, the division being made, then first and principally let us deduct
the Kings fifte part. And for the better performance thereof, I do name and
appoint Alounsod A^il Treasurer for the King, and also I do elect Gonsalo
Mexia Treasurer of the army.

All the new Magistrates ratified his sayings, and allowed his discretion and
wisdom, praising the election of the new officers as men most meet for
such an office, and besought them to accept their charge.

This diligence done, he commanded to bring forth into the markette place all
the goods and treasure which they had gotten, as well cloth of Cotton,
Feathers, Gold, and Plate, which might amount unto in value the sum of.
27000. Ducates: The same he caused to be delivered unto the new elected
treasorers by account, requestyng the whole counsel of the City that they
should make division thereof. The counselors and communaltie replied,
saying: Sir here is nothing to divide, for deductyng the fifte part which
appertains to the King, all the rest shall be to make payment for the
furniture which you prepared for this voyage, and you being satisfied, then
the ships, munition and furniture shall serve in common for us all,
beseeching him with one assent to take all the treasure, and to send unto the
kings majesty his portion or fifte part, even as should seem most
convenient unto him.

Cortes replied and said, ^^^eraluie of Cortez.
that time hereafter should serve to pay him according to their gentle offer:
But for this present time my loving fellows (quoth he) I will receive no more
than the share or portion that appertains unto my office of general
Captain, and all the residue shall be for the Gentlemen of my company,
wherewith ye may begin to make payment of your debtes, which ye ought when
ye made your provision to come with me on this voyage.

And where I have appointed certain things to send to the King, of more value
than his fifte part, it might please them, for as much as they were such
things as could not be well divided, and likewise the first fruit of that
Conquest, freely to give him liberty to use his discretion in that only
point. They al in general granted to his request, whereupon he took out of
the stock, these things followyng.

Inuentary.
First the two wheels of Gold and silver, which Teudilli presented unto
him on the behalf of Mutezuma. A collar of gold of eight pieces, whereat
hanged a hundredth four score and three little Emeraldes, and two and thirty
little read stones, like unto Rubies, of small value: there hanged at the same
collar seven and twenty little belles of Gold, and certain heads of pearl.
Another collar of four doubled twiste, with a hundredth and two Rubies, and a
hundredth and seventy and two Emeraides, and ten good pearls well set,
and for border or fringe six and twenty belles of gold: both those collers
were beautiful to behold, and had many other fine things wrought in them,
more than is here declared. Many graynes of gold of the bigness of a pease,
even as they were found. A Casket of graynes of gold of the same sort. A
Helmet of woodde champed vnth gold and besette with stones, and at the beuier
five and twenty belles of gold, and upon the roppe a green bird, with his
eyes, beak, and feet of gold. A sallet of planches of gold, and belles
round about it, decked with stone. A bracelet of gold of small weight. A
rod like unto a royal Scepter, with two rings of gold hangyng thereat,
garnished with pearl. Four forkes with three shepchookes at each, covered with
feathers of sundry colors. Many payres of shoes made of Dear skins, sowed
with gold threede, and in the soales were set certain stones of color
white and blewe which shyned fair. Six pair of letherne shoes of diverse
colors, garnished with gold, silver, and pearl. A Targatte of woodde covered
with leather, beset round about with belles of Latton, and the bosse in the
midst was planched with gold, and there was engraued upon the same
Vitsilopucthli, God of the wars, and also four heads set crossewise, which
heads were of a Lion, a Tigre, an Eagle, and an Owl, very lively made with
feathers. Many skins of beast and foul, corried and dressed in their
feathers and in hair. Four and twenty targets of gold feathers, and set with
pearl both curious and gallant to behold. Five Targets of feathers and silver.
Four fishes of gold well wrought. Two birds called Auades, and other birds of
gold. Certain Hatchets and a rod of latten. Diverse loking glasses garnished
with gold. Many Myters and crowns of gold and feathers wrought of many colors
beset with pearl and stone. Many fair feathers of sundry colors. Many tuffes
of feathers adorned with silver and gold. A garment like a coape of cotton,
wouen of sundry colors, and in the midst a black whele made of feathers.
Many surplices, vestments, palles, frontals and ornaments of Idols alters and
temples. Many couerlets of cotton of diverse colors, which showed like unto
unshorn velvet. Many shirtes, Iackettes, headclothes and other naperie. Many
Carpets and hangings of cotton.
Al these things were more beautiful than rich, although the wheels were very
rich, the workmanshippe of all the rest, was more worth than the thing it self.
The colors of the cloth of cotton wool was exceeding fine, and the feathers
natural.

The pounced work in gold and silver did exceed our goldsmithes, of which
things we will write in an other place. They joined with this present certain
Indian books of figures which serve to their use for letters: these books are
solden like unto clothes, and written on both sides. Some of these books were
made of cotton and glewe, Strange Paper.
and others were made of leaves of a certain tree called Melt, which serve
for their paper, a thing strange to behold.

At that time the India^s of Zempoallan had many prisoners to sacrifice. Cortez
demanded them to send unto the Emperor, but the Indians desired him to pardon
them, for if we so do (quoth they) we shall offend our gods, who will take
away our corn and children from us, yea and also our lives in so doing.

Yet notwithstanding, Cortez took four of them, and two women which were al
young and lusty.

But it was very strange to see those that should be sacrificed, how they were
trimmed and decked with feathers, and went dancing through the City, asking
alms for their sacrifice and death. It was also strange to see the offerings
yt were given the^. They had at their ears hanging rings of gold beset with
turkey stones, and likewise other rings at their lips, which showed their
teeth bare, a griesely sight to see, but yet esteemed among them a thing
beautiful.

Letters from the army and magistrates of the new town directed to the
Emperor.
WHen this present and fifth part was laid aside for the king, Cortez required
the magistrates to name and appoint two atturnyes, to carry the Emperors portion
unto Spain. And that he for his part would give unto them his full power, and
letter of attourneye, with also one of his best Ships for that voyage.

The Counsel of the new town chose Alounso Fernandez Portocarero, and
Francisco de Monteio for that iourneye: whereof Cortez was very glad, and gave
them Antonio de Alominos for their pilot, with gold and plate sufficient for
turn and return of the voyage. Cortez gave them instructions, what they
should do particularlye for him, in the Court of Spain as also in Civil,
and the town where he was borne. He sent to his Father and Mother certain
money, with news of his prosperitye: he sent also with them the ordinances
and acts instituted, and wrote by them a large letter to the Emperor, in the
which he gave full aduertisemente of all things which had passed from the
time of his departure from the Island of Cuba until that day, and of the
discord between bym and James Valasques, and of their great traueyle and
pains, with the great good will which they all bare unto his royal service:
he certified likewise of the riches of that countreye, with the majesty and
power of Mutezuma. He offered to bring in subjection unto his royal Crown and
state of Castil, all that Empire, and to win also the great City of Mexico,
and to bring that mighty king Mutezuma to his hands quick or dead.

Beseeching the Emperors majesty to have him in remembrance when offices and
provisions should be sent unto that new Spain latelye discovered at his
great costs, and in recompense of his pains and travel.

The Counsel and magistrates of Vera Crux wrote also two letters to the
Emperor, the one was touching the success of their proceedings in his royal
service. In that letter, went only the Aldermens firmes, and Judges.

The other letter was firmed by the generalitye and chiefest of the army, the
contents whereof was in substance, A good protestation
that they would hold and keep that town and country won, in his royal
name, or end their lives in the quarrel, if his majesty did not otherwise
determyne.

They also most humblye besought him, that the government thereof, and of all that hereafter should be conquered, might be given to Herna^do Cortez their
guide, general captain, and chief Justice by them elect and chosen, saying,
that well he had deserved the same, for that he alone spent more than the whole
army upon that journey. And that it might please his majesty to confirm that,
which they generally of freewill had done for their own safeguard and
securitye, in the name of his royal majesty.

And if by chance his majesty had already given the said office of
government to any other person, that it might please him to revoke it.

For so should it be expedient for his service, and quietness of the country.
And thereby might be excused, rumors, slanders, perils, and slaughters, that
might ensue, if any other should govern and rule as captain general.

And moreover they besoughte his majesty to grant them answer with
breuity, and good dispatch of their attourneys, who departed from the port of
Aguiahuistlan in a reasonable ship the twenty six day of July. Anno. 1519.

They touched by the way at Marien a port of Cuba, declaring that they went to
Hauana: they passed through the channel of Bahama without disturbaunce, and
sailed with a prosperous wind, till they arrived in Spain.

The cause why the generaltye had written these letters was, suspecting James
Velasques, who had friends and great favor in the Court and counsel of Indias,
and also some secret friends in Cortez his camp. For Francisco Salzeda
brought news that James Velasques had already obtained a grant of the Emperor
for the government of that land by the means of one Bonito Martinez going into
Spain. And although they knew not the certainty thereof, yet it was most true,
as shall appear in another place.

An vproa^re among the soldiers against Cortez, and the punishment for the
same.
THere were some in the host ye murmured against the election of Cortez, for
thereby was excluded James Valasques, unto who^ they bare good will.

Some were Valasques friends, and other some his kinesfolkes, who let not to
say openly, that Cortez by flattery, sutteltie and gifts had gotten and
obtained his purpose.

And that the dissymulation in making him self to be entreated and prayed to
accept that charge and office, was a thing ceastily feigned, whereby such
election could not be of any value, and chieflye without any such authority
of the Jerome Friars dam, who ruled and governed the Indians as chief
presidents: how much more they had news that James Velasques had already
obtained the government of that land, and Yucatan. Then Cortez began to
understand in those matters, and made informatio^ who had raised up this
rumoure, and being known, he apprehended the chiefest, and sent them
prisoners aboorde his Ship: and to molifye their wrath, he shortly releassed
them again, the which afterward was cause of more mischief, for these his
enemies would have fled with a Vergantine and killed the master, pretending
to fly unto the Island of Cuba, Mischefe.
for to advertise James Velasques of the great present sent unto the Emperor,
to the intent it should be taken from their attorners passing near the port
of Hauana, with all the letters and relations of their business, because the
Emperor should not see it, to conceive well of their proceedings. Then
Cortez began to be agreeued in earnest, and apprehended diverse of them, whose
confessions being taken, the matter was manifestly known to be true, and there
upon according to the process, Two hanged, and two vvhipped.
he condemned those that were most culpable, and caused forthwith two of them
to be hanged, who were John Escudero, and James Cermenio pilot, and condemned
Gonsalo de Vmbria and Alonso Penate to be whipped, and incontinent execution
was done, all the rest being pardoned.

With this correction Cortez was more feared, and also esteemed, than before he
was, for certainly if he had used gentleness, he should never have tamed
them, yea and if he had not looked to them in time, he had bin spoiled: for
their pretense was, to have advertised James Velasques, who would have
prevented them of their Shyps and present, and yet afterward he sent a
Caruell after the said Ship, although it were too late.

Cortez caused all his Ships to be sunk, and broken upon the shore, a most
worthy fact.
COrtez purposed to go unto Mexico, and would not give his Souldyers to
understand it, because they should not refuse the journey, through the talk
of Teudilli, especially hearing that the City of Mexico was situated upon
water, which they imagined to be exceeding strong, as in effect it was: A
famous fact.
and to the intent that they should all follow him, although against their
wills, he determined to spoil all his Ships, which was a strange case,
perilous, and a great loss. His intent thoroughly weyed, he little esteemed
the loss of his Ships to withstand his men from disturbance of his
enterprise, for doubtless they would have stayed him, yea and rebelled, if
they had known his mind and pretended purpose. He did secretly accord with
one of the Masters of his Fleet in the night season to bore holes in them,
that thereby they might synke, without any remedy to recover them again.

Also he requested the other Masters and Pylots to publish among the army,
that the Ships were so rotten and wormeaten, that they were not fytte to go
to sea again, and that they should, when they chanced to espy him and many
of his Souldies together, come and certify him openly of the estate and force
of the said Ships, because that afterward they should not lay any fault
to his charge.

According to this instruction, the Pylots and Masters did accomplish his
commandment: for shortly after they espied him among a flock of his
company, and then came they unto him, saying: Sir, your navy is not to make
any more voyages, by reason that they are all leake, and spoiled, rotten, and
worm eaten, wherefore according to our duty, we do certify you thereof, to
provide therein as you shall see cause. All the Soldiers gave credit to their
tale, because the Ships had bin there more than three months. And after
long talk about the matter, Cortez commanded that they should profit
themselves of them the best that they might, and as for the Hulles, let them
sink or run a shore, fayning great sorrow for so great a loss, and want of
such provision. And in this manner they let run a shore fine of the best
Ships, fauyng their Ordinance, vittayles, sails, Cables, Ankers, ropes, and
all other tacle: and shortly after they spoiled other four vessels, but that
was done with some difficulty, because they began to surmise the intent of
Cortez, and began openly to say, that Cortes meant to carry them to the
slaughter house. He then pacifyed them with gentle words, saying, what is he
that will refuse the wars in so rich a Country? if there be any of you that
will leave my company, he or they may (if please them) return to Cuba in a
Ship that yet remains. And this he spoke, to know how many were the
cowards, meaning in time of need to have no trust or confidence in them. Then
diverse shameless persons demanded license to return to Cuba, but they were
such as loved no wars. There were also others that said nothing, who would
gladly have returned, seeing the greatenesse of the Country, and the
multitude of the people, but yet they were ashamed to show cowardice openly.

Cortez knowing his souldyers minds, commanded the other Ship to be sunk, so
that then they were all without hope to go out of that Country at yt time,
exalting and praising the noble mind of Cortes showed in that worthy fact.
Certaynely it was a deed necessary for the present time, and done by the
judgment of a stout Captain, although he lost much by his Ships, and abode
without succor of the sea. There are few of these examples, which are not of
valiant personages, as was omiez Barbaroza with the cut arm, who a few years
past brake seven Galleys and Foystes, to win thereby Bugia, as largely I do
write thereof in battayles of ye sea in our days.

How the inhabitants of Zempoallan brake down their Idolles.
EVery day seemed long to Cortes, with the desire to see Mutezuma. He now
began to publishe openly his journey and departure, and chose out of the body
of his host a hundred and fifty me^, which he thought sufficient to leave for
safeguard of the new town and fort, which was almost finished, and appointed
Pedro de Hircio their Captain, leaving with them two Horses, and two small
pieces of Ordinance, with many Indians to serve them, and fifty Towns round
about them in faithful friendship and league, out of the which Towns they
might always have at their need fifty thousand men of war: and he
departed with the residue of his Spanyardes toward Zempoallan, which might
be four leagues from thence, and was scarcely come to the Town, Nevves for
Cortez.
when news was brought him that four Ships of Francisco Garray sailed
along his coast, and were in sight of Vera Crux. With this news he returned
incontinent with a hundred of his men, suspecting evil of those Ships. At
his coming to Vena Crux, his Captain there informed him how he had gone
himself to know what they were, and from whence they came, and what they
would, but could speak with none of them. Cortes being informed how they
road at anchor, took Captain Hircio and certain of his company to expect
their coming ashore, suspectyng them much, because they road so far off,
being by signs and tokens willed to come into the Harbor. Cortes having
wandered near three miles, met with three Spaniardes which came from the
ships, the one of them said that he was a Notary, and the other two were to
serve for witnesses in their affairs, which was, to ascite and notify
certain wrytings, which they showed not: and also to require Cortes by virtue
of the same, to come and make repartitio^ of that country with captain Garay
their general, for their said Captain pretended that conquest (as first
discouerer of the same,) certifying moreover that he was determined to
inhabit twenty leagues dista^t from that place Westwarde near unto Nahutlan,
which now is called Armeria, Cortes answered, that they should return unto
their ships, and to will their Captain to come to Vera Crux with his navy,
and there they would commune together about his coming, and if he stood in
need of any thing it should be provided. And if it were (as they reported)
that he was comen on the Kings affairs, he would gladly favor his
proceedings, considering that he and all his were there in service of his
highness, how much more being all of one nation.

They answered, that in no wise their captain nor none of his army would come
ashore, nor yet come where as Cortes was. With this answer Cortes understood
the matter, and laid hold of them, and went and placed himself in ambushe
behind a little hill of sand, which stood right over against the ships,
being near sun set, and slepte there that night till day approached, and
the morning far spent, hopyng that Garay his Pilote or some of his company
would come ashore, meaning likewise to apprehende them for to be certified
what course they had made, and what hurt they had done, and findyng them
guilty, to send them prisoners into Spain: likewise he desired to know
whether they had spoken with any vassals of Mutezuma, and seeing they came not a
land his suspicion was the greater.

Cortes commanded three of his men to change apparel with the three
messengers that came from Garay, A wise practice.
and this done, caused them to go to the Sea side, wauyng with their clokes,
and calling for the ship boat. Now those of the ships thought by their
apparel that they were their own men, and came with a dozen persons in the
skiffe with Crossebowes and Handgunnes. Then Cortes his men which were clothed
in other men's garments hid themselves among bushes, as who would say, they
were gone into the shadow, for to flee from the great heat of the Sun,
being at that time high noone, and because they should not be known.

The Mariners of the skiffe set a land two men with Hargabushes, and other
two me^ with Crossebowes, and an Indian who went straight way to the bushes,
thinkyng to find their fellows. Then stepped forth Cortes and caught them
before they could get aborde the skiffe, although they meant to have
defended themselves, so that one of them who was a Pilote, having his
Hargabushe ready charged, and would have shot at captain Hircio, and assuredly
if his match and powder had been good he had slain him: When the general
aborde the ships perceived this deceit, he would abide no longer, and
commanded to make sail, not tarying for his skiffe. By these seven me^ taken
at two times Cortes was satisfied, and also certified how captain Garay had
sailed along the coast seeking Florida, and arrived in a river (the King of
that province was called Panuco,) where they found little gold, barteryng
aborde their ships: all their gold passed not three thousand Castelins, but
in exchange of things of small value: nothing contented Garay on that voyage,
because the quantity of gold was small and not fine.

With this news Cortes returned to Zempoallan with his men which he brought in
his company: and there concluded and fully agreed with those Indians to pull
down their Idols and sepulchers of their Cassikz, which they did reverence as
Gods, persuading them to worship the God of heaven. And after this doctrine
their league of friendship was effectually established, and with other towns
adjoining against Mutezuma. Those Indians gave unto him gagues to be always
faithful of word and promise, and offered unto him as many men fit for
war and service as he would require. Cortes received the gagues which were
of the principallest persons of the towns, as Mamexi, Teuch, and Tamalli, he
took also a thousand Tamemes, that is to say, men that are carriers, who
ordinarily takes his burden upon his back which is half a hundred weight,
and those fellows follow the camp with their bag and bagage: These men
served for horses to draw the ordinance, and to carry other munition and
victuals.

How Olintlec exalted the mighty power of Mutezuma.
COrtes departed from Zempoallan (leaving that town named Siuillia,) toward
Mexico, the sixtenth day of August of the same year, with 400. Spaniardes and
fiftene horses, and six pieces of ordinance, and 1300. Indians with the carriers
and me^ of Cuba. And when Cortes departed from Zempoallan he had not one
vassal of Mutezuma in his camp to lead them the way toward Mexico, for all
were fled, seeing the new league, or else by commandment of their Lord: and
the Indians of Zempoallan knew not well the way.

The first three days journey the army passed through the country of their
friends, and were lovingly received and lodged, especially in Xalapan. The
fourth day they came to Sicuchima^l, which is a strong place situated on a
hill side very craggy, and the way to pass there unto is made with force of
man's hand as a stayre. And if the inhabitants thereof would have resisted the
entrance, with great difficulty both footmen and horsemen might have
entered the town, but as afterward appeared, they were commanded by Mutezuma
to lodge them and also to honor them. The rulers of that town said to
Cortes, that for as much as he went to visit their Prince Mutezuma, he
should assure himself that they were and would be his friends. This town
has many villages and farms beneath in the plain, for Mutezuma was always
provided there of. 5000. men of war.

Cortes gave great thanks to the Lord for his curtesse and good
entertaynement, much esteeming the good will of this Lord Mutezuma, and so
departed from thence, and went to pass over a mountain very high, the
passage whereof he named Nembre de dios, because it was the first that he had
passed, being so asperous and high, that there is none such in all Spain,
for it contained directly upright three leagues, and has in many places grapes
and trees with honey. And discendyng down on the other st^^ of that hill, they
came to a town called Theuhixuacan, which is a forte and friend to Mutezuma,
where our army was received and entertained as in the other town behind.

And from thence he traueled three days in a country inhabitable, and passed
some necessity of hunger, and much more of thirst, Troubles.
bica^se all the water that they found was saltishe, and many of his men for
want of other drank thereof, whereof they fell into sickness: and sodamely
fell a meruaylous Hayle with great cold, which increased their grief, yea and
the Indians of their company thought there to end their lives, and some of the
Indians of Cuba died there through nakedness, not being accustomed to so cold
a country. After the fourth journey of evil way they ascended up an other
hill, and upon the top thereof, (to their judgment) they found a thousand
carte load of wood ready cut, near to a little tower of idolles: they named
that place the port of wood: and having passed two leagues from the port of
wood, they found the country barren and poor, but soon after the army came
to a place which they named white Castle, because the Lords house was of
stone very white and new, and the best that they had seen in all that
country, and so curiously wrought, that they meruayled thereat: that town in
their language is called Zaclotan, and the valley near unto it is named
Zacatami, and the Lords name is Olintlec, who received Cortes honorably, and
provided for him and his company abundantly, being so commanded by Mutezuma,
as he reported afterward.

And in token that he had received that commission from his Lord, A strange
joy.
he commanded fifty men to be sacrificed for joy, whose blood they saw new
and fresh. The towns men of that town carried the Spanyardes on their
shoulders, on such bears as we carry dead men to Church. Cortes informed
them (by his enterpreters) of the cause of his coming into that country, as
he had used in other places, and demanded whether he the Lord of this town
were tributary to Mutezuma. This Cazike being amazed at his question, answered,
saying: What is he that is not either slave or vassal to the great Mutezuma,
Then Cortes certified him, who and what the Emperor king of Spain was,
willing him to be his friend and seruitour, and further enquired if he had any
gold to send him some. This Cazike answered, that he would do nothing without
the commandment of his Lord, nor yet send his king any gold although he
had enough. Cortes dissimuled the matter, and held his peace, yet by and by he
desired to know the Majesty and mighty power of Mutezuma: the Cazike
answered, that Mutezuma was Lord of the whole world, and that he had thirty
Vassals who were able to make a. 100000. men of war: each one of them he also
certified that he sacrificed. 20000. men yearly to his Gods: And also his
dwelling was in the most beautyfullest and strongest city of all that ever was
enhabited, likewise (quoth he) his house and court is most great, noble, and
replenished with Gentlemen, his riches incredible, and his charges excessive.
And truly therein he said the very troth, except in the sacrifice wherein he
something enlarged, although the slaughter of men for sacrifice in every temple
was very great, yea and some hold opinion, that some years were sacrificed
above. 50000. men. Being in this conversation, came two Gentlemen of that
valley to see the Spanyardes, and each of them presented unto Cortes four
women slaves, and certain collers of gold of small price. Olintlec although
he was vassal to Mutezuma, was a great Lord, and had. 20000. vassals, and
thirty wives altogether in his house, beside a bundreth other women that
attended upon them. And had for his guard and household, 2000. persons, his
town was great, and had. 13. temples in it, and each temple many idolles of
stone of diverse fashio^s, before whom they sacrificed men, doves, quayles, and
other things with persumes and great veneratio^. In this place and territory,
Mutezuma had. 5000. soldiers in garrison, and ordinary posts from thence to
Mexico. Until this tune, Cortez had not so amply understood the might and
power of Mutezuma, yea and though many inconuemences, difficulties, fear, and
such like, did represent it self unto him in his ^ourney to Mexico, which
perhaps would have amazed some valiant persons, yet he showed not one jot of
cowaroise, hau^ng heard such a report of that mighty Prince, but rather his
desire was so much the more to see him.

Considering now that he should pass through Taxcallan to go to Mexico,
Taxcallan being a great and sirong City, and warlike people: he dispatched
four Zeampoalianezes to the Lords and Captains of that City, on the behalf
of Zempoallan and his own, offering unto them his friendship and favor,
giving them to understand, that those few Christians would come unto their
City to serve the^, desiring the^ to accept the same, thinking assuredly that
those of Taxcallan would have done with him as the Zempoallanezes had done,
which were both good and faithful, who had always used troth with him, cue^ so
he thought that now he moughte credit them, for they had informed him, that
the Tlaxcaltecas were their friends, and so would be his, considering that
they were utter enemies to Mutezuma, and willingly would go with him to the
siege of Mexico, with desire of liberty, and to revenge old injuries and
griefs, which they had sustained many years before of the people of Culhua.
Cortez refreshed himself in Zaclotan five days, where is a fresh river and
quiet folk, pulling down the Idolles, and placed a remembrance of Christ
crucified, as he had done in all the Towns that he had passed.

He took his leave of Olintlec, leaving him well pleased, and went to a town two
leagues from thence along ye river side, whereof was Lord Iztaemixtlitan, one
of the Gentlemen who had given him the slaves and collers of gold.

This town stands in a plain ground of two leagues compass, which is
replenished with so many houses as does seem to touch one another, in that
way that our army passed: and the town it self does contain five thousand
householdes, standing on a hill, and on the one side thereof is the Lords
house with a strong forte, being the best yet seen in those parties, walled
with good stone with barbucan and deep ditche. There Cortes rested himself
three days, abiding the four messengers which he sent from Zacloton, to
know the answer that should be brought.

The first encounter that Cortez had with the men of Tlaxcallan.
COrtes seeing the long tarying of the messengers, he departed from Zaclotan
without any intelligence from Tlaxcallan. Our ca^p had not marched much after
their departure from that place, but they came to a great circuit of stone
made without lyme or mortar, A strange wall.
being of a sadom and a half high, and twenty foot broad, with loupe holes to
shoot at: that wall crossed over all the valley from one mountain to another,
and but one only entrance or gate, in the which the one wall doubled against
the other, and the way there was forty paces broad, in such sort, that it was
an evil and perilous passage, if any had been there to defend it. Cortes
demanded the cause of that circuit, and who had buylte it, Iztacmixtlitan
that went to bear him company, told him that it was but a division from
their country and Tlaxcallan, and that their antecessors had made the same to
disturb the entrance of the Tlaxcaltecas in time of war, who came to rob
and murder them, because of the friendship betwixt them and Mutezuma, whose
vassals they were.

That strange and costly wall, seemed a thing of great majesty to our
Spanyardes, and more superfluous than profitable, yet they suspected that the
Tlaxcaltecas were valiant warriers, who had such defense made against them.
And as Cortes and his army stood beholding this work, Iztaemixtlitan thought
he had bin afraid to proceed forward, and prayed him (for so much as he was
his Lords friend) not to pass that way, nor yet through the Country of
Tlaxcallan, for so much as he went to visit his master, for (quoth he) if
they know you to be my Lords friend, they will seek your displeasure, as
they have done to others, and I will provide you guides to lead you
continually through the domini^ ^f Mutezuma, where you shall be well received
and provided, until you come to Mexico.

But Mamexi and the others of Zempoallan willed him to refuse that offer and
counsel in any wise, alleatgyng that it was an only pretense to separate them
from the friendship of that province, whose people were good, honorable, and
valiant, and that Iztaemixtlitans persuasion was to prohibit their help and
succoure against Mutezuma, willing him earnestly to give no credit unto his
sayings, for he and his allies are false Traitors, and meante to bring him into
some snare, where they might kill both him and his company, and feed upon
their flesh.

Cortes for a space was amazed at ye talk of ye one and the other, but in
conclusion he accepted the council of Mamexi, for that he had conceived a
better opinion of the Zeampoallanezes his allied friends, than of the others.
And setting all fear aside, he took the way to Tlaxcallon, byddyng
Iztaemixtlita^ farewell, and with three hundred Souldyers on a rank, he entered
the way in the wall, and proceeded in good order all the way forwards,
carrying the Ordinance ready charged, and he himself the leader of all his
army, yea and sometimes he would be half a league before them, to discover
and make the way plain.

And having gone the space of three leagues from that circuit, be commanded
his footmen to make have, because it was somewhat late, and he with his
Horsemen went to descrye the way forwards, who ascendyng up a hill, two of the
foremost horsemenne met with fifteen Indians armed with swords and Targets
and tuffes of feathers, which they use to wear in the wars. These fifteen
were spies, and when they saw the Horsemen, they began to fly with fear,
or else to give advise.

Then approached Cortez with other three horsemen, calling to them to stay, but
by no means they would abide: then sire Horsemen ran after them, and
ouertooke the^, who joined all together, with determinatio rather to dye than
to yield, showing them signs to stand still; yet the Horsemen coming to lay
hands on them, they prepared themselves to battle, and fought, desendyng
themselves for a while. In this fight the Indians slew two of their Horses,
and as the Spanyardes do witness, at two blows they cut off a Horse head,
bridle and all. Then came the rest of the Horsemenne, and the army approached,
for there were in syghte near five thousand Indians in good order, to
succoure their fifteen fyghting men, but they came too late for that
purpose, for they were all slain with the anger that was taken for the killyng
of the two Horses, and would not render themselves in time: yet
notwythstandyng their fellows fought, until they espied our army coming,
and the Ordinance, then they returned, leauyng the field to our men, but
our Horsemenne followed them, and slew about 70, persons of them, without
receiving any hurt.

This done, A subtle message.
the Indians sent unto Cortes two of the four messengers which had bin
sent thither before with other Indians, saying, that the Tlaxcaliecas knew
nothing of the things that were happened, certifying likewise that those with
whom he had fought were of other comunities, and not of their jurisdiction,
being sorrowful for that which had passed: and for so much as it happened
in their Country, they would willingly pay for the two Horses which were
slain, praying them to come in good time to their Town, who would gladly
receive them, and enter into their league of friendship, because they seemed
to be valiante men: but all was a feigned and a false message:

Yet Cortes believed them, and gave them thanke^ for their courtesy and good
will, and that according to their request he would go unto their Town, and
accept their friendship. And touching the death of his Horses, he required
nothing, for within short space he expected many more: but yet God knows how
sorrowful he was for the want of them, and not only so much for the^, as that
the Indians should think that Horses could dye, or be slain.

Cortez proceeded forwards about two leagues where the Horses were killed,
although it was almost Sunnesette, and his men weeried, having traveled far
that day.

His will was, to have pitched his Camp in a strong place of water: wherefore
he planted his army by a River side, whereas they remained all that night with
good watch both of footmen and horsemen, fearing some assault: but there was
no attempt given that night, whereby they might have taken better rest, than
they were aware of.

How there joined a hundred and fifty thousand men against Cortez.
THe next morning at Sun rising, Cortez departed with his army in good order,
and in the midst of them went the fardage and artillery, and as soon as
they were come to a little Village there near at hand, they met with the
other two messengers of Zempoallan, who departed from them at Zaclotan: they
came with pitiful cheer, exclayming of the Captains of the power of
Tlaxcallan, who had bound them, and deteyned them from returning; but with
good fortune, that night they had broken loose, and escaped, for otherwise
in the morning following, they had bin sacrificed to the God of Victory, and
after the sacrifice, to be eaten, for a good beginning of their wars,
protesting the like to be done with the berded men, and with as many as came
with them.

They had no sooner told their tale, when there appeared behind a little hill
about a thousand Indians, very well appointed after their fashion, and came
with such a marvelous noise and cry, as though their voices should have
pierced the Heavens, hurling at our men stones, darts, and shot with
bows and arrows.

Cortes made many tokens of peace unto them, First ^actayl^.
and by his interpreters desired them to leave the battle. But so much the
more as he entreated for peace, the more hastio and earnest were they, thinkyng
either to have ouercomen them, or else to hold them play, to the intent that
the Spanyardes should have solowed them to a certain ambushe that was prepared
for them, of more then. 80000. 80000 (...).
men, which they had planted in a creek of a river which abutted upon the
high way. Then our men began to cease from words, and to lay hand upon their
weapons, for that company of a thousand were as many, as on our side were
fighting men, they were well practiced in the wars, very valiant, and also
pitched in a better place for fight. This battle endured certain hours, and
at the end the Indians being either wearied, or else meaning to take our men
in the snare appointed, began to fly toward their maine battle, not as
overcome, but to join with their own folk. And our men being hot in the
fight and slaughter which was not little, followed them with all their fardage,
Second battle.
and unawares fell into the ambushe among an infinite number of Indians armed,
they stayde not because they would not put themselves out of order, and passed
through their camp with great haste and fear. The enemies began to set upon
the horsemen, thinkyng to have taken their lances from them, their courage was
so stout: many of the Spaniardes had there perished, had it not bin for the
Indian friends. Likewise the courage of Cortes did much animate them, for
although he led his army making way, yet diverse times he turned him back to
place his men in order and to comfort chem, and at length came out of that
dangerous way into the plain field, where the horses might help, and the
ordinance stand in steed, which two things did greatly anoy the enemy to
their great wonder and marvel, and at the sight thereof began to fly.

In both encounters remained many Indians slain and wounded, and of the
Spaniardes some were hurt, but none killed, giuyng most hearty thanks unto
God for their delivery from so great a multitude of Indians their enemies with
much joy and pleasure of the victory. Then they went to pitche their camp
in a village called Teoacaziaco, where was a little Tower and a Temple, and
there fortified themselves, and buylte cotages of bows and straw. The Indians
of Zeampoallan, and those of Iztacmixtlitan did play the valiant men that day,
wherefore Cortes honored them with hearty thanks.

This day was the first of September. The night followyng our men slepte not
quietly with fear of invasion of their enemies, The care of good soldiers.
but they came not, for they never use to fight in the night season. And as
soon as it was day Cortes sent to the Captains of Tlaxcallan, to require
them of peace and friendship, willing them quietly to suffer the passage
through their country to Mexico, for that they meant them no hurt but rather
good will. This done, he left two hundredth Spanyardes and the Carreirs in
the camp. And took with him other two hundredth, with seven hundredth Indians,
and went with them abroad to skirmishe in the face of their enemies, and at
that time burned five or six villages, and returned with four hundredth
prisoners, without receyuyng any hurt, although they followed him to his
camp. At his return he found the answer of the Captains his enemies,
which was, that the next day they would come and talk with him and declare
their minds.

Cortes was well prevented that night, for the answer liked him not, but
rather seemed brave, and a matter determined to be done as they had said:
likewise those which were taken prisoners, certified that his enemies were
joined together to the number of a. 150000. 15000 ^i men.
me^ to give him battle the next day following, and to swallow the^ alive whom
so mortally they did hate, thinking the^ so be friends to Mutezuma, unto whom
they wished all evil and mischief.

It was most true that the Tlaxcaltecas had gathered all their whole power to
apprehende the bearded men, and to make of them a more solemn sacrifice unto
their Gods, than at any time heretofore they had done, with a general
banquet of their flesh, which they called Celestial. The Captains of
Tlaxcallan divided their soldiers into four battayles, the one to Tepeticpac,
another to Ocotelulco, the third to Tizatlan, and the fourth to Quiahuiztlan,
that is to say, the men of the Mountains, the men of the Lymepittes, the men
of the Pinetrees, and the water men, every of these had their Lords and
Captains whom they should repair unto and obey, and all these four sorts
of men does make the body of the common weal and city, and also command
both in time of war and peace. So that every of these Captains had his just
portion or number of warriers, but the general of all the whole army was called
Xicotencatl, who was of the Limepits: and he had the standart of the city,
which is a Crane of gold with his wings spread, adorned with Emeralds and
siluerworke, which standart is according to their use, either carried before the
whole host or else behind the^ all. The second Captain or Lieuetenant was
Maxixcazin, and the number of the whole army was. 150000. men. Such a great
number they had ready against. 400. Spaniardes and yet at length overcome:
nevertheless after all this broyle, they were most greatest friends. These
four captains came with their chpany that the fields where they were seemed a
forest. They were trim fellows and well armed according to their use,
although they were painted so that their faces showed like devils with great
tuffes of feathers and triumphed gallantly. Indian ar(...).
They had also slinges, staves, spears, swords, bows and arrows, skulles,
splintes, gantlettes all of wood, gilte or else covered with feathers or
leather, their corselets were made of cotton woolle, their targettes and
bucklers gallant and strong, made of woodde covered with leather, and trimmed
with laton and feathers, their swords were staves with an edge of flint stone
cunningly joined into the staff, which would cut very well and make a sore
wound.

The host (as is declared) was divided into four parts, their instruments of
war were hunters bornes, and drums called attabals made like a caldron and
covered with vellam. So that the Spanyardes in all the discovery of India did
never see a better army together nor better ordered.

The threatening of the Indian camp against the Spanyardes.
THese Indians were great braggers, and said among themselves, what mad
people are these that threatens us and yet knows us not: But if they will be
so bold to invade our country without our license, let us not set upon them
so soon, it is meet they have a little rest, for we have time enough to take
and bind them, let us also send them meat for they are commen with empty
stomachs: And again they shall not say that we do apprehende them with
weariness and hunger. Apresent.
Whereupon they sent unto the Christians three hundredth Gynnea cocks, and two
hundredth baskets of bread called Centli. The which present was a great sucker
for the need that they stood in. And seen after (quoth they) now let us go
and set upon them, for by this time they have eaten their meat, and now we
will eat them, and so shall they pay us the victuals that we sent: likewise we
will know if Mutezuma commanded them to come into our country, or who else.
And if he sent them, then let him come and deliver them: and if it be their
own enterprise, they shall receive their reward accordingly. These and such
like bragges they used, seeing so few Spaniardes before them, A reekning made
before the host.
and not knowing their strength. Then the four Captains sent two thousand
of their valiantest men of war and old Soldiers, to take the Spanyardes
quietly, with commandment that if they did resist, either to bind, them or
else to kill them, meaning not to set their whole army upon them, saying that
they should get but small honor for so great a multitude, to fight against
so few. The two thousand Soldiers passed the trench that was betwirt the
two camps, and came boldly to the Tower where the Christians were. Battle.
Then came forth the Horsemen, and after them the footmen, and at the first
encounter they made the Indians feel how the iron swords would cut: and
at the second, they showed of what force those few in number were, of whom a
little before they had so iested: But at the third brunte they made those
lusty Soldiers fly, who were come to apprehende them, for none of them
escaped, but only such as knew the passage of the trenches or ditche.

Then the main battle and whole army set forth with a terrible and
marvelous noise, and came so fierce upon our men, till they entered into our
camp without any resistaunce, and there were at handye strokes and wrastlyng
with the Spanyardes, and in a good space could not get them out, killyng
many of them which were so bold to enter: and in this sort they sought four
hours, before they could make way among their enemies. And then the Indians
began to faint, seeing so many dead on their side, and the great wounds they
had, and that they could kill none of the Christians: yet the battle ceased
not till it drew near night and then they retired. Whereof Cortes and his
Soldiers were exceedyng glad, for they were fully weried with killyng of
Indians, so that all that night our men triumphed with more joy than fear,
considering that the Indians fought not by night, they slepte and took their
rest at pleasure, which they had not done til that time, but always kept
both watch and ward.

The Indians finding many of their host missyng, yet they would not yield
themselves as overcome, as after did appear. They could not well tell how
many were slain, nor yet our men had leisure to count them.

The next day in the morning Cortes went forth to run the fields as he had
done before, Cortes was a painful man.
leaving half his men to keep the camp, and because he should not be
espied he departed before day, and burned about.x. towns, and sacked one
town, which was of three thousand houses, in the which were found but few
folk of fight, because the most of them were gone to their camp: After the
spoil, he set fire on the town and came his way to his camp with a great
pray by noone time. The enemies pursued thinkyng to take away their pray, and
followed them into the camp, where they fought five hours and could not kill
one Spaniarde, although many of their side were slain: for even as they were
many and stood on a throng together, the ordinance made a wonderful spoil
among them, so that they left off fighting, and the victory remained for our
men. The Indians thought that the Spanyardes were inchaunted because their
arrows could not hurt them.

The next day followyng, the four Captains sent three several things in
present to Cortes, and the messengers that brought them said: Sir behold here
five slaves, A strange present.
and if thou be that rigorous God that eatest man's flesh and blood, eat these
which we bring unto thee, and we will bring thee more. And if thou be the
gentle and mee^e God, behold here Franckinsense and Feathers. And if thou be a
mortal man, take here foul, bread, and Cherries.

Cortes answered, that both he and his were mortal men even as they were. And
because that always he had used to tell them troth, wherefore did they use to
tell him lies, and likewise to flatter him, for he desired to be their
friend, aduising them not to be mad and stubborn in their opinion, for if
they so did, assuredly they should receive great hurt and damage. Likewise
(quoth he) it is apparent unto you how many of your side are slain without the
loss of one of mine, and with this answer sent them away. Notwithstanding the
answer sent, there came about. 30000. of them even to Cortes his camp to
prove their Corselettes, as they had done the day before, but they returned
with broken pates. Here is to be noted, that although the first day the whole
host of Indians came to combat with our men, and finally all they came to
fight, yet the next day they did not so, but every several captain by
himself, for to divide the better the travail and pains equally among them:
and because that one should not disturb another through ye multitude,
considering that they should fight but with a few, and in a narrow place, and
for this consideration, their battayles were more fresher and stronger, for
each captain did contend who should do most valiantly, for to get honor, and
especially in killyng one Spaniarde, for they thought that all their hurtes
should be satisfied with the death of one Spaniarde, or taking one prisoner.

Likewise is to be considered, the strangeness of their battle, for not
withstandyng their controversy all those fiftene days that they were there,
whether they fought or no. Indian policy.
The Indians sent unto the Spanyardes cakes of bread; Gynnea cocks and
Cherries. But this polycie was not to give them that meat for good will, but
only to epsy and see what hurt was done amongst them, and also to see what
fear or stomach they had to proceed: but the Spanyardes fell not into that
reckenyng, for the espies of Tlaxcallan said, that none had fought with them
but certain outlawes and knaves called Ot^mies, who lived as vagaboundes
without a Lord or other ruler: And that they were thieves, who had their
abiding behind a hill, which they poynted unto with their hand.

How Cortez cut off the hands of fifty Indian espies.
THe next day after these presents were sent unto them as Gods, which was
the sixte of September, there came to the Camp fifty Indians of Tlaxcallan,
which seemed after their sort honest men, and gave unto Cortes bread,
cherries, and Gynnea cocks, as they ordinarily used to do, enquiring how all
his Spaniardes did and what they meant to do, and whether they stood in
necessity of any thing. And after this communication they went up and down
the camp, gasing and beholding the horses, armor and artillery, and seemed
amassed to see such things. But the effect of their coming was the office of
espies.

Teuche of Zempoallan marking these things, who being of a child brought up in
wars, by reason whereof he was expert and wise, came unto Cortes, saying, sir it
seems not well, yt these Tlaxcaltecas wander up and down your camp beholding
the entrance and going out of the same, The good advise of a friend.
to behold likewise the fortitude and weakness of your power, I like it
not: It may please you to make inquiry whether they be espyes or no. Cortez
having heard his tale, gave him hearty thanks for his good advice, yea and
marvelled, that neither he himself, nor none of his Spanyardes had noted the
thing, the Indians having so many days come unto them after this sort, yea and
that only Indian of Zempoallan had considered it.

Now the original cause was not because Teuch was more wise than the
Christians, but by reason that he had seen and heard those Indians commune
with the subjects of Iztacmixilitan to feel their minds, and with craft and
subtlety to obtain their desire: whereby Cortez understood that those
fellows came not to any good purpose: he apprehended that Indian which stood
next unto him, and having him alone from his fellows, by his interpreters
examined him effectually, Confession.
who incontinent confessed that he was a spy, and that his coming thither was
to view the way how to enter their Camp for to spoil and burn their Tents:
and for so much as they had proved fortune all the hours of the day, and all
happened contrary to their desire, against their ancient fame and glory which
they had obtained by noble exploytes in wars, they now meant to prove their
success by night, hoping of better fortune: and also because their soldiers
should not fear the Horses, with the darkness of the night, nor the blows
or stripes of the bright swords, nor yet the fire and terrible noise of the
Ordinance: and that Captain Xicoteucatl was already appointed for that
enterprise, with provision of many thousand soldiers which lay in ambush in a
vale behind certain hills, right over against their Camp.

After this confession taken, Cortes full prudently commanded to take also the
several confessions of other four or five, who likewise confessed that they
were all espies, upon whose confessions they were al fifty taken prisoners, A
good correction.
and judgment given, that their one hand should be cut off, which was
forthwith executed, and then were returned to their Camp, signifying unto them
that the like justice should be executed upon as many espyes as they might
take. And also they were charged to show unto their General who had sent
them, that both day and night he would be ready for them.

When the Tlaxcaltecas saw their espyes come in this pickle, they were in a
marvelous fear, and it seemed a new world unto them: they also believed that
our men had some familiar spirits that did instruct them of their
thoughts, and with fear of cutting off hands, there went no more espies with
victuals.

An embassage that Mutezuma sent to Hernando Cortez.
WHen those espyes were gone, our men espied out of our Camp a great
multitude of men go crossing over a hill, and it seemed that they were those
that the Captain Xicotencatl had in ambush: and although it was near night,
Cortes determined to follow them, A careful Captain.
and not to abide their coming, fearing that at the first brunt they might
set fire among his cotages, as was pretended among them, which pretense having
taken effect, might have bin the destruction of all his men, either by the
fire or otherwise: wherefore he put all his men in good order, and commanded
the Horsemenne to deck the breast plates of his Horses with belles, and then
proceeded toward their enemies, who durst not abide their coming, having
intelligence of the cutting of their espyes hands, and likewise hearing the new
noise of belles: yet our men followed them till two hours within night,
through many sown fields of Centli, and slew many of the^, and then returned
with victory to the Camp.

At that season were come six noble men from Mexico, Ambassag^ from Mutezuma.
who brought two hundred serving men to wayt upon them. They brought unto
Cortes a present, which was a hundred garments of cotton, and some of
feathers, and a thousand pieces of gold.

These ambassadors on the behalf of Mutezuma, declared, that their Lord would
be friend with the Emperor, and also with him, and his company, requestyng
to know what tribute he would yearly demand, in gold, plate, pearls,
slaves, or garments, or of any other thing that was within his kingdom, and
the same tribute he would well and truly pay without delay, with such
condition, that neither he nor his company should come unto Mexico. And this
request (quoth they) is not only because you should be disturbed to come into
his country, but chiefly because the way is evil, barren, Excuses.
and full of evil rocks, which let does grieve Mutezuma, that such
valiant men as ye be should suffer in his Country, lying not in his power
to remedy it.

Cortez did thankefully receive the present and gentle offer for the Emperor
King of Castile, but (quoth he) my earnest desire is, that you depart not til
ye see the end of these wars which I have now in hand, because ye shall
carry news thereof to Mexico, what I pretend to do against these mortal
enemies of Mutezuma.

Then Cortez fell into an ague, for which cause he went not out to skyrmish as
he was wont to do, but only provided to make his Camp strong against certain
flocks of Indians, which came daily to skirmishe, for that was as ordinary,
as the meat that was wont to be brought to the^: but yet these skirmishes nor
fury of y^ India^s were not like to their fierce beginning.

Cortez now means to take a purgation for his ague: took certain pills
which he brought with him from Cuba, at such hour of the night as is used
for purgations.

It happened that the next day following, before his purge had wrought, came
three great companies of Indians to besiege his Camp. It should seem that
those Indians had some intelligence of his sickness, or else thinking with
fear that he durst not come abroad as he was wont to do.

Cortes being advertised of this news, without any more respect to his
purgation taken, A valiant Captain.
took his horse, and with his men came to the encounter, and fought with
his enemies all day till it was night, and drove them a good way off, to their
great hurt, and then returned to his Camp, and the next day following, he
purged as fresh, as though it had bin newly taken. I do not rehearse this for
a miracle, but to declare what he passed: for Hernando Cortez was a great
sufferer of travel and pains, and one of ye first that always was at any
assay or brunt of enemies, and he was not only a good man of his hands, but
also grave in counsel. And having thus purged him self, and taken rest those
days, he watched every night that fell to his lotte, as well as any other
soldier, and so continually he used to do. He was not for this the less
esteemed, but rather much the more beloved among his men.

How Cortez won a great City called Zimpanzinco.
IN an evening Cortes went up to the top of his Tower, and looking round
about him, he espied about four leagues distant in the Mountains among
rocks and proceeding out of a wodde diverse smokes, whereby he ymagined people
to be there: he opened not his mind to any man, but commanded two hundred of
his men to follow him, and some Indians his friends, and within three or
four hours of the night he took his journey toward the Mountains, being
very dark. An evil Spirit appeared.
He had not fully gone a league, when suddaynely appeared the likeness of a
great Bull which ouerthrewe them that they could not stir. The first
Horseman being fallen, they aduysed Cortez thereof, who answered, that he
should return with his Horse to the Camp: and incontinente fell another,
Cortez commanded him the like: and when three or four were fallen, his
company retired, saying, it was an evil token, desiring him to return and
abide the morning, that they might see whether they went. He answered,
saying, ye ought to give no credit to witchcraftes or fantasies, for God, A
courag^ous Cap^ayne.
whose cause we take in hand, is above all nature: wherefore I will not leave
my pretended journey, for I do ymagine that of this nyghtes travel shall come
great ease and pleasure, saying, that the Devil has in this form of a Bull
appeared, to disturb us. He had no sooner ended his talk, when his Horse
fell likewise: then counsel was taken what was best to be done.

It was determined that the Horses which were fallen, should be returned to the
Camp, and that of the residue, each Horseman should lead his Horse by the
bridle, and so proceed on their way, and shortly after the Horses were well
again, but they never knew of what motion they had fallen: with the
darkness of the night they lost their way to the Mountains, and chanced
into a cragged rockie way, that they thought never to have come out thereof.

And after a while that they had gone this evil way, with their hear
standing with very fear, they espied a little light, and took the way
thither, where they found a little house, wherein were two Women, and those
Women, with other two women that afterward they met, conducted them to the
Wilderness, where they had espied the smoke, and before day they set upon
certain Villages, and slew many, yet they burned not those Villages, because
they should not be perceived through the light thereof. They received there
advise, that near at hand were great populations, and soon after he came to
Zimpanzinco, a town of twenty thousand houses, as after did appear by the
visitation of Cortes. These inhabitants being unadvised of this suddayne
hap, were taken in their beds, and came out all naked through the streets
to know what the great mourning and lamentation meante: at the first entrance
many were slain, A famous Cortez.
but because they made no resistance, Cortez commanded to cease from killyng,
nor yet to take any of their goods, or women.

The fear of these poor inhabitants was so great, that they fled without
respect of the father to the child, or husband to the Wife; or yet either of
house or goods.

Cortes commanded signs of peace to be made unto them, and with that they
stayed, and before the Sun rising, the Town was pacifyed.

Cortez went up into a Tower to descry the Country, and there espied a most
great population: he then demanded what it was: answer was made that it was
called Tlaxcallan, and the Towns thereunto apperteynyng. Then he called his
Spanyardes, and said unto them: behold, what would it have prevailed us to
kill these poor souls, having yonder so many enemies? and without doing
any more hurt in that Town, he went to a fair Fountain there at hand,
and thither came the Rulers of that Town, and other four hundred men
without weapon, and brought with them much victual, most humbly they
besought Cortes to do them no more hurt, gyuing him likewise great thanks,
that he had so fauourablye used them, offering both to serve and obey him,
and from that day forward they would not only keep his friendship, but
also travel with the Lords of Tlaxcallan and others, that they should do
the same. Cortez replied, that sure he was, how they had fought against him
before that time, although that now they brought him meat, yet
notwithstanding he pardoned them, and also received them into his service and
friendship, to the use of the Emperor.

With this communication he departed from them, and returned to the Camp very
joyful with so good success, having such a dangerous beginning, with the
suddayne fall of their Horses, wherein the Proverb is fulfilled, which
says, Speak not evil of the day, till it be at an end.

They had also a great hope, that those new friends would be a mean, to
cause the Tlaxcaltecas to leave from War, and to become their friends.

From that day forward he commanded that none of his Camp should do any
hurt to any Indian, and certifyed his men that the same day his wars were
at an end with that province.

The desire that some of the Spanyardes had to leave the wars.
WHen Cortez was returned so joyful to his Camp, he found some of his men
discouraged with the suddayne mishappe of the Horses, fearing that likewise
some misfortune had happened to Cortes, but when they saw him come well and
with victory, their joy was great, although true it is that many of his men
were not well pleased, but desired much to leave the wars, and to return to
the coast, as they had often requested, but now chiefly seeing such a great
Country, and full of people, who would not permit their abiding there, and
they being so few in number in the midst among them without hope of
succoure, certaynely things to be feared. With this murmuration they thought it
good to talk with Cortes, Murmuration.
and also to require him to proceed no further, but return back again to
Vera Crux, from whence by little and little they might have intelligence with
the Indians, and therevppon proceed according to time, and that he might
provide more Horses and men, which was the chiefest provision of the war.

And although some secretly informed Cortes of thy^ matter, yet he gave no
ear to their talk, but an a night as he came out of his Tower to ouerlooke
the watch, he heard a loud talk out of one of the Cotages, and began to
hearken what their communication was: and the matter was, that certain
soldiers said these words: If our Captain be mad, and go where he may be
slain, let him go alone, what need we to follow him. Cortez hearing this
talk, called two of his friends for witness, willing them to harken his
soldiers talk, for he that durst speak such words would be ready to do
it. Also he heard others say, what shall our journey be as Pedro Carbonerotes
was? who went into Barbaria to take Mores, and he and all his were there
slain, wherefore said they let us not follow him but turn in time. It
grieved Cortez much to hear this talk, who would feign have corrected them
but it was not then time, wherefore he determined to lead them with
sufferaunce, and spoke unto them as follows.

The Oration made by Cortez to his Soldiers.
Masters and loving friends, I did choose you for my fellows, and ye chose
me for your captain, and all was for the service of God, and the augmenting of
his holy faith, and also the service of our sovereign Lord the King now
Emperor: and next for our own commodity, I (as ye have seen) have not
failed nor yet displeased ye, nor ye likewise have otherwise done to me unto
this day. But now I do feel faintness in some, yea and an evil will to go
forward in the wars which we have in hand: but (God be praised) it is now
finished, at the least the end is understood, what it may be, and also the
wealth that may follow, as partly you have seen, but much without comparison
of that you have not seen, which is a thing that does exceed the greatness
of our words or thoughts.

Fear not my loving fellows to go and abide with me, God forbid that I
should think, yea or that any should report, that fear vexes my company,
or else disobedience to their Captain, which is a perpetual infamy, if we
should leave this Land, this War, this way already made, and return as
some do desire, shall we then live at rest, loytring as well and lost
folk: God forbid, that ever our nation should have such a name, having
wars of honor. And whether (I pray) shall the Ox go where he shall not
help to ploughe the ground? do ye think peradventure that ye shall find
less people, worse armed, and not far from the sea? I do assure you, that
in so thynkyng ye seek after five feet for a Catte, yea and you shall
travel no way, but that you shall meet some evil passage (as the Proverb
says) yea and far worser than this that we have in hand. For why (God be
thanked) since we came into this Country, we never wanted meat, friends,
neither money nor honor. For now ye see that ye are esteemed more than
men, yea as persons immortal, and Gods, if it might be spoken, for these
Indians being so many and without number, and so armed as ye your selves
affirm, yet can they not kill one of us: and as touching their weapons, you
see that they are not poisoned, as the Indians of Cart^gena, Veragna, and the
Caribez do use, which have killed many of our nation therewith, dying as
mad men ragyng.

And if there were no other cause than this only, you should not seek others
with whom to war: I do confess that the Sea is somewhat far from us, and
never Spaniarde traveled so far into the main land of India, as we have
done: for why now we leave the Sea a hundredth and fifty miles behind us, nor
yet ever any has come so near Mexico where Mutezuma does reside, from whom
such messages and Treasure we have received. It is now but three score miles
thither, and the worste is paste, as you do see, if we come thither, as I
trust in Jesus we shall, then shall we not only get and win for the
Emperor our natural Lord a rich Land, great Kingdoms, infinite
Vassalles, but likewise for our selves much riches, as Gold, Silver,
Precious stones, Pearls, and other commodity, and besides this, the greatest
honor that ever any nation did obtain. For look how great a King this is,
how large his country is, and what great multitude of people he has, so
much the more is our glory.

Besides all this, we are bound as Christians to exalte and enlarge our
Catholyke faith, as we have begone, abo^^^ng Idolatry and blasphemy against
our Savior Christ, taking away the blouddy Sacrifice and eating of man's
flesh, so horrible and against nature, and many other grievous sins so
much here used, for the foulness whereof I name them not.

And therefore (I say) fear you nor yet doubt you the victory, considering
that the worste is paste. Of late we overcame the Indians of Tabasco, and also
an hundredth and fifty thousand this other day of the Tlaxcaltecas, who have
the only name of breakers of Lions jaws: so with Gods help you shall be
Conquerers of the rest, if ye faint not and follow me.

All his company was pleased and content with this comfortable exhortation,
and those that were faint hearted recovered strength. And his valiant Soldiers
recovered double courage, and those who hated him began to honor him: and in
conclusion he departed from thence exceeding well-beloved of all his company. But
all his former talk was very needful as time then required: for why? some of
his (as you have heard) were desirous to return: likewise upon dissension,
rebellion might have grown, and he forced to return to the sea coaste, where
all his toil and travel taken had been lost.

How Xicotencatl came for Ambassador to Cortez his Camp.
Cortez had not so soon made an end of his talk, when Xicotencatl came
entryng into the camp, who was chief and general captain in Tlaxcallan, and
of all the wars: he brought in his company fifty persons of authority to
keep him company. They approached near where Cortes was, and saluted each
other according to the use of their country. Their salutations ended and the
parties setten down, Xicotencatl began the talk, saying: Sir I am come on
mine own behalf and also of my fellow Captain, and Lieuetenant Maxixca, and
in the name of many other noble personages, and finally in the name of the
whole state and common weal of Tlaxcallan, to beseech and pray you to admit
us into your friendship, and to yield our selves and country unto your
King, crauyng also at your hand pardon for our attempt in taking arms against
you, we not knowing what you were, nor what you sought for in our country.
And where we presumed to resists and defend your entrance, we did it as
against straungrrs whom we knew not, and such men as we had never
heretofore seen: and fearyng also that you had been friends to Mutezuma, who
is and always has been our mortal enemy. And these things we suspected,
seeing Mutezuma his servant in your company, or else we imagined that you were
comen to usurp our liberty, the which of time without memory we have
possessed, as our forefathers did with the shedyng of their blood. And of our
own natural provision we want cotton woolle to clothe us, wherefore in time
paste we went as naked as we were borne, but some of us used other clothe to
cover our nakedness, made of the leaves of the tree called Metl: and Salt
also we wanted, of which two things so necessary to humayne life, Mutezuma
had great store, and other our enemies, with whom we are round about
environed. And likewise where we have no gold. stones of value, or any rich
thing to barter with them, of very pure necessity many times we are forced to
sell our own bodies to buy these wantes. And this extremity (said he) we
needed not, if that we would be subjects and vassalles to Mutezuma. But yet
had we rather all in general to end our lives, than we would put our
selves in such subjection, for we think our selves as valiant men in
courage as our forefathers were, who always have resisted against him and his
grandfather, who was as mighty as now is he: we would also have withstoode
you and your force, but we could not, although we proved all our possibility
by night and day, and found your strength invincible, and we no luck against
you. Therefore sithence our fate is such, we had rather be subject unto you
than unto any others. For we have known and heard by the Zeampoallanezes,
that you do no evil, nor came not to vex any, but were most valliaunt and
happy, as they had seen in the wars, being in your company. For which
consideration, we trust that our liberty shall not be diminished, but rather
our own persons, wives, and family better preserved, and our houses and
husbandry not destroyed. And in su^me of all his talk, the tears trickling
down his cheeks, he besought Cortes to wey that Tlaxcallan did never at any
time reknowledge any superior King or Lord, nor at any time had commen any
person among them to command, but only he, whom they did voluntarily elect
and chose as their superior and ruler.

It can not be told, how much Cortes rejoiced with this Embassage, and to
see such a mighty Captain come unto his camp to submit himself: and also
it was a matter of great wayght to have that City in subjection, for the
enterprice which he had in hand, whereby he fully made an account that the
wars were at an end, to the great co^tentation of him and his company, and
with great fame and reputation among the Indians.

Cortes with a merry and loving countenance answered, laying to their charge
the hurt and damage which he had received in their country, because they
refused at the first to harken unto him, and quietly to suffer him to enter
into their country, even as he had required and desired by his Messengers of
Zeampoallan sent unto them from Zaclotan. Yet all this notwtstandyng, he did
both pardon the kyllyng of his two horses, the assaultyng of him in the high
way, and the great lies which they had most craftily used with him, (for
where as they themselves fought against him, yet they laid the fault to
others) likewise their pretense to murder him in the ambush prepared for him,
(enticing him to come to their City,) without making first defiance according
to the law of arms.

These causes notwithstanding, he did lovingly receive their offer made in
subjection to the Emperor, and in this sort departed, saying, that shortly
he would be with him in Tlaxcallan, and presently he could not go with him
for the dispatche of the Ambassadors of Mutezuma.

The receiving and entertaynement of Cortez in Tlaxcallan.
IT grieved much the Ambassadors of Mutezuma, to see Xicotencates in the
Spanishe Camp, and the offer made unto Cortes in the behalf of his King, of
their persons, City and goods, aduising Cortes to give no credit unto them,
for all their saying (quoth they) is treason and lies, and to the intent to
lock you up in their City.

Cortes answered, that although their advise were true, yet he did determine to
go thither, for that he feared them less in the town then in the field. They
hearing this answer and determmation, besought him to give unto one of them
licen^e to return unto Mexico, to advertise Mutezuma of all that was past,
with an answer to their Embassage, promising within six days to have news
from Mexico, and till then prayed him not to depart with his Camp.

Cortes granted their request, and abode there the time appointed, expectyng
the answer. In this mean season came many of Tlaxcallan in the camp, some
brought Ginnea cocks, other brought bread and Cherries, and gave it for
nothing in comparison, with merry countenance, desiryng them to go home with
them unto their houses.

The sixth day the Mexican came, according to promise, A rich present.
and brought unto Cortes ten Iewelles of Gold, both rich and well wrought,
and a fiftene thousand garments of Cotton exceeding gallant, and most
earnestly besought him on the behalf of Mutezuma, that he should not danger
himself in trustyng to the words of the Tlaxcaltecas, who were so poor yt
with necessity they would rob him of the things which his master had sent
him, yea and likewise murder him, knowing of the friendship between his
master and him: likewise all the chiefest Lords of Tlaxcallan, came to
entreat him to go with them to Tlaxcallan where he should be cherished,
lodged, and well provided. For it was a great dishonor and shame for them to
permit such personages to abide in such vile cotages as they were in. And
if (quoth they) you trust us not, that then we are ready to give you for your
security what soever gages you shall demand: notwithstanding they did both
swear and faithfully promise, that they might safely go with them, saying
also that the Oath and faith of their common weal should never be broken for
all the goods in the world.

Whereupon Cortez seeing the good will of so many Gentlemen his new friends,
and likewise the Indians of Zeampoallan, of whom he had good credit, did so
importune him and assure him of his going, he commanded his fardage to be
laden and also his ordinance, and departed toward Tlaxcallan, which was six
leagues from that place, with as good order as it had been to a battle: And
at the Tower where he had pitched his camp, he left certain Crosses for a
memory, with a great heap of stones, Entrance into Tlaxcallan.
and entered into Tlaxcallan the eightenth of September. There came out such a
multitude of people to see him and to meet him in the way, that it was a
wonder to see.

He was lodged in the greatest temple, which had many great and fair lodgyngs,
sufficient for him and all his company, except the Indians his friends which
were lodged in other Temples. He set certain limittes, out of the which he
commanded straightely that none of his company should pass, upon pain of
death, and also commanded that they should take nothing, but what should be
given them. His commandment was well observed, for none presumed to go a
stoanes cast without his license. The Indian Gentlemen showed great pleasure
and courtesy to the strangers, and provided the^ of all things necessary, and
many of them gave their daughters unto them, in token of true friendship,
and likewise to have fruit of their bodies, to be brought up for the wars,
being such valiant men.

This Country lyked well our men, and the great love of the people. They
abode there at their pleasure twenty days, in which time they did procure to
know particularly the estate of their common weal and secrets, and also were
sufficiently instructed of the estate of Mutezuma.

The description of Tlaxcallan.
TLaxcallan is properly in the Indian tongue as much to say, as bread well baked,
for there is more grain called Centli gathered, than is in all ye province
round about.

In times past the City was called Texcallan, that is to say, a valley betwixt
two hills. It is a great City, and planted by a river side, which springs
out of Atlancatepec, and watreth the most part of that province, and from
thence issues out into the South sea, by Zacatullan. This City has four
goodly streets, which are called Tepeticpac, Ocotelulco, Tizatlan,
Quiahuiztlan. The first street stands on high upon a hill, far from the
river, which may be about half a league, and because it stands on a hill,
it is called Tepeticpac, that is to say, a hill, and was the first population
which was founded there on high, because of the wars.

An other street was situate on the hill side toward the River, because at
the building thereof, there were many pyne trees: they named it Ocotelulco,
which is to say, a pine apple plot. This street was beautiful, and first
inhabited of all the City, and there was the chiefest Market place, where all
the buying and selling was used, and that place they called Tianquiztli: in
that street was the dwelling house of Maxixca. Along the River side in the
plain stands another street called Tizatlan, because there is much lyme
and chalk. In this street dwelled Xicotencatl, Captain general of the
common weal. There is another street named by reason of the brackish water,
Quiahuiztlan, but since the Spanyardes came thither, all those buildings are
almost altered, after a better fashion, and built with stone. In the plain by
the river side, stands the Town house, and other offices, as in the City of
Venice. This Tlaxcallan was governed by noble and rich men: they use not that
one alone should rule, but rather fly from that order, as from tyranny.

In their wars (as I have said before) they have four Captains, which
governs ^ache one street, of the which four, they do elect a Captain
general. Also there are other Gentlemen that are vndercaptaynes, but a small
number. In the wars they use their standerde to be carried behind the army,
but when the battle is to be fought, they place the standerde where all the
host may see it, and he that comes not incontinent to his ancient, pays a
penalty. Their standerd has two crossebowe arrows set thereon, which they
esteem as the relikes of their auncetors. This standerd two old soldiers and
valiant men, being of the chiefest Captains, have the charge to carry, in
the which standerde an abusion of southsaying, either of loss or victory is
noted. In this order they shote one of these arrows against the first enemies
that they meet, and if with that arrow they do either kill or hurt, it is a
token that they shall have the victory, and if it neither kill nor hurt, then
they assuredly believe that they shall lose the field.

This province or Lordship of Tlaxcallan, has. 28. Villages and towns,
wherein is contained 150000. householdes. They are men well made, and good
warriors, the like are not among the Indians. They are very poor, and have no
other riches, but only the grain or corn called Centli, and with the gain
and profit thereof, they do both cloth themselves, and pay their tributes,
and provide all other necessaries. They have many market places, but the
greatest and most used daily, stands in the street of Ocotelulco, which is
so famous, A strange contractation.
that 30000. persons come thither in one day to buy and sell, which is to say,
changing one thing for another, for they know not what money means.

They sell such things in that market, as here we use, and al thing unto them
needeful to eat, and cloth for themselves, and necessaries for building.

They have all kind of good policy in the City: there are Goldsmithes,
fetherdressers, Barbors, hotehouses, and potters, who make as good earthen
vessel, as is made in Spain. The earth is fat and fruitful for corn,
fruit, and pasture, for among the pine trees grows so much grass, that our
men feed their cattle there, which in Spain they can not do.

Within two leagues of that City stands a round hill of six miles of
height, and five and forty miles in compass, and is now called Saint
Bartholmewes hill, where the snow freeseth. In times past they called that hill
Matealcucie, who was their God for water. They had also a God for wine, who was
named Ometochtli, for the great drunkenness which they used. Their chiefest
God was called Camaxtlo, and by another name Mixcouatl, whose Temple stood in
the street of Oc^telulco, in the which temple there was sacrifised some
years above eyghte hundred persons. In Tlaxcallan they spoke three languages,
that is to say, Nahualh, which is the courtly speech, and chiefest in all the
land of Mexico: an other is called Otomir, which is most commonly used in the
Villages: There is one only street that spoke Pinomer, which is the grosest
speech. There was also in that City a common Iayle, where fellons lie in
yrons, and all things which they held for sin, was there corrected.

It chanced at that time a Townesman to steal from a Spanyard a little gold,
Correction.
whereof Cortes complained to Maxixca, who incontinent made such inquiry, yt
the offender was found in Chololla, which is another City five leagues from
thence: they brought the prisoner with the gold, and delivered him to Cortez,
to do with him his pleasure: Cortes would not accept him, but gave him
thanks for his diligence: then was he carried with a Crier before him,
manifestyng his offense, and in the Market place upon a skaffolde they brake
his joints with a cudgel: our men marvelled to see such strange Justice.

The aunsvvere of the Tlaxcaltecas touching the leaving of their Idolles.
WHen Cortez saw that these people executed Justice, and lived in Religion
after their manner, although abominable and devilish: and always when he
desired them to leave off from their Idolatry and that cruel vanity, in
killing and eating men sacrifised, considering that none among them how holly
soever he were, would willingly be slain and eaten, A godly persvvasio^.
required them to believe in the most true God of the Chrystians, who was the
maker of Heaven and earth, the giver of rain, and creator of all things that
the earth produces only for the use and profit of mortal man.

Some of them answered, that they would gladly do it, only to pleasure him,
but they feared that the commons would arise and stone them. Others said, that
it was an hard matter to vnbeleeue that which their forefathers had so long
believed, and that it should be a cause to condemn their forefathers and
themselves.

Others said, that it might be in time they would convert, seeing the order
of the Christian Religion, and understanding the reasons and causes to turn
Christians, and likewise perceiving thoroughly the manner and life of the
Christians, with their laws and customs: and as for warlike feats, they were
satisfied, and had seen such trial, that they held them for men invincible
in that point, and that their God did help them.

Cortes promised them, that shortly he would bring them such men, as should
instruct and teach them, and then they should see which way was best, with the
great joy and fruit that they should feel. They accepting that council
which he like a friend had given them, and for as much as presently it could
not be brought to pass by reason of his journey to Mexico, he desired them,
that the Temple wherein he was lodged, should be made a church for him and his
company, and if it pleased them, they might also come to see and hear their
divine service.

The Indians granted to his request, and daily came among them all the time of
their abode there, and some came and dwelte with the Spanyardes, but the
chiefest friend was Captain Maxixca, who never went from Cortez.

The discord betvveene the Mexicans and Tlaxcaltecas.
COrtez being thoroughly satisfied of their hearty good wylles, he demanded of
them the estate and riches of Mutezuma. They exalted him greatly, as men that
had proved his force. And as they affyrmed, it was near a hundred years that
they mainteyned war with him and his father Axaiaca, and others his Uncles
and Grandfathers. And said also, that the gold and treasure of Mutezuma, was
without number, and his power and dominion over all the land, and his people
innumerable: for (quoth they) he joins sometime two hundredth thousand men,
yea and three hundred thousand for one battle. And if it pleased him, he
would make as many men double, and thereof they were good witness, because
they had many times sought with the^.

Maxixca desired that Cortes should not adventure himself into the power of
the men of Culhua, whereat some of the Spanyardes feared and suspected evil of
the matter.

Cortes told him, that notwithstanding all those things which they had told
him, he was fully minded to go to Mexico, to visit Mutezuma, wishing him to
advise him what he might do, or bring to pa^se for them with Mutezuma, for he
would willingly do it, for the courtesy showed unto him, and that he believed
Mutezuma would grant him any lawful request.

Then they besought him to procure for them a license to have cotton wool and
salt out of his Country, for (said they) in time of the wars we stood in
great need thereof, and that they had none but such as they boughte by
stealthe of the Comercans very dear, in change of gold: for Mutezuma had
made a straight law, whereby all such as carried any of those commodities to
them should be slain. Then Cortez enquired the cause of their disorder and
evil neyborhood. They answered, that their griefs were old, and cause of
liberty: but as the Ambassadors did affirm, and Mut^zuma afterward declare,
it was not so, but for other matter far differente. So that each party
alleging their causes, their reasons were, that the young men of Mexico and
Culhua did exercise and bring them up in warlike feats near unto them, and
under their noses, to their great annoyance, whereas they moughte have gone to
Panuco and Teocantepec, his frontiers a far off.

Likewise their pretense was, to have war with them being their neyghbors,
only to have of them to sacrifice to their Gods: so that when they would make
any solemn feast, then would they send to Tlaxcallan for men to sacrifice,
with such a great army, that they might take as many as they needed for that
year: for it is most certain if Mutezuma would, in one day he moughte have
brought them in subjection, and slain them all, joining his whole power in
effect^: but his purpose was, to keep them for a pray to hunt withal, for men
to be sacrificed to his Gods, and to eat, so that he would never send but
a small army against them: whereby it did chance that sometimes those of
Tlaxcallan did overcome.

Cortez received great pleasure to hear these discordes betwixt his new
friends and Mutezuma, which was a thing fit for his purpose, for by that
means he hoped to bring them all under subjection, and therefore he used the
one and the other secretly, to build his pretense upon a good foundation.

At all this communication there stood by certain Indians of Vexozinc^,
which had bin against our men in the late wars, the which Town is a City
as Tlaxcallan, and joined with them in league of friendship against Mutezuma,
who oppressed them in like effect of slaughter for their Temples of Mexico, and
they also yielded themselves to Cortes for vassals to the Emperor.

The solemn receiving of the Spanyardes into Chololla.
THe Ambassedors of Cortes seeing the determination of Cortes to proceed on
his journey toward Mexico, they besoughte him to go by Chololla, which
stood five leagues from thence, certifying that Chololla was a City in their
friendship, and that there he might at his pleasure abide the resolution of
their Lord Mutezuma, whether it were his pleasure that he should enter into
Mexico or no. This request was only to have him from thence, for truly it
greeue^ much Mutezuma of their new friendship and league, fearyng that
thereof would some great displeasure happen toward him, and therefore
procured all that was possible to have him from thence, sending him always
presents to allure him to come from thence the sooner. But when the
Tlaxcaltecas saw that he would go to Chololla, it grieved them much, saying
unto Cortes, that Mutezuma was a liar and fraudelent person, and that Chololla
was a city his friend but not constant, and it might happen that they would
displease him, having him within their City, wishyng him to look well to
himself: A gentle offer.
And if needs he would go^ thither, yet they would provide, 20000. men to
keep him company.

The women that were given to the Spaniardes at their first entrance, had
understanding of a snare that was laid to murder them at their coming to
Chololla, by means of one of the four Captains, who had a sister which
discovered the thing to Pedr^ de Aluarado who kept her. Correction of treason.
Cortes incontinent called that Captain out of his house, and caused him to be
choked, and so was the matter kept close that his death was never known,
whereby the snare was undone without any rumor. It was a wonder that all
Tlaxcallan had not made an uproar seeing one of their greatest Captains dead.
There was inquiry made of that snare, and the truth being known, it was
approved that Mutezuma had prepared. 30000. Soldiers who where in camp for
that purpose within two leagues of the City, and that the streates in
Chololla were stopped up with timber and rayles, and the tops of their houses
provided with stones, which houses are made with plain rooffes or sotties,
and the high way stopped up, and other false bywayes made with deep holes
pitched full of stakes very sharp, to spoil and lame both horse and man: these
engines were finely covered with sand, and could not be espied, although the
skoute had gone before on foot to discover. The matter also was very
suspicious, for these Citizens of Chololla had not at any time come to visit
him, or sent any present unto him as others had done.

Whereupon Cortez consulted with the Tlaxcaltecas to send certain messengers
to Chololla, to request their Captains and rulers to come unto him, who did
their message accordingly, and the Cholollans would not come, but yet they
sent three or four persons to excuse them, saying yt they were not well at
ease, praying him to signify unto them what he would have: the Tlaxcaltecas
informed Cortes that those messengers were men of small credit and of low
degree, wishyng him not to depart till their Captain came. In this forte
Cortes returned their messengers back again, with commandment written,
declaring that if they came not within three days, he would proclayme them
rebels and his utter enemies, and as such would he chasten them with all
rigor.

When this commandment came unto them, the next day followyng came many
Lords and Captains to make their excuse, saying, that the Tlaxcaltecas were
their enemies, and that through them they could not live in safety: likewise
they knew of the evil report which they had made against them: wherefore
they besought him to give no credit unto them, for why, they were both false
and cruel men: beseechyng him also to go with them to their City, and then
he should see that all was but a mockery that had been told him, and they his
good and faithful friends: and last of all they offered to serve him as
tributary subjects.

Cortes commanded that all this talk should be set down in writing before
the Notary and his interpreters, and so took his leave of the Citizens of
Tlaxcallan. Maxixca wept at his departure, but there went in his pany a
hundredth thousand men of war: there were among them many Marchantes that
went to barter for Salt and Mantels.

Cortes commanded that those hundredth thousand men should go always by
themselves: that day he reached not to Chololla, but abode by a broke side, and
thither came many of the city, to desire him that the Tlaxcal^ecas should not
do any hurt in their country: whereupon Cortes commanded them to return
back again all saving. 5000. or there about, much against their wills. But
they still required him to take good heed of those evil folk, who be not
(quoth they) men of war, but ^edlers, and men of double heart: and they of
their parts would be very loath to leave him in any peril or danger, having
given themselves to be his true and faithful friends.

The next day in the morning the Spaniardes came to Chololla, and there came
out near, 10000, Indians to receive him with their Captains in good order:
many of them presented unto him bread, foul, and roses, and every Captain as
he approached welcomed Cortes, and then stood aside that the rest in order
might come unto him. And when he came entering into the City, all the other
Citizens received him, marueling to see such men and horses.

After all this came out all the religious men, as Priests, and Ministers to
the idols (who were many and strange to behold,) and all were clothed in
white like unto surplices, and hemmed with Cotton threede: some brought
instruments of music like unto Cornettes, other brought instruments made of
bones, other an instrument like a ketel covered with skin, some brought chafing
dishes of coals with perfumes, others brought idols covered, and finally they
al came singing in their language, which was a terrible noise, and drew near
Cortes and his company, sensing them with sweet smelles in their sensers.

With this pomp and solemnity (which truly was great) they brought him into
the City, and lodged him in a house where was room enough for him and his,
and gave unto each of them a Gynnea cock, and his Indians of Tlaxcallan,
Zempoallan and Iztacmixtlitan, were provided by themselves.

The conspiracy of the Cholollans to kill Cortes and his men.
ALL that night followyng Cortes was vigilant with all his company, for both in
the way and in the town they had found some of the things whereof they had been
advised before in Tlaxcallan, and although their first present was a Gynnea
cock to each man's allowance, other three days followyng they gave them
nothing almost to eat, and very seldom the Captains came to visit them,
whereof Cortes had great suspicion.

And in this mean while the Ambassadors of Mutezuma entreated him to leave of
his journey to Mexico, alleging that their great King would die in beholding
their beardes and gesture: other times they said that there was no passage,
other times they would say that they wanted wherewith to sustain them. And
seeing them fully and in every respect answered to all these points, they
caused the Towns men to inform them, that where Mutezuma his abiding was,
were monstrous Lysardes, Tigers, Lions, and many other flerce heastes, the
which when Mutezuma commanded to be losed, were sufficient to pluck in
pieces, and to destroy those few strangers: and seeing that all these
policies auayled not, they consulted with the Captains and chief Citizens to
murder the Christians. And because they should so bring it to pass, the
Ambassadors promised the Citizens great rewards on the behalf of Mutezuma,
and presented to their general a drum of Gold, and promised to bring the
thirty thousand soldiers which lay about two leagues from thence: the
Cholollans promised to deliver them bound hand and foot. But yet they would
not consent that those Soldiers of Culhua should come into their City,
fearyng that they (under color of friendship) would remain with the town,
for why, the Mexicans had used the like sleyght. And in this forte they with
one bolte meante to kill two birds at a shote, for they thought to take the
Spaniardes sleepyng, and then to remain with the Town of Chololla. Many
pe^^ls.
Also it was determined, that if all these pretenses could not be brought to
pass, that then they should be conducted a contrary way to Mexico upon the
left hand, in the which were many dangerous places, because the way was all
sandy, with many sluices, diches, and holes of three fadome deep, meaning there
to meet them and to carry them bound to Mutezuma: this matter being fully
agreed, they began to take away their householde stuff, and to carry it with
their wives and children up into the mountains.

And our men being also ready to depart from thence for their small cheer
with evil countenance, Help from God.
it happened, an Indian woman (being wife to one of the principalest
Citizens,) having some affection to the bearded men, said unto Marina, that
she should abide there with her, for that she loved her well, and that it
would grieve her that she should be slain with her master. Marina
dissimulyng the matter, procured to know what they were that had conspired the
thing, and having knowledge thereof, she ran to seek Aguillar her fellow
interpreter, and both together informed Cortes of the whole matter.

Cortes hearing this news, slepte not, but incontinent examined two of the
Citizens, who confessed the thing even as it passed, and as the Gentlewoman had
declared: where upon Cortes stayed his journey two days, to mollify the
matter and to disapoynt them of that evil pretended purpose, and also to
correct their offenses, he commanded their rulers to be called, saying that
he had to talk with them, and when they were comen be required them neither to
use lies nor deceytes with him, but rather like men to defy him to the
field and battle, for (quoth he) honest men use rather to fight than to
lie. They all answered that they were his friends and seruitours, and no
liars, and that it might please him to show them when he would depart, for
they would go armed to keep him company. He answered that he would depart
the next day followyng, and that he required but only some of their slaves to
carry his fardage, because his own Tamemez or Carriars were weried: likewise
he required some provision of victual.

At this last request they smyled, saying among themselves, to what purpose
will these men have victuals, for shortly they themselves shall be boiled and
eaten with the sause called Axi, yea, and if Mutezuma had not pretended their
bodies for his own dishe, they had been eaten here before this time.

The punishment that Cortez executed for conspiracy.
THe next day in the morning the Chol^llans thinkyng that they had their
determinate purpose in good readiness, they came and brought many to carry
their fardage, and other some to carry the Spaniardes upon their backs,
hopyng to apprehe^d them in the same order. There came also many armed men of
the most valiantest, to kill him that should disorder himself. Likewise that
day their Priests sacrificed ten children of three yea^es of age to their God
Quezalcouail, five of these children were men, and the other five women,
which was their custom when they began their wars: the Captains placed
themselves at the four doors of Cortes his house with some armed men. Cortes
carely in the morning had secretly in a readiness the Indians of Zempoal^an
and Tlaxcallan, Ovvorthy Cortes.
and other friends: he commanded his horsemen to take their horses, giving
them this watch word, that when they heard the noise of the shot of a
handgun, that then they should play the me^, for it imported all their lives.
And he seeing the towns men approach near his lodging, commanded ye captains
and chiefest of them to come unto him, saying, yt he would take his leave of
them: there came many, but be would not suffer above thirty persons to come
in, who were the principallest, and declared unto the^, that always he had
dealte truly with them, and they with him nothing but treason and lies.
Likewise they had under color requested that his friends the Tlaxcaltecas
should not come unto their town, and that he fulfilled there in their desire,
and also commanded his own men in no wise to be hurtful unto the^, yea and
although they had not provided him of victuals as reason did require, yet he
would not permit any of his men to take the value of one hen from them, so
that in recompense of all his gentle dealings and good will, they had most
wickedly procured the death of him and all his company. And because they
could not perform it in their own town, they had prepared the slaughter in
the high way, at those dangerous places which they had determined to lead
them unto, pretending also the help of thirty thousand men, Soldiers of
Mutezuma, which army stood not fully two leagues from thence. And for this
horrible and detestable wickedness ye shall all die, and in memory of
traitors I will destroy this city, and turn the fundations vpwardes, so that
there shall remain no remembrance of you.

Their offense being manifest, could not be denied, and lookyng one upon an
other, their colors waxed pale and wanne, saying, this man is like unto our
Gods, who knows all things, therefore let us not deny the truth, and
openly before the Ambassadors of Mutezuma confess their error and evil
fact.

Then said Cortes to the Ambassadors, you do see that we should have been
slain by the Cholollans, and through the procurement of Mutezuma, but yet I
believe it not, co^sideryng that he is my friend and a mighty Prince, saying
also that Noble men used neither treason nor lies, wherefore fear not you, but
these dissemblyng Traitors shall be punished, for you are persons inviolable
and messengers of a Prince, whom he meante to serve and not offend, because
he had an assured opinion in Mutezuma, to be a virtuous Prince, and one that
would not commit villainy.

All these words he spoke, because he would not fall out with Mutezuma,
until he saw himself within the City of Mexico.

Incontinent he commanded some of those Captains to be slain, and kept the
residue bound. Then he shot off his handgun, which was the watch unto his
army, who forthwith set upon the Townsmen, and within two hours slew
six thousand persons and more.

Cortes commanded that they should kill neither woman nor child: they
fought welneere five hours: they set fire on all the houses and Towers that
made resistance, and drove all the inhabitants out of the Town. The dead
carcases lay so thick, that of force they must tread upon them.

There were twenty Gentlemen, and many Priests, who ascended up to the high
tower of the temple, which has a hundred and twenty steps, from whence
with arrows and stones they did much hurt, and would not yield, whereupon
our men set fire to the Tower, and burned them all. Then they exclaymed on
their Gods, who would neither help them nor their City and holy sanctuary.

The City being sacked, our men took the spoil of gold, plate, and
feathers, and the Indians their friends took clothes and salt, which was the
treasure that they desired.

Cortez commanded to cease the spoil. The other Captains that lay bound,
hearing of such a great destruction and punishment, most pitifully besought
Cortez to loase some of them, for to see what was become of their Gods and
common people. Likewise they humbly besought him to pardon them, who had not so
much fault^ as Mutezuma, who persuaded and entised them to that pretended
treason.

Upon their lamentable request, he loased two of them, and the next day
following the City was as full of people again, that there seemed not one to
be wanting.

At the suit of the Tlaxcaltecas who were put for mediators, Cortes pardoned
them all, and set his prisoners at liberty, assuring them that the like
correction he would do upon al them that should dissemble or show an evil
countenance, or make lies, or finally use any kind of treason toward him:
whereupon they all abode in great fear. He made the knot of friendship
between them and the Tlaxcaltecas, which in time past had bin betwixt them,
for Mutezuma and his auncetors made them enemies, with fair promises, words
and also fear.

The Citizens having their general flayne, chose an other with license of
Cortes.

The Sanctuary or holy place among the Indians was Chololla.
CHololla is a city as Tlaxcallan, and has but one person who is governor
and general Captain, chosen by the consent of all the Citizens. It is a City
of twenty thousand householdes within the walls, and in the suburbs as
much more. It shows outwardes very beautiful, and full of towers, for
there are as many temples as days in ye year, and every temple has his
tower. Our men counted four hundred towers. The men and women are of good
disposition well favored, and very witty.

The women are Goldsmithes and also Caruers, the men are warriers, and light
fellows, and good masters for any purpose: they go better apparelled than
any other India^s yet seen. They wear for their utter garment clokes like
unto Moriscos, but after an other sort. All the Country round about them is
fruitful and eareable ground, well watered, and so full of people, that
there is no wast ground, in respect whereof, there are some poor, which
beg from door to door. The Spanyardes had not seen any beggars in that
Country before they came thither.

Chololla is a City of most devotion and Religion in all India, it is called
ye Sanctuary or holy place among ye Indians, and thither they traveled from
many places far distante on pilgrimage, and for this cause there were so many
temples.

Their Cathedral Temple was the best and highest of all the new Spain, with a
hundred and twenty steps up unto it.

The greatest Idol of all their Gods was called Quezalcouately, God of the
air, who was (say they) the founder of their City, being a Virgin of holy
life, and great penance. He instituted fasting and drawing of blood out of
their ears and tongs, and left a precepte, that they should sacrifice but
only Quayles, Doves, and other foul.

He never ware but one garmente of Cotton, which was white, narrow and long,
and upon that a mantle besette with certayneredde crosses.

They have certain green stones which were his, and those they keep for
relikes. One of them is like an Apes head. Here they abode twentye days, and
in this mean while there came so many to buy and sell, that it was a wonder
to see. And one of the things that was to be seen in those fayres, was the
earthen vessel, which was exceeding curious and fine.

The hill called Popocatepec.
THere is a hill eight leagues from Chololla, called Popocatepec, which is to
say, a hill of smoke, for many times it ^asteth out smoke and fire. Cortez
(...) thither ten Spanyardes, with many Indians, to carry their victual,
and to gu^^e them in the way. The ascending up was very troublesome, and full
of craggie rocks. They approached so nigh the top, that they heard such a
terrible noise which proceeded from thence, that they durst not go unto it,
for the ground did tremble and shake, and great quantity of Ashes which
disturbed the way: but yet two of them who seemed to be most hardy, and
desirous to see strange things, went up to the top, because they would not
return with a sleuelesse answer, and that they might not be accounted
cowardes, leaving their fellows behind them, proceeded forwards. The Indians
said, what mean these men? for as yet never mortal man took such a journey
in hand.

These two valiant fellows passed through ye desert of Ashes, and at length
came under a great smoke very thick, and standing there a while, the
darkness vanished partly away, and then appeared she vul^an and concauetie,
which was about half a league in compass, out of the which the air came
reb^unding, with a great noise; very shrill, and whistling, in sort that the
whole hill did tremble. It was to be compared unto an oven where glass is made.
The smoke and heat was so great, that they could not abide it, and of force
were constreyned to return by the way that they had ascended: but they (...)
not gone far, when the vulcan began to lash out flames of fire, ashes, and
imbers, yea and at the last stones of burning fire: and if they had not chanced
to find a rock, where under they shadowed themselves, undoubtedly they had
there bin burned.

When with good tokens they were returned where they left their fellows, the
other Indians kissed their garments as an honor due unto Gods. They presented
unto them such things as they had, and wondered much at their fact.

Those simple Indians thought, Purgatory.
that that place was an infernal place, where all such as governed not well,
or used tyranny in their offices, were punished when they dyed, and also
believed, that after their purgation, they passed into glory.

This vulcan is like unto the vulcan of Cicilia, it is high and round, and
never wants Snow about it, and is seen a far off in the night, it
lasheth out flames of fire.

There is near about this hyl many Cities, and Huexozinco is one of the
nighest.

In ten years space this strange hill of workyng did expel no vapoure or
smoke: but in the year. 1540. it began again to burn, and with the
horrible noise thereof, the neighbors that dwelte four leagues from thence
were terrifyed, for the especial strange smokes that then were seen, the
like to their predecessors had not bin seen.

The ashes that proceeded from thence came to Huexozinco, Quelaxcopan,
Tepiacac, Quauhquecholla, Chololla, and Tlaxcallan, which stands ten
leagues from thence, yea some say, it extended fifteen leagues distant, and
burned their herbs in their gardens, their fields of corn, trees, and
clothes that lay a drying.

The consultation that Mutezuma had, concerning the coming of Cortez into
Mexico.
COrtez pretended not to fall out with Mutezuma, before his coming to Mexico,
and yet he understood all Mutezuma his pretense, whereupon he complayneth to
the Ambassadors, saying that he much marvelled that such a mighty Prince,
who by so many Gentlemen had assured his friendship unto him, should now
procure his total destruction, in not keeping his promise and fidelity, In
consideration whereof, where he meant to visit him as a friend, that now he
would go to his Court as an enemy. The Ambassadors excused their masters
cause, besieching him to withdraw his fury, and to give license to one of
them to go to Mexico, who would bring answer from thence with all speed.

Cortes granted unto the request, the one of them went, and returned again
within six days in company of another messenger that had gone thither
before, who brought ten platters of gold, and a thousand five hundred
mantels of cotton, with much victual, and Cacao which is a kind of fruit
that serves for current money among them. Likewise they brought a certain
kind of wine or licoure made of Cacao and Centli. They informed Cortes, that
Mutezuma was innocente of the coniuration in Chololla, nor by any means
privy to their dealings, affyrming moreover that the garrizon of souldyers did
apperteine to Acazinco, and Acazan, who were neyghbors to Chololla, who by
inducement of some naughtye persons, had procured that thing, saying that he
should both see and understand him to be his faithful and loving friend, praying
him to come forward on his journey, for he would abide his coming in Mexico.

This embassage pleased well Cortez, but Mutezuma feared, when he heard of the
slaughter, Prophecy of the Devil.
and burning of Chololla, and said to his friends, these are the people that
our Gods said should come and inherit this land.

Mutezuma went incontinent to his Oratorie, and shut in himself alone, where
he abode in fasting and prayer eight days, with sacrifice of many men, to
asilake the fury of his Idolles, who seemed to be offended.

The voice of the Devil spoke unto him, bidding him not to fear the
Christians, saying they were but few, and when they were come, he should do
what he lysted with them, willing him in no wise to cease from the bloody
sacrifice, least some mischance might happen unto him. And assured him that he
should have the Gods Vitzipuchtli, and Tescatlipuca to preserve and keep
him. And because Quezalcouatle was agreeued for want of bloody sacrifice, he
permitted the Strangers to punish them of Chololla. And Mutezuma hearing this
devilish Oracle, and likewise Cortez having warned him that he would visit
him as an enemy, he was by this persuasion of Satan, the better willing to
receive him into Mexico.

Likewise Cortes when he came to Chololla, was strong, and had at
commandment a mighty power, and there made himself stronger, the fame
whereof, was blown abroad, throughout all the dominions of Mutezuma. And
whereas the poor Indians had but only marvelled at their persons and
furniture, now they began to tremble and to fear at his doings, so that
wheresoever he came, they opened him the gates with pure fear, more than for
any love.

Muteznma at the beginning, pretended to fear Cortes with the fearful
passages and other perils and danger, as the fortitude of Mexico, with his
great multitude of subjects, and the great number of Princes that did both
serve and obey him: and seeing that all these things profited not, he thought
to have overcome him with gifts and treasure, knowing that he had required
gold: yet he saw that nothing would, prevail, for that Cortez would needs
come to see him, whereupon, he took counsel of the Devil what he should
do in that case, An evil counselor.
upon which counsel he was satisfied by his Priests and Captains, that he
ought not to war against so few strangers, for if he so did, the dishonor
would be his, and chiefly, because Cortez certifyed that he was an Ambassador,
and using him otherwise, it might so fall out, that his own subjects would
rebel against him their Lord and Prince, saying likewise that it was
manifest that the Otomies and Tlaxcaltecas would favor his side, and also
many others, for to destroy and spoil Mexico, upon which consultation it was
openly proclaimed, that his will was that the strangers should enter into
Mexico freely, thinking that if at any time they should displease him, to
make a breakefast of them the next day.

Things that happened to Cortez in his journey to Mexico.
COrtez having so good an answer of the Ambassadors, he gave license to as
many of the Indians his friends, as listed to depart home to their houses,
and he likewise departed from Chololla with some borderers that would needs
follow him.

He left the way that the Mexicans had persuaded him to come, for it was both
evil and dangerous, as the Spaniarde which went to the vulcan had seen, he
went another playner way and more nearer. That day he traueled but four
leagues, because he meant to lodge in the villages of Huexozinco, where he was
friendly received, and they presented unto him slaves, garments, and gold,
although but little, for they are poor by reason that Mutezuma has environed
them about, because they were of the parcialitie of Tlaxcallan. The nert day
in the morning be ascended up a hill covered with snow, which was six miles
of height, where if the. 30000. Soldiers had waited for them, they might
easily have taken them, by reason of the great cold: and from the top of
that hill, they discovered ye land of Mexico, and the great lake with his
villages round about, which is an exceedyng goodly sight. But when Cortes saw
that beautiful thing, his joy was without comparison, and he took not so much
pleasure, but some of his men feared as much, and there was a murmuration
among them to return back again, yea and like to have been a mutiny among
them. But Cortes with his wisdom and dissimulation did pacify the matter,
with courage, hope, and gentle words, Oh wise Cortes.
and they seeing that their Captain at all assayes was the first himself, they
feared the less the things that they imagined. And discending down into the
plain, they found a great large house, sufficient for him and all his company,
with six thousand Indians of Tlaxcallan, Huexozinco, and Chololla. And ye
servants of Mutezuma made cotages of straw for the Tamemez or carriers, who
were lade^ with the fardage, and victuals: there was a good supper prepared for
them, and great fires to warm them, and all things necessary. Thither came
many principal persons from Mexico to visit him, among whom was a kinsman of
Mutezuma, who presented unto Cortes the value of three thousand Ducates in
gold, and besought him to return back again, and to have consideration of
the poverty, hungrr, and evil way, yea and to pass in little boats in
danger of drowning. And as for tribute to be given to the Emperor, a greater
sum should be appointed the^ though he went personally to Mexico, yea and
that it should be paid at what place he would apoint. Cortes welcomed them, as
reason did require, and presented unto them haberdashe toys, which they
esteemed in much, and chiefly he did lovingly entertayne Mutezuma his kinesman,
unto whom he made this answer, saying, I would gladly serve and pleasure
such a mighty prince as your sovereign Mutezuma is, if it lay in my hands
without offense of the King my master, and concerning my going to Mexico,
Mutezuma shall receive both pleasure and honor rather than otherwise, and
after I have talked with him I will soon return, likewise hunger I fear not,
neither yet doubt that I nor none of mine shall want, and for my passage on
the water, I say it is nothing in comparison of two thousand leagues, which I
have sailed only to come and visit him.

But yet for all this talk, if they had found him careless, they would have
pinched him as some does say, for he gave them to understand that he nor his
men slept not by night, nor yet unarmed themselves, yea and also if it chanced
the^ to find in the night season any that were not of their company, they slew
them out of hand, desiring him to advise his men thereof, least any of them
should happen to fall into that danger, which would much grieve him, and with
this talk they went all to take their rest.

The next day in the morning he proceeded forward and came to Amaquemecan which
is two leagues from thence, and stands in the province of Chalco, a town
that co^tayneth 20000. householders. The Lord of that towns presented to
Cortes forty women slaves, and. 3000. Ducats in gold, with meat abu^dantly
for two days, and secretly made complaynt unto him of Mutezuma. And from
thence he went to another town four leagues from thence, the one half thereof
was builte upon the lake, and the other half upon the land at the foot of a
ragged hill. There went in his company many subjects of Mutezuma for
purueyers, but yet both they and the towns men would feign have laid hand
upon the Spaniardes, and every night would send their spies to see what the
Christians did, but the watch slew about twenty of them, whereupon the matter
stayed and their pretense took no effect: sure it is a thing to laugh at, for
at every fancy they would prove to kill them, and yet they were not for the
purpose. The next day in the morning came twelve Lords from Mexico, among
whom was Cacama Neuew to Mutezuma, who was Lord of Tezcuco a young man of.
xxv. years of age, whom the Indians did much honor: he was carried upon their
shoulders, and when they set him down one went before with a brom to sweep
the dust out of his way. These Gentlemen came to accompany Cortes excusing
Mutezuma, saying that he was not well at ease and therefore he came not
personally to receive him. And yet they entreated Cortes to return back
again, and not to come unto Mexico, gyuing him to understand by signs, yt
they would there displease him, yea and also defend the passage and entrance, a
thing easy to be done, but they were either blinded or else they durst not
break the Calsey. Cortes entertained the^ like noble me^, and gave unto the^
of his haberdashe, and departed from ye town with many grave personages who
carried with the^ a great train, which filled up the way well nigh as they
should pass, wo^dring at their beardes, harneys, apparel, horses and
ordinance, saying to themselves, these be Gods. Cortes gave them warning not
to come among the horses, nor among his men, for fear they would kill them.
This he made them believe because he would not have his way stopped, for yt the
number of the was so great. They then came to a town buylte upon the water of
two thousand houses, and before they came thither they had gone more than half
a league upon a fair Calsey, which was twenty foot broad: the town had
fair houses and many towers: the Lord of the town did receive them
worshipfully, and provided all things plentifully, desiryng him to abide there
that night, and secretly made complayntes against Mutezuma, of many wrongs and
exactions done by him, and certified him, that from thence the way was very
fair to Mexico, and all the like ^alsey as he had passed. With this news
Cortes was very glad, for he meant to have stayed there for to have buylte
barks and foystes, and yet he feared least they would break the calsey,
wherefore he had always a care over Cacama, who with the other Lords desired
him not to abide there, but to proceed forward to Iztacpalapan, which was but
two leagues off, and that the Lord thereof was another Neuew to Mutezuma. To
admit their request he went with them to that town, and from thence to Me^ico
was but two leagues, the which the next day he might go at pleasure; and come
timely into the City, and in this order came to Iztacpalap^n.

Every two hours came messengers betwixt Cortes and Mutezuma: then came
Cuetlauac Lord of that town, with the Lord Culhuacan his hinsman (...) him,
who presented unto him, slaves, ga^^ments, and feathers, and to the value of
four thousand Ducates in gold. Cuetlanac received all the Spaniards into his
own house, which has very fair sod^ings all of stone and Carpenters work
exceeding well wrought, with (...) and low^ roumes, with all kind of service:
The chambers were hanged with cloth of Cotton, very rich, after their manner.
There were fair garde^s replenished with many sweet flowers, and sweet trees
garnished with networke, made of Canes, and covered with roses and other fine
herbs, with sundry pondes of sweet water. There was an other garden very
beautiful of all sorts of fruytes and herbs, with a great ponde walled with
lyme and stone, and was four hundredth paces square, made with fair steps to
discende unto the bottom in many places, and was full of diverse kinds of
fishes, and many kind of water birds, which sometimes covered ye pond, as
Gulles. Mewes, and such like. Iztacpallapan is a town of.10000. households,
and is planted in a lake of salt water, the one half of the town buylt on the
water, and the other on the land.

The Solemn pomp vvherevvith Cortez was received into Mexico.
FRom Iztacpalapan to Mexico is two leagues all upon a fair calsey, upon the
which eight horsemen may pass on ra^ke, and so directly straight as though it
had been made by line. And who soever has good eiesight might discern the
gates of Mexico from thence. Coyoacan is a town of six thousand dwellers,
Vizilopuchtli is of five thousand. These towns are planted in the lake, and
are adorned with many temples, which have many fair towers, that do
beautify excedingly the lake. There is great contractatio^ of Salt, which is
made there, and from thence is carried abroad to fayres and markets, which
thing was a great rent to Mutezuma. Upon this Calsey are many draw bridges
buylt upon fair arches that the water passes through.

Cortes passed this calsey with. 400. Spaniardes. and. 6000. Indians his
friends: their passage was with much ado, by reason of the great multitude of
Indians which came to see him, and coming near the city, there adjoined
another calsey with a brother passage, where stands a strong bulwark of stone
of the height of.ij. fadom, with two towers on each side, and two gates very
strong. Here at this forte came three thousand Courtiers and Citizens to
receive him, and every of them touched the ground with his right hand and
kissed it, and passed forwards in the order as they came. These salutatio^s
endured an hour and more. From the bulwark the calsey lies directly, and
before the eutraunce into the streate there is an other drawebridge made of
timber ten paces broad, under the which the water passes too and fro. At this
bridge came Mutezuma to receive Cortes under a Canapie of green feathers and
gold with much argentery hangyng thereat, which Canapie four noble men did
carry. And the two princes Cuetlauac, and Cacama his neuewes, did lead him by
each arm: all three were rich appareled and al of one fashion, except
Mutezuma, which had a pair of shoes of gold besette with precious stones,
and the soles were tied to the upper part with latchets, as is painted of the
Antikes. His Gentlemen went by two and two laying down and taking up mantels
and couerlets upon the ground, because his feet should not touch the same:
then followed him as in procession. 200. noble men barefooted, with garments of
a richer livery than the first three thousand. Mutezuma came in the midst of
the streate, and the others came behind him as nigh the wall as they might,
their faces toward the ground, for it was a great offense to look him in the
face. Cortes alighted from his horse, and according to our use went to embrace
him, but the Princes who led him by the arms would not suffer him to come so
nigh, for they held it for sin to touch him, but yet saluted each one ye other.

Cortes put about Mutezuma his neck a collar of Margarites, Diamondes, and
other stones al of glass. Mutezuma received it thankfully, and went before
with one of the princes his Neuewes, and commanded the other to lead Cortes by
the hand next after him in the midst of the streat: and proceeding forward
in this order, then came the Ge^tlemen in the richest livery to welcome him one
by one, touching the ground with their hands, and after returned to their
standing. And if the Citizens had come as they requested, all yt day would not
have served for salutatio^s. The collar of glass pleased well Mutezuma, and
because he would not take without giuyng a better thing as a great prince, he
commanded to be brought two collers of read prawnes, which there are much
esteemed, and at every one of them hanged eight shrimpes of gold of excellent
workmanship, and of a finger length every one, he put these collers with his
own hands about Cortes his neck, the which was esteemed a most great favor,
yea and the Indians marueled at it. At this time they were come to the streate
end, which was almost a mile long, broad, straight and very fair and full
of houses on each side, in whose doors, windows and tops was such a multitude
of Indians to behold the strangers, that I know not who wondered most, our
men to see such a number of them, or else they to see our men, their ordinance
and horses, a thing so strange unto them. They were brought unto a great court
or house of idols, which was ye lodging of Axaiaca, at the door whereof
Mutezuma took Cortes by the hand and brought him into a fair hall, and
placed him upon a rich carpet, saying unto him, Sir now are you in your own
house, eat and take your rest and pleasure, for I will shortly come and visit
you again. Such (as you hear) was the receiving of Hernando Cortes by
Mutezuma a most mighty King, into his great and famous City of Mexico, the
eight day of November. 1519.

The Oration of Mutezuma to the Spanyardes.
THe house where the Spaniardes were lodged was great and large, with many
fair chambers sufficient for them all: it was nete, clean matted, and hanged
with cloth of Cotton, and feathers of many colors, pleasant to behold. When
Mutezuma was departed from Cortes, he began to set his house in order, and
placed the ordinance at his door, and having all his things in good sort, he
went to a sumptuous dinner that was prepared for him. As soon as Mutezuma had
made an end of his dinner hearing that the strangers were risen from the
table, and reposed a while, then came he to Cortes, salutyng him, and satte
down by him. He gave unto him diverse jewels of gold plate, feathers, and many
garments of Cotton, both rich, well wouen, and wrought of strange colors, a
thing truly, that did manifest his greatness, and also confirm their
imagination. This gift was delivered honorably, and then began his talk as
follows: Lord and Gentlemen, I do much rejoice to have in my house such
valiant men as ye are, for to use you with courtesy, and entreat you with
honor, according to your descrte and my estate. And where heretofore I desired
that you should not come hither, the only cause was, my people had a great
fear to see you, for your gesture and grimme beards did terrify them, yea,
they reported that ye had such beasts as swallowed men, and that your coming
was from heaven, bringing with you lightning, thunder and thu^derbolts,
wherewith you made the earth to tremble and to shake, and that ye slew
therewith whom ye pleased. But now I do see and know that you are mortal me^,
and that ye are quiet and hurt no man: also I have seen your horses, which are
but your servants, and your Gunnes like unto shootyng Trunkes. I do now hold
all for fables and lies which has bin reported of you, and I do also accept
you for my near kinsmen. My father told me that he had heard his forefathers
say, of whom I do descend, that they held opinion how they were not
naturals of this land, but come hither by chance, A strange opinion.
in company of a mighty Lord, who after a while that they had abode here,
they returned to their native soil: After many years expyred, they came
again for those whom they had left here behind them, but they would not go
with them, because they had here inhabited, and had wives and children, and
great government in the land. Now these myghtie Lords seeing that they were
so stubborn, and would not return with them, departed from them sore
displeased, saying, that he would send his children that should both rule and
govern them, in justice, peace, and ancient Religion, and for this
consideration, we have always expected and believed, that such a people
should come to rule and govern us, and considering from whence you come, I do
think that you are they whom we looked for, and the notice which the great
Emperor Charles had of us, who has now sent you hither. Therefore Lord and
Captain, be well assured, that we will obey you, if therebe no feigned or
deceytefull matter in your dealings, and will also divide with you and youres
all that we have. And although this which I have said were not only for your
virtue, fame, and deeds of valiant Gentlemen, I would yet do it for your
worthiness in the battayles of Tauasco, Teocazinco, and Chololla, being so
few, to overcome so many.

Now again, if ye ymagine that I am a God, and the walls and roufes of my
houses, and all my vessel of service to be of pure gold, as the men of
Zempoallan, Tlaxcallan, and Huexozinco have informed you, it is not so, and I
judge you to be so wise, that you give no credit to such fables. You shall also
note, that through your coming hither, many of my subjects have rebelled,
and are become my mortal enemies, but yet I purpose to break their wings.
Come feel you my body, I am of flesh and bone, a mortal man as others are and
no God, although as a King I do esteem my self of a greater dignity and
prehemine^ce than others. My houses you do also see, which are of timber and
earth, and the principallest of Masons work, therefore now you do both know
and see what odious liars those talebearers were. But troth it is, that gold
plate, feathers, armor, jewels, and other riches, I have in the treasory of my
forefathers a long time pr^serued, as the use of Kings is, all the which you
and yours shall enjoy at all times. And now it may please you to take your rest,
for I know that you are weery of your journey. Cortez with joyful countenance
humbled himself, seeing some tears fall from Mutezuma his eyes, saying unto
him, upon the trust I have had in your clemencye, I insisted to come both
to see and talk with your highness, and now I know that all are lies which
has bin told me. The like your highness has heard reported of us, assure
your self, that the Emperor King of Spain is your natural Lord, whom
ye have expected for, he is the only heir from whence your lynage does
proceed, and as touching the offer of your highness treasure, I do most
hartyly thank you.

After all this communication, Mutezuma demanded whether the bearded men
which came with him, were either his vassals or his flaues, because he would
entertayne each one according to his estate. Cortes answered, A loving
^^usvvere.
that they were all his breethren, friends, and fellows, except some that
were his servants.

Then he departed, and went home to his Palace, and there informed himself
particularlye who were Gentlemen, and who were not, and according thereunto,
sent every one particular gift or present. To the Gentlemen he sent the
reward by his Controller, and to the Mariners and other seruitors, by a Page
of his household.

The Majesty and order, vvherevvith Mutezuma was served.
MVtezuma was a man of a small stature and lean, his couloure tawnie as all
the Indians are. He had long hear on his head, six little hears upon
him, as though they had bin put in with a bodkin. His thin bearde was
black. He was a man of fair condition, and a doer of Justice, well spoken,
grave and wise, beloved and feared among his subjects. Mutezuma does signify
sadness.

To ye proper names of Kings and Lords, they do add this syllable C. which is
for courtesy and dignity, as we use Lord. The Turk uses Zultan. The Moore or
Barbarian calls his Lord Mulley, and so the Indians say Mutezumazin. His
people had him in such reverence, that he permitted none to sit in his sight,
nor yet in his presence to wear shoes, nor look him in the face, except very
few Princes. He was glad of the conversation of the Spanyardes, and would not
suffer them to stand on foot, for the great estimation he had of them, and if
he lyked any of the Spanyardes garments, he would exchange his apparel for
theirs.

He changed his own apparel four times every day, and he never clothed
himself again with the garments which he had once worn, but all such
were kept in his Guardrobe, for to give in presents to his servants and
Ambassadors, and unto valiante souldyers which had taken any enemy prisoner,
and that was esteemed a great reward, and a title of privilege.

The costly ma^tels whereof had bin diners sent to Cortes, were of the same
Guardrobe.

Mutezuma went always very net and fine in his attire. He bathed him in his
hotehouse four times every day. He went seldom out of his Chamber, but when
he went to his meat. He eat always alone, but solemnelye and with great
abundance. His table was a pillowe, or else a couple of coulloured skynnes. His
Chair was a fourefooted stole made of one piece, and hollow in the midst,
well wroughte and painted. His table clothes, napkins and towels were made of
Cotton woll, very white and new, for he was never served but once with that
naperie. Four hundred Pages brought in his meat, all sons of great
Lords, and placed it upon a table in his great Hall. The meat being
brought in, then came Mutezuma to behold the dishes, and appointed those
dishes that liked him best, and chasing dishes were prepared to keep that
moate warm, and seldom would eat of any other dish, except the Lord Steward
or Controller should highly commend any other dishe.

Before he sat down, came twenty of his wives of the fairest and best
esteemed, or else those that served weekly by turn, brought in the basin and
ewer, with great humbleness. This done, he sat him down, and then came the
Lord Steward, and drew a wodden net before him, because none should come
nigh his table. And this noble man alone placed the dishes, and also took them
away, for the Pages who brought in the meat came not near the table, nor yet
spoke any word, nor no man else.

While the Lord Mutezuma was at his meat, except some Iester, they al served
him barefooted. There assisted always somewhat a far off, six auntiente and
noble men, unto whom he used to give of the dish that best lyked him, who
received the same at his hand with great reverence, and eat it incontinent,
without loking in his face, which was the greatest humility that they could
use before him. He had music of Fiddle, Flute, and of a Snayle shell, and a
Caudron covered with a skin, and such other strange instruments. They had
very evil voices to sing. Always at dinner time he had Dwarfes, crookebackes,
and other deformed counterfets, all for majesty and to laugh at, who had
their meat in the Hall among the Iesters and Idyots, which were fed with
part of the meat that came from Mutezuma his table, all the rest of the meat
was given to three thousand of the Guard, who attended ordinarily in the yard
or court, and therefore they say that there was brought for his table three
thousand dishes, and as many pottes of wine, such as they use, and that
continually the buttrey and Pantrey stood open, which was a wonder to see
what was in them. The platters, dishes, and cups, were al of earth, whereof
the King was served but once, and so from meal to meal new. He had likewise
his service of gold and plate very rich, but he used not to be served with
it, (they say) because he would not be served twice therewith, the which he
thought a base thing. Some affirm, that young children were slain and dressed
in diverse kind of dishes for Mutezuma his table, but it was not so, only of
man's flesh sacrifised he fed now and then. The table being taken up, then
came again the Gentlewomen to bring water for his hands, with the like
reverence as they used at the first, and then went they to dinner with the
other wives, so that then the Gentlemen and Pages waited as their course fell.

The footeplayers that played before Mutezuma.
WHen his table was taken up, and his seruitors gone to meat, Mutezuma sat
still: then came in the suitors that had any affairs to deal with him,
barefoted, for all the persons did use that reverence, except some Princes his
kinsmen, as the Lords of Tescuco, and Tlacopan, and a few others: and being
cold weather, they used to wear old ragged clothes upon their rich
garments. Al suitors used to make three or four courtesies, not loking toward
his face, and speaking unto him their heads downewardes, and in that order
retired back again. Mutezuma answered his suitors very gravely, with low
voice, and in few words, and not to al suitors, for others his secretaries or
counselors that stood by, answered for him, and having their answer, they
returned backewardes, not turning their tails to the prince. After these
businesses done, he used some recreation, hearing Iesters or songs, wherein he
delighted much, or else to look upon the players, who play with their feet,
as we do with our hands. These have a cudgel like unto a pastlers rowler,
which they toss high and low, as it were a bal in the air, strange to
behold. They use other plays to pass the time, in such an order, that it
seemed marvelous to the lookers on. Cortez brought into Spain some of these
players. Also they use Matachines, in such sort they do play, that they stand
each upon others shoulders, and he that stands highest, shows many feats.
Sometime Mutezuma did behold the players, who played at a game called
Patoliztli, which is much like our Tables, and they play with beans,
squared like dice, which they call Patolli, and throw them out of both their
hands upon a matte, or else upon the ground, where are made certain strikes,
upon which they set down the chance that is thrown: and at this game they
play all that they have, and many times they value their own bodies, and play
that into captivity, and to remain a slave, I mean such as are common
gamesters of small estate.

The Tennis play in Mexico.
SOmetimes Mutezuma went to the Tennis Court. Their ball is called
Villamaliztli, and is made of the gum which comes from a tree called Vlli.
This tree grows in a hot Country. The gum being kneded together, and so
made round, is as black as pitch, and somewhat heavy, and very hard for the
hand, but yet good and light to rebound, and better than our windballes. They
play not at chases, but at ba^die, or at check, that is, if the ball touch the
wall it loses. They may strike the ball with any part of their body, but
there is always a penalty if they only strike not with the buttoke or side,
which is the finest play: wherefore they use a skin upon each butttocke.
They play so many to so many for a pack of mantels, or according to the
ability of the players. Also they play for gold and feathers, and sometime
for their own bodies, as they use at Patolli, which is there permitted and
lawful. The Tennis Court is called Tlachco, and is a Hall long and narrow, but
wyder upwards, than downewardes, and higher on the sides than at ye ends, which
is an industry for their play. The house is always white and smooth in the
side walls: they have certain stones like unto mylstones, with a little hole in
the midst that passes through the stone, the hole is so small, that scarcely
the ball may pass through, but he that chances to strike the ball into the
hole, which seldom happens, wins the game, and by an auntiente law and
custom among Tennis players, he ought to have the clokes of all those that
stand and behold the play, on that side that the ball went in, and in some
Tennis Courts, the half of the garments of them that stand lookyng on. The
winner is then bound to make certain sacrifice to the God of the Tennis play,
and to the stone where the ball entered. The beholders of the play would say,
that such a wynner should be a thief and an adulterer, or else that he
should dye quickly.

They used in the Temple of the Tennis play two Images of the God of the ball,
which stood upon the two lower walls. Their Sacrifice was celebrated at
midnighte, with many Ceremonies and Witchcraftes, and songs for that purpose.
Then came a Priest from the Cathedral Church, with other Religious persons
to bless the Sacrifice, saying certain diuelishe prayers, and throwing the
ball four times in the Tennis Court. In this order was the Tennis play
consecrated, and after this consecration it was lawful to play, or else not,
for this diligence was first to be done when any Tennis Court or play was
newly built.

The owner of the Tennis Court also would never suffer any to play, until he
had first offered something to the Idol, their superstition was so great.

Mutezuma brought the Spanyardes to behold this pastyme, and gave the^ to
understand, yt he delyghted much in this game, and also to see our men play at
Cards and Dyce.

The number of vviues that Mutezuma had in his house.
MVtezuma had many houses as well in Mexico as without, for his recreation and
pleasure, as also for his ordinary dwelling. To write of al it should be
tedious, but where his continual abiding was, he named Tepac, that is to say,
Palace. And that Palace had twenty doors or gates which had their outcomming
into the common streates.

It has three courts, and in the one stands a fair fountain, many halles,
and a hundred chambers of twentie-three, and thirty foot long, an hundred
bathes and hothouses: and although the building was without nails, yet very
good workmanship.

The walls were made of masons work, and wrought of Marble, Iaspe, and other
black stone, with veins of read, like unto rubies and other stones, which
glistered very fair: the Rooffes were wrought of Timber, and curiously carved:
the Timber was Cedre, Cipers, and Pynetree: the chambers were painted and hong
with cloth of cotton, and clothe made of Conneys hair and feathers. The beds
were poor and of no vallew, for they were nothing but Mantels laid upon
mattes, or upon Hay, or else mattes alone: few men lay within those houses.

There were a thousand women, and some affirm yt there were three thousand,
accounting gentlewomen, servant and slaves: the most were noble men's
daughters, Mutezuma took of them for himself, those that liked him best, and
the others he gave in marriage to Gentlemen his servant.

The saying was that he had at one time a hundredth and fifty women his wives
with child, who through the persuasion of the Devil took Medicines to cast
their creatures, because they knew that they should not inherit the state:
these his wives had many old women for their Guarde, for no man was permitted
to look upon them.

The shield of arms that is set in his pallayce, and likewise carried to
the wars, is an Eagle soryng upon a Tiger his talents bente as taking pray.
Some thynk it is a Gryphon and not an Egle. The Gryphons in time paste, say
they, did cause the vale of Auacatlan to be dispeopled, for they were great
deuourers of men, and that their abidyng was in the Mountains of Teoacan:
they approve that these Mountains were called Cuitlachtepelt, of Cuitlachtli,
which is a Gryphon bigger than a Lion: but the Spaniardes did never see any of
them.

The Indians by their old Pictures do paynt those Gryphons to have a kind of
hear and no feathers, and also affirm, that with their talandes and teeth
they break men's bones. They have the courage of a Lion and the countenance of
an Egle: they paynte him with four feet, and teeth, with a kind of down
more like woolle than feathers, with his beak, talandes and wings.

And in all those things the picture agrees with our paynting and writing, in
such sort that a Gryphon is no approved natural Foul, nor yet beast. Pliny
judges this tale of Gryphons to be lies. There are also other Lords that give
the Gryphon in their arms, flying with a heart in his Talandes.

A house of Foul, which were only preserved for their feathers.
MVtezuma had another house, with very good lodgings and fair gallaries, buylt
upon pillars of Iaspe, which extends toward a goodly garden, in the which
there are ten pondes or more, some of salt water for sea foul, and other some
of fresh water for river foul and lake foul, which pondes are devised with
sluyses to empty and to fill at their pleasure for the cleanness of the
feathers. There is such a number of foul, that scarcely the ponds may hold
them, and of such diverse kinds both in feathers and making, as sure it was
an admiration for the Spaniardes to behold, for the most of them they knew
not, nor yet had at any time seen the like. And to every kind of foul they
gave such bayte as they were wont to feed of in the fields or Rivers. There
did belong to that house three hundred persons of service: some were to cleanse
the pondes: other some did fish for bayte: other some served them with meat:
other did loose them and trim their feathers: others had care to look to
their eggs: others to set them abroode: others cured them when they were
sick: and the principallest office was to pluck the feathers: for of them was
made rich Mantels, Tapissarie, Targattes, Tuffes of feathers, and many other
things wrought with Gold and Silver: a most perfect work.

A house of foul for havvking and other strange things.
THere is another house with large quarters and lodgings, which is called a
house for foul, not because there are more tha^ in the other, but because they
be bigger and to hawk withal, and are foul of rapine, wherefore they are
esteemed as more nobler than all the others.

There are in this house many high halles, in the which are kept men, women
and Children: in some of them are kept such as are borne white of color,
which does very seldom happen: in other some are dwarfes, crokebackes,
burstenmen, counterfaites, and monstrous persons, in great number: they say
that they used to deforme them when they were children, to set forth the
kings greatness: every of these persons were in several Halles by themselves.

In the lower Halles were great Cages made of Timber: in some of them were
Lions, in other Tygres, in other Ownzes, in others Wolves: in conclusion, there
was no four footed beast that wanted there, only to the effect that the
mighty Mutezuma might say that he had such things in his house.

They were fed with their ordinary, as Gynea cocks, Dear, Dogs, and such
like.

There was also in other Halles great Earthen vessels, some with earth, and
some with water, wherein were snakes, as gross as a man's thigh, Vipers
Crocodrilles, which they call Caymanes, or Lizarts of twenty foot long, with
such Scales and head as a Dragon has: Also other little Lisarts, and other
venomous beasts and Serpents as well of the water as of the land, a terrible
fight for the lokers on.

There were also other Cages for foul of rapyne of all sorts, as Hawks,
Kyghtes, Boyters, and at the least nine or ten kind of Hawks. This house of
foul had of daily allowance five hundred Gynea cocks, and three hundred men
of service, besides the Falconers and Hunters, which are infinite. There were
many other sorts of Fowls that our men know not, which seemed by their beak
and talents good to Hawk withal.

To the Snakes and other venomous beasts they gave the blood of men
sacrifised, to feed them, and some say they gave unto them man's flesh,
which the great Lysarts do eat very well. The Spaniardes saw the flower
covered with blood like a iealy in a slaughter house, it stonke horribly.

It was strange to see the officers in this house how every one was occupied.
Our men took great pleasure in beholding such strange things, but they
could not away with the roaryng of the Lions, the fearful hissing of the
Snakes and Adders, the doleful howling and barking of the Wolves, the
sorrowful yelling of the Ownzes and Tigres, when they would have meat.

Most certain, in the night season it seemed a Dongeon of Hell, and a
dwelling place of the Devil, and even so it was in deed, for near at hand
was a Hall of a hundred and fifty foot long, and thirty foot broad, where
was a Chapel with the Roof of silver and gold in leaf Wainescotted, and
decked with great store of pearl and stone, as Agattes, Cornerines,
Emeraldes, Rubies, and diverse other sorts, and this was the Oratory where
Mutezuma prayed in the night season, and in that chapel the Devil did
appear unto him, and gave him answer according to his prayers.

He had other houses like unto Barnes, only for the feathers of fowls, and
for mantels which proceeded of his rentes and tributes, a thing much to be
seen: upon the doors was set his arms, which was a Connie.

Here dwelled the chief officers of his house, as Tresorer, Controller,
Receyuers and other officers appertainyng to the Kings revenues. Mutezuma had
no house wherein was not an oratory for the Devil, whom they worshipped for
the Jewels there. And therefore those houses were great and large.

The Armory of Mutezuma.
MVtezuma had some houses of Armor, upon the doors whereof stood a bow and
arrows. In these houses was great store of all kind of munition which they
use in their wars: as Bows, Arrows, Slings, Lances, Darts, Clubbes, Swords
and Bucklers, and gallant Targettes more trim than strong, Skulles and
Splintes, but not many, and al made of woodde, gilte or covered with leather.
The woodde whereof they make their Armor and Targettes, is very hard and
strong, for they use to toaste it at the fire, and at their arrowe ends they
enclose a little piece of flinte stone, or a piece of a fish bone called
Libisa, and that is venomous, for if any he hurt therewith and the head
remain in the wound, it so festereth, that it is almost incurable.

Their swords are of woodde, and the edge thereof is flint stone, enclosed or
joined into a staff, with a certain kind of glue which is made of a root
called Zacolt and Teuxalli, which is a kind of strong sand, whereof they
make a mixture, and after kneade it with blood of Battes or Rearemice and other
foul, which does glewe marvelous strong, and lightly never vncleaueth: of this
stuff they make nails, pearcers, and ogars, wherewith they bore timber and
stone: with their swords they cut spears, yea and a horse neck at a blow,
and make dentes into iron, which seems a thing impossible and incredible. In
the City no man may wear weapon, but only in wars, huntyng, and among the
kings Guarde.

The Gardens of Mutezuma.
BEsides the foresaid houses he had many others for his only recreation and
passetyme, with excellent fair gardens of medicinal herbs, sweet flowers,
and trees of delectable savor, which were many, and a thing to give praise to
God the maker and creator of all.

In that Garden were a thousand personages, made and wrought artificially of
leaves and flowers. Mutezuma would not permit that in this Garden should be
any kind of pot Herbs, or things to be sold, saying, that it did not
appertain to Kings to have things of profit among their delytes and
pleasures, for such things (said he) did appertain to Merchants.

Yet notwithstanding he had Orchards with many and sundry fruits, but they
stood far from the City, and whyther seldom times he went: he had
likewise out of Mexico pleasant houses in wooddes and forrestes, of great
compass, enuyroned with water, in the which he had fountaynes, rivers,
pondes with fish, warrantes of Conneys, rocks and covert where were Hearts,
Buckes, Hares, Foxes, Wolves, and such like, with wilderness for every sort.

To these places the Lords of Mexico, used to go and sport themselves, such
and so many were the houses of Mutezuma, wherein few Kings were equal with
him.

The court and Guarde of Mutezuma.
HE had daily attending upon him in his priuye guard six hundred noble men
and gentlemen, and each of them three or four servants, and some had twenty
servant or more, according to his estate: and in this manner he had three
thousand men attendant in his court, and some affirm more, all the which were
fed in his house of the meat that came from his table.

The serving men always abode below in the court all the day, and went not
from thence till after Supper.

It is to be thought that his Guard was the greater, because the strangers
were there, although in effect of troth it is most certain, that all the
Lords that are under the Mexicall Empire (as they say) are thirty persons of
high estate, who are able to make each of them a hundred thousand men. There
are three thousand Lords of Towns, who have many vassals.

These noble men did abide in Mexico certain time of the year, in the Court
of Mutezuma, and could not depart from thence without especial license of the
Emperor, leaving each of them a son or brother behind them for security
of Rebellion, and for this cause they had generally houses in the City: such
and so great was the court of Mutezuma.

The great subjection of the Indians to their King.
THere is not in all the dominions of Mutezuma any subject that pays not
tribute unto him. The noblemen pay their tribute in personal service. The
husba^dmen called Maceualtin, with body and goods. In this sort they are
either tenauntes, or else heirs to their possessions. Those which are heirs,
do pay one third part of all their fruit and commodity that they do reap or
bring up, as Dogs, Hens, Foul, Conyes, Gold, Silver, Stones, Salt, Wax,
Honey, Mantels, Feathers, Cotton, and a certain fruit called Cacao, that
serves for money, and also to eat. Also all kind of grain, and garden
Herbs and fruits, whereof they do maynteyne themselves.

The Tenantes do pay monthly or yearly as they can agree, and because their
tribute is great, they are called slaves, for when they may have license to
eat eggs, they think it a great favor. It was reported that they were
taxed what they should eat, and all the residue was taken from them. They
went very poorly clothed, yea and the most of their treasure was an earthe^
pot, wherein they boiled their herbs, a couple of Milstones to grind their
Corn, and a matte to lie upon. They did not only pay this rent and tribute,
but also served with their bodies at all times when the great King should
command. They were in such great subjection to their prince, that they durst
not speak one word, although their daughters should be taken from them to be
used at their pleasure. It was reported, that of every three sons, they
delivered one to be sacrifised, but ye report was false, for if it had bin
true, the Towns had not bin so replenishe^d with people as they were: and also
the noble men did not eat man's flesh, but only of those which were
sacrifised, and they were slaves or prisoners taken in the wars. Assuredly
they were cruel butchers, and slew yearly for that bloody sacrifice many
men, and some children, but not so many as was reported. All the aforesaid
rentes they brought to Mexico upon their backs and in boats, I mean so much
as was necessary for the provision of the house and Court of Mutezuma, all the
residue was spente among souldyers, and bartred for gold, plate, precious
stones, and other rich Jewels, esteemed of Princes, all the which was
brought to the treasory. In Mexico was large and great barnes and houses to
receive and keep the Corn for provision of the City, with officers and
vnderofficers, who did receive the same, and kept account thereof in books
of painted figures. Also in every Town was a receyuer, who bare in his hand a
rod or a bushe of feathers, and those gave up their accomptes in Mexico. If
any such had bin taken with deceypt and falsehoode, death was his reward, yea
and his kindred punished with penalties, as of a lignage of a Traitor to his
Prince. The Husbandmenne, if they paid not well their tribute, were apprehended
for the same, and if they were found to be poor through sickness and
infirmity, then they were borne withal, but if they were found to be lazy
and slothful, they should be used accordingly: but in conclusion, if they
paid it not at a day appointed, then they should be sold for slaves to pay
their debt, or else be sacrificed.

There were many other provinces, which paid a certain portion, and
reknowledged service, but this tribute was more of honor than profit. In this
sort Mutezuma had more than sufficient to provide his house and wars, and to
heap up great store in his treasory. Moreover, he spente nothing in the
buildings of his houses, for of long time he had certain towns that paid no
other tribute, but only to work and repair continually his houses at their
own proper cost, and paid all kind of workmen, carrying upon their backs,
or drawing in sleddes, stone, lyme, timber, water, and all other necessaries
for the work. Likewise they were bound to provide all the fierwod that should
be spent in the Court, which was a great thing, and did amount to 230. hundred
weight a day, which was five hundred men's burdens, and some days in the
winter much more. And for the Kings Chimneys they brought the bark of Oak
trees, which was best esteemed for the light thereof, for they were great
sorcerers. Mutezuma had 100. cities with their provinces, of whom he received
rentes, tributes, and vassalage, where he maintained garrison of soldiers, and
had treasorers in each of the^. His dominion did extend from the North sea to
the South sea, and 600. miles in lo^gitude within the maine la^d, although in
very deed there were some towns, as Tlaxcallo^, Mechuacan, Panuco, and
Teocantepec, which were his enemies, and paid him neither tribute nor
service: but yet the ransom was much, when any of them were taken.

Also there were other kings and noble men, as of Tezcuco and Tlacopan, which
were not in subjection unto him, but only in homage and obedience, for they
were of his own lignage, unto whom Mutezuma married his daughters.

The situation of Mexico.
MExico at the time when Cortes entered, was a City of sixtye thousand houses.
The Kings house and other noble men's houses were great, large, and beautiful,
the others were small and roynish, without either doors or windows: and
although they were small, yet there dwelled in some of them two, three, yea and
ten persons, by reason whereof, the City was wonderfully replenished with
people.

This City is built upon the water, even in the same order as Venice is. All
the body of the City stands in a great large lake of water. There is three
sorts of streets very broad and fair, the one sort are only of water,
with many bridges, an other sort of only earth, and the third of earth and
water, that is to say, the one half earth to walk upon, and the other half
for boats to bring provision of all sorts. These streets are kept always
clean, and the most part of the houses have two doors, the one toward the
calsey, and the other toward the water, at the which they take boat to gos
where they list. And although this City is founded upon water, yet the same
water is not good to drink, wherefore there is brought by conduit water from
a place called Chapult^pec, three miles distant from the City, which springs
out of a little hill, at the foot whereof stands two Statues or covered
Images wrought in stone, with their Targettes and Lances, the one is of
Mutezuma, and the other of Axaiaca his father.

The water is brought from thence in two pypes or Canalls in great quantity,
and when the one is foul, then all the water is conuayed into the other, til
the first be made clean. From this fountain all the whole City is provided,
so that they go selling the same water from street to street in little
boats, and do pay a certain tribute for the same.

This City is divided into two streets, the one was called Tlatelulco, that
is to say, a little Island, and the other Mexico, where Mutezuma his dwelling and
court was, and is to be interpreted a spring. This street is the fairest and
most principal, and because of the Kings palace there, the City was named
Mexico, although the old and first name of the City was Tenuchtitlan, which
does signify fruit out of stone, for the name is compounded of Tetl, which
is, stone, and Nuchtli, which is fruit, called in Cuba, Tunas. The tree that
bears this fruit, is named Nopal, and is nothing almost but leaves of a
foot broad and round, and three inches thick, some more, and some less,
according to the growth, full of thorns which are venomous: the leaf is
green, and the thorn or prick russet. After that it is planted, it
increases, growing leaf unto leaf, and the foot thereof comes to be as
the body of a free, and one leaf does not only produce another at the point,
but at the sides of the same leaves proceeds other leaves: And because here
in Spain is of the same trees and fruit, it needs no further description.

In some provinces where water is scante, they use to drink the juice of these
leaves. The fruit thereof called Nuchtli, is like unto fygges, and even so
has his little kernels or graynes within, but they are somewhat larger, and
crowned like unto a Medler. There are of them of sundry colors, some are
green without, and Carnationlike within, which have a good taste. Others are
yellowe, and others white, and some speckled: the best sort are the white: it
is a fruit that will last long.

Some of them tastes of pears, and other some of Grapes: it is a cold and a
fresh fruit, and best esteemed in the heat of Summer. The Spanyardes do more
esteem them than the Indians. The more the ground is labored where they
grow, the fruit is so much the better.

There is yet another kind of this fruit read, and that is nothing esteemed,
although his taste is not evil, but because it does color and dye the eaters
mouth, lips, and apparel, yea and makes his vryne look like pure blood.
Many Spanyardes at their first coming into India, and eating this fruit, were
in a maze, and at their wits end, thinking that all the blood in their
bodies came out in vryne: yea and many Physicians at their first coming were
of the same belief: for it has happened, when they have bin sent for unto
such as have eaten this fruit, they not knowing the cause, and beholding the
vryne, by and by they ministered medicine to staunch blood: surely a thing to
laugh at, to see the Physicians so deceived. Of this fruit Nuchtli and Tetl,
which is a stone, is compounded Tenuchtlitan, When this City was begun to
be founded, it was placed near unto a great stone that stood in the midst
of the lake, at the foot whereof grew one of these Nopal trees, and therefore
Mexico gives for arms and devise the foot of a Nopal tree springing from a
stone, according to the Cities name.

Others do affirm, that this City has the name of his first founder, called
Tenuch, being the second son of Iztacmixcoatl, whose sons and
descendentes did first inhabit this land of Ananac, called now new Spain.

Howsoever the opinions are, certain it is that the situation is called
Tenuchtlitan, and the dwellers there Tenuchea Mexico.

Mexico is as much to say, as a spring or fountain, according to the property
of the vowell and speech.

Others do affirm, that Mexico has his name of a more auntiente time, whose
first founders were called Mexiti, for unto this day the Indian dwellers in
one street of this city are called of Mexica. The Mexiti took name of their
principallest Idol called Mexitli, who was in as great veneration as
Vitzilopuchtli, God of the war.

Mexico is environed with sweet water, and has three ways to come unto it
by calsey, the one is from the West, and that calsey is a mile and a half
long. Another from the North, and conteyneth three miles in length. Eastwarde
the City has no entrye. But Southwarde the Calsey is six miles long, which
was the way that Cortez entered into the City.

The lake that Mexico is planted in, although it seems one, yet it is two,
for the one is of water saltishe, bitter, and pestiferous, and no kind of
fyshe lives in it. And the other water is wholesome, good and sweet, and
brings forth small fish.

The salt water ebbeth and flows, according to the wind that blows. The
sweet water stands higher, so that the good water falls into the evil,
and reuerteth not backward, as some hold opinion. The salt lake conteyneth
fifteen miles in breadth and fifteen in length, and more than five and forty
in circuit, and the lake of sweet water conteyneth even as much, in such
sort, that the whole lake conteyneth more than thirty leagues, and has about
fifty towns situated round about it, many of which Towns do conteyne five
thousand housholdes, and some ten thousand, yea and one Town called
Tezcuco, is as big as Mexico. All this lake of water springs out of a
Mountain that stands within sight of Mexico. The cause that the one part of
the lake is brackishe or saltish, is, that the bottom or ground is all salt,
and of that water great quantity of salt is daily made.

In this great lake are above two hundred thousand little boats, which the
Indians call Acalles, and the Spanyardes call them Canoas, according to the
speech of Cuba and Santo Domingo, wrought like a kneding trough: some are
bigger than other some, according to the greatenesse of the body of ye tree
whereof they are made. And where I number two hundred thousand of these boats,
I speak of the least, for Mexico alone has above fifty thousand ordinarily
to carry and bring unto the City victual, provision, and passengers, so that
on the market day all ye streets of water are full of them.

The Market place of Mexico.
THe Market is called in the Indian tongue Tlanquiztli: every parish has his
Market place to buy and sell in: but Mexico, and Tlatelulco only, which are yt
chiefest cities, have great fayres and places fit for the same, and
especially Mexico has one place where most days in the year is buying and
selling, but every fourth day is the great Market ordinaryly: and the like
custom is used throughout the dominions of Mutezuma.

This place is wide and large, compassed round about with doors, and is so
great, that a hundred thousand persons come thither to choppe and change, as a
City most principal in all that region. Wherefore the resort is from far
parties unto that place. Every occupatio^ and kind of Marcha^dise has his
proper place appointed, which no other may by any means occupy or disturb.
Likewise pesterous wares have their place accordinglye, (that is to say) stone,
timber, lyme, brick, and all kind of stuff unwrought, being necessary to
build withal. Also mattes both fine and course of sundry workmanship, also
coals, woodde, and all sorts of Earthen vessel glazed and painted very
curiously: Dear skins both raw and tanned in hair and without hair, of
many colors, for shoomakers, for bucklers, Targets, Ierkins, and lyning of
wooden Corselets: also skins of other beasts and foul in feathers ready
dressed of all sorts, the colors and strangeness thereof was a thing to
behold. The richest Merchandise was salt, and mantels of Cotton wolle of
diverse colors, both great and small, some for beds others for garments and
clothing, other for Tapissarie to hang houses, other cotton clothe for linen
breaches, shirtes, table clothes, towels, napkins, and such like things.

There were also Mantels made of the leaves of the tree called Metl, and of
Palm tree, and Connie hear, which are well esteemed, being very warm, but ye
couerlets made of feathers are the best: they sell threede made of Connie
hear, pieces of linen clothe made of cotton wolle, also skaynes of threede of
all colors: also it is strange to see the great store of poultrie that is
brought to that market, and although they eat the flesh of the foul, yet the
feathers serve for clothing, mixyng one sort with another. There are of these
foul so many sorts and several colors, that I can not number them: some
wild, some tame, some water foul, and other some of rapine. All the bravery
of the market, is the place where gold and feathers jointly wrought is sold,
for any thing that is in request is there lively wrought in gold and feathers
and gallant colors. The Indians are so expert and perfect in this science,
that they will work or make a Butter fly, any wild beast, trees, roses,
flowers, herbs, roots or any other thing so lively, that it is a thing
marvelous to behold. It happens many times that one of these workmen in a
whole day will eat nothing, only to place one feather in his dew perfection,
turnyng and tossing the feather to the light of the Sun, into the shade or
dark place, to see where is his most natural perfection, and till his work
be finished he will neither eat nor drink. There are few nations of so much
fleame or sufferance. The Art or Science of Goldsmiths among them is the most
curious, and very good workmanship engraven with toles made of flinte, or in
moulde. They will cast a platter in moulde with eight corners, and every
corner of several metal, that is to say, the one of gold, and the other of
silver, without any kind of sowder: they will also found or cast a little
caudren with lose handles hangyng thereat, as we use to cast a Bell: they will
also cast in mould a fish of metal with one scale of silver on his back and
another of gold: they will make a Parret or Popingay of metal, that his
tongue shall shake, and his head move, and his wings flutter: they will cast an
Ape in mold, that both hands and feet shall stir, and hold a spindle in his
hand seeming to spinne, yea and an apple in his hand as though he would eat
it. Our Spaniardes were not a little amazed at the sight of these things, for
our Goldsmithes are not to be compared unto them. They have skill also of Amell
work, and to set any precious stone. But now as touching the markette, there
is to sell Gold, Silver, Copper, Leadde, Latton, and Tin, although there is
but little of the three last metals mentioned. There are Pearls, Precious
stones, diverse and sundry sorts of Shelles, and Bones, Sponges, and other
pedlers ware, which certainly are many and strange sorts, yea and a thing
to laughe at their Haberdashe toys and trifles. There are also many kind of
herbs, roots, and seeds, as well to be eaten as for Medicine, for both
men, women and children have great knowledge in herbs, for through poverty
and necessity, they seek them for their sustenaunce and help of their
infirmities and diseases. They spend little among Physicians, although there
are some of that Art, and many Poticaries, who do bring into the markette,
ointments, Siroppes, waters, and other drugges fit for sick Persons: they
cure all diseases almost, with herbs, yea as much as for to kill lyse they
have a proper herb for the purpose.

The several kinds of meats to be sold is without number, as Snakes without
head and tail, little Dogs gelte, Moules, Rattes, Long worms, Lyse, yea and
a kind of earth, for at one season in the yiere they have Nets of mayle with
the which they rake up a certain duste that is bredde upon the water of the
lake of Mexico, and that is kneeded together like unto oas of the sea: they
gather much of this victual, and keep it in heaps, and make thereof cakes
like unto brickebats: they sell not only this ware in ye market, but also send
it abroad to other fayres and markets a far of: they eat this meat with as good
stomach as we eat cheese, yea and they hold opinion that this sku^me or
fatness of the water, is ye cause that such great number of foul comes to
the lake, which in the winter season is infinite.

They sell in this market venison by quarters or whole, as Does, Hares, Connies,
and Dogs, and many other beasts, which they bring up for the purpose, and
take in huntyng. There are a great number of shoppes that sell all kind of
orfall and tripes. It is a wonder to see how so much meat ready dressed could
be spent. There is also flesh and fish roasted, boiled and baked, Pies and
Eustardes made of diverse sorts of eggs, the great quantity of bread is
without number. Also corn of all sorts threshed and vnthreshed. The great
store of sundry kinds of fruytes is marvelous which are there sold, both
green and ripe: there is one sort as big as Almondes called Cacao, which
is both meat and curxant money. There are diverse kind of colors to be sold,
which they make of Roses, flowers, fruits, barks of trees, and other things
very excellent: they sell there Honey of sundry kinds, oil of Chian, made of
a seed like unto mustarde seed, and oynting any painted clothe therewith, the
water can not hurt it, they also dress there with their meat, although they
have both butter and larde. Their sundry sorts of wines shall be declared in an
other plate: it would be a prolirious thing to rehearse all the things that
are to be sold in that markette. There are in this fair many Artificers, as
Packers, Barbars, Cutlers, and many others, although it was thought that among
these Indians were none such. All the things recited, and many others which I
speak not of, are sold in every market of Mexico, all the sollers pay a
certain sum for their shops or sta^dings to the King, as a custom, and they
to be preserved and defended from thieves: and for that cause there go
certain Sergeants or officers up and down the market to epsy out
malefactors. In the midst of the market stands a house which may be
seene-throughout the fair, and there sits twelve aunc^ent men for judges to
dispatch law matters: their buying and selling is to change one ware for
another, as thus, one gives a hen for a bundell of Maiz, other give mantels
for salt, or money which is Cacao, and this is their order to choppe and
change: they have measure and strike for all kind of corn, and other earthen
measures for Honey and Wine, and if any measure be falsified, they punish the
offenders and break their measures.

The great Temple of Mexico.
THe Temple is called Teucalli, that is to say, Gods house, Teutl signifies
God, and Calli is a house, a vowell very fit, if that house had been of the
true God. The Spaniards that vnders^a^d not the language, do pronounce and call
those Temples Cues, and the God Vitzilopuchtli, Vchilob^s. There are in Mexico
many parish churches, with towers, wherein are chapels and Altares where the
images and idols do stand, and those chapels do serve for burial places of
their founders, and the Parishioners are buried in the Churchyard. All their
temples are of one fashion, therefore it shall be now sufficient to speak of
the cathedral church. And even as those temples are al in general of one
making in that city. Idoe believe that the like was never seen nor hard off.
This temple is square, and does contain every way as much ground as a
crossebow can reach level: it is made of stone, with four doors that abutteth
upon the three calseys, and upon an other part of the City, that has no
calsey but a fair streate.

In the midst of this Quadern stands a mount of earth and stone square
likewise, and fifty fadom long every way, buylte upward like unto a pyramide
of Egypt, saving the top is not sharp but plain and flat, and ten fadom
square: upon the weast side, are steps up to the top, and were in number
and hundredth and fourtene, which being so many, high, and made of good stone
did seem a beautiful thing. It was a strange sight to behold the Priests,
some going up and some down with ceremonies, or with men to be sacrificed.
Upon the top of this Temple are two great Alters, a good space distant the
one from the other, and so nigh the edge or brimme of the wall, that scarcely a
man might go behind them at pleasure. The one Alter stands on the ^ight
hand, and the other on the left, they were but of five foot high, each of
them had the hacke part made of stone, painted with monstrous and foul
figures, the Chapel was fair and well wrought of Masons work and timber,
every Chapel had three loftes one above another, sustained upon pillars, and
with ye height thereof it showed like unto a fair tower, and beautified the
City a far of: from thence a man might see all the eittie and towns
round about the lake, which was undoubtedly a goodly prospect. And because
Cortes and his company should see the beauty thereof, Mutezuma brought him
thither, and showed him all the order of the Temple, even from the foot to the
top. There was a certain plot or space for the idol priests to celebrate
their service without disturbance of any. Their general prayers were made
toward ye rising of the sun. Upon each alter stands a great idol. Beside
this tower that stands upon the pyramide, there are forty towers great and
small belonging to other little temples which stand in the same circuit, the
which although they were of the same making, yet their prospect was not
westwarde, but otherwise, because there should be a difference betwirte the
great temple and them. Some of these Temples were bigger than others, and every
one of a several God, among the which there was one round temple dedicated
to the God of the air called Quecalcoua^l, for even as the air goes round
about the heavens, even for that consideration they made his temple round. The
entrance of that Temple had a door made like unto the mouth of a Serpent, A
strange door.
and was painted with foul and Devilish gestures, with great teeth and gummes
wrought, which was a thing to fear those that should enter in thereat, and
especially the Christians unto whom it represented very Hell with that ougly
face and monsterous teeth.

There were other Teucalles in the city, that had the as^^nding up by steps in
three places: all these temples had houses by themselves with all service and
priests and particular Gods. At every door of the great temple stands a large
Hall and goodly lodgings, both high and low round about, which houses were
common armories for the City, for the force and strength of every town is the
temple, and therefore they have there placed their store house of munition. They
had other dark houses full of idols, great and small, wrought of sundry
metals, they are all bathed and washed with blood, and do show very black
through their daily sprinklyng and anointing the^ with the same, when any man
is sacrificed: yea and the walls are an inche thick with blood, and the
ground is a foot thick of blood, so that there is a devilish stench. The
Priests or Ministers goes daily into those Oratories, and suffer none others
but great personages to enter in. Yea and when any such goes in, they are
bound to offer some man to be sacrificed, that those bloody hangmen and
ministers of the Devil may wash their hands in blood of those so sacrificed,
and to sprinkle their house therewith. For their service in the kitchen they
have a ponde of water that is filled once a year, which is brought by conduct
from the pryncipal fountain. All the residue of the foresaid circuit serves
for places to breed foul, with gardens of herbs and sweet trees, with
Roses and flowers for the Altars. Such, so great and strange was this temple
of Mexico, for the service of the Devil who had deceived those simple Indians.
There does reside in the same temple continually five thousand persons, and
all they are lodged and have their living there, for that temple is marvelous
rich, and has diverse towns only for their maintenance and reparation, and
are bound to sustain the same always on foot. They do sow corn, and
maintain all those five thousand persons with bread, fruit, flesh, fish,
and firewoodde as much as they need, for they spend more fire woodde than is
spent in the kings court: these persons do live at their hearts ease, as
servants and vassals unto the Gods. Mutezuma brought Cortes to this temple,
because his men should see the same, and to inform them of his religion and
holiness, whereof I will speak in an other place, being the most strange and
cruellest that ever was hard off.

The Idols of Mexico.
THe Gods of Mexico, were two thousand in number, as the Indians reported, the
chiefest were Vitcilopuchtli and Tezcatlipuca, whose images stood highest in
the Temple upon the Altars: they were made of stone in full proportion as big
as a Giant. They were covered with a lawne called Nacar. These images were
besette with pearls, precious stones, and pieces of gold, wrought like birds,
beasts, fishes, and flowers, adorned with Emeralds, Turquies, Calcedons, and
other little fine stones, so that when the lawne Nacar was taken away, the
Images seemed very beautiful to behold.

The Image had for a girdle great snakes of gold, A wicked attire.
and for collors or chains about their necks, ten hearts of men, made of
gold, and each of those Idolles had a counterfaite visor with eyes of glass,
and in their necks death painted: each of these things had their
considerations and meanings. These two Gods were brethren, for Tezcatlipuca
was the God of Providence, and Vitcilopuchtli God of the wars, who was
worshipped and feared more than all the rest.

There was another God, who had a great Image placed upon the top of the
Chapel of Idols, and he was esteemed for a special and singular God above
all the rest. This God was made of all kind of seeds that grows in that
Country, and being ground, they made a certain past, tempered with childrens
blood, and Virgins sacrifised, who were opened with their razures in the
breasts, and their hearts taken out, to offer as first fruits unto the
Idol. The Priests and Ministers do consecrate this Idol with great pomp and
many Ceremonies. All the Comarcans and Citizens are present at the
consecration, with great triumph and incredible devotion. After the
consecration, A mad offering.
many devout persons came and sticked in the dowy Image precious stones,
wedges of gold, and other Jewels. After all this pomp ended, no secular man
might touch that holy Image, no nor yet come into his Chapel, nay scarcely
religious persons, except they were Tlamacaztli, who are Priests of order.
They do renew this Image many times with new dough, taking away the old, but
then blessed is he that can get one piece of the old rags for relikes, and
chiefly for souldyers, who thought themselves sure therewith in the wars. Also
at the consecration of this Idol, a certain vessel of water was blessed with
many words and ceremonies, and that water was preserved very religiously at
the foot of the altar, for to consecrate the King when he should be crowned,
and also to bless any Captain general, when he should be elected for the
wars, with only giving him a draught of that water.

The Charnell house or place of dead men's sculles for remembrance of death.
WIthout the temple, and over against the principal door thereof, a stones
cast distant, stands the Charnell house only of dead men's heads prisoners in
wars and sacrifi^ed with the knife.

This monument was made like unto a Theater, more larger than broad, wrought
of lyme and stone, with ascending steps, in the walls whereof was graffed
betwixt stone and stone a skul with the teeth outward.

At the foot and head of this Theater, were two Towers, made only of lime and
skulles, the teeth outward, and this wall having no other stuff, seemed a
strange sight. At and upon the top of the Theater, were 70. polles,
standing the one from the other four or five foot distant, and each of them
was full of staves from the foot to the top. Each of these staves had others
made fast unto them, so that every of them had five skulles brothed through the
temples. Andrewe de Tapia did certify me, that he and Gonsalo de Vmbria did
reckon them in one day, and found a hundred thirty and six thousand
skulles on the polles, staves, and steps. The other Towers were replenished
out of number, a most cruel custom, being only men's heads slain in
sacrifice, although it has a show of humanity for the remembrance there
placed of death. There are also men appointed, that when one skull falls, to
set up another in his place, so that the number may never want.

How Cortez took Mutezuma prisoner.
HErnando Cortez and his company, were six days in beholding and perusing
the scituatien of the City, and secrets of the same, with the notable things
before rehearsed: they were often visited by Mutezuma, and the Gentlemen of his
Court, and abundantly provided of things necessary for his use, and the
Indians of his company.

Likewise his Horses were cherished and served with green barley and grass,
whereof there is plenty all the year: Likewise of corn, meal, roses, and of
all things that their owners would request, A svveet^ bed.
in so much that beds of flowers were made for them in place of litter. But
yet notwithstanding, although they were in this sort cherished, and also
lodged in so rich a Country, where they might fill their purses, they were
not yet all content and merry, but rather with great fear and care,
especially Cortes, who had the only care as head and chief Captain for the
defense of his fellows, he (I say) was pensive, noting the situation of the
City, the infinite number of people, the state and majesty of Mexico, yea and
some disquietnesse of his own company, who would come and lay unto his
charge the snare and net that they were in, thynkyng it a thing impossible
that any of them could escape, if Mutezuma were thereunto determined, or else
with the least muteny in the world, that might be raised in the City,
although that every inhabitant should throw but one stone at them, or else to
break up the drawbridges, or withdrawing their victuals things very easy to
be done. With this great care that he had of the preservation of his
fellows, and to remedy the peril and danger that he stood in, he
determined to apprehe^d Mutezuma, Determination of Cortez.
and to builte four Foystes to have the lake in subjection, which he had
tofore ymagined, and without the apprehension of the King, he could not come
by the Kingdom: he would very gladly have buylt the Foystes out of hand, but
he left off that pretense only, because he would not delay the emprisonment of
Mutezuma, wherein consisted the effect of all his business, so that forthwith
he minded to put in execution his intent, without gyuing any of his company to
understand thereof.

The quarrel wherewith he had armed himself for that purpose, was, that the
Lord Qualpopoca had slain nine Spanyardes: likewise encouraged him the
great presumption of his letters written to the Emperor Charles his king,
wherein he wrote that he would take Mutezuma prisoner, and dispossess him of
his Empire. These causes considered, he took the letters of Pedro Hircis,
wherein was written, how Qualpopoca was the cause of the death of nine
Spanyardes, and put those letters into his pocket, and walking up and down his
lodging, tossyng too and fro these ymaginations in his brain, full of care of
the great enterprise that he had in hand, yea he himself judging the matter
doubtful, and his head being in this sort occupied, he chanced to espy one
wall more whiter than the rest, and beholding the same, he saw that it was a
door lately dammed up, and calling unto him two of his servant (for all the
residue were asleep) because it was late in the night, he opened that door,
Treasory of Mutezuma.
and went in, and there found sundry halles, some with Idols, some with gallant
feathers, Jewels, precious stones, plate, yea and such an infinite quantity of
gold, that the sight thereof amazed him, and other gallant things that made
him to marvel. He shut this door again as well as he moughte, without
touching any part of that treasure, because he would not make any uproar
therabout, nor yet to delay the emprisonment of Mutezuma, for that treasure was
always there to be had.

The next day in the morning came certain Spanyardes unto him, and many
Indians of Tlaxcallon, saying that the Citizens did go about to conspire their
death, and to break down the bridges of the calseys, to bring their purpose
the better to pass. So that with this news, being true or false, Cortes left
the one half of his men to defend and keep his lodging, and at every cross
steete he planted me, and the residue he sent to the Court by two and two, and
three and three, and he himself came to the pallaice, saying that he must
talk with Mutezuma of matters that did emport their lives. Cortes was
secretly armed. Mutezuma hearing how Cortez attended for him, came forth and
received him, taking him by the hand, and placed him in his seat. Thirty
Spanyardes waited upon Cortez, and the residue above without at ^he door.

Cortez saluted Mutezuma according to his accustomed manner, and began to jest
and talk merrily as he was wont to do. Mutezuma being careless of the thing
that Fortune had prepared against him, was also very merry, (...) pleased
with that conversation. He gave unto Cortez Jewels of gold, and one of his
daughters, and other noble men's daughters to others of his company. Cortes
received the gift, for otherwise it had bin a frent unto Mutezuma. But yet he
informed him, that he was a married man, and that he could not merry with his
daughter, for the Christian law did not permit the same, nor yet that any
Christian inought have more than one wife, upon pain of infamy, and to be
marked in the forehead.

After all this talk ended, Cortez took the letters of Pedro Hircio, and
caused them to be interpreted unto Mutezuma, making his grievous complaynte
against Qualpopoca, who had slain so many Spanyardes through his
commandment, yea and that his subjects had published, that they would kill
the Spanyardes, and break down the bridges.

Mutezuma excused himself earnestly, as well of the one as of the other,
saying, the report given out against his subjects was false and untrue, and
as for Qualpopoca who had slain the Spanyardes, he was innocent thereof: and
because that he should see the troth, he called incontinent certain of his
servants, commanding the^ to go for Qualpopoca, and gave unto them his
seal, which was a stone that he ware at his wrest engraued with the figure of
the God Vitzilopuchtli, and the messengers departed therewith incontinent.

Cortez replied and said: My Lord, your highness must go with me to my
lodging, and there abide, until your messengers return with Qualpopoca, and
the certayn^tie of the death of my men: In my lodging your highness shall
rule and command as you do here in Court, your person shall be well used,
wherefore take you no care, for I will have respect unto your honor, as to
mine own proper, or the honor of my (...) you to pardon me in this my request,
for if I should do otherwise, and dissemble with you, mine own company would
be offended with me, saying that I do not defend them, according to duty.
Wherefore command your householde servants to repose themselves without
alteration, for be you assured, that if any hurt come unto me, or unto any of
mine, your person shall pay the same with life, considering that it lies in
your hand to go quietly with me.

Mutezuma was sore amazed, saying, Sir, my person is not fytte to be a
prisoner, yea, and though I would permit the same, my subjects would not
suffer.

They abode arguing the matter near four hours, and at length Mutezuma was
content to go, having promise that he should rule and govern as he was wont
to do. Cortes commanded a place in his lodging to be trimmed for him, and he
went forthwith thither with Cortes. There came many noble men barefooted,
weeping and lamenting the case, carrying their best garments under their
arms, and brought a rich seat, whereon Mutezuma was placed, and they carried
him upon their shoulders.

When it was blown abroad in the City that Mutezuma was carried prisoner to
the Spaniards lodging, all the City was on an uproar? but yet Mutezuma did
comfort the Gentlemen that carried and followed him weeping, praying them to
cease their lamentation, saying that he was not prisoner, nor yet wont with
the Chrystians against his will, but for his only pleasure. Cortes appointed
a Spanish guard for him, with a Captain, the which he daily changed, and had
Spaniards always in his company to make him past time. A sorovvful pastime.
Also poor Mutezuma was contented with their conversation and gave the^ still
rewards. He was served with his own servants India^s, as at home in his
palace. Cortes always entreated him to put off sadness and to be merry,
permitting him to dispatch suitors, and to deal in all affairs of his estate,
and to comune and talk openly or secretly with his noble me^ as he was wont
to do, and that was but only a bayte to bring them to the book. There was
never Greek nor Romayne, nor any other nation since the name of Kings was
ordained, did give ye like enterprise, as Hernando Cortez did, in taking
Mutezuma prisoner in his own house, being a most mighty King, and in a most
strong fort among infinite people, he having but only 450, companions.

The recreation of Hunting, which Mutezuma used.
MVtezuma had not only all the liberty that he desired in the City, being
prisoner among the Spanyardes, but also Cortes permitted him to hunt and hawk,
or to go to the temple, for he was very deudute, and a great hunter.

When he went a hunting, he was carried upon men's shoulders with eight or ten
Spaniards in his guard, and three thousand Mexicans, who were Gentlemen, his
servants, and hunters, of whom he had a great number, some to seek the
game, others to beat the couertes, and others to mark. Some of those Hunters
were only for hares and connyes, other for all sorts of Dear, Wolves, foxes,
and such like. They were very perfect with their bows, and good markeme^, for
he that missed his mark at fourscore pases distant was punished. It was
strange to see the number of people that went with him on hunting, and to see
the slaughter of beasts killed, with hand, slaves, (...), and bows, (...)
those beasts wire tame, and other brave and (...), and Ounces, It is a h^^de
thing to take a (...) hunting as they do, being in manner a naked people, and
the beast courageous and strong, but yet the Prou^^^e says, slight and cunning
is better than (...).

It is a more strange thing to take any foul that flies in the air as their
Fauconers do, for after they have once marked and set eye upon any foul, the
Faulconers of Mutezuma will under take to catch him, although the foul be
never so swifte of wing, being at the least so commanded, by the King. It
happened one day that Mutezuma stood in his gallerie with his Guarde of
Spanyardes, who had espied a fair Hawk soryng in the air, oh quoth they what
a fair Hawk flies ponder, Mutezuma bearyng their talk, called unto him
certain of his Faulconers, commaundyng them to follow that Hawk and to bring
him unto him. The Faulconers went to fulfill his request, and followed that
foul with such diligence, that in short space they brought the Hawk unto
him, who presented the same unto the Spaniards, and ^^ing truly almost
incredible, but yet certified by word and wrytings of the present witnesses.
Their chiefest and most pleasant pastime of Hauking was, of Kightes, Ranens,
Crows, Pies, and other birds of hardy stomach and (...) in flight, great
and small of all sorts, for the which he had Egles, Buyters, and other foul
of rapyne marvelous swifte of wing, and such as would mount very high in
the air, with the which they murdered Hares, Wolves, and (as some say) Hearts.

He had other foulers, that used Nets, Snares, and sundry engine, Mutezuma
used much to shoot in a tronke, and with his bow killed many wild beasts.
His houses of pleasure as I have before declared, stood six miles from the
City in pleasant wooddes: and always when he went a huntyng after the time
that he was prisoner, the same day he would return again to Cortes his
lodging, although he banketed and feasted with the Spaniardes at his places of
sporting and pastime, and would always at his return to his lodgyng give some
present unto the^, that had accompanied him that day.

Cortes seeing the liberality of Mutezuma, said unto him: sir, my company are
unruly fellows, and as I understand, they have founds out feign of your
treasure, and have made spoil thereof: whenfore I would know your pleasure
what shall be d^^^ with th^^ An^ in effect it was the treasure that Cortes
himself had found out. Mutezuma answered, saying, sir that treasure which
they have found, did appertain unto the Go^des: But yet notwithstanding, let
them leave the seathers, and all such things as are (...) all the (...) take
for you (...) them, and if you will have more, I will provide it for you.

How Cortez began to pluck down the Idols of Mexico.
WHen Mutezuma went unto the temple, he went lea^ing upon a noble man's arm,
^^else was ^^ode betw^^ne two, a^^ a noble personage went (...) before him with
three small wandes in his hand, signifying thereby that the King in person was
there at hand, and in token also of justice and correction, If he had been
carried upon (...) shoulders then at his ^lighting dow^^ he ^^^ke one of those
^^ddes into his own hand. He was a Pri^^^ful of ceren^^^^^^ in all his doings,
but the substance of his estate is already declared, from the time that Cortes
entered into Mexico until this present. Those first days that the (...) the
City, and as often as (...) to the temple, (...) men were slain (...)
sacri^^ce. And to pr^hibite such abominable cr^^ltie and sin, c^^mitted^^
the preson^^ of the Christian^ who went in com^^^ of Mutezuma, Cortes required,
Mutezuma, to commaund^ that no man's flesh should be any more spoiled, or blood
sh^^de in sacrifice, and in not fulfilling his request, he would dest, die ^^th^
the temple and City. Also he signified unto him, that he himself would
throw down the idols, before th^^ presence and all the Citizens.

Mutezuma r^^lied to his ^emau^^, saying: It may please you to leave of your
determination, wast that in so doing all the City fall into an uproar and
rebellion to defend their good Gods, and ancient Religion, the which Gods had
always provided them of water, bread, health, light, and all other things
needful. This notwithstanding, the first time that Mutezuma went to the
temple after his imprisonment, Cortes and his company went with him, and every
of them laid hands upon the idols, and threw them down headlong from their
seats, and Altars, and other Chapels, Mutezuma with this sight was in great
agony, yea and his subjects ready to take weapon to slay them there present,
but yet Mutezuma commanded his subjects to stay from their pretense:
beseechyng Cortes to stay from his proceedings, at whose request (...) ^eas^d,
for he thought as yet time served not for the purpose and pretense: but he
declared unto them by his interpreters as follows.

The exhortation that Cortez made to Mutezuma and to the Citizens of Mexico,
concerning their Idols.
ALl creatures in the world (mighty prince, and y^^ Gentlemen and religions
person^ whether it be ye here or we in Spain, or whatsoever other nation that
it may be) have I say, all one beginning and ending of mortal life, which is
had from God: we are al formed and made of one metal, and have all souls and
senses, even so doubtless as we are like in proportion of body and soul, yea
and kinsfolk in blood, although that by the providence of the same our God,
some are borne fair and beautiful, and other some fo^le and disfigured: some
of one color and some of another: some prudent and wise, and other some fond
and foolish, without either judgment or virtue: in the which his marvelous
works God shows himself just, holy and almighty, giuyng those several
gifts, to the intent that the wise and learned inought teach the rude and
ignorant, and to guide the blind into the right way of salvation, by the
steps of true and vnsayned religion.

Therefore I and my fellows, as your gestes and kinsmen, according to equity
do pr^^ure and wish the same unto you. A man and his life consists in three
things as ye shall understand, that is body, soul, and goods: as for your
goods and riches, which is the least that we desire, for ye know well that
we have taken nothing forcible from you, but ^^ely those things which ye have
freely and liberally given us likewise we have not hurt, misused or molested
your persons, wives or children, nor yet do mean any such thing, your souls
health only is the thing we seek, for your salvation, and that we now
pretend to show; and to give unto you perfect notice of the true and
everlasting God. There is none of natural judgment can deny, but that there
is one God, but yet through ignorance and deceyte of the Devil, will also
think, that there are many Gods, and not acerte unto the true God. But I
(...) say and most assuredly certify you, that there is no other true God,
but only ^e whom we Christians do serve, adore, and worship, the which is
one eternal, without beginning and without end, the only creator and
governor of things created: he alone made the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon,
and Stars, the which his creatures ye do worship: he (I say) founded and
made the Sea, and the sundry and marvelous fishes therein: he planted and made
the land with all the monstrous beasts therein, fowls likewise in the air,
Plants, Herbs, Stones and such like. All the which creatures ye as blind
and ignorant do hold for Gods.

Our almighty God after he had finished and made all the former works with his
own blessed hands, made one man and one woman, and being so formed and wrought,
he put a soul and breath into each body, and then delivered the world unto
them, showing them Paradise and glory. So that of that manne and woman, we all
mortal men proceeded in generation, and in this sort are the handy work of
God, kinsmen and brethren. Now if we will come unto God our father, it is
needful and necessary that we be good, virtuous, pitiful, innocent and under
obedience, the which ye can not be if you worship statues, images, idols,
and use bloody sacrifice of man's flesh. Is there any of you that would
willingly be slain? no truly: why then do you slay other so cruelly, and
where you can put no souls, why do you take them from thence? there is none
of you, nor your false Gods, that can make souls, nor can forge men's bodies of
flesh and bone, for if ye could, there is none of you would be without
children, according to your own appetite and desire, in fashion, beauty and
workmanship. But where our God of heaven does make al creatures, he uses
therein his own discretion, and gives children to whom he pleases: and
therefore is he GOD alone, and for these causes should ye have, esteem, and
worship him for such a mighty God, desiryng of him by prayers to give rain
and temperature, that the earth may bring forth Corn, Fruit, Herbs,
Flesh, Foul, and all other necessaries for the sustentation of life. All
these things the hard stones gives not unto you, no nor yet your dry wooden
images and cold metal, neither yet the small seeds wherewith your servant
and slaves, with their filthy hands do make these images and foul statues,
It was marvel that Corres was not taken for an heretic.
the which ye do worship. O what fond people and mad religious persons,
who worship their own workemanshippe, do ye think that they are Gods that
rotte and moldre away, and have no life, and can neither help nor kill?
Therefore I say unto you, that now and hereafter there is no cause that ye
should have any more idolles, nor yet any more slaughters for sacrifice, no nor
yet to make any more prayers or supplications unto them, being both Blind,
Deaf, and Dumme.

Will ye know who is God, and where he is? lift up your eyes unto Heaven,
and then shall you understand that above is a Godhead or Deity that moves
the heavens, and governs the course of the Sun, rules the Land and
replenisheth the Sea, who provides for Man and Beast both Corn and Water.
This God whom ye now imagine in your hearts, him (I say) serve and
worship, not with death of men or blouddy sacrifice abominable, but with
devotion and humble prayer as we Christians do. And consider well, that to
teach and instruct you, these things, was the cause of our coming hither.

With this exhortation, Cortes aplaked the ire of the Priests and Citizens,
their idols being thrown down, Mutezuma took order that no more should be
set up, commaundyng to sweep and make clean the Chapels of the stinking
blood that was in the^, forbidding sacrifice of man's flesh. Mutezuma and his
officers made a sole^pne vow and promise to permit no more slaughter of men,
and to set up a Cross for remembrance of the death and passion of Jesus Christ
borne of the virgin Marie. The which their promise was well fulfilled, for
after that day the Spanyardes could never hear nor find of any more
sacrifice: But yet there abode in their hearts a mortal rancor, the which
could not long be dissimuled.

Truly in this worthy fact Cortes got more honor than though he had
ouercomen them in battle.

The burning of the Lord Qualpopoca and other Gentlemen.
AFter twenty days that Mutezuma had been prisoner, returned the messengers
who had gone with the seal for Qualpopoca, and brought him, his Son, and
other fiftene principal persons, with them, the which by inquiry made, were
culpable and partakers in the counsel and death of the nine Spaniardes.
Qualpopoca entered into Mexico accompanied like a great Lord as he was, being
borne upon his servant shoulders in rich furniture. As soon as he had saluted
Mutezuma, he and his Son were delivered unto Cortes, with the other fiftene
Gentlemen. Cortes placed them asunder, and commanded them to be put in Irons,
and their examinations taken, they confessed that they had slain those
Spaniardes in battle.

Cortes demanded of Qualpopoca if he were subject to Mutezuma, why (quoth he)
is there any other Prince to whom I might be in subjection? giving almost to
understand that he was a Lord absolute. Cortes answered, that a far greater
Prince was the King of Spain, whose subjects under color of friendship and
salfeconduct he had slain. But (quoth he) now shalt thou make payment
thereof. And being again more straighter examined, they confessed that they
had slain two Spaniards by the advice and inducement of the great prince
Mutezuma, and the residue were slain in the wars, and had assaulted their
houses, and entered their country, wherefore they held it lawful to kill them.

Through the confession pronounced by their own mouths, sentence was given
against them, and they condemned to be burned, which sentence was openly
executed in the market place in sight of all the people, without any mutine or
slander, and with great silence, terror and fear of the new manner of
justice which they saw there executed upon so noble a man, in the chief seat
and kingdom of Mutezuma, being gestes and strangers.

The cause of the burning of Qualpopoca.
AT the time that Cortes departed from Vera Crux, he left in commission to
Pedro Hircio, to procure to inhabit in that place which is called Almeria, and
not to permit Francisco de Garray to soiourne there, for so much as once he was
driven from that coast. Now Hircio to fulfill his commission, sent to require
those Indians with peace and frie^dship, and to yield themselves for vassals of
the Emperor. Qualpopoca Lord of Nahutlan, which is now called as aforesaid
Almeria, sent to advertise Pedro Hircio, that he could not come to yield his
obedience, for the enemies that were in the way: but if it would please him to
send some of his men, for the security of the way, he would willyngly come
unto him. Hircio hearing this answer, sent four of his men, giving credit to
his message, and for the desire he had to inhabit there.

When the sour Spanyardes came into the province of Nahutlan, there met with
them many armed men, who slew two of them, and made thereof a great triumph:
the other two escaped sore wounded, and returned with that news to the Town
of Vera Crux. Pedro Hircio believing that Qualpopoca had done that injury,
armed out against him fifty Spanyardes, and ten thousand Indians of
Zempoallan, with two horses, and two pieces of Ordinance.

Qualpopoca hearing this news, came with a mighty power to drive them out of
his Country, and in that encounter, seven Spanyardes were slain, and many
Zempoallanezes, but at the end he was overcome, his Country spoiled, and
Town sacked, and many of his army slain and taken captives. The prisoners
declared, that by the commandment of the great Lord Mutezuma, all this
uproar was attempted by Qualpopoca: it might well be, for at the hour of
death they confessed the same. But some affirm, they said so, but to excuse
themselves, and to lay the fault to the Mexicans, Hircio wrote these news to
Cortez being in Chololla, and through these letters Cortez apprehended
Mutezuma (as is before declared.)

How Cortez put a pair of gives on Mutezuma his legs.
BEfore the execution of Qualpopoca and his fellows, Cortes declared unto
Mutezuma, that Qualpopoca and his company had confessed, that by his advice and
commandment, the nine Spanyardes were slain, wherein he had done very
evil, they being his friends and guestes: but (quoth he) if it were not in
respect of the love I bear unto you, this matter should not in this sort be
shut up, and then knocked a pair of gives on his legs, saying, he that
kills ought to be killed, according to the laws of God. These things did.
Cortes, because he should occupye himself in his own grief and sorrow, and
to let other men's pass.

Mutezuma waxed pale with countenance of death, through the great fear that he
was in, seeing himself in Irons, a new and strange thing for such a great
King, excusing himself that he was innocent of the fact. And as soon as the
execution of burning was done, Cortez commanded to put away the Irons that
Mutezuma ware, offering him liberty, and willing him to go unto his own
palace, who rejoiced much to see himself out of the Irons, and gave Cortes
most hearty thanks, and refused to go home to his own palace, surmising
that the offer was but words, or else fearing least his subjects would kill
him, seeing him out of the Spanyardes power, for permitting himself to be
taken prisoner, and so to be kept. He said also, that if he went from them,
his subjects would rebel, and compel him to kill the Spanyardes.

Truly the poor simple soul was of small heart and courage, to suffer
himself to be taken prisoner, and after his imprisonment would never procure
liberty, Cortes offering it unto him, and many of his noble men desired him.
And remaining in that order, there was none in Mexico durst offend any
Spanyard for fear of displeasing him, for Qualpopoca came 70. leagues with
only warning him that the great Lord had sent for him, showing him the figure
of his seal, yea and all the peers of his realm that dwelte farthest off,
were ready to obey his commandments.

How Cortez sent to seek for Mines of gold into diverse places.
COrtez had a great desire to know how far the Empire of Mutezuma did
extend, and what friendship was betwixt him and other Kings and Princes
Comarcans, and also to gather together a good sum of gold, to send to Spain
to the Emperor for his custom or first part, with full relation of the
Country people, and things happened until that day. Wherefore he prayed
Mutezuma to show him where the mines were, from whence he and his subjects had
the gold and plate. Mutezuma granted to his request, and incontinent
appointed eight Indians, of the which four were Goldsmythes, who had knowledge
and understanding of Mines, and the other four were guydes for the journey He
commanded them that by two and two they should go into four provinces, that
is to say Zucolla, Malinaltepec, Tenich, and Tutepec, with other eyghte
Spanyardes which Cortez appointed, to have knowledge of the rivers and mines
of gold, and to bring a moster of the same. The eight Spanyardes departed on
their journey, with the other eyghte Indians, with tokens from Mutezuma.
Zucolla is 80. leagues from Mexico, and the Lord thereof is subject to Mutezuma,
who showed unto the Spanyardes three rivers with gold, and gave of each river
a moster thereof, although it were but little, for with want of knowledge they
knew not well the manner how to get it out of the river. These messengers in
their journey too and fro, passed through three provinces full of people and
habitatio^, with good buildings and fruitful ground, and the people of the one
of them called Tlamacolapan, are of good reason and judgment, and better
apparelled than the Mexicans.

Malinaltepec is 70. leagues from Mexico, from whence also they brought mosters
of gold, the which is had out of a great river, by the naturals of that
Country.

Tenich stands up toward the head of the same river of Malinaltepec, who are
people of another language, and would not permit our men to have relation of
the thing that they sought. The Lord of that place is called Coatelicamatl,
who is not subject to Mutezuma, nor yet is his friend, thinking that his men
had bine spies: but when he was informed who they were, he gave the
Spanyardes license to be resolved of their affairs, but straightly commanded,
that the Indians of Mexico should not presume to come into his dominion. When
the Mexicans heard these news, they required the Spanyardes not to credit
that Cazike, saying, that he was an evil and a cruel man, and would surely
kill them. Our men were somewhat amazed, fearing to talk with Coatelicamatl,
although they had his license, seeing the people of the country armed with
Lances of five and twenty foot long: but yet at length leaving cowardice
aside, they proceeded forwards. Coatelicamatl received the^ courteously, and
showed them six or seven rivers with gold, out of the which graynes of gold
were taken in his presence, who gave the same moster unto them, and sent also
his Ambassadors to Cortez, offering his land and person unto him, with
certain mantels, and Jewels of gold.

Cortez more rejoiced of the Embassage, than of the gold and presents, knowing
thereby that Mutezuma his enemies desired his friendship: but Mutezuma and
his counsel liked not the matter, for although Coatelicamatl is no great Lord,
yet his people are good souldyers, and his country full of wilderness, of
Rocks and Mountains. The other that went to Tutepec, which stands near
the sea coast, and twelve leagues from Malinaltepec, returned likewise with
moster of gold of two Rivers, and brought news that the Country was fit to
build upon, with hope to reap much gold, finding once an art to get it
out of the river.

Cortez hearing these news, prayed Mutezuma to build a house there in the name
of the Emperor Charles, who incontinente sent thither workmen and
laborers, which within two months had built a great house, and other
three little houses round about it, with a ponde of water full of fish, and
five hundred Duckes, and a thousand five hundred Turkey cocks and hens, and
much household stuff, so that the gift was worth twenty thousand Castlins
of gold. He gave unto him also twenty bushels of the grain called Centli,
ready sown, and two thousand stocks of trees called Cacauatl, which
brings forth the fruit Cacao, that serves for money and meat. Cortes
began this husbandrye, but yet made not an end thereof, with the coming of
Pamfilo de Naruaiz, and the uproar in Mexico, which shortly followed. He also
besoughte Mutezuma to certify him if there were any sure port or harbor on
the Sea coast, where the Spanish navy might ride in safety: he answered
that he knew of none, but that he would send to make inquiry thereof. And
forthwith he commanded all that coast to be painted in a cloth made of cotton
woll, with all the rivers, bays, creekes and capes that were within his
dominion. In all the same portrayture did not appear any port, skale, or
sure road, saving a gulf that falls out of the Mountains, which place is
now called the harbor of Saint Martine, and Saint Anthony in the province of
Coazacoalco. The Spaniards thought the same to be a straight or passage into
the South sea, to pass unto the Maluccos and spicerie, but they were deceived
although they believed the thing that they desired. Cortes for this purpose
sent ten Spanyardes, all good mariners and Pylots, in company of the
Indians that Mutezuma sent on that voyage at his own cost.

They departed, and came to Chalohicoeca, where first they came aland, the
which place is now called S. John de Vlhua.

They went 70. leagues along the coast, without finding any River, although
they met with many brooks of shallowe water, not fytte for a road for
Ships.

They aported at Coazacoalco, the Lord whereof was enemy to Mutezuma, his
name was Tuchintlec, who friendly received the Spanyardes, for he had
intelligence of them, at their lying at Potonchan. He gave unto them boats, to
sound and seek the River, where they found six fadome in deapth, and went
up that River twelve leagues, where they descryed many great towns, and it
seemed a fruitful soil. This Cazike Tuchnitlec, sent unto Cortes with the
Spaniards certain gold, precious stones, and cloth of cotton, with apparel
made of skynnes, and tigers, requesting his friendship, and to admit him
tributarie to the Emperor, paying yearly a certain portion of his riches,
with such condition, that the Indians of Culhua should not enter into his
jurisdiction.

Cortes much reioysed with these messages, and was glad of the finding of the
fair river, for the Mariners had informed him, that from the river of
Grijalua unto Panuco, was no river to be found, but I believe they were
deceived. Cortes returned back again some of those messengers, with a present
of Spanish ware for Tuchnitlec, and to be better informed of all his meaning,
with a special charge to know the commodity of that port and Country, who
went, and in short time returned well satisfied of their demand: whereupon
Cortes sent thither John Velasques de Leon, for Captain of a hundred and
fifty Spanyardes, with commission to build a fort.

The imprisonment of Cacama, King of Tezcuco.
THe weak courage and stomach of Mutezuma, caused his subjects not only to
murmr, but also to seek means of rebellion, especially his nephew
Cacamazin, Lord of Tezcuco, who was a stout young man and an honorable, and
one yt received great grief of his Uncles imprisonment: and seeing that ye
matter seemed long, he besought his Uncle to procure his liberty, and to show
himself a Lord, and not a slave: but seeing at length that he could not
accept and follow his council, he began to stir in the matter, threatening
the death and destruction of the Spanyardes. Some said, that Cacama did begin
that matter, to revenge the injury and dishonor done unto his Uncle. Others
said, that his meaning was to make himself King of Mexico. Others held
opinion, that his pretense was only to make an end of ye Spaniards. But let it
be for whatsoever purpose. Once he gathered a great army, which he could not
want, although Mutezuma was prisoner, especially against ye Spaniards. He
published that he would redeem his Uncle out of Captivity, and expulse the
Strangers, or else kill and eat them.

This was a terrible news for the Christians, but yet for all those bragges
Cortes dismayde not, rather he determined forthwith to prepare himself for
the wars, and to besiege him in his own house and Town, saving that
Mutezuma disturbed him, saying that Tezcuco was a place very strong, and
situated in water, and that Cacama was a man of bold and stout courage, and
had at commandment the Indians of Culhua, and was also Lord of Culhuacan
and O^umpa, which were fortes of great strength, thinking to bring the matter
to a better pass another way: so that Cortez ruled himself by the counsel of
Mutezuma, and sent unto Cacama, praying him to have in remembrance the
friendship that had bin betwixt them two, from the time that he came and
brought him into Mexico, and that always peace was better than war, and
especially for a noble man of vassals, for the beginning of wars was pleasant
to him that knew not what wars meante: and in so doing, he should do both
pleasure and service to the King of Spain.

Cacama answered, that he had no friendship with him that would take away his
honor and kingdom, Cacama was wise.
and that the wars which he pretended, was profitable for his vassals, and in
defense of their Country and Religion, yea and before he determined peace, he
meante to revenge his Uncles wrongs and his gods.

Also (quoth he) what have I to do with the King of Spain, who is a man that
I know not, no nor yet would gladly hear of him.

Cortez turned again to admonish and require him diverse times to leave off
his determination, and wylled Mutezuma to command him to accept his offer.

Whereupon Mutezuma sent unto him, desiryng him to come unto Mexico, to take
some order in those controversies and discordes betwixt him and the Spanyardes.

Cacama answered very sharply unto his Uncles request, saying, if you had
blood in your eye, or the heart of a Prince, you would not permit your self
to be prisoner, and captive of four poor strangers, who with their fair
speech and flatteryng talk have bewitched you, and usurped your kingdom, no
nor yet, suffer the Gods of Culhua to be thrown down and spoiled, yea and
the Mexican religion and holy places, violated and trodden with thieves feet
and deceyuers: likewise the honor, glory, and fame of your predecessors
blotted and abased, through your faint stomach and cowardice. But
notwithstanding, according to your request, and to repair our religion to
restore the Gods to their Temples, to preserve the kingdom, and to procure
liberty for you and the City, I will obey your commandment: But how? not
with my hands in my bosom, but like a warrier, to kill those Spaniardes who
have so affrented the nation of Culhua. Our men stood in great peril, as well
of the losing of Mexico as of their own lives, if this war and mutiny had
not soon been qualified: for why? Cacama was valiant, stout, and a good
soldier, yea and well furnished of men of war: also the Citizens of Mexico,
were desirous of the same, for to redeem Mutezuma their prince, and to kill
the Spaniardes, or else to expulse them out of the City.

But poor Mutezema remedied the matter, knowing or foreseing, that wars
would not prevail, yea and believed, that at the end all should fall upon his
back. He dealt with certain Captains and Gentlemen that dwelt in Tezcuco
with Cacama, to apprehend him, and bring him prisoner, considering that he was
their king and yet alive. But whether it were, that those Captains had served
Mutezuma in the wars, or whether it were for gifts and rewards, they
apprehended Cacama being in counsel among them, treatyng of his wars
pretended, and embarked him in a boat armed for the purpose, and so brought
him to Mexico without any further slander or strife, and when he was comen to
Mexico, they put him on a rich seat, as the Kings of Tezcuco were wont to
sit upon, being the greatest Prince in all that land next unto Mutezuma: and
in this sort brought him before his uncle, Cacama prisoner.
who would not look upon him, but commanded him to be delivered unto Cortes,
who incontinent clapped a pair of gives on his legs, and a pair of manacles
on his hands, and put him into sure Guarde and custody.

After that Cacama was in this order prisoner, with the consent of Mutezuma was
elected Lord and Prince of Tezcuco and Culhuacan, Cucuzca, Cacama his younger
brother, who was abidyng in Mexico with his uncle, and fled from his brother:
Mutezuma did entitle him with the ceremonies accustomed unto Princes newly
elected and chosen. So that forthwith he was obeyed in Tezcuco by Mutezuma his
commandment, for he was there better beloved than Cacama, who was somewhat of
a crooked nature. In this sort was remedied all the former peril, but if there
had been many Cacamas, it would have fallen out otherwise.

Here Cortes made kings, and commanded with as great authority as though he
had obtained already the whole Empire of Mexico: and certainly since his
first entry into that country, he had an assured hope to win Mexico, and to be
Lord over the whole state of Mutezuma.

The Oration that Mutezuma made unto his Noble men, yielding himself to the
King of Castile.
AFter the imprisonment of Cacama, Mutezuma proclaimed a Parliament, unto the
which came all the Seniors Comarcans, and being all together, he made the
Oration followyng unto them.

My kinsmen, friends and servants, ye do well know that eightene years and
have been your king, as my fathers and Grandfathers were, and always I have
been unto you a loving Prince, and ye unto me good and obedient subjects, and
so I hope you will remain all the days of my life. Ye ought to have in
remembrance, that either ye have heard of your fathers, or else our adeuines
have instructed you, A fond belief^.
that we are not naturalles of this country, nor yet our kingdom is durable,
because our forefathers came from a far country, and their king and captain
who brought them hither, returned again to his natural country, saying that
he would send such as should rule and govern us, if by chance he
himself returned not. Believe ye assuredly, that the king which we have
looked for so many years, is he that has now sent these Spaniardes, which
ye here see. Who does certify, that we are their kinsmen, and that they
have had notice of us a long time: let us therefore give thanks unto the
Gods, that now they are comen in our days, being a thing that we so much
desired.

Ye shall now do me service and pleasure, that ye yield your selves unto
this Captain for vassals of the Emperor King of Spain our soueraygne, I my
self have already yielded me for his seruitour and friend, praying you that
from hence forwards ye obey him as ye have obeyed me. And that ye yield and
pay unto him the tributes, customs and service that ye were wont to pay unto
me, and in so doing, ye can do me no greater pleasure. Poor Mutezuma.
His heart then would not suffer him to speak any more, with the sobbes,
sighs, and tears, that fell from his eyes. All his subjects there present
fell into a cry, weepyng and mournyng, that for a good space they had no power
to speak: they gave shrykes, and sighings, vtteryng with their mouths many
doleful, and sorrowful speeches, yea that it pitied our own men at the
hearts. But in conclusion, they answered that they would obey his
commandment. Then Mutezuma and the Burgesses of Parliament in order yielded
themselves for vassals of the king of Castile, promising loy altie. This act
was set down by the Notarie, and with witnesses auctorized. Then the Indians
departed home to their houses with sorrowful hearts, God knows, as you may
imagine. It was a strange thing to see Mutezuma weep with so many Noble men
and Gentlemen, yea and with what grief they became subjects to an unknown
Prince, but they could not otherwise do, seeing that Mutezuma did command
the same.

Also they had a certain Prognostication and forwarning by their Priests of
the coming from the east parties a strange people, A true prophecy.
white of colourand bearded men, who should win and rule that country.
Likewise there was a secret talk among them, that in Mutezuma should end and
finishe, not alone the lynage of Culhua, but also the Empire and kingdom:
therefore some were of opinion, not to name him Mutezuma which signifies,
agrieued with misfortune. They say also that Mutezuma himself had many times
answer of the Oracle of the Gods, that in him should finishe the Mexican
Emperors, and that no child of his should succeed in his kingdom, and that
he should lose his seat in the eight year of his reign: and for these causes
he would never procure war to withstand the Spaniardes, beleuyng that they
should be his successors. Yet on the other side he thought his opinion would
take no place, for that he had raygned seuentene years: But this should seem
to come from the providence of God, which gives kingdoms and takes them
away.

Cortes gave unto Mutezuma most hearty thanks on the behalf of the Emperor,
and for himself, and comforted him, who was very sad, promysing also that
always he should be king and Lord, and command as heretofore he had done,
and better, yea and also he should be chief ruler of all the other lands and
countries, that he should get and bring to the service of the Emperor.

The Gold and Jewels that Mutezuma gave unto Cortes for tribute.
AFter certain days that Mutezuma and his counsel had yeelden their
obedience, Cortes said unto him, how that the Emperor was at great costs and
charges in his wars, wherefore it should be necessary that his new vassals
should begin to serve in some thing, and to pay their tribute, willing him to
send throughout his dominion to see what could be gathered of Gold, and that
he himself should begin first to pay tribute to the example of others.
Mutezuma answered that he was contented so to do, willing that some of his men
should go unto the house of foul for the same. There went many, and there
saw gold in planches like brickebattes, Jewels, and pieces wrought in a hall,
and two chambers which were opened unto the^. The Spaniardes wo^dering at the
sight, would not touch any thing, without giving first advertisement to
Cortes, who incontinent went thither, and caused it all to be carried to his
lodgyng: besides this treasure Mutezuma gave unto him rich clothes of cotton
and feathers maruelously wouen in figures and colors, it seemed without
comparison, for the Spaniardes had never seen the like: he gave unto him more,
twelve shooting tronkes, wherewith he himself was wont to passetime: some of
them were payn^ed with birds, beasts, flowers and trees very perfect, a work
surely much to be commended: and some of them were engraue^ very curiously,
with their mouldes and pellets of gold.

He sent also his servants by two and two, and five and five, each company
with one Spaniarde, to the Lords of other provinces, fourscore, and a bundred
leagues from Mexico, to gather in gold for the accustomed tributes, and new
service to the Emperor. Every Lord and Seignior paid the quantity appointed
and taxed by Mutezuma, in gold, plate, jewels, stones and pearls.

The messengers returned, although they had tarried somewhat long on their
journey, of whom Cortes received all that they brought, and caused it to be
molten, out of the which was had in fine gold 1600000. Castlins, of the value
of seven shillings and six pence the piece, and rather more, and also five
hundred marks of plate, after six Ducates the mark.

This treasure was divided among the Soldiers, but not all: every man was
paid according to his office. The horsemen had twice as much as the footmen.
Also C^rte's was paid out of the stock the money promised him in Vera ^rux.

There came to the kings part. 32000. Castlins and a bundred marks of plate,
the which was wrought there in platters, saucers, cups, ewers and other
pieces, according to the Indian fashion, to be sent to the Emper^ur. Besides
this, the present that Corte* laid afide, and take out of the sto^ke to send
to ye Emperor, was worth. 100000. Ducates, in pearls, precious stones, gold,
and feathers, feathers and filuer, and many other tewels, as the gallant
tr^nkes, which beside their, value were strange to dehold, wrought with the
bravery aforesaid. This present appointed, was not sent, for that and all the
rest was afterward lost at the troubles in Mexico, as hereafter shall more
plainly appear.

How Mutezuma required Cortez to depart from Mexico.
COrtes seeing himself rich and mighty, he occupied himself in three things,
the one was to send unto Santo Domingo and other Islands, news of his
proceedings and prospotitie, and also m^ney to provide men, horses and
armor, for his own company were to few for so great a country. The other
was, to take fully and wholly the state of Mutezuma, having him prisoner, and
also at his commandment Tlaxcallan, Coa^elteamath, and Tuchintlec, knowing
also that the Indians of Panuco, Tecoantepe^, and Mechuatun, were mortal
enemies to the Mexicans, who would aid and assist him having need of their
help, his third pretense was, to procure all the Indians to be Christened,
the which purpose he took first in hand, as a thing most nede^ full. On the
other side, Mutezuma repented himself, having news that Pamfilo de Naruaiz
was arrived, who came as enemy to Cortes, yea and after all this he was at
length driven out of Mexico, These notable things shall be re^ersed in their
order. But now Mutezuma came, and desired Cortes to depart out of his
country, adnising him that otherwise both be and his men were in peril of
killyng, saying also, that three especial causes moved him to this request:
the one was, the daily suit of his subjects, who enportuned him to come out of
captivity, and to murder the Spanyardes, saying, that it was a great shame for
them to suffer their Prince to be in prison in the power of so few
strangers, whom they might use as a footebal: having dishonored the^ and
robbed them of their goods, gatheryng and heaping up their gold for
themselves, and for their king, who as seemed by their doings, was but a poor
fellow, and if he would not accept their offer and suit, that then of their
own authority they would take the thing in hand, for so much as he refusing
to be their king they would also refuse to be his vassals, giuyng warnyng and
advice that he should look for no better reward at the Spaniardes hands,
than Qualpopoca and Cacama his Neuewe had received, although they should
flatter him never so much.

An other cause was that the Devil had appeared unto him, and willed him to
kill those Christians, or drive them out of the land, threatnyng him that if
he did not so, that then he would go from him and never talk any more with
him, for (quoth he) with their gospels, baptism and devotion, they do much
displease me. Mutezuma answered him, that there was no reason to kill the^
being his friends and honest men, but he would entreat them to depart, (unto
this) the Devil answered that he should do so, and therein he would receive
great pleasure, for either he would go his way and leave him, or else that
Christian fellows should depart, for they sow here (quoth he) a Christian
faith y^ which is much against our Religion, and can not dwell both together.
Another cause was, that Mutezuma was not well pleased with the imprysonment of
Cacama, who^ once he loved excedyng well: so in fine, secretly he repented him
of all that was past in the Spanyardes favor, and chiefly by the persuasion of
the Devil, who said that he could not do unto him a more acceptable
service, and of greater pleasure to the Gods, than to expel the Spaniardes
and abolishe the name of Christians, and in so doing, the seat of Kings should
not finish in the lineage of Culhua, but rather be enlarged, and his children
should reign after him, wishing him not to believe in prophes^es, sithence the
eight year was past, and was now in the eyghtenth year of his reign. For
these causes, or possible for other which we know not off, Mutezuma prepared
an army of a hundred thousand men so secretly, that Cortes knew not thereof,
to the effect, that if the Spanyardes would not depart, being once more
required, that then he meant not to leave one of them alive. With this
determination, he came for the one day into the yard or court, and had long
conference and consultation with his Gentlemen about this matter. This done,
he sent for Cortes, who liked not this news, saying to him self, I pray God
this message be to good purpose, and taking twelve of his men which were
readyest at hand, went to know wherefore he had sent for him. Mutezuma arose
from the place where he sat, and took Cortez by the hand, commanding a
stool to be brought for him, and so sat them down both together, and began
his talk as follows. Sir, I beseech you to depart from this City and
Country, for my Gods are sore offended with me, because I do, and have
permitted you here so long: demand of me what you please, and it shall be
given you, because I love you well: and think you not, that I give you this
warning in jest, but rather in good earnest, therefore it is convenient, that
you depart. It seemed strange unto Cortez this talk. Also he saw by the
countenance of Mutezuma, that some thing was a working, and before the
interpreter of Mutezuma had made an end of his talk, Cortes willed one of his
me^ to go forthwith, and to advise all his fellows, saying, yt the weight of
their lives was in question. Then our me^ called to remembrance what was told
them in Tlaxcallon, considering that it was needeful of courage and help from
God to bring them out of that danger. When Mutezuma had ended his tale, I have
(quoth Cortes) understood your meaning, A surtle Fox.
and do thank you for the same: also I would know when it is your pleasure
that we should depart, and it shall be done. Even when it please you (quoth
Mutezuma) take the time that you think meet, and against that time will I
prepare a hundred waighte of gold for you, and fifty pound weight to each of
your me^.

Cortes said, you know; that when I came into this Country, I commanded all
my Ships to be sonke, so that now I have need of ^^ne conueniente to build
vessels to earrie us into our Country wherefore my request is that you
command some of your Carpe^ters to be called, to cut down timber for the
purpose, for I have men that can make the vessels. And this done, we will
depart, so that you give us the gold which you have promised, and certify
you the same to your Gods and vassals.

Mutezuma received great pleasure at this answer, and said, your request
shall be fulfilled: and incontinente he sent for many Carpenters. Likewise
Cortes prepared certain of his Mariners for Shipwrightes. All the which
workmen went unto great woddes of Pinetrees, and there cut down the ^^mber
necessary for the purpose. Mutezum^ being a simple man, gave credit to all
Cortez his talk: Cortes likewise advertised his men of his proceedings, and
said unto them, M^^^zuma would have us depart out of his Country, because his
vassals and the Devil ha^he entised him thereunto: wherefore it is needful
that we build shipping, and therefore I pray you go with these Indians, and
procure to cut down the best timber fit for our purpose, and in tho (...) God
will provide for us, whose affairs w^ have (...) in hand, of remedy and
succor in suthe sort th^^ine lose not this fruitful country. It is also
necessary, that when you come unto the wodde, that you make all the delay
possible, giving a show that you are busse occupied, and with great desire to
make an end, that those Indians may suspect nothing of our pretense. Depart
in Gods name, and advise me always what does pass in your affairs.

The fear that our men stood in to be s^crisis^d.
EIght days after their departure toward the wodder, arrived fifteen sail of
ships at the coast of Chalch^^oeca. The Indians of that coast adiused M^tezuma
thereof, who was not a little afraid with the news, and called Cortes unto
him, who feared as much some uproar there, and when they showed Cortez ye
Mutezuma was come forth into the yard, he suspected that if Mutezuma pleased,
they should be all destroyed. Wherefore he said unto his men, masters and
friends, Mutezuma has sent me, considering what passed this other day, I hold
it for no good token, I now go to know his will: wherefore, whatsoever
happen, be you always vigilant and ready, commending your selves to God.
Remember also whom ye are, and who are these Infidels, abhorred of God, and
friends unto the Devil, without weapon, and experience in war: if we chance
to fight, the hands of each of us shall show by deed with sword, the valor
and courage of our hearts: yea, and although we all die, yet shall we remain
with victory, for that we have fulfilled the thing we took in hand, and the
service which we owe unto God as faithful Christians, with our duty as true
subjects to our prince. They all answered, saying, we will do all our
possibility while life lasts, without fear of peril or danger, for we
less esteem death than honor. With this answer Cortes went to Mutezuma,
who said unto him, Senior Captain, you shall understand that now you have
Ships wherein you may depart, therefore now at your pleasure make you ready.

Cortez answered, not knowing of that shipping, saying, Mighty Sir, when my
Ships are finished I will depart, nay (quoth Mutezuma) I mean not those
Ships, for there are arrived eleven other Ships at the coast near unto
Zempoallan, and shortly I shall be certifyed, whether the people that are come
in them, are come a shore, and then shall we know what people, and how many
they are in number. Blessed is Jesus Christ (quoth Cortez) unto whom I give
most hearty thanks for his great mercies showed unto me, and to the Gentlemen
of my company. One of Cortes his men went to show the glad tidings to their
fellows, who then received double strength, praising God, and embraced one
another with great pleasure and joy. And Cortes with Mutezuma being in
communication together, came another poast, who brought news of fourscore
Horsemen that were landed, with eight humdred footmen, and twelve pieces of
Ordinance, At the time of need provides God.
and showed painted in a cloth the whole relation both of men, horses, ships,
and ordinance.

Mutezuma hearing the news that this poast had brought, arose from his
seat, and took Cortes in his arms, saying, now do I more love you, than I
have done heretofore, and will this day dyne with you. Cortes gave him thanks
for the one and the other, and in this sort went hand in hand to Cortes his
Chamber, who willed his Spaniards not to make any extraordinary joy, or
alteration, but that they should keep all together with vigilant watch, and
to give hearty thanks unto God for the comfortable news. Mutezuma and Cortes
dyned together with great content and pleasure, the one thynking to abide and
to enjoy the kings state and Country, the other thinking that then they would
avoid the land. But notwithstanding all these ymaginations, a certain Indian
Captain importuned Mutezuma secretly to kill all Cortes his men, being but
few in number, and then should he be the readier to dispatch the others that
were newly come, and not to permit them to join one with another: yea and
again, when the new come men should know of the death of their
countrymen, they would not presume to abide in the land.

With this counsel Mutezuma called many his friends and chief estates to
counsel, propounding the case and judgment of the Captain, which being
among them thoroughly heard, there were many of sundry opinions, A drunken
reckoning.
but the conclusion was, to permit the other Spaniards to come, saying, the
more enemies, the more gain, and if we kill but those which are here, then
the others will return to their ships, and so shall we not make the solemn
sacrifice of them to the Gods, according to our desire. Mutezuma was occupied
in this counsel with five hundred noblemen and Gentlemen daily, and according
to determination, they commanded to cherish and serve Cortes and his company
more than ordinary, saying their joy was at an end.

How James Velasques sent Pamfilo de Naruaizagainst Cortes.
James Velasques being sore agreeued, with desire of revenge against Cortes,
not only for his expenses at the time of preparation of Cortes his fleet,
which was but small, but of mere hatred of the present honor and prosperity
of Cortes. Whereupon he invented great causes and quarrels againsto him,
saying and alleging, that Cortez had not given account of his proceedings
unto him, being Gouernoure of Cuba, and Cortez his Deputy, but rather without
his consent and knowledge, had sent to Spain to the King, advise of his
discovery, as who would say, that was treason, or an evil fact: but chiefly
his fury was, knowing how Cortes had sent an honorable present, with the Kings
part or portion of treasure unto Spain, yea and whole relation of the
discovery, with Francisco de Monteio, and Alounso Fernandez Portocarrero, the
which proceedings James Velasques meant to disturb, for that he had laid
in ambushe a coupell of caruels, to have taken Cortes his present, and
messengers, the which his pretense and purpose took no place, so that with
the prosperous news of Cortes, his fury and madness the more increased,
ymagining still his destruction.

And being occupied in these sonde ymaginations, it happened that his Chaplin,
one Benito Martine, brought letters from the Emperor unto him, with title
and letters pattentes, of General and chief Governor of all that then was
discovered, inhabited, and conquered in the land and coast of Yucatan. With
this news, Velasques began to triumph, not only so much for the honor, as also
to drive Cortez from Mexico. Whereupon, he incontinent prepared this Fleet or
Navy of eleven Ships, and seven Vergantines, with nine hundred men, and
fourscore Horses, and appointed one Pamfilo de Naruaez for Captain General,
and his Deputy in the regiment of the Country: and for his more quicker
dispatch, he himself went with him throughout that Island, till they came to
Guaniguanico, which is the Westermost harbor of the Island, and being there
Naruaez ready to depart for Mexico, and Velasques to return to Cuba, came the
lisenciat Lucas Vasques de Aillon, a chief Judge of Santo Domingo, in name of
the whole Chancery, to require Velasques upon great penalties, that he should
not permit or suffer Pamsfilo de Naruez to proceed on that voyage against
Cortes, which would be cause of Murder, civil wars, and other mischiefs
among the Spaniards, yea and that Mexico should be in danger of losing, with
all the rest that was conquered, and in quiet to the Kings use, saying unto him
moreover, that if there were any discord between them for goods, or points
of honor, that then it did apperteyne to the Emperor to judge, and determine
the cause, and not that he himself should be judge in his own cause, using
force against the other party, praying them for the service of God and the
King, that if they would go to conquer, that then they should seek other
Countries, having so good an army and fleet, and Countries enough to seek.
This diligence, request and authority of the Licenciate Aillon, to Velasques
and Naruaez prevailed not: A noble Judge.
he seeing their obstinacy and little regard to him being a chief Judge,
determined to go with Naruaez in his Ship, to let and disturb the great
hurt that might follow, thinking there in the new Spain to persuade Naruaez,
better than in the presence of Velasques, yea and also if need should be, to
be a mean of quietness betwixt them.

Pamfilo de Naruaez took shipping in Guaniguanico, and sailed till he came
near unto Vera Crux with all his fleet, and having intelligence that there
were a hundred and fifty Spaniards of Cortes his band, he sent unto them a
Priest, with one John Ruiz de Gueuara, and Alonso de Vergara, to require them
to receive him for their Captain and gouernoure. But the new Citizens would
give no care to their talk, but rather apprehended them, and sent them
prisoners to Mexico to Cortez, to advertise him of their embassage, wherevpo^
Naruaez unshipped his men, horses, armor, and artillery, and went with the^
directly to Ze^poalla^. The Indian Comarcans being as well friends to Cortez,
as vassals to Mutezuma, gave unto him gold, mantels, and vittayles, thinking
that they had bin Cortez his men.

The substance of a letter that Correz wrote unto Naruaez.
BEfore Cortes knew the effect of the coming of this new fleet, his head was
sore troubled, for, on the one side he was glad of the coming of his own
nation, on the other side he liked not so great an army. Likewise he ymagined,
that if they came to succor him, he held the Country for conquered: also if
that they were come against him, he judged the Country to be lost. He judged
also, that if they were come from Spain, that then they had brought to him
the thing looked for, but if they were come from Cuba, he feared civil wars.
He also thought, that from Spain could not come so many folk in so short
space. Finally, he deemed, that his old enemy James Velasques was come
personally, but when he knew the whole truth, then was he much more pensive,
thinking that the thread of his prosperity was cut asunder, yea and that they
would be mean to stop the gappes of the whole discovery, both of the
secrets of the land, mines and treasure, as also, in the knowledge of the
friends or enemies of Mutezuma. It should be also a let to inhabit the places
which he had begun, yea and also to Christen the Indians, which was the
principal thing that he pretended, yea and a let or stop of many other things
begun in y^ service of God and the prince, fearing also by flying from one
inconvenience, to fall into many, and also if he should permit Pamphilo de
Naruaez to come unto Mexico, it should be a mean of his perdition: if
likewise he should encounter him, he feared some rebellion in the City, and
the setting at liberty of Mutezuma, putting in peril his own honor, life,
and travail: and to avoid all these dangers and inconveniences, he
determined remedy. First, he dispatched two men, the one unto John Velasques
de Leon, who was gone to inhabit at Coazacoalco, willing him at the sight of
his letter to repair unto Mexico, giving him advise of the coming of Naruaez
and of the great need that he stood in, of him and his company. The other
messenger he sent to Vera Crux, to bring full relation of the arrival of
Naruaez, and what was his pretense.

The letter sent to John Velasques, came no sooner to his hand, but forthwith
he obeyed and fulfilled the same, contrary to the expectation of Naruaez, for
he was his brother in law, and kinsman unto James Velasques. Cortes seeing his
constancy, had him ever after that time in great estimation.

From the Vera Crux came twenty of the towns men with certificat what Naruaez
had published, and brought with them a priest, with Alonso Gueuara and John
ruiz de Vergara, who had comen to Vera Crux to amotiue the town, under color
that they had brought the commission from the king. Cortes on the otherside,
sent unto Naruaez seignior Bartholome de Olmedo, with other two Spaniards, to
offer unto him his friendship, and otherwise to require and command him on
the behalf of the king and of his own, as chief justice of the land, and in
the name of the rulers and Aldermen of the town of Vera Crux, who were then in
Mexico, that he should enter peaceably, without making any alteration until
his authority and commission were seen and allowed, and to make no slander
or uproar to the hindera^ce of the king his masters procedings.

But all this diligence and letters of Cortes and the other rulers prevailed
not, he seeing this, set at liberty the priest that was brought prisoner, and
sent him unto Naruaez, with certain rich collers of gold, and other jewels
with a letter, wherein he wrote, that he was more gladder of his coming in
that fleet than any other, for the friendship and old acquaintance that had
been betwixt them, desiring him that they might talk and co^ferre together,
alone, for to take order to prohibit wars, sedition, bloudshedde and
disquietnesse among them, being of one nation and brethren, requestyng him to
show his commission from the king unto him, or unto the counsel of Vera Crux,
and he would willingly obey it as reason did require: and if he had not brought
any such commission, yet he would make some honest agreement with him. Pamfilo
de Naruaez seeing himself strong and mighty, did little regard Cortes his
letters, offers, nor requests, and chiefly because James Velasques was sore
displeased with Cortes.

The talk of Naruaez to the Indians, and his answer to Cortes.
PAmphilo de Naruaez declared to the India^s that they were deceived with their
opinion in Cortes, for that he alone was Captain general and chief Lord,
and that Cortes was but a naughty man, and so were all they of his company
which are now in Mexico, who were all but his boys, A foul brag.
and that his present coming was to cut of Cortes his head, and to chasten the
others, likewise he meant to drive them all out of the country, and then to
depart himself, and to leave them in full liberty.

The Indians gave credit to his talk seeing so many bearded men and horses,
and thereupon began to attend and serve him, leauyng their old friends in
Vera Crux. Also Naruaez began to flatter Mutezuma, and sent him word that
Cortes aboade in that country against the will of his Prince, and that he was
a covetous rebel, who robbed his country, and that he pretended to kill
Mutezuma. and to make himself king. Also that his coming was to set him at
liberty, and to restore unto him all that those wicked fellows had taken from
him. And because that others should take example of their factes, he would
command them all to be slain, willing him to take no care, for in short
space they would see each other. And that when he had set him at liberty with
restitution of his goods, he would incontinent depart his country. These
treaties were so foul and abominable, with the injurious words which Pamfilo
de Naruaez spoke openly against Cortes and his men, yea they seemed odious unto
all his own host and army, and some of his own me^ checked him for the same,
especially Barnardin^ de Santa Clara, who seeing the country so peaceable and
so well pleased with Cortes, he could not let but reprehende Naruaez in his
words. Also the licenciat Aillon required him diverse times to cease from his
slanderous talk, upon pain of death and loss of his goods, and also not to
proceed toward Mexico, for the great hurt that might ensue, with slander
among the Indians, disquietnesse among the Spaniardes, and offense to the
Emperor his Majesty. Pamfilo de Naruaez being moved with his talk laid hand
upon Aillon, being a chief judge for the King, and apprehended also his
Secretary and an other officer, and forthwith shipped them, and sent the^ to
James Velasques governor of Cuba. But when Aillon saw himself at sea, and
free from Naruaez, he began to threaten ye Mariners, commanding the^ not to
presume to carry him to Cuba to Velasquez his power, but only to Santo
Domingo, where he was one of ye kings counsel in chancery: the Mariners
fearing the Kings justice, obeyed his commandment and when he was aported at
Santo Domingo, he wholly informed the Counsel there, of Naruaez and his wicked
dealyng, whose testimony and information did much blemishe the credit of
Velasques, A cruel proclamation.
and exalt the travels of Cortes. After that Naruaez had shipped away Aillon,
he proclaimed war with fire and sword against Cortes, and promised certain
marks of Gold to him that should apprehende or kill him, or Pedro de
Aluarado, and Gonsalo de Sandoual, with other principal persons of his
company. Also he made division of his goods among his me^ before they came to
possess it. A mad ^eckenyng.
Surely these three points were of a man without wisdom or discretion.

Many of Naruaez his company did amotiue themselves, through the commandment
of the Licenciat Aillon, and through the same and liberality of Cortes.
Whereupon incontinent one Pedro de Villalobos a Portingal, and six or seven
more fled unto Cortes, yea and others wrote unto him, offering themselves to
his service, if by chauce they should encounter.

Cortes received the letters, A good captain and a wise.
but kept in silence from his company the firmes of those which had written to
him. Some do think that Cortes had suborned them with letters, fair
promises, yea and a horse load of chains and planches of gold, which he
sent secretly to Naruaez his camp with a servant of his, publishing
likewise, that he had an army of two hundredth Spaniardes in Zempoallan, where
he had none at all: these policies might well be, for he was prudent, careful
and quick in his business, and Pamfilo de Naruaez was slothful and
careless.

Naruaez made answer to Cortes his letter by seignior Bartholome de Olmedo,
the substance of his message was, that forthwith he should repair to the
place where he was abiding, and there he should see the Emperors commission
and order, wherein was authority given to him to take and keep that country
for James Velasques, yea and that already he had made a town of men only,
with all officers thereunto appertayning.

After this letter and message sent, he dispatched likewise one Barnaldino de
Quesada, and Alonso de Mata, to require Cortes to depart and leave the country
upon pain of death, and to notify unto him these acts by order of law.
Cortes laid hand upon Alonso de Mata, because he named himself the kings
Notary, and showed no title or authority for the same.

The talk that Cortez had with his own Soldiers.
COrtes perceiving the small fruit that his letters (presents) and
messengers, obtained at the hands of Naruaez, and that in no case, he would
show his commission which came from the king, he determined to go unto him,
and according to the old Proverb, Face to face does get respect, and likewise
if it were possible, to agree upon some good order and quietness: whereupon he
sent Rodrigo Aluarez his surueyor, with John Velasques, and John del Rio, to
treat with Naruaez of many matters, whereof three things were the
principalest. The first was, that they two might meet alone, or else so many,
for so many, and that Naruaez should permit Cortes to abide in Mexico, and he
withal his company should co^quere Panuco or other kingdoms, also that
Cortes would pay the charges, and have consideration to gratify his soldiers,
or else that Naruaez should abide in Mexico, and deliver unto Cortes. 400. of
his men, to the intent that with them, and his own men he might proceed to
seek other countries to conquer. Last of all, he required to see the kings
commission, for that he would obey the same. Naruaez liked none of these
offers, only he accepted that they should meet together with each of them ten
Gentlemen for security, bound with solemn oath, and firmed this agreement
with their names. But it took no effect, for Rodrigo Aluarez advised Cortes
that Naruaez had made a snare to apprehend him, or to kill him at their
meeting. Cortes understood the matter, or else he had some other intelligence
by some that loved him well. And this former agreement taking no place, Cortes
determined to go unto him.

But before his departing, he declared unto his company, saying, I trust ye
have in remembrance what and how much I have done for you, since ye beginning
of this enterprise, yea and also how lovingly and friendly ye have dealt for
me: Ye shall now understand that James Velasques, in steed of thanks giving
us, has sent to murder us, Pamfilo de Naruaez, who is a stubborn and an
unreasonable man, one ready to execute our good deserts done in the service
of God and our Prince, with an evil reward. And the cause is only, for doing
our duty in the sending of the Kings part and portion to his Royal person
and not unto him. Also this Naruaez has already confiscated our goods, and
given them to other men, and our bodies condemned to the Gallows, yea and our
fame and honor plaide at tables, with great injurious and slanderous words
proclaimed against us, which things truly are not of a Christian, no nor yet we
with Gods help will let the matter so to slip: yea and though we ought to
leave the reuengment unto God, yet we will not suffer them to enjoy our
trauayles and pains, who are now comen white fingered to spoil the blood of
their neighbors, yea and like mad men to strive against their own nation,
sowing slander among those Indians which served us as our friends, ye and
procuring more cruel wars, than the civil war between Mario and Sila, or
of Caesar and Pompeio, who turned vpsidowne the Roman Empire. Wherefore I do
determine to meet him by ye way, and not to suffer him to come unto Mexico,
for it is better to say, God save you, than they to come and say who is there?
ye and though they are many, a good heart does break evil fortune, as it has
appeared by us, who have passed through the pikes since our coming hither:
moreover, I doubt not but that many of Naruaez his company will come unto us.
Therefore my dear friends do I give, you advise of my pretense, to the intent
ye those which will go with me, let them prepare themselves, and those that
will not, let them remain to keep Mexico and Mutezuma, which is as much in
effect. At the end of his talk he promised great rewards if yt with victory he
returned. His me^ answered al with one voice, yt they were al at his
commandment, and ready to fulfill his will, yet some feared the pride and
blindness of Pamfilo de Naruaez: on the otherside the Indians began to be
lusty, to see dissension among the Spanyardes, and that the Indians of the
coast were joined in league with the new come me^.

The requests of Cortez to Mutezuma.
AFter al his talk and answer of his soldiers, he went to visit and to comune
with Mutezuma for to depart on his journey, with somewhat ye lesser care, and also
to prove the mind and will of Mutezuma, unto whom he uttered his mind as
follows. Sir you know ye love ye I have, and desire to serve you, and chiefly
the trust again, that you will have to my companions when I am gone from this
city. Therefore I pray you: that it may please you to remain here in this
lodgyng, and to have regard unto these strangers, Chvv^^^ Cortes.
which I leave with you, also I commend unto you, the gold and jewels which is
in their custody, and given unto us of your own liberality. For I do now
go to signify unto those which of late are comen in the new fleet, how your
highness does command that I depart from this land, and that they do not
agrauate or molest your subjects, nor yet presume to enter into your country,
but that they remain on your coast, until we be ready to depart with them,
according to your will and pleasure. And if in the mean season, any of your
subjects be so unadvised, as to molest my men, which now remain in your power
and Guarde, that then it may please you to be their shield, succor, and only
defense. Mutezuma promised to fulfill his request, wishing him moreover, that
if any in his journey should offend him, then immediately to advise him, and
that he would send his men of war to chasten the^, yea and also (if it
pleased him,) he would give unto him guydes to salfe conduct him through his
own dominion to the Sea coast, who should provide him of all necessaries by
the way. Cortes kissed his hands for his courtesy, with most hearty thanks
for the same, and gave unto him certain Spanishe apparel, and other glasen
Jewels, and also other like treasure to his Noble men, which stood by at all
the talk. But in effect he told him not what he pretended to do, nor yet the
news of Pamfilo de Naruaez his procedings was not come to his ear, or else,
it may be that Mutezuma dissimuled the matter with inward pleasure, that one
Christian should kill the other, thinkyng thereby to have most sure his
liberty, and the Gods pleased.

The imprisonment of Pamfilo de Naruaez.
COrtes was so well beloved among his company, that they offered willingly to
go with him, by reason whereof he chose. 250. men fit for his journey, and
left other. 200. in guarde of Mutezuma and the City, with Pedro de Aluarado
for their Captain. He left also with them the artillery and four Foystes
ready made, to have the lake in subjection, beseeching them only to have
special regard that Mutezuma fled not from them to Naruaez, and not to
permit him to go out of their fort or strong house.

With those few Spaniards Cortes took his journey with no more but oyght or
nine Horsemen, and certain Indians for his service, and carriage.

Passing through Chololla and Tlaxcallan, he was honorably received and lodged,
and about fifteen leagues from Zempoallan where Naruaez was abiding, he met
with two Priests, and his old especial friend Andres de Duero, who had lent
him money for the setting for the of that voyage. These three persons came to
require him to obey the General lately come as Lieutenant to the Governor
Velasques, and to deliver unto him the Country, with all the fortes or Castles
therein, aduising him, that if he would not accomplish the same, that then he
would proceed against him, even as an enemy and Rebel, to the execution of
death. Likewise, if he would fulfill the request made unto him, that then he
should have liberty, and conueniente shipping to depart, both for him, and as
many as would go with him. Cortes answered, A stout man.
that he would rather suffer death, than to leave the Country which he had
conquered and pacifyed with his hands and industry, without any
commandment from the Emperor: and (quoth he) if against all equity and
justice, he will contend with me in war, I will defend me as well as I may,
and if I have the victory (as I trust in God and the right that I have on my
side,) I shall not stand in need of shipping, and if I be slain, much less.
Therefore I do require him to show unto me his commission and authority had
from the Emperor, for until I do both see and read the same, I will accept
no agreemente: and if (quoth he) that he refuse the same, that then I dare
warn, admonish, and require him to return to Cuba, the place from whence he
came, and if he will not obey my precept, I will then apprehende him, and send
him prisoner in yrons to the Emperor: and with this answer dispatched the
three messengers, sending also a notarie of his own, to command him to take
his shipping, and to depart without making any altercation in the Country, or
ye ensuing of further morders and strife, and if not, that upon Whitsonday,
which was within three days following, he meante to be with him at supper.
Pamfilo de Naruaez made a mockery and jest at his commandment, and took
Prisoner the Notarie which came from Cortes with that order, holding Cortes
for mad, who made so many bragges with so small a company. And before John
Velasques de Leon, and John de Rio, Cortes his friends, he mustered his men,
who were in number fourscore Hargabushers, a hundred and twenty Crossebowes,
six hundred men, with other weapon, and fourscore Horsemen, An uncertain
rec^oaing.
saying, how will Cortes defend himself against us, nay at length he will
know his duty: he promised money to him that should either kill, or take
Cortes prisoner. And the same offer made Cortes against Pamfilo, who made a
round of his footmen, and skirmished with his Horsemen, shooting off his
artillery, to put in fear the pore Indians.

Naruaez signified again unto Mutezuma with the messengers who carried all the
triumph and muste^ pointed, all his former dealings, but hearing that Cortes
was near at hand, he sent out his light Horsemen to dyscrie his Camp.

All Naruaez his Horses were ready sadled and brideled, and his men armed.
Cortes entered so close and secret, that no man almost heard him, and the
first word he spoke, having all his men within with him, was, shut the
gates, and strike, down with them. There were at that time many shining
worms, which with their glistering seemed matches of Hargabushe, so that if
one piece at that time had bin discharged, they would have bin in a great
fear.

Naruaez being about to put on his privy coat, came one unto him, saying:
Sir, Cortes is near your lodgyng, let him come in (quoth he) for he comes to
talk with me. Naruaez had his men in four Towers of his lodging, and he
himself was in the one, with a hundred Spanyardes, and at his door thirteen
pieces of Ordinance ready charged. Cortes commanded his chief Sheriff Go^salo
de Sa^doual, with forty or fifty of his fellows, to go up into Naruaez his
Chamber, and he himself with other twenty men abode at the door to defend
and keep that none might enter thereat, until he had finished his business.
The residue of his men besieged the other Towers, so that they might not
succoure one another.

Naruaez hearing the noise, would needs fight, although he was required to
stay his hands, and coming out at his Chamber door, they struck out one of
his eyes with a pike, and then they laid hand upon him, dragging and drawyng
him down the stayres by the heels, and when he saw himself brought before
Cortes, he said, oh Senior Cortes, thank your great fortune, in having my
person prisoner, A dark night for Naruae^.
who answered him again, oh Naruaez, the having of thy body prisoner, is the
least thing that I have done, sithence I came into this land. Cortes
commanded forthwith to lay him in yro^s, and to carry him to the rich town
of Vera Crux, where he abode prisoner certain years.

This combat endured but a while, for within one hour Pamfilo de Naruaez, and
the chiefest of his company were taken prisoners, and their weapons and armor
taken from all the rest. There were slain of Naruaez his men sixeteene, and of
Cortes his side were killed only two persons with a piece of Ordinance. They
had no leisure to give fire to their Ordinance, with the great diligence and
have of Cortes, saving unto one piece that killed the two men. The tutche holes
were stopped with wax, through the great rain that had fallen. By this mean
those that were overcome, did take occasion to ymagine that Cortes had suborned
the master gunner, and others.

Cortes used great sobriety and discretion, for he would not permit any of
the prisoners to be reviled or misused with any injurious words, no nor yet
Naruaez, who had spoken so much evil of him, although many of his men
desired reuengement. Pedro de Maluenda servant to James Velasques, who was
chief Steward to Naruaez, fled to the Ships with all the stuff that he
could get, without any let of Cortes. Here may you see what difference
and advantage is betwixt man and man, what did each of these Captives say,
think, and do, seldom time does happen that so few of one nation does
overcome so many of the same nation, especially the greater number being
fresh, lusty, and in a strong hold.

The Rebellion of Mexico against Cortes.
AFter that Cortes had obtained victory against Naruaez, he knew very well the
most part of his company, unto whom he spoke courteously, praying them to
forget the things past, and so would he also. And also likewise, that it
might please them to go with him to Mexico, which was the richest City of
all that India. He also restored to every man his armor and weapons, which
were taken from them in their overthrow. He also left very sew of them
prisoners with Naruaez. The Horsemen took the field with stomach to fight,
but after they had heard of his offer, they submitted themselves. In
conclusion, all those that were come, hoping of spoil, were glad to accept
his offer, and to go with him with faithful promise truly to serve him.

He renewed his power in Vera Crux, and brought thither the navy of Naruaez He
also dispatched two hundred Spanyardes to the river of Garay, and sent also
John Velasques de Leon with other two hundred men. To inhabit of Coazacoalco.
He dispatched also a Spanyarde by post to Mexico, with news of the victory,
and he himself followed toward Mexico, with the great care that he had of
those whom he had left there in guard of Mutezuma and the City.

The Post that went on this journey, in stead of thanks, was sore wounded by
the Indian Rebels, but although he was so hurt, yet he returned to Cortes,
with news that Mexico was revolted, and that they had burned the four
Foystes, also assieged the Spanish house, and thrown down a wall, and mined
another, yea and set fire upon the munition, taken away their vittayles, and
had brought them to such extremity, to be either slain, or remain
prisoners, saving that Mutezuma commanded to cease the combat, yea and for
all that they would not leave their armoure, nor depart from the fiege, only
they somewhat amayned their fury for their princes sake.

These news were sorrowful to Cortes, for thereby his pleasure was turned
into care, the rather to make have to succoure his friends and fellows, for
if he had delayed his coming but a small while, he had found them either
slain, or else their bodies ready to sacrifice: but his greatest comfort was,
that Mutezuma remained still prisoner. He mustered his men in Tlaxcallan, and
found of his Spanishe nation a thousand footmen, and near a hundred
Horsemen, He proceeded forwards toward Tezcuco, where he found none of the
Gentlemen of his acquaintance, nor yet he there was received, as in time past
he had bin, but rather he found a great alteration in the Country, and also
many towns without people, or else rebelled. In Tezcuco met with him a
Spanyarde, whom Aluarado had sent to desire him to come unto them, and to
certify him of all the premises, saying moreover, that with his coming their
furye would be pacifyed.

With this messenger came another from Mutezuma, who declared unto Cortes, that
his Lord was innocent of all that was done, praying him, that if he had
conceived any evil opinion against him, to put away the same again, and
that it might please him to go directly to his own house, where he abode
his coming with the Spanishe guarde, that he had left with him, who were
alive and in good health as he had left them.

With this message, Cortes and his company reposed all that night, and the
next days, being Midsommer day, he entered into Mexico at dynner time, with
his hundred Horsemen, and the thousand footmen, with a great company of
their friends of Tlaxcallan, Huexocinco, and Chololla, but he saw but few
folk in the streets, and small entertaynement, with many bridges broken, and
other evil tokens.

He came to his lodgyng, and all those of his company which could not well
be lodged there, he sent them to the great Temple. Mutezuma came forth into
the yard to receive him, full heavy and sorrowful, as it seemed, of that
offense which his subjects had done, excusing himself: and then every one
entered into his lodgyng and Chamber, but the joy and pleasure of Pedro de
Aluarado was incomparable, saluting the one the other, with demaundes and
questions how they fared, yea and how much the one company declared of
prosperity and pleasure, the other again replied as much of sorrow and
trouble.

The causes of the Rebellion.
COrtes procured to know the principal cause of the insurrection of the
Mexican Indians, and having a general day of hearing, the charge being laid
against them, some said, that it was through the letters and persuasion of
Naru^^z: Others answered, their desire and meaning was, to expel the
strangers, according to agreemente made, for in their skirmishes they cried
nothing but get you hence, get you hence: Other said, that they pretended
the liberty of Mutezuma, for in their Combats they would say, let go
our God and King, if you list not to be slain. Others said, that they were
Thieves, and had robbed their gold and plate from them, which was in valewe
more than seven hundred thousand duckettes. Others cried, here shall you
leave the gold that you have taken from us. Others said, that they could not
abide the syghte of the Tlaxcaltecas, and other their mortal enemies. Many
believed that the mutinye (...) for throwyng down their Gods and Idolles.
each of these causes were sufficient to rebel, how much more altogether.

But the chiefest and most principal cause was; that after the departure of
Cortes toward Naruaez, happened a solemn holiday, which the Mexicans were
wont to celebrate, and desiring to observe the same, as they were wont to do,
they came and besoughte Captain Aluarado to grant them license, and not to
ymagine that they were joined together, to kill the Spanyardes. Aluarado gave
them license, with such conditions, that in their Sacrifice should no man's
blood be spilte, nor yet to wear any weapon.

At this feast, six hundred Gentlemen and principal persons joined together
in the great temple: some do say, that they were more than a thousand
persons of great estate, but that night they made a marvelous great noise,
with cornets, shells, cloven bones, wherewith they made a strange music: they
celebrated the feast, their naked bodies covered with tele, made and wrought
with precious stones, collers, girdels, bracelettes, and many other jewels of
gold, silver; and aliofar, with gallant tuffes of feathers on their heads.
They daunced a dance called Mazeualiztli, which is to say, deserte with pain,
and so they call Mazaudi a husbandman. This dance is like Netoriliztli, which
is another dance. The manner is, that they lay mattes in the Temple yard, and
with the sound of their Drums, called Atabals, they dance a round, hand in
hand, some singing, and others answer, which songs were in ye honor and
praise of the Godor Saint, whose feast it is, hoping for this service to have
rain, corn, health, victory, peace chyddren, or any other thing that they
may wish for, or desire.

These Indian Gentlemen being occupied in their daunsing and ceremonies, it
fortuned that Pedro de Aluarado went to the Temple of Vitzilopuchtli to behold
their doings, and whether his going was of his own accord, or by the consent
of his company I am not certain, although some say that he was advised how
the mutiny was there conspired, as after did follow: others hold opinion,
that their only going to the Temple was to behold the maruaylous and strange
dance. And then seeing them so richely attyzed, A covetous desire and a vile.
they coueted their Gold and Jewels which they were, and besieged the Temple
with ten Spaniardes at each door, and the Captain entered in, with fifty
men, and without any Christian respect slew and murdered them al, and took
from them all their treasure. Although this fact seemed odious unto Cortes,
yet he dissimuled the matter, for fear least he should hurt his own
proceedings, as time did then require knowing not, what need he might have of
them, but especially to avoid contention among his company.

The threatenings of the Mexicans against the Spaniardes.
THe cause of this rebellion, being well known, Cortes demanded how their
enemies fought, mary (quoth they) after they had taken weapon against us for
the space of ten days arew, they never seized with great fury to assault and
co^bat our house, and we with fear least Mutezuma should escape and flee unto
Naruaez, durst not go out of doors to fight in the streate, but only to
defend the house with especial care of Mutezuma, according to your charge
given unto us. Also we being but few and the Indians many, who still refreshed
their men, they did not only weary us, but also put us in great fear and
clean out of courage, yea and if at the greatest brunt, Mutezuma personally
had not ascended to the top of our wall, commanding them if ever they meant
to see him a live, to stay and cease from their enterpryce.

At the sight of Mutezuma they were all amazed, and incontinent ceased the
combat and assault. They said also that with the news of the victory had
against Pamfilo de Naruaez, Mutezuma required his men to leave off from their
pretense, not withstandyng the Indians calling to remembrance, that Cortes was
a coming with a greater company, at whose return they should have the more to
do, began afreshe to assault the house, whereupon some do think, that it
was against the will of Mutezuma. But it followed, that one day the Spaniardes
standing in great peril, charged their greatest piece of ordinance, and
gyuing fire, the piece discharged not, the Indians seeing the same, began a
fresh with a marue^lous terrible noyce, using staves, Bows, lances, and
stones that came as thick as Hayle, saying now will ^^ee redeem our King,
set our houses at liberty, and revenge our injuries. But in the midst of
their fury the piece went of, without any more prymyng or touch, with a
great and fearful thunderyng, the piece being great and full of hayle shot,
with the main pellotte, made a strange spoil among them, and with fear they
retired. But yet they began to say, well, well, shortly shall your flesh be
boiled, although we mean not to eat it, for truly it is very carrayne and
good for nothing. But yet we will bestow the same upon the Eagles, Lions,
Tigres and Snakes, who shall be the graves for your filthy carcases.

But if forth with ye let not Mutezuma depart, and restore him to his
liberty, ye shall quickly have your reward, for your presumption and pride,
who durst be so bold, as to lay hand on Mutezuma being our God and Lord, that
gives us our daily food. And yet ye with your filthy thieves hands presumed
to touch him, oh how does not the earth open and swallow you which takes
other men's goods. But mark the end, for our Gods whose religion you did
profane, will reward you according to your deserte, and if they do not shortly
execute their wrath, then let us alone, for we will out of hand make an end
of you. And as for those thieves and villains of Tlaxcallan your slaves, shall
not depart praising their gaynes, who now presume to take their masters
wives, ye and to demand tribute of them, unto whom they themselves are
tributors. These and such like were the words of the Mexicans. But our men,
although they were in a marvelous fear, yet they reprehended their folly, as
touching Mutezuma, saying that Mutezuma was no God, but a mortal man as they
were, and no better, and that their Gods were vain idols, and their religion
most false and abominable, and that only our God was holy, just, true and
infinite.

The great extremity and danger that our men were put in by the Mexicans.
IN hearing the former talk in defense of the house, and providing of things
necessary, the night passed away. And in the morning to prove the Mexicans
intent, Cortes commanded the market to be used as in time past. Aluarado
wished Cortes to show himself toward him as agrieued and not well pleased,
making as though he would apprehend and correct him for the things passed,
thinking that Mutezuma and his men would have entreated for him. Cortes passed
not for that talk, saying that th^^ were infidels, devilish and wicked people,
with whom such complementes should not be used.

But he commanded a certain principal Gentleman of Mexico, who stood there
present, that out of hand he should command the market to be furnished as
in time past. This Indian understanding that Cortes had spoken evil of them,
made as though he went to fulfill his commandment: but he went to proclayme
liberty, publishyng the heinous and injurious words which he had hard, so
that in short space the matter began to ware hoate, for some went and brake
down the bridges, others went to call all the Citizens, who joined themselves
together, and besieged the Spaniardes house, with such strange noise that one
could not hear another: the stones flewe like hayle, Darts and arrows
filled the Spanyardes yard, which troubled them much. Cortes seeing this
broyle, he with certain of his men went out at one door, and an other Captain
at another, with each of them two hundred men. They fought with the Indians
who slew four Spaniardes, and wounded many more, and of them were slain very
few with their succor and defense at hand. If our men fought with them in the
streates, then would they stop their passage at the bridges: if they
assaulted their houses, then they were beaten with stones from the top of
their houses which were flat ruffed, and at their retire they persecuted
them terribly.

They set fire upon the Spaniardes house in sundry places, but chiefly in one
place they could not aplake the fire a great while, until they threw down
certain chambers and walls, whereas they had entered at pleasure, had it not
been for the Artillery, Crossebowes and handgunnes, which were there in
defense of that place. This combat endured all that day until night, yea and
in the night also they had their hands full: our men had little leisure to
sleep, but rathe^ spente the night in mendyng the walls and doors, and curing
the wounded men who were more than four score, and likewise to set their men
in order and readiness for the fight of the next day following.

It was no sooner day, but the Indians began their assault a fresh, with more
courage and fury than the day before, so that our men were feign to trust to
their artillery, the which the Indians feared not a whitte: for if a shot
carried ten, fiftene or twenty Indians at a clappe, they would close again as
though one man had not been missyng. Cortes came out with other two hundredth
men, and gate some bridges, burned some houses, and slew many that defended
them. But the Indians were so many in number, that no hurt appeared, yea and
our men were so few in comparison of them, that although they fought all the
day, yet had they much a do to defend themselves, how much more to offend.
That day never a Spaniarde was slain outright, but three score of them were
wounded and hurt, whereby they had enough to do to cure them for that night,
and to procure remedy and defense against the hurtes which they received from
the house tops. A strange invention*
They invented Engines of timber made upon wheels, and four square, covered
on the top, and with Art to pass through the streates: there were placed on
each of them twenty men with Pikes, Hargabush, Crossebowes and one double
Base. Behind the Engines went men with shouels and Mattockes, to throw down
houses, bulworkes, and to rule and govern the Engines.

The death of Mutezuma.
ALl the while that the Engines were a making, our men came not out to fight,
being occupied in the work, but only to defend their lodgyng. The enemies
thinkyng that they were all sore hurt and wounded, began their wars
again, reuilyng them with many injurious words, threatnyng them, that if they
would not deliver Mutezuma, that they would give them the most cruellest
death that ever man suffered, and came with great force to have entered the
house.

Cortes desired Mutezuma to go up into the sotie, which is the top of the
flat roufe of the house, and to command his subjects to cease from their
heat and fury. At Cortes his request he went up, and leaned over the wall to
talk with them, who beginning to speak unto them, they threw so many stones
out of the streate, houses and windows, that one happened to hitte Mutezuma on
the temples of his head, with which blow he fell down to the ground: this
was his end, even at the hands of his own subjects and vassalles against
their wills: for the truth is that a Spaniarde held a Target over his head,
whereby they knew him not, nor yet would believe that he was there, for all the
signs and tokens which were made unto them. Cortes forthwith published the
hurt and danger of life of Mutezuma: some gave credit to his tale, and
othersome would not, but rather fought very stoutly. Three days Mutezuma
remained in extreme pain, and at the end departed his life.

And because it should appear that his death was of the stripe that they had
given, and not by any hurt received at their hands, he caused two gentlemen of
Mexico, who were prisoners, to carry him out upon their backs, who certified
the Citizens of the certentie of his death, that at that present tune were
giuyng battery to the house. But yet for all this they would not leave off the
combat, nor yet the wars, as some of our men thought they would, but rather
proceeded on their purpose, with greater courage and desire of revenge. And
when they retired, they made a pityfull lamentation, with preparation to bury
their king in Chapultepec. On this sort died Mutezuma, who was holden for a
God among the Indians. Some say that he desired to be Baptized at the
Shrouetide before his death, and they prolonged the matter, thinking at Easter
followyng to have christened him with honor and triumph. But as it happened,
it had been better to have done it at that time according to his request. But
with the coming of Pamfilo de Naruaez the thing was also delayed, and after
he was wounded it was likewise forgotten, with the troubles that they were in.
It was credibly informed, that Mutezuma was never consentyng to the death of
any Spaniarde, nor yet in conspiracy against Cortes, but rather loved him
entierly: yet some are of an other opinion, and both give good reasons to
approve their arguments, but the truth could not well be known, for at that
time our men understood not the language, and again Mutezuma after his death,
left none to open that secret.

The Indians affirm that he was of the greatest blood of all his lineage, and
the greatest king in estate, that ever was in Mexico. It is also to be noted,
that when the kingdoms do most flourish, then are they niest to a change, or
else to change their Lord, as does appear in this history of Mutezuma. Our
men lost more by ye death of Mutezuma than the natural Indians, if we consider
the murder and destruction that incontinent did follow. Mutezuma was a man very
moderate in his diet, and not so vicious as other India^s, although he had many
wives. He was also liberal and free hearted: he was esteemed for a very wise
man, in my judgment he was either wise in lettyng things pass after that
sort, or else a very fool, that did not understand their doings: he was as
devout as warlyke, for he had been present in many battayles: it is reported
that he wanne and had victory in nine battayles. and also other nine times
victory man for man in the field, he reigned seuentene years and certain
months.

The combat betvveene the Spaniardes and the Indians.
AFter the death of Mutezuma, Cortes sent unto his Neuewes, and to the other
noblemen who mainteyned the wars, desiryng the^ to come and speak with him,
and they came, unto whom Cortes spoke from the wall where Mutezuma was slain,
saying, that it were meet that they should cease from war, and to chose
another king, and also to bury the dead, and that he would come to his
burial as his friend: likewise he signified unto them, that for the love he
bare unto Mutezuma who had entreated for them, he had stayed from the final
spoil of the city, and correction of them for their rebellion and
obstinacy. But now that he had not unto whom to have respect, he would both
burn their houses, and chasten them, if that they submitted not themselves to
his friendship.

They answered, that they would neither leave the wars, nor yet esteem his
frie^dship, until they saw themselves in their liberty, and their wrongs
wholly revenged, yea and that without his counsel they could elect the King
unto whom of right ye kingdom did apertaine. And since the Gods has taken
our well-beloved Mutezuma, we will give his body a Sepulcher, as unto such a King
does apperteyne: yea and if he would go and bear his friend Mutezuma company
to the Gods, that then he should come forth, and they would quickly dispatch
him: and as for the residue, they would have rather war tha^ peace, yea and
that they were not men that did yield with words. Also seeing their King
was dead, for whose respect they ceased to burn their houses, roast their
bodies, and eat their flesh, but now (quoth they) if ye depart not, we will
not dally long time with you.

Cortez finding them stout and stubborn, liked not the bargain. Again, he
knew well that their meaning was, that if they had departed from the City,
to have spoiled and murdered them by the way. And seeing that their lives,
rule and government consisted in strength of hand and good courage, he came
forth in a morning with the three engines, four pieces of Ordinance, and five
hundred Spaniards, and three thousand Tlaxcaltecas, to fight with the enemies,
and to burn and spoil their houses. They brought the engines near unto
certain great houses which stood near unto a bridge, casting their scaling
ladders on the walls, and so got up to the top where many people were, and
there combated awhile, but shortly turned to their forte again, without doing
any great hurt, with one Spanyarde slain, and many wounded, and also the
engines broken and spoiled, yea the multitude of Indians were so thick, and
flewe upon the Ordinance in such sort, that they had no leisure to discharge
them. The stones came also so thick from the house tops, that the engines
were soon at an end. And the Citizens having housed them again in the forte
and lodging, began to amend the hurt done in their houses, and to recover the
streets that were lost: also ye great Temple, in the Tower whereof, five
hundred principal men had fortifyed themselves with vittayles, stones, and
long Lances, piked with iron and flint stone very sharp, but truly they did
most hurt with stones. This Tower was high and strong, as I have before
declared, and stood near unto the Spanyardes forte, which from that tower
received much hurt. Although Cortes was somewhat sad and heavy, yet he
ceased not like a good Captain to comfort and encourage his men, and
always was the first man at any brunt or assay, and his heart could not
permit him to remain penned up in that sort, wherefore he took three hundred
Spanyardes, and went to assiege the high tower. Three or four days he ceased
not that enterprise, but could not come to the top, being so high a thing,
and many persons in defense of the same, well provided, with fit munition
for the purpose, so that our men came daily tumbling down the stayres, flying
to their house with broken pates, so that our Spanyardes dysmayed more and
more, and many murmured at the matter: you may well judge how Cortes his heart
was afflighted, for the Indians increased still in courage, having the better
hand, and daily victory from the high Tower. A valiant man.
But now Cortes determined to leave his house, and not to return thereunto
again, until he had won the Tower. He bound his Target to his arm which
had bin hurt before, and beseeged the Tower again with many of his men,
Tlaxcaltecas and other friends, and many times, although they were beaten
down, arose again, succoring one another, till at length they got to the
top, and there fought with the Indians, till some of them lept out of the
Tower, and stood hanging upon the listes of the wall, which were three in
number, the one higher than the other, and a foot broad. Some fell down to
the ground, who besides their falls, were received upon the swords point, and
in this sort they left none alive. Three hours they fought on the top of the
Tower, because ye multitude of Indians were great. In conclusion, the whole five
hundred men there dyed very valiantly, and if their weapon and knowledg^^ ^ad
bin equal, the victory had bin doubtful. Cortes set (...) on all the
Chapels, and other three Chapels, where infinite Idols were, yet those sely
Indians lost no poyn^^ of courage with the loss of their Temple and Gods,
which touched them at the heart, but rather began with more surie to assault
the Spanish house.

How the Mexicans refused the offer of peace made by Corcez.
COrtez considering the great multitude of Indians his enemies, and also the
great courage, with desire of reuengement: and waying also how his men were
weak and weeryed with fight, yet (I may say) with great desire to go from
thence, if that the Citizens would have suffered them: he began again to
require them with peace, and to desire them of truce, saying unto them also,
that they should consider, how that many of their side were slain, and yet
they could kill none of them. They being more hard hearted than before,
answered that they utterly refused his offer, saying, that they never would
have peace with those who had slained their men and burned their Gods: yea
(quoth they) and although some of us are killed, yet we also do both kill and
hurt, for ye are mortal men, and not immortal, as we are: behold ye also the
number of us, upon Zoties, in windows and streets: assure your selves there
are three times as many within the houses. So we shall sooner make an end of
you by kyllyng one and one, than you shall do of us by killing a thousand by
thousand, or ten thousand by ten thousand: for ending all these whom you see,
there will come so many more, and after them so many more: but if ye were once
killed, there would come no more Spanyardes, yea and when our weapons can not
thoroughly destroy you, that then we will sterue you to death with hunger and
famine, yea and though now you would depart, it is too late, because ye
bridges are thrown down, and the calseys broken, and succoure by water you
have none. In this communications the day was spente, and night at hand, their
heads occupied, and hearts full heavy, for hunger alone had bin enough to
finish their days, without any further war. That night, the one half of
the number of Spanyardes armed themselves, and late in the evening came forth
into the City. The India^s now being not accustomed to fight at such hours,
the Spanyardes burned above three hundred houses in one street, and in some of
them found many Citizens, of whom they left not one alive. They burned and
spoiled three Zoties near unto their own lodging, which had greatly
annoyed them before. The residue of the Spanyardes which abode at home,
amended the engines, and repaired their houses. As this journey happened well unto
them, early in the morning they proceeded out again, and went to the bridge
where their engines had bin broken, and although they found there great
resistance, yet the matter imported their lines. They fought with noble
courage, and got many towers, houses and Zoties. They wanne also four of the
eight bridges which were in the City, leaving guard in those places which were
won, returning to their Camp with many wounds, keyng both weery and full
of care and sorrow.

The next days they came forth again^, and wanne the other four bridges, and
dammed them up with earth, in such sort, that the Horsemen that way followed
the enemies to the firm land. Cortez being occupied in damming up the
ditches, and making plain way of the bridges, there came certain messengers
unto him, saying, that near at hand, abode many noblemen and Captains to
treat of peace, requiring him to come unto them, praying him to bring
Tlamacazque his prisoner, who was one of the principallest of the Devils
Clergy there, to hear the treaty of the matter.

Cortes went, and carried the Priest with him, whom he appointed to require
them to cease from contention, and to remove their siege, but he came not
back with answer. All this was a feigned fetch, to see the state of the
Christian Camp, or else to recover their religious Tlamacazque. Cortes seeing
their deceyte, went his way to dinner, and was no sooner set at his meat,
but certain Tlaxcaltecas came running in with an open cry, saying, that their
enemies had recovered again the bridges, and went armed up and down the
streets, and had also slain the most of the Spanyardes that were left in
guard of the bridges, Incontinente Cortes went out with the Horsemenne, who
were readyest at that time, and made way through the troop of enemies,
following them even unto the firm land, but at their return, the footmen
that were hurt and weeried in keeping of the street, could not sustain the
force and fury of the infinite number of Indians, which came upon them, yea
with much add they could escape home to their forte. The multitude was not
so great of Indians in the street, but also by water in Canoas, so that
stones flewe on both sides, and galled our men cruelly. Cortes was hurt in
one of his knees very sore, whereupon it was blown abroad through the City,
that Cortes was slain, which news did greatly discourage our men, and much
animate the Indians. But yet Cortes for all his pain and hurt, ceased not to
embolden and encourage his Souldyers, who set afreshe upon the enemies. At the
farthest bridge fell two Horses, which troubled much our men that followed.
Cortes made such way among the Indians, that the Horsemen had reasonable
passage, and being ye hindmost man himself, he was in great peril of taking.
It was a marvel to see what a spring he gave with his Horse, and thereby
escaped, but in conclusion, with stones they were forced to return to their
hold, being very late.

As soon as he had ended his supper, he sent some of his men to guard the
street and bridges, and to defend the same against the enemy. They were
somewhat joyful of their proceedings and good success which they had the
same day.

How Cortez fled from Mexico.
But Cortes waying the substance of the matter, saw in effect that his side
went to wrack, wherefore he requested his men to depart from thence, who
were not a little joyful to hear their Captain pronounce that saying, for
few or none of them escaped unhurt and wounded. They feared death, but yet
wanted not stomach and heart to dye. The Indians were so many, that if the
Chrystians should but only have cut their throtes without resistance, yet
they had bin too few for that purpose.

They were also in such necessity of bread, that pinched them sore. Their
powder and shot was spente, and almost all other provision. Their house was
welnigh beaten down about their ears. All these causes were sufficient to
leave Mexico, and to seek to save their lives: yet on the other side, they
judged it an evil cas^, to turn their backs to their enemies, for (quoth
they) the very stones rises up against him that flies. They feared again the
passage of the arches where the bridges had bin, so that now they were full
besette with sorrow, care, and misery: but in fine, they all agreed to depart
that night, for many days before, one of their company called Botello, who
presumed to have good skyll in the Art of Nigroma^cie, did declare unto them,
that if they would depart from Mexico at a certain hour appointed, that then
they should escape, or else not: but whether they gave credit to his sayings or
no, they fully determined to depart that night, and like unto politic and
good Souldyers, they prepared a bridge of timber to carry with them, to pass
over the arches where bridges had bin. This is most certain, they were all
privy and agreede to the departure, and not as some report, that Cortes fled
away, leaving above two hundred Spanyardes in the house, who knew nothing of
his departure, and were afterward all slain, sacrifised, and eaten in
Mexico, for out of the City he could not have departed so secretly, but it
should have come to their ears: how much more out of one house, where they
were all together.

Cortes called John de Guzman his Chamberlayne, commanding him to open the
hall where the treasure was, and called all the officers and others, to see the
distribution of the same. First the kings portion was deducted, and he gave a
Horse of his own, and men to carry it: and for the remainder, he willed every
man to take what he listed, for he gave it frankely unto them. The soldiers
which had come with Naruaez, and now served Cortes, were somewhat hungry of
treasure, Reward of a covetous ^^nd.
so that they took as much gold and other riches, as they might possible
carry, but it cost them dear, for at their going out of the City, with the
weight of their heavy burdens, they could neither fight, nor yet make have
on their way, upon which occasion, the Indians caught many of them, and drew
them by the heels to the slaughterhouse of Sacrifice, where they were slain
and eaten: yet those that escaped, had each of them some profit, for that
pray was well worth seven hundred thousand Duchetes: but being things wrought
in great pieces, they were troublesome to carry, so that he which carried
least, escaped best. Yet some do think, that there remained in that house a
great part of the treasure, but it was not so, for after our men had taken
what they would, then came in the Tlaxcaltecas, and made spoil of all the rest.

Cortes gave charge to certain of his men, to guard with much respect, a
son and two daughters of Mutezuma, Cacama, and his brother, and many other
great Gentlemen his prisoners.

He also appointed other forty me^ to carry the bridge of timber, and other
Indians to carry the Ordinance, and a little grain of Centli that remained.

The vantgarde he committed to Gonsalo de Sandoual, and Antonio de Quiniones;
and the reregarde he committed to Pedro de Aluarado, and he himself remained
with a hundred men, to use his discretion. In this order, and with good
deliberation, at midnight he departed from Mexico in a dark mist, and so
quietely, that none of the Indians knew thereof, commendyng themselves unto
GOD, beseechyng him in their prayers, to deliver them from that present
danger, and took the way of Tlacopan, being the same way that he came into
the City.

The first arche whereof the bridge was thrown down, they passed with the
timber bridge which they carried with them at ease.

In this mean time the watch and espies which warded in the hiest temples,
had descried their flight, and began to sound their instruments of war with
a marvelous cry, saying, they fly, they fly: And suddenly with this noise,
they having no armor to put on, nor other impediment, joined an infinite
company of them together, and followed with great celeritie, yea and with
such a heavy and terrible noise, that all the lake pronounced the Echo,
saying, let the cursed and wicked be slain, who has done unto us such great
hurt.

But when Cortes came to plant his bridge upon the second arche of the City,
there met him a great company of Indians to defend the same, yet with much
ado he planted his bridge and passed there upon with five horsemen and a
hundred Spaniardes, and with them proceeded through the Calsey to the main
land passing many perilous places, wherein swamme both man and horse, for the
bridge of timber was broken: this done, he left his foot men on the firm
land, under the government of John Xaramillo, and returned back with the
five horsemen for to succor and help the residue of his company which were
behind. But when he came unto them, he found some fighting with great courage,
but many slain. He lost also his gold and fardage, his ordinance and
prisoners, yea in fine he found a marvelous change and alteracion of the
estate he left them in, whereupon like a good Captain he showed his wisdom
and valor, helpyng and recoueryng as many of his men, as he might, and brought
them into safety. He left also Captain Aluarado to succor the rest.

But Aluarado with all his power and strength could not resist the fury of the
enemies, wherefore with the Lance in his hand he began to fly, seeing the
great slaughter of his company, so that he was forced to pass over the dead
carkases, yea and upon some that were not thoroughly dead, who made a
lamentable, pytifull, and doleful moan. And coming to the next arche, whose
bridge was broken down, of necessity he took his Lance, and therewith leaped
such a space, that the Indians were amassed to see, for none of his fellows
could do the like, although they approved the enterprise, and were drowned for
their labor.

When Cortes saw this sorrowful fight, he sat him down, not to take any
rest for his weariness, but only to bewail the dead men, yea and also them
that were alive and in great danger, and also to ponder the unsteadfastness
of cruel fortune in the perdition of so many his friends, such great treasure
and lordshippe, so great a City and Kingdom, but also to bewail the
sorrowful estate that he himself stood in, seeing the most of his men
wounded and hurt, and knowing not whyther to go, for that he was not certain
of the help and friendship of Tlaxcaltecas. Yea and what hard heart, would
not have relented to behold the dead bodies, who a little before had entered that
same way, with such magnificall triumph, pomp and pleasure. But yet having
care of those whom he had left on the firm land, he made haste to Tlacopan.

This sorrowful night, which was the tenth of July in An. 1520. were slain
about. 450. Spaniardes, 4000. Indian friends, and. 46. horse, yea and (as I
judge) all the prisoners which were in his company. If this mishap had fortuned
in the day time, possible so many and so great a number had not perished. But
where it fortuned by night, the noise of the wounded was sorrowful, and of the
victors horrible and fearful. The Indians cried victory, calling upon their
devilish and filthy Gods with joy and pleasure, our men being overcome,
cursed their unfortunate lot, yea the hour, and he that brought them thither,
others cried unto God for succor, others said help, help, for I stand in
danger of drowning. I know not certainly whether more perished in the water or
the land, hopyng to save themselves by swimming and leapyng over the sluices
and broken places, for they say, that a Spaniarde was no sooner in the water,
but an Indian was upon his back. They have great dexterity and skill in
swimming, so that catching any Spaniarde in the water, they would take him by
the one arm, and carry him whither they pleased, yea and would vnpanch him in
the water. If these Indians had not occupied themselves in taking the spoil of
those that were fallen and slain, certainly one Christian had not escaped that
day: but in fine, the greatest number of Spaniardes that were killed, were
those that went most laden with gold plate and other jewels, and those which
escaped, were they that carried least burdens, and the first that with noble
courage made way to pass through the troop of Indians.

Now we may safely say, that the covetous desire of gold, whereof they had
plenty, was cause of their death, and they may answer that they died rich.
After that those, which had escaped, were paste the calsey, the Indians stayed
and followed them no further, either for that they contented themselves with
that which they had done, or else they durst not fight in open field: But
principally it is thought, that they abode to mourn and lament for the death
of Mutezuma his children, not knowing till then their sorrowful end. But now
seeing the thing present before their eyes, they wrang their hands, and made a
pitiful dole and cry, and the rather, because they themselves had slain them
against their wills.

The battle of Otumpan, a notable victory.
THe Inhabitants of Tlacopan, knew not how our men came spoiled, hurie, and
over thrown, and again our men stood in a maze, and knew not what to do nor
whither to go. Cortes came unto them, and ce^forted them and placed them in
order before him, requyring them to make have, until they might come into the
broadefield, before such time as the men of Tlacopan should hear of the news
passed, and so to arm themselves and to join with forty thousand Mexicans,
who after the mournyng for their friends, came marchyng after them. He placed
in the vantgard the Indians his friends, and passed through certain tilled
ground, and continually fought as they went, until they came to a high hill,
where was a tower and a Temple, which is called our Lady church at this day.

The Indians slew some of the Spaniardes which came in the reregard, and many
of their Indian friends, before they could get up to the top of the hill.
They lost much of the gold, that had remained, and with great hazard
escaped through the multitude of Indians with life, their horses which
remained alive, were four and twenty, A vvery journey.
who were tired both with travel and hunger, and the Spaniardes their
masters, with the residue could scarsely stir hand or foot with
weariness of fightyng, and penury of hunger, for all that day and night they
ceased not from fight, eating nothing at all.

In this Temple were reasonable lodgings, where they fortified themselves as
well as they might, and drank one to an other, but their supper was very
sle^der. After their simple feast was ended, they went and beheld an infinite
number of Indians, which had beset them almost round about, making a
marvelous shoute and cry, knowing that they were without victuals, which
only is a war worser than to fight with the enemy. They made many fires
with the woodde of sacrifice, round about the tower and Temple, and with this
policy, at midnight departed secretly. A payneful man.
It happened that they had Tlaxcalteca to be their guide, who knew well the
way, assucing to bring them into the jurisdiction of Tlaxcallan: with this
guide they began to journey. Cortes placed his wounded men and fardage in the
midst of his company, the soldiers that were whole and in health, he
divided into the vantgarde and reregarde: he could not pass so secretly, but
yt they were espied by the Indian scoute, which was near at hand, who gave
advise thereof incontinent. Five horsemen which went before to discover, fell
among certain companies of Indians, which attended their coming to rob
the^, and seeing the horsemen, they suspected that the whole army was at hand,
where upon they fled, but yet seeing them few in number stand and joined with
the other Mexicans that followed and pursued our men three leagues until they
came to a hill where was an other temple with a good tower and lodgyng, where
they lodged that night without supper. They departed in the morning from
thence, and went through a cragged and naughty way, to a great town the
enhabitantes whereof were fled for fear, so that they abode there two days
to rest themselves, to cure their me^, and horses: also they somewhat eased
their hu^gery stomakes and carried from thence provision, although not much,
for they had none to carry it. And being departed from thence, many enemies
pursued them and persecuted them very sore. Likewise ye guide erred out of his
way, and at length came to a little village of few houses, where they reposed
ye night: In the morning they proceeded upon their way, and the enemies still
pursuyng and troubled them sore all the day.

Cortes was wounded with the stripe of a sling, Cortes vvounded with a flyng.
and therewith was in great danger of life, for his head so rancbled, that of
necessity they were forced to take out certain pieces of his skull, whereupon
he was driven to seek a solitary place in the wilderness to cure him, and in
going thitherwardes, the enemies wounded five Spaniardes and four horses,
whereof one died, and that was eaten among them for a sumptuous supper, and yet
not sufficient for them all, for there was none of them which were not vexed
with hunger. I speak not of their wounds and weariness, things sufficient to
have made an end of life. But certainly the Spanishe nation can abide more
hunger than any other, and especially these with Cortes did show the proof.
The next day in the morning departing from a little Village, and fearyng the
multitude of enemies, Oh noble Cortez.
Cortes commanded each horseman to take a sick manne behind him, and those
that were somewhat stronger, to hold by the horse tails and stirroppes: he
likewise made cruches for other some to ease them, and would not leave one of
his men behind him to be a pray and supper for the Indian enemies. This advise
was very profitable as things fell out, yea also there were some of them that
carried upon their back their fellows, and thereby were saved. They had not
iourneyed a fall league into a plain field, when there met them an infinite
number of Indians who compassed them round about, and assaulted our men in
such sort, that they verily believed that day to end generally their lives,
for there were many Indians that durst wrastell with our men, man to man, yea
and laid some of them in the duste, and drew them by the heels, whether it
were with the great courage which they had, or whether it were with the
travail, hunger and hurtes of our men I know not, but great pity it was to
see, how they were drawn by the Indian enemies, and what grievous moan they
made.

Cortes that went with vigilant care comfortyng his men, as much as was
possible to do, Oh valiant Cortez.
and well perusing the great danger that they were in, commendyng himself to
God, set spurs to his horse and made way through the greatest troop of
Indians, and came unto the captain general who bare the Royal standart of
Mexico, and passed him through with his Lance, whereof he incontinent died. But
when the Indians saw the standart fallen, they threw their ancient on the
ground and fled, scattering them here and there like men amazed, knowing not
whither to fly, for such is their custom in war, that when they see the
general slain, they forthwith leave the field. Then our weary souls began to
recover heart and strength, and the horsemen followed the^ to their great
anoyance and slaughter. It was credibly reported, that there were that day in
field. 200000. Indians. 200000. Indians.
And the field where this battle was fought is called Otumpan: there was
never a more notable fact done in India, nor greater victory since the first
discovery of the same. And as many Spaniardes as saw Hernando Cortes fight
that day, did hold opinion, that never one man did more greater feats in
arms, and that he only was the mean in his own person to save and deliver
them all.

The entertaynement which the Spaniardes had in Tlaxcallan.
AFter this victory obtained, Cortes with his company went to lodge in a house
planted alone, in a plain ground, from whence appeared the Mountains of
Tlaxcallan, whereof our men much rejoiced: yet on the other side they stood
in doubt whether they should find them their friends in such a dangerous
season, for because the unfortunate man that flies, finds nothing in his
favor, for all thing that he pretends, happens clean contrary. That night
Cortes himself was scoute, not because he was more whole then his fellows,
but like a good Captain, he divided the travail and pains equally, even as
their hurt and damage was come.

Being day, they iourneyed in plain and straight way, directly to the
Mountains and Province of Tlaxcallan, they passed by a sweet fountain of
water, where they well refreshed themselves, and after they came to Huazilipan,
a town of Tlaxcallan, of.4000. housholdes, where they were lovingly received
and abundantly provided for three days, which they abode there refreshing and
curing their weary bodies. Some of the towns men would give the^ nothing
without payment, but the most part did use them very gently: Unto this Town
came Maxixca, Xicotencatlh, Axotecalth, and many other principal persons of
Tlaxcallan, 50000. me^.
and Huexozinco with.50000. men of war, who were going to Mexico to succor
the Spaniardes, knowing of there troubles, but not of their hurt and spoil,
yet some hold opinion that they having certain knowledge of all their
mishappes and flight from Mexico, came only to comfort them, and in the name
of all their communaltie and state, to offer them their Town, in conclusion,
they seemed sorrowful for their misfortunes, and again joyful to see them
there: Faithful friends.
Yea some of them with anguishe of heart wept, and said, we did advise and
warn ye, that the Mexicans were Traitors and wicked persons, and yet ye
would not believe us: we do pyttie and bewail your troubles, but if it
please you, let us go thither to revenge your injuries, and the does of your
Christians, and our Citizens and if now ye will not, that then it may please
you to go with us home to our houses, for to recreate your persons, and to
cure your wounds.

Cortes did cordially rejoice, to hear and find such succor and friendship,
in such good men of war, whereof he stood in doubt as he came thitherward.
He gave them most hearty thanks for their loving offer, courtesy, and good
will. He gave unto them of such Jewels as remained, and said unto them, the
time will come, that I shall desire your help against the Mexicans, but now
presently it is needful, to cure my sick and wounded men.

The noble men that were there present, besought him to give them leave to
skirmish with the Indians of Culhua, for as yet many of them wandered there
about. Cortes granted their request, and sent with them some of his men,
which were lusty, and in good health, who proceeded forth all together, and in
that journey slew many Indian enemies, so that after this time, the enemies
appeared no more. Then with triumph, pleasure, and victory, they departed
toward the City, and our men followed. It is credibly reported, that twenty
thousand men and women met them by the way with sundry kinds of meats: I do
believe that the most of them came to see them, for the great love which they
bare unto them, and likewise to enquire of their friends which had gone with
them to Mexico, of whom few returned. In Tlaxcallan they were honorably
received, and well used. Maxixca gave his house to Cortes, and the residue of
his company were hosted at Gentlemen's houses, who cherished them exceedingly,
whereby they forgate the pains, sorrows, and travels past, for in fifteen
days before, they lay on the bare ground.

Certaynely the Spanyardes were much indebted to the Tlaxcaltecas, for their
loyalty and faithful friendship, especially unto that good and virtuous
Gentleman Maxixca, who threw Xicotencatl down the stayres and steps of the
chief Temple, for giving his counsel to kill the Spanyardes, meaning to
reconcile himself with the Mexicans.

He also made two Orations, the one to the men, and the other to the women, in
the great favor and praise of the Spanyardes, putting them in remembrance,
how that they had not eaten salt, nor worn cloth of cotton wool in many
years before, until now that their friends were come: and to this day these
Indians do much presume of their fidelity, and likewise of the resistance
and battle they made with Cortes in Teoacazinco, so that now when they
celebrate any great feast, or receive any Christian vizeking, there comes of
them out into the field sixty or seauentie thousand men, to skirmishe and
fight in the same order as they did with Cortes.

The protestation and request of the Souldyers to Cortes.
WHen Cortes departed first from Tlaxcallon toward Mexico to visit Mutezuma,
he left there twenty thousand Castlins of gold and more, besides the Kings
portion which was sent with Monteio and Portocarrere. He left there also many
other things if need should have happened in Mexico of money, or other things
to provide his men in Vera Crux, and this he left there also, to prove the
fidelity of his friends in Tlaxcallon. And after he had obtained the victory
against Naruaez, he wrote unto the Captain that he should send for the same,
for reason required that in all things they should have their parts.

The Captain of Vera Crux sent fifty Spanyardes and five Horsemen for the
same, who at their return, were slain and taken prisoners with all that
treasure, by ye men of Culhua who had rebelled through the coming of Pamfilo
de Naruaez, robbing and spoiling sundry days. But when Cortez understood
this news, his soy was turned to sorrow, not only for the gold and treasure
so much, as for the loss of his men, fearyng also some other war or
uproar to have bin in the rich Town of Vera Crux, whereupon he sent a
messenger thither, who returned in short time, certifying that all the
inhabitants there were in good health, and also all the Comarcans quiet, and
without any token of alteration. This news and answer pleased Cortes and all
his company, which desired to go thither, but he would not permit them,
Exclamation.
wherefore they began to murmr and to exclayme, saying, what thinks Cortes,
what means he to do with us? why, will he keep us here to dye an evil
death? what have we offended him, that he will not let us go? we are already
full of weariness, our bodies are yet full of fresh wounds, we have spente our
blood, and are now without strength and apparel: we see our selves in a
strange Country, and full of miserye, environed with enemies, yea and without
hope to come to that high place from whence we fell, yea then might we he
accounted for worse than mad men, to come into the perils from whence we
escaped: we mean not now to end our lives so desperately, as he would have
us, for with the insatiable thirste of honor and glory, he esteems not
his life, neither ours. He does not likewise consider, that he wants men,
horses, artillery, and armoure, things so necessary for the wars, yea he
also wants victual, which is a thing most principal: what shall we say,
but that he erreth, and is deceived, in giving credit to these Tlaxcaltecas,
who are like unto the other nations of ^ndia, which are light, changeable, and
lovers of new things, yea and rather, in effect of troth, they better love
the Culhuacans, than the Spanishe nation, yea and although they now dissemble,
yet when they shall see a great army of Mexicans come upon them, they will
then deliver us alive, to be eaten, and sacrificed, for it is an old rule,
that friendship does not long endure betwixt them that are of sundry
religion, apparel, and speech.

After all these complayntes and murmurations among themselves, they made a
protestation and request, in form as it were in the name of the King and all
the company, praying him incontinent to depart from thence, and to go with
them to the Town of Vera Crux, before the enemies might disturb their way
and passage, and then they to remain both bought and sold, and shut up as
it were in a prison: also they declared, that in Vera Crux they should have
better opportunity to make themselves strong, if that he meante to return
again upon Mexico, or else to take shipping, if to it should seem convenient.

Cortes hearing this request, and determination of hy^ Souldyers, was at his
wits end, ymagining that their prefence was, only to procure him to go from
thence, and afterward to ra^^e him at their pleasures, and heeing a thing
clean contray to his pretended purpose, he answered them as follows.

The Oration made by Cortez in answer to his Souldyers demand.
MY masters, I would do and fulfill your request, if it were a thing meet
and conueniente for you, for there is not one alone of you, how much more all
in general, for whom I should not willingly adventure my goods and life, if
he should need the same: for why? your deeds have bin such, that I stand bound
never to forget the^, or else to show my self an ungrateful man. And think
you not good friends, although I do not fulfill the thing which you so
earnestly desire, that therefore I esteem not your authority: but in not
granting to the same, I do exalt and esteem you in greater reputation: for
why? in our departing now from hence, our honor is blotted and stained for
evermore, and in abiding here, we shall like valiant men preserve the same.
What nation is there, that had rule, dominon, and Empire in this world, that
has not bin overcome at some time? What famous Captain returned home to his
house, for the loss of one battle? none truly, for he that does not
persevere, shall never triumph with Lady Victory: he that retyreth, shows that
he flies, and remains a mocking stock for all men: but he that shows
nobly his face, does utter the courage of his heart, yea and is both feared,
and also beloved.

If we now should depart from hence, these our friends would accept and judge
us for cowardes, and refuse perpetually our friendship. Likewise our enemies
would judge the same, and never hereafter stand in fear of us, which
should be a great shame unto our estimation. Is there any among us, that
would not hold himself affrented, if it should be said, that he turned his
back and fled, how much more would it be a dishonor for us all to have the
same report?

I do much marvel at the greatenesse of your invincible hearts in battle:
you were wont to be desirous of wars, and now that such just and laudable
war does offer it self, you do fear and refuse the same: sure it is a
thing clean contrary to our nature. What is he that will prate of harnes,
and never ware none? It was never yet seen in all this India and new world,
that any of our nation retired with fear. And would you now that it should
be said, that Cortes and his company fled, being in security, and without
peril or danger? I beseech God not to permit any such thing. The wars
do much consist in fame: why then? what better thing would you desire, than
to be here in Tlaxcallan in despite of all your enemies, yea proclayming open
wars against them, and they not dare to annoy us? Therefore you may well
consider, that here you are more sure than if you were from hence, so that
here in Tlaxcallan you are honored with security and strength, and besides
this, you have al things necessary of physic and medicine to cure your
wounds and obtain your health: yea, and I am bold to say, that if you were
in your own natural Country, you should not have the like, nor yet so much
made off.

I do now mean to send for our men that are in Coazacoalco and Almeria, and
so we shall have a reasonable army: yea and although they come not, we are
sufficient, for we were fewer in number when first we entered into this
Country, having no friends: and likewise you know well, it is not the number
that does fight, but the courageous heart and mind. I have seen one of you
discomfyte a whole army, as Ionatas did, yea and many among you have had
victory against a thousand, yea ten thousand Indians, as King David had
against the Philistines. I look daily for Horses from the Islands, and other
armoure and artillery we shall have from Vera Crux. And as for vittayles, take
you no care, for I will provide you abundantly, for they are things that
always follow the Conqueroures: and as for these Citizens of Tlaxcallan, I
bind my self that you shall find them trusty, loyal, and perpetual
friends, for so they have promised me upon their solemn oaths, yea, and if
they had meante otherwise, what better opportunity of time could they have
wished, tha^ these latter days, where as we lay sick in their own beds and
houses, yea some of us lame, wounded, and in manner rotten, and they like
loving friends have not only helped you, but also served you with diligence of
servants, for they would rather choose to be your slaves, than subjects to
the Mexicans: their hatred is such to them, and their love so great to you.
And because you shall see the troth, I will now prove them and you, against
these of Tepeacac, who slew of late days twelve Spanyardes. And if this
journey happen evil, then will I follow your request, and if it please God
that it happen well, then will I entreat and pray you to follow my counsel.

The Souldyers hearing this comfortable speech, began to lay aside their
desire to go from thence to Vera Crux. They answered generally, that they
would obey his commandment, it should seem with the promise made,
touching the success of the victory in Tepeacac, and lightly seldom it
happens, that a Spanyard says no, when he is required to go on warfare, for
it is holden for a dishonor and shame.

The vvarres of Tepeacac.
COrtez found himself at hearts ease with this answer, for it was a thing yt
had much troubled him: and undoubtedly if he had followed his fellows demand,
he should never have recovered Mexico again, and they likewise had bin slain
in the way toward Vera Crux, for they had many perilous places to pass.
Each one of them waxed whole of his wounds, saving some which dyed for want of
loking to in time, leaving their wounds filthy and unbound, as Surgio^s do
affirm, with also their great travel and weakness, And likewise other some
remained lame and halt, which was no small grief and loss: but the most part
recovered health, as I have declared. After twenty days fully past, which
they had abode in Tlaxcallan, Cortes determined to make war with the Indians
of Tepeacac, which is a great Town, and not far from thence, for they had
slain twelve Spaniards, which came from Vera Crux toward Mexico. Likewise
they were of the league of Culhua, and therefore were helped by the Mexicans,
and did many times great hurt to the inhabitants of Tlaxcallan, as Xicotencatl
did testifye. Cortes desired his loving friend Maxixca, and diverse other
Gentlemen, to go with him, who forthwith entered into counsel with the states
and comunaltie of the City, and there determined with general consent to
give unto him forty thousand fighting men, besides many Tamemoz, who are foot
carriers, to bear the baggage, victual, and other things. With this number of
Tlaxcaltecas, his own men and horses, he went to Tepeacac, requiring them in
satisfaction of the death of ye twelve Christians, that they should now yield
themselves to the obedience of the Emperor, and that hereafter never more to
receive any Mexican into their town or houses, neither yet any of the province
of Culhua.

The Tepeacacs answered, that they had slain the Spaniardes for good and just
cause, which was, that being time of war they presumed to pass through
their country by force, without their will and license. And also that the
Mexicans and Culhuacans were their friends and Lords, whom always they would
friendly entertayne within their town and houses, refusing utterly their offer
and request, protesting to give no obedience to whom they knew not, wishyng
them therefore, to return incontinent to Tlaxcallan, except they had desire
to end their werie days.

Cortes innuited them diverse times with peace, and seeing it prevailed not, he
began his wars in earnest. Their enemies likewise with the favor of the
Culhuacans were brave and lusty, and began to stop and defend their
pretended entrance. And they being many in number, with diverse valiant men
among them, began to skirmishe sundry times, but at the end, they were
overthrown, and many slain, without killing any Spaniarde, although many
Tlaxcaltecas were killed that day.

The Lords and principal persons of Tepeacac seeing their overthrow, and that
their strength could not prevail, yielded themselves unto Cortes for
vassalles of the Emperor, with condition to banish for ever their allied
friends of Culhua. And that he should punish and correct at his will and
pleasure, all those which were occasion of the death of the twelve Spaniardes.
For which causes and obstinacy, at the first Cortes judged by his sentence,
that all the towns which had been privy to the murder, should for ever
remain captives and slaves: others affirm that he overcame them without any
condition, and corrected them for their disobedience, being Sodomites,
idolaters and caters of man's flesh, and chiefly for example of all others. And
in conclusion, they were condemned for slaves, and within twenty days that
this wars lasted, he pacified all that province, which is very great: he
drove from thence the Culhuacans: he threw down the idols, and the chiefest
persons obeyed him. And for more assurance he builte there a town, naming it
Segura de la Frontera: he appointed all officers for the purpose, being a town
situated in the high way from Vera Crux to Mexico, whereby the Christians and
strangers might pass without danger. In this wars served like faithful
friends the Indians of Tlaxcallan, Huexocinco and Cholalla, promysing the like
service and succor against Mexico, yea and rather better than worse. With this
victory the Spaniardes recovered great fame, for they were thought to have been
slain.

The great authority that Cortez had among the Indians.
AFter all these things were finished, Cortes commanded and gave license to all the Indian friends, to return home unto their houses, except his assured
friends of Tlaxcallan, wh^^ he kept in his company for the wars of Mexico: he
now dispatched a post to Vera Crux, commaundyng that four of the ships
which Naruaez had brought, should be sent with all speed to ye Island of Santo
Domingo, for men, horses, armor, powder and other munition, also for woollen
cloth, linen, shoes, and many other things: and wrote his letters for the
same to the licenciat Rodrigo de Figueroa, and to the whole magistrates of
Chancery, certifying them of all their proceedings in that country, beseechyng
them of help and succor, and that forthwith to be sent by the messenger.

This done, he sent twenty horsemen, two hundred Spaniardes, and many
Indians unto Zacatami and Xalaxinco, which were towns subject to the
Mexicans, and placed in the high way to Vera Crux, who had slain certain
Spaniardes passing that way. This company went thither, with their accustomed
protestations, which prevailed not, whereupon followed fire and spoil: many
Gentlemen and other principal persons came to yield themselves to Cortes,
more for fear than for good will, crauyng pardon for their offense, promising
also not to offend again, nor yet at any time to take armor against the
Spaniardes. Cortes pardoned them, and then his army returned, with
determination to keep his Christmasse in Tlaxcallan, which was within twelve
days followyng. He left a Captain with three score Spaniards in the new
town of Segura, to keep that passage, and also to put in fear the Comarcans
that dwelled thereabout: he sent before him his whole army, and he himself
went with twenty horsemen from thence to Coliman to lodge there that night,
being a city of his allied friends, and there to ordain and make by his
authority, both Noble men and Captains in lue of them which died with the
disease of small pockes. He aboade there three days, in the which the new
Lords were ordained, who afterward remained his especial friends. The
next day he came to Tlaxcallan, being six leagues distant from thence, where
he was triumphantly received. And truly at that time he made a journey most
worthy of renown and glory.

At this season his dear friend Maxixea was departed this transitory life,
for whom he mourned clothed in black, after the Spanishe fashion: he left
behind him certain sons, of whom the eldest was.xij. years of age, whom
Cortes named and appointed for Lord of his fathers estate, and the commons did
certify it to appertain unto him. This was no small glory for Cortes to give
estates, and also to take them away at his pleasure, yea and that those Indians
should have him in such fear and respect, that none durst do any thing in
acceptyng the inheritance of their fathers without his good will and license.

Now Cortes procured that every man should make his harneys, weapons and
provision ready and in good order: he made also great haste in building
Vergantines, for his timber was already cut and seasoned: he sent unto Vera
Crux for sails, tacle, nails, roapes and other necessary things, whereof
the^e was store remaynyng of the furniture of the ships that were sunk. And
having want of pitche, for in that country the Indians knew not what it
meant, he commanded certain of his Mariners to make the same in the high
Mountains where was store of Pine trees, and not far from the city.

The Vergantines that Cortez commanded to be built, and the Spaniardes which
he had joined together to besiege Mexico.
THe fame of prosperity which Cortes enjoyed, was wonderfully blown abroad
with the news of the imprisonment of Mutezuma, and the victory against Pamfilo
de Naruaez, whereupon there came many Spaniardes by twenty and twenty in a
company from Cuba, Santo Domingo, and other Islands. Although that journey
cost some their lives, for in the way they were murdered by those of Tepeacac
and Xalacinco, as is before declared, yet notwithstanding there came many to
Tlaxcallan, whereby his host was much increased, beseechyng him to make haste
toward the wars.

It was not possible for Cortes to have espies in Mexico, for the Tlaxcaltecas
were known by their lips, ears, and other tokens, and also they had in
Mexico guard and great inquiry for that purpose, by reason whereof he could not
certainly know what passed in those parties, according as he desired, for to
have provided himself of things needful: yet a Captain which was taken
prisoner in Huacacholla, certified that Cuetlauac Lord of Iztacpalapan, Neuewe
to Mutezuma, was elected Emperor after his Uncles death, who was a wise and
valiant man, and he it was that had driven Cortes out of Mexico, who now had
fortified Mexico with many bulworkes and caves, and with many and sundry sorts
of weapon, but chiefly very long Lances, yea and planted them in the ground to
resist and molest the horsemen. He proclaimed pardon and free liberty,
without paying any tribute for the space of one whole year, yea and further as
long as the wars should last, he promised also great rewards to all them
that should kill any Christian, or expulse them from that country. This was a
policy whereby he gatte much credit among his vassals, yea and gave them
great courage to play the valiant men. All this news was found to be true,
saving only Cuetlauac was dead. And that Quahutimoecin, Neuew also, as some
do say, of Mutezuma, raygned at that time, who was a valiant man and a good
warrier, as hereafter shall be declared, who sent his messengers through out his
Empire, proclaymyng as great rewards as Cuetlauac had done before, declaryng
unto them that it was more reason to serve him than strangers, and also to
defend their old ancient Religion, and not to credit such Christians as
would make themselves Lords of other men's goods, yea and make them slaves
and captives as they had done in other places. Quahutimoc encouraged much his
subjects, and kindled with his talk their wrath against the Spaniards: yet
there were some provinces that gave no ear to his information, but rather
leaned to our side, or else meddled with neither side. Cortes seeing the effect
of the matter, determined forthwith to begin the wars: he mustered his men
on Saint Steuens day, and found forty horsemen, and five hundredth and
forty footmen, whereof four score were Hargabushiers, and cross bow men,
niene pieces of ordinance, and little powder: his horsemen he divided into
four squares, and his footmen into nine: he named and appointed captains,
and other officers for the host, unto whom in general he spoke as follows.

The exhortation of Cortez to his Soldiers.
MY loving brethren, I give most hearty thanks unto Jesus Christ, to see you
now whole of your wounds and free from diseases: likewise I much rejoice to
see you in good order trimly armed, yea and with such desire to set again
upon Mexico, to revenge the death of our fellows, and to win that great
City, the which I trust in God shall be brought to pass in short time,
having the friendship of Tlaxcallan and other provinces, who have as great
desire to see the overthrow of the Mexicans, as we our selves, for therein
they get both honor, liberty and safegarde of life. Also it is to be
considered, that if the victory should not be ours, they poor souls should be
destroyed and remain in perpetual captivity. Also the Culhuacans do abhor
them worse than us, for receiving us into their houses and country: therefore
sure I am that they will stick unto us unfeignedly. I must needs confess
their unfeigned friendship, for present works do testify the same. They will
not only be a mean to bring others their neighbors to our service, but also
have now in readiness.100000. me^ of war, to send with us, besides a great
number of Tamemez or carriers to carry al our provision. Ye also, are now the
same which always heretofore ye have been, for I as witness being your
captain, have had the victory of many battayles fighting with a.100. yea and
200000. enemies: we got also by strength of arm many strong cities, yea and
brought in subjection many provinces, not being so many in number as we are
now, for when we came first into this country we were not so many as now
presently we are. Again in Mexico they fear our coming: it should also be a
blot unto our honor that Quahutimoc should inherit ye kingdom that cost our
friend Mutezuma his life. Likewise I esteem all that we have done is nothing, if
we win not Mexico, our victories should also be sorrowful if we revenge not
the death of our dear fellows. The chief and principal cause of our coming
into this country, was to set forth the faith of Jesus Christ, and therwithal
does follow honor and profit which seldom times do dwell together. In those
few days that we were in Mexico, we put down the idols, we caused sacrifice
and eating of man's flesh to be laid aside, and also in those days we
began to convert some to the faith. It is not therefore now reason to leave
of so laudable an enterprise, so well begone. Let us now go whither holy
faith does call us, and where the sins of our enemies deserves so great a
punishment, and if ye well remember, the Citizens of that city were not
content to murder such an infinite number of men, women and children before the
idols, in their filthy sacrifice, for honor of their Diuelishe Gods, but
also to eat their flesh, a thing inhumayne, and much abhorred of God, and al
good men does procure, and especially Christians, to defend and punish such
odious customs.

Besides all this, they commit that horrible sin for the which the five
cities with Sodom were burned by fire from heaven: Why then what greater
occasion should any man wish for in earth, than to abolish such wickedness,
and to plant among these bloody tirants the faith of Jesus Christ, publishing
his holy gospel? Therefore now, with joyful hearts let us proceed to serve
God, honor our nation, to enlarge our Princes dominions, and to enriche our
selves with the goodly pray of Mexico, to morrow God willing we will begin
the same.

All his men answered with cheerful countenance, that they were ready to
depart when it pleased him, promising their faithful service unto him. It
should seem the rather with the desire of that pleasure and great treasure
which they had eight months enjoyed before.

Cortes commanded to proclayme throughout his army, certain ordinances of
war for the good government of his host, which he had written among
others: and were these that follows: That none should blaspheme the holy name
of Jesus. That no Soldier should fight with his fellow. That none should
play at any game, his horse nor armor. That none should force any woman. That
none should rob or take any Indian captive without his special license and
counselors.


That none should wrong or injury any Indian their friends: he also taxed iron
work and apparel, for cause of the excessive prices that they were there
sold for.

The exhortation made by Cortez to the Indians of Tlaxcallan.
THe next day following, Cortes called before him all the Lords, Captains,
and principal persons of Tlaxcallan, Huexocinco, Chololla, Chalco, and of
other towns, who were there present at that time, saying as follows. My
Lords and friends, you know the journey which I have now in hand, to morrow
God willing I will depart to the war and siege of Mexico, and enter into the
land of your enemies and mine: And the thing that now I do require, and also
pray, is, that you remain faithful and constant in your promise made, as
hitherunto you have done, and so I trust you will continue. And because I can
not bring so soon my purpose to pass according to your desire and mine,
without the Vergantines which are now a making, and to be placed in the lake of
Mexico, therefore I pray you to favor these workmen which I leave here,
with such love and friendship, as heretofore you have done, and to give them
all things necessary for their provision, and I do faithfully promise to take
away the yoke of bondage, which the inhabitants of Culhua have laid upon you,
and also will obtain of the Emperor great liberty and privileges for you.

All the Indians showed countenance of obedience, and the chiefest Gentlemen
answered in few words, saying, we will not only fulfill your request, but
also when your vessels are finished, we will bring them to Mexico, and we all
in general will go with you, and truly serve you in your wars.

How Cortez took Tezcuco.
COrtez departed from Tlaxcallan with his Souldyers in good order, which was a
goodly sight to behold, for at that time he had eyghtie thousand men in his
host, and the most of them armed after their manner, which made a gallant show:
but Cortes for diverse causes would not have them all with him, until the
Vergantines were finished, and Mexico beseeged, searing want of vittayle for
so great an army: yet notwithstanding he took twenty thousand of them,
besides the Carriers, and that night came to Tezmoluca, which stands six
leagues from Tlaxcallan, and is a Village apperteyning to Huexocinco, where he
was by the principal of the Town well received. The next day he iourneyed
four leagues, into the territory of Mexico, and there was lodged on the (...)
of a hill, where many had perished with cold, had it not bin for the store of
woodde which they found there. In the morning he ascended vpwar^^ on this hill;
and sent his scoute of four footmen and four horsemen to discover, who
found the way stopped wish great trees newly cut down, and placed cross^wise
in the way: but they thynking that yet for war (...) was not so, proceeded
forth as well as they ^^ght, li^ at length the let with great hugi^ trees was
such, that they could pass no further, and with this newe^ were forced to
return, certifying Cortes that the Horsemenne could not pass that way in any
wise. Cortes demanded of them, whether they had seen any people, they
answered (...), whereupon he proceeded forward with all the Marsen^^ (...)
thousand footmen, commaundyng all the residue of his army to follow him
with as much (...) might he, so that with that company which he carried
with him, he made way, taking away the trees that were cut down to disturb
his passage: and in this order, in short time passed his host, without any hurt
or danger, but with great pain and travel, for certaynely if the enemies had
bin there to defend that passage, our men had not passed, for it was a
very evil way, and the enemies also thought the same to be sure with the
trees which were crossed the way, whereupon they were careless of that
place, and attended their coming in plain ground: for from Tlaxcallan to
Mexico are three ways, of the which Cortes chose the worst, ymagining the
thing that afterward fell out, or else some had advised him how that way
was clear from the enemies. And being past this crooked passage, they espied
the lake of Mexico, and gave unto God most hearty thanks for the same, and
there made a solemn vow and promise, not to return, until they had won
Mexico, or lost their lives. They abode there and rested themselves, till all
the whole army^ were come together, to descend down into the plain, for now
they might descrye the fires and beacons of their enemies in sundry places,
and all those which had attended their coming by the other two ways, were
now gathered together, thynkyng to set upon them betwixt certain bridges,
where a great company aboade, exspecting their coming: but Cortes sent
twenty Horsemen, who made way among them, and then followed the whole army,
who slew many of them, without receyuyng any hurt. And in this order they
came to Quahutipec, which is of the jurisdiction of Tezcuco, where they abode
that night, and in that place found neither manne nor Woman: but not far
off was pytched the Ca^^e of the Indians of Culhua, which might be near a
hundred thousand men of war, who were sent by the Seniors of Mexico, and
Tezcuco, to encounter our army, in consideration whereof, Cortes kept good
watch with ten Horsemen, and all his Souldyers were warned to be in
readynesse at a call, if need should happen.

The next day in the morning he departed from thence toward Tezcuco, which
stands three leagues distante, and proceeding on their journey, four
principal persons, inhabitants of Tezcuco, met with them, bearing a rod of
gold, with a little flagge, in token of peace, saying, that Coacuacoyozin
their Lord had sent them to desire him not to make any spoil in his Country,
and likewise, to offer his friendship, praying also, that it might please him
with his whole army to take his lodging in the Town of Tezcuco, where he
should be well received. Cortes rejoiced with this message, although he
suspected that it was a feigned matter, but one of them he knew very well,
whom he saluted, saying: My coming is not to offend any, but rather to do you
good. I will also receive and hold your Lord for a friend, with condition,
that he do make unto me restitution of the treasure which he took from
five and forty Spaniards, and three hundred Tlaxcaltecas, all the which were
by his commandment also slain of late days. They answered that Mutezuma
caused them to be murdered, who had likewise taken the spoil, and that the
Citizens of Tezcuco were not culpable in that fact, and with this answer they
returned.

Cortes went forward on his way, and came to Quahutichan and Huaxuta, which are
suburbs of Tezcuco, where he and all his host were plented^^^y provided of al
things necessary, and threw down the Idolles. This done, he entered into the
City, where his lodging was prepared in a great house, sufficient for him and
all the Spanyardes, with many other the Indian friends. And because that at his
first entry, he saw neither women nor children, he suspected some treason,
and forthwith proclaimed, upon pain of death, that none of his men should go
out. The Spaniards began to triumph in their lodgings and cha^bers, placing
every thing in good order. In the evening they went up into the Z^^ies and
galleries, to behold the City, which is as big as Mexico, and there they
saw the great number of Citizens that fled from thence with their stuff,
some toward the mountains, and others to the water side to take boat, a
thing strange, to see the great have and stir to provide for themselves, at
the least there were twenty thousand little boats (called Conoas) occupied, in
carrying household stuff and passengers. Cortes would feign have remedied it,
but that night was so nygh at hand, that he could not. He would gladly also
have apprehended the Lord, but he was one of the first that fled unto Mexico.
Cortes caused many of the Citizens, to be called before him, and having in his
company a young gentleman of a noble house in that country, who was also last
christened, and had to name Herna^do, Cortes being his godfather, who loved him
well, said unto the citizens, that this new Christian lord, Don Herna^do, was
son unto Nezaualpincintli their loving Lord, wherefore he required them to
make him their king, considering that Goacnacoyocin, was fled unto the enemies,
laying also before them his wicked fact in killing of Cacuza his own brother,
only to put him from his inheritance and kingdom, through the enticemente of
Quahutimoccin, a mortal enemy to the Spaniards. In this sort was Don Hernando
elected king, and the fame thereof being blown abroad, many citizens repaired
home again to visit their new Prince, so that in short space the city was
as well replenished with people, as it was before, and being also well used at
the Spaniardes hands, they served them dilygentlye in all things that they
were commanded. And Don Hernando aboade ever after a faithful friend unto
the Spaniardes, and in short time learned the Spanishe tongue: and soon after
came the inhabitants of Quahutichan, Huaxuta and Auntenco, to submytte them
selves, craving pardon, if in any thing they had offended. Cortez pardoned
them, and gave them license to depart home unto their houses.

Quahutimoc, Coacnacoijo and other magistrates of Culhua sent to rail upon
those towns, for yeeldyng themselves to the Christians, but they laid hold
upon the messengers, and brought them unto Cortes, of whom he informed
himself of the state of Mexico, and sent them back again, requiring their
Lords of peace and friendship: but it prevailed not, for they were fully
armed for the war.

At this instante certain friends of James Velasques went up and down the
Camp, A good correction.
procuring secretly a mutenie among the soldiers, to have them to return to
Cuba, and utterly to destroy Cortes his proceedings. This thing was not so
secretly wrought, but that Cortes had knowledge, whereupon he apprehended the
doers thereof, and by their confessions the matter did plainly appear,
whereupon he condemned to death one Antonio de Villafania, who was natural of
Samora, and forthwith executed the sentence, wherewith the punishment and
Mutiny was ended, and ceased.

The Spaniardes which were sacrificed in Tezcuco.
Daily increased Cortes in strength and reputation, and many towns as well of
the parts of Culhua as others came unto his friendship and obedience. Within
two days that Don Hernando was made king, came certain gentlemen of Huaxuta
and Quahutichan, to certify unto him, how all the power of the Mexicans was
coming toward them, and to know if it were his pleasure, that they should
carry their wives, children, and other goods into the Mountains, or else to
bring them where he was, their fear was so great. Cortes made unto the^ this
answer, saying: be ye of good courage, and fear ye not. Also I pray you to
command your wives and families to make no alteration, but rather quietly to
abide in your houses. And concerning the enemies, I am glad of their coming,
for ye shall see how I will deal with them. But the enemies went not to
Huaxuta, as it was thought: nevertheless Cortes having intelligence where they
were, went out to encounter them, with two pieces of Ordinance, twelve
horsemen and two hundred Spaniardes, with many Indians of Tlaxcalla^. He fought
with the enemy, and slew but few, for they fled to the water. He burnt
certain towns where the Mexicans were wont to succor themselves. The next
day came the chiefest men of three towns to crave pardon, and to beseech him
not to destroy the^, promising never to harbor nor succor, any of Culhua.

The Mexicans hearing what these towns men pretended, with great ire made a
foul correction among them, as did appear by many of them, which came unto
Cortes with broken heads, desiring reuengement.

The inhabitaunts of Chalco sent also unto him for succor, declaring that the
Mexicans made great spoil among them. But Cortes being ready to send for his
Vergantines, could not relieve them all, and especially with Spaniardes:
wherefore he remitted them to the help of the Tlaxcaltecas, and unto the^ of
Huexocinco, Chololla, Huacacholla and other friends, promising that shortly he
would come himself. But this answer pleased him not, yet for the present
need they required his letters to be written unto those towns. And being in
this communication, there came messengers from Tlaxcallan, with news, that the
Vergantines were ready, and to know if he stood in need of any succor, for
of late, (quoth they) we have seen many beacons, and fires, which are greater
tokens of war, than heretofore has been seen.

There came at that time, a Spaniard also from Vera Crux, with certain news,
that there had arrived a ship, which had brought thirty Soldiers besides the
mariners of the ship, with eight horses, great store of powder, shot,
crossebowes, and Harquebushes. The plesent news rejoiced much our men,
whereupon Cortes sent forthwith to Tlaxcallan for the Vergantines, Gonzalo de
Sandoual, with two hundred Spaniards, and fifteen horsemen, and commanded
that in their way they should burn and destroy the town where the forty five
spaniardes, and three hundred Tlaxcaltecas were slain, with five horses more,
when Mexico was last besieged: and y^ village is in ye jurisdiction of Tezcuco,
and bordereth upon the territory of Tlaxcallan, yea, and for that purpose he
would gladly have corrected and punished the dwellers of Tezcuco, but time then
permitted not ye same, although they had deserved more punishment than the
others. For why? in their town they were sacrifised and eaten, yea and the
walls painted with their blood, showing mo^^ over perfect tokens, how it was
spaniards blood. The (...) off also the horses skins and tanned the^ in the
hea^^, and afterward hung them up, with the horseshoes in their great
temple, and next unto them, the spaniards garments, for a perpetual memory.

Sandoual went unto that place with determinate intent to follow his
commission, and also before he came to ye place, he found written in a house with
a cole, these words: here in this house was a prisoner ye unfortunate John
^ust, who was a gentleman, and one of the five horsemen that were taken. But the
people of that town, being many, fled when they saw the Spaniardes approach
near unto the^. But Sandoual followed them, and slew many of them: be took
also prisoners, many women and children, who yielded themselves unto his
mercy, and their bodies for slaves. He seeing so little resistance, and
beholding the pitiful moan of the wives for their husbands, and the children
for their fathers, had compassion on them, and would not destroy their town,
but rather caused the dwellers to come again, and pardoned them, with oath,
that hereafter they should serve them truly, and be unto them loyal friends.
In this sort was the death of the Christians revenged, yet Sandoual asked them
how they slew so many Christians without resistaunce, marye (quoth they) we
made an ambush in an evil and narrow way, ascending up a hill, and there as
they went up by one and one we spoiled them, for there, neither horses nor
other weapon could defend or help the^, so yt we took them prisoners and sent
them to Tezcuco, where, as is before deblared, they were sacrificed in the
reuengement of the imprisonment of Calama.

How the Vergantines were brought from Tlaxcall to Tezcuco.
Now when the enemies which murdered the Spaniardes, were reduced and
chastened, Sandoual proceeded forward toward Tlaxcallan, and at the border of
that province, he met with the Verga^tines which were brought in pieces, as
tables, planches, and nails, with all other furniture, the which eight
thousand men carried upon their backs.

There came also for their safeconduicte twenty thousand men of war, and a
thousand Tamemez, who were the carriers of victuals, and servants. The^ the
Spanishe Carpenters said unto Sandoual, that for as much as they were now
come into the country of enemies, it might please him to have regard
thereunto, for dangers that might happen: he allowed well their judgment.

Now Chichimecatetl, being a principal man and a valiant also, was captain of
a thousand men, and desired to have the vantguard with the Timber, and having
had the same charge hitherunto, it should be an affrent for him, to be put from
it, and gave many reasons in his behalf. But notwithstanding his request, he
was entreated to take the reregarde. And that Tutipil and Teutecatl captains,
very principal gentlemen, should have the vantgard, with ten thousand men. In
the myddest were placed the Tamemez, and those that carried the foyst, with all
the apparel of the Vergantines. Before those two captains, went a hundred
Spaniardes, and eight horsemen, and behind and last came Sandoual with all the
residue, and seven horsemen. But now although Chichimecatetl was offended,
touching his first charge, now much more because the Spaniardes were not in
his company, saying (quoth he) ye take me not for valiant, or else not
faithful. That matter being pacified, and every thing in good order, they took
their way toward Tezcuco, with a marvelous noise, crying, Christians,
Christians, Tlaxcallan, Tlaxcallan, and Spain.

On the fourth day they entered into Tezcuco, in very good order, with the
sound of drums, snayle-shelles, and other like instruments of Music, and
against their entry into the City, they put on al their brauerye of clothes,
and bushes of feathers, which truly was a gallant sight: they were six
hours, in entryng into the town, keeping their array.

Cortez came forth to receive them, and gave great thanks unto the gentlemen,
and all the company, and provided them of good lodgings and entertaynement.

Of the Docke or trench which was made to launch, the Vergantines.
Many provinces of India, came to submit and offer their service unto
Cortes, some for fear of destruction, and others for the hatred which they
bare to the Mexicans: So that now Cortes was strong both with Spaniardes and
Indians. Also the Spanishe Captain of Segura, sent a letter to Cortez, the
which letter he had received of another spaniard, the effect thereof was as
follows. Noble gentlemen, diverse times I have written unto you, but as yet I
never received answer, nor yet now do I I think otherwise, notwithstanding
ye shall understand, that the Culhuacans have done much hurt in this
country, but we remain with victory. This province desires to see and know
Captain Cortez, for to render themselves unto him, and now they stand in
need of our nation, wherefore it may please you to send unto us thirty
Spaniardes.

Cortez answered the letter in such sort, that he then presently could not
send the thing desired, for that he was ready to the siege of Mexico:
notwythstanding he gave them great thanks, with hope shortly to see the^. He
that writ the former letter, was one of the Spaniardes that Cortez had
sent to the province of Chinanta, a year paste, to enquire of the secrets of
that place, and to seek for gold and other commodities. And if it so
happened, that the Lord of that place made that Spaniarde a Captain, against
the Culhuacans their enemies, for Mutezuma made them war being far from
Mexico, because they had entefrayned the Spaniardes. But through the industry
of that Christian, the Lord aboade always with victory, and having
understanding that some of his nation were in ^epeacac, he wrote so often as
the letter declares, but none of them came to their hands, but only this last
letter: our men rejoiced much to hear that the Spaniardes were alive, and
also the Lord of Chinanta to be their friend: likewise they marueyled much
how they had escaped, for at the time that they fled from Mexico, all other
Spaniardes that were abidyng in the Mines and other Lordshippes, were slain by
the Indians.

Cortes made his preparation for the seege of Mexico with all have, and
furnished him with scalling ladders, and other necessaryes, fit for such a
purpose. His Vergantines being nailed, and thoroughly ended, he made a sluise or
trench of half a league of length, twelve foot broad and more, and two fadome
in depth. This work was fifty days a doing, although there were four
hundred thousand me^ daily working, truly a famous work and worthy of memory.

The Vergantines were calked with Towe and cotton woll, and for want of tallow
and oil, they were (as some report,) driven to take man's grease, A strange
tallovve.
not that they slew men for that effect, but of those which were slain in the
wars. The Indians who were cruel and bloody butchers, using sacrifice, would
in this sort open the dead body, and take out the grease. The Vergantines
being lanched, Cortes mustered his men, and found nine hundred Spanyardes, of
the which were 86. Horsemen, and a hundred and eyghteene with Crossebowes and
Hargabushes, and all the residue had sundry weapons, as swords, daggars,
Targets, Lances, and Halbertes. Also they had for armor, corselets, coats of
mayle, and Iackes. They had moreover three great pieces of cast iron, fifteen
small pieces of brass, and ten hundred waighte of powder, with store of
shot. All that ye have heard, was the provision that Cortes had for the
seege of Mexico, the strongest and greatest City in all India and new world.
In each Vergantine he placed a piece of brass. He proclaimed again all the
institutions and ordinances of the war, praying and commanding that they
might be well and faithfully observed, and said, Brethren and my fellows, now
do you see our vessels ready, yea and also you do remember how troublesome a
thing it has bin to bring them hither with the cost and sweat of our
friends, and one of the chiefest hopes that I have shortly to win Mexico,
are these vessels, for with them we will burn all their Canoas, or else we
will so lock them up, that they shall not help them, whereby we will annoy our
enemy as much that way, as our army shall do by land. I have also a hundred
thousand men of war my friends to beseege this City, who are (as you know)
ye valiantest men in all these parties. You have also your vittailes provided
abundantly, and that which now imports, is, that you play the men, as
heretofore you have done, and most humbly to pray unto God for victory, for
that this war is his.

The order of the host and army of Cortes for to beseege Mexico.
THe next day following, Cortes sent unto the provinces of Tlaxcallan,
Huexocinco, Chololla, Chal, and other Towns, warning the^ within ten days
to come unto Tezcuco, with their armoure, weapon, and other necessaries, for
the seege of Mexico. He certifyed them also, how the Vergantines were ready
with all other furniture accordingly, and the Spanyardes were very desirous to
lose no time, wherefore they meante not to delay their pretense, farther than
the day appointed.

The Indians hearing this news, and because they would not come too late to
the beginning of the assault, came incontinente, and entered into Tezcuco in
good order of war, above sixty thousand men, gallantly trimmed after their
use and custom. Cortes friendly welcomed them, and provided them lodgings
accordingly.

On Whitsonday, all the Spanyardes came into the field, whereas Cortes made
three chief Captains, among whom he divided his whole army. Unto Pedro de
Aluarado the first Captain, he appointed thirty horsemen, and a hundred and
seauentie footmen of the Spanyardes, two pieces of ordinance, and thirty
thousand Indians, commanding him to camp in Tlacopan. Unto Cristoual de Olid
the second Captain, he gave three and thirty Horsemen, and a hundred and
eyghteene footmen of the Spanish nation, two pieces of ordinance, and thirty
thousand Indians, and appointed him so pitch his camp in Culhuacan. To Gonsalo
de Sandoual who was the third Captain, he gave three and twenty Horsemen, and
160. footmen, two pieces of Ordinance, and 40000. Indians, with commission to
choose a place to pi^ch his Camp.

In every Vergantine he planted a piece of ordinance, six hargabushes, or
crossebowes, and 23. Spaniards, me^ most fittest for that purpose. He appointed
also Captains for each, and himself for general, whereof some of the
chiefest of his company began to murmr that went by land, thinking that
they had bin in greater danger, wherefore they required him to go with the
main battle, and not by water. Cortes little esteemed their words, for
although it is more danger in the water than in the land, yet it did more
importe to have greater care in the wars by water, than on the land, because
his men had bin in the one, and not in the other.

On the tenth of May Aluarado, and Cristoual de Olid departed, and went that
night to a Town called A colman, where was between them great discord
touching their lodgings, yea and if Cortes had not sent to take up the matter,
much mischief had ensued. The next day they lodged in X^l^t^pe^, which was
not inhabited. The third day they came unto Tlacopan, which was also as all
the Towns of the lake, without people, there they were lodged in the Lords
house of the Town.

The Tlaxcaltecas began to view Mexico by the calsey, and fought with their
enemies, until the night made them to cease.

On the thirteenth of May, Cristoual de Olid came to Chapultepec, and brake the
conduites of sweet water, whereupon Mexico was destitute of the same, being
the conduit that did provide all the City. Pedro de Aluarado with his company
procured to amend all the broken places of the calsey, that the horsemen might
have free passage, and having much to do in these affairs, he spente three
days, and fighting with many enemies, some of his men were hurt, and many
Indian friends slain. Aluarado abode in Tlacopan with his army, and Cristoual
de Olid retired to Culhuacan with his men, according to the instruction
received from Cortes, and fortifyed themselves in the Lords houses of the
Town, and every day skyrmished with the enemies, and some went to the Towns
near at hand, and brought Centli, fruit, and other provision. In this
business they occupied themselves a whole week.

The Battle and victory of the Vergantines against the Canoas.
THe new King Quahutimoc having intelligence how Cortes had launched his
Vergantines and so mighty a power to beseege Mexico, entered into counsel with
the chiefest peers of his Realm. Some were of opinion, and did provoke him to
the wars, considering their great multitude of people, and fortitude of the
City.

Others were of opinion, who tendered much the common weal, that no Spanyarde
that should happen to be taken prisoner should be sacrificed, but rather to
be preserved for conclusion of peace if need should so require. And finally
some said, that they should demand of their Gods what was best to do.

The King that inclined himself more to peace than to war^e, said that he
would remitte the matter to the judgment of the idolles, and that he would
advise them what answer should be made unto him but: in heart he desired to
come to some honest order and agreement with Cortes, fearing the thing that
after did ensue. But seeing his Counsel and subjects so determined to war,
he commanded four Spaniardes which he had prisoners in a cage, to be
sacrificed unto the Gods of war, with a great number more of Indians.

He spoke to the Devil in the image of Vitzilopuchtli, A Devilish sentence.
who answered him that he should not fear the Spaniardes being but few, nor
yet those which were comen to help them, for that they should not long abide
in the siege, commanding him to go forth and to encounter them without fear,
for he would help them and kill his enemies. With this answer of the devil,
Quahutimoc commanded forthwith to break down the bridges, watch the City,
make bulwarks, and to arm five thousand boats, and said unto the
Spaniardes, that the Gods would be pleased with the sacrifice of their
bodies, the Snakes filled with their blood, and the Tigres relieved with their
flesh, they said also to the Indians of Tlaxcallan, ah ye Cuckold knaves,
slaves and traitors to your gods and king, will you not repent the wickedness
which ye have committed against your masters, therefore shall you now die
an evil death, for either you shall die with hunger, or else upon the knife:
and then will we eat your flesh, and make thereof solemn a banquet as the like
has heretofore never been seen, and in token thereof hold take these arms and
legs which we throw unto you of your own men, which we have now sacrificed
for the obtaining of victory. And after these wars we will go unto your
country and spoil your Town, and leave no memory of your blood or
generation. The Tlaxcaltecas laughed at their mad talk, and said, that it
should be better for them to yield and submit themselves to Cortes his
mercy, and if not, yet it were more honorable to fight than to brag, willing
them to come out into the field. And bad them assuredly believe, that the end
of all their knavery was at hand: it was a world to hear and see the bragges
and crakes on both sides. Cortes hearing of all these matters, sent Sandoual to
take Iztacpalapan, and he enbarked himself to meet him at that place.

Sandoual combated the town on the one side, and the towns men and people
with fear fled unto Mexico, on the otherside by water: he burned the town.
Cortes came at ye time to a strong rock like a tower, situated in the water,
where many men of Culhua were, who seeing them approach with their Vergantines,
set their beacons on fire, and threw down upon them stones and shot of
their arrows. Cortes went ashore with a hundredth and fifty men, and
combatted the forte, till at length he wanne the battlement, which was the
Indians best defense, and with much ado he came to the top, and there
sought until he had not left one alive, saving women and children. It was a
fair victory, although five and twenty Spanyardes were hurt and wounded,
yet the forte was strong, and the overthrow a great discouragyng of the enemy.

At this instant were so many beacons and other fires made round about the
lake and upon the hills, that all seemed a light fire. And also the Mexicans
hearing that the Vergantynes were coming, they came out in their boats, with
five hundredth Gentlemen which came to see such new kind of vessels, and
to prove what they were, being a thing of so great a fame. Cortes embarked
himself with the spoil of the forte, and commanded his men to abide all
together for the better resistance, and because the enemies should think that
they feared, whereupon they might without any good order give the onsette upon
the Christians, and so to fall suddenly into the snare. But it followed, that
when they came within shot of the Spaniardes ordinance: they stayed abydyng
more company, but in short space there came so many Canoas, that it seemed a
wonder to behold: They made such a terrible noise with their voices, drums,
Snayle shelles, and other like instruments of war, that they could not hear
one an other, with such great crakes and bragges, as they had done in time
paste.

And being both parties in a readiness to fight, there happened such a
poupewinde to the Vergantines which came from the shore, that it seemed
meruellous. Cortes the^ praising God, commanded al his Captains to give the
onset altogithers, and not to cease until the enemies should be driven to
retire into Mexico, for that it was the pleasure of God to send unto them that
prosperous wind in token of victory. This talk ended, they began to set
upon the enemy, who seeing the Vergantines come with such lucky wind, yea and
such a sight as the like unto them had not been seen, they began to fly with
such great haste, that they spoiled, brake, and sunk many of them, and such
as stood to defend themselves were slain, so that this battle was soon
ended. They pursued them two leagues, until they had locked them up in the
water streates of Mexico, and took many Lords and Gentlemen prisoners. And
the key of al these wars ^^sisted in this victory, for our me^ remained for
Lords of the whole lake, and the enemy with great fear and loss: they had
not been so soon spoiled, but that there were so many of them, who disturbed
one an other. But when Aluarado, and Cristoual de Olid saw the fortunate
success of Cortes by water, they entered the calsey with their army, and took
certain bridges and bulwarks, and drove the Indians from them, with all their
force and strength: But with the help of the Vergantines which came unto them,
the Indians were driven to run a whole league upon the calsey, and where they
found the calsey broken, they procured to leap over, and so fell into the
midst.

Cortes proceeded forwards, and ^indyng no Canoas, he landed upon the calsey
that comes from Iztacpalapan, with thirty men, and combatted two towers of
i^olles which were walled with wall of lyme and stone: it was the same place
where Mutezuma received Cortes. He wan those towers in short time, although
they were defended with all possibility: he unshipped three pieces of
ordinance to scour the calsey, which was full of enemies: at the first shot
he did great hurt among the^, and being the night at hand, they seized on
both sides for that day. And although Cortes had determined otherwise with his
Captains, yet he aboade there that night, and sent to the camp of Gonsalo de
Sandoual for powder and fifty me^, with half the company of Indians of
Culhuacan.

How Cortez besieged Mexico.
THe night of Cortes his abiding there, was perilous, for he had not above a
hundredth men in his company, and about midnight set upon him many Mexicans
both by water and land, although they accustomed not to fight in the night,
but the Vergantines made them sone to retire.

In the morning came unto Cortes from Cristoual de Olid, eight horsemen, and
four score footmen. The Mexicans combated the towers, where Cortes was
lodged, who incontinent came forth and drove them along the calsey, until he
had won an other bridge and a bulwark, and made a great spoil among them,
with the ordinance and horse men, pursuyng them to the vtmoste houses of the
City: and because many of the Canoas which were on the other side of the
calsey galled Cortes and his men, he brake down so much of the calsey, that
he might well pass some of his Vergantines to the otherside, the which with
few encounters shut up the Canoas on that side, within the succor of Mexico:
and in this wise he remained Lord over both the lakes.

The next day Sandoual departed from Iztacpalapan toward Culhuacan, and in his
way he took and spoiled a little City that stands in the lake, because they
came out to resist him. Cortes sent unto him two Vergantines to pass his men
where the ca^^ey was broken. Sandoual left his company with Cristoual de Olid,
and went to Cortes with ten horsemen, and when he came he found him in fight
with the enemies, and he alightyng from his horse, an Indian persed him through
the foot with a dart. Many Spaniardes were hurt that day, but their grief
was well revenged, for from that day forward the Indians courage was much
abated. With the pains, labor and victory already obtained, Cortes might now
at ease pitche his camp at his own pleasure where he would, and also provide
his army of victuals: six days he ceased not skirmishyng, and the
Vergantines likewise found out channels that they might go round about the
City, yea and went spoylyng and burning many houses within the Suburbs.

Mexico was besieged in four places, although at the first they determined but
three. Cortes was placed betwixt the two towers of the calsey: Pedro de
Aluarado in Tlacopan^ Cristoual de Olid in Culhuacan: Gonsalo de Sandoual in
Xaltoca: for they had advise that the same way they would flee out of the
City, seeing themselves in any danger. It would not have grieved Cortes to
have left a passage for the enemy, but only because they should not profit
themselves upon the land, and provide the City that way of armor and
victual, yea, he also thought to prevail against his enemies better upon the
land than upon the water. And again according to the old proverb, When
thine enemy flies make him a bridge of silver.

The first skirmishe within the city of Mexico.
COrtes pretended to enter the City, and to get what he could, and also to
see what stomach the enemy had: he sent to advise his captains, that each of
them should do the like, requiring them to send unto him some of their
horsemen and footeme^. He gave special commandment to Cristoual de Olid to
have regard to the keeping of his calsey, and to forsee that the inhabitants of
Xo^hmilco, Culhuacan, Iztacpalapan, Vitzalopachtli, Mexicalcinco, Cuetlauac,
and other cities thereaboutes come not that way behind them and unawares. He
commanded that the Vergantines should go along the calsey on both the sides,
of any need should happen. Cortes early in the morning came out of his camp
with. 200. Spaniardes and. 80000. Indian friends: they had gone but a small
space, when they met with their en^mies well armed, keeping the gappe where the
calsey was broken, which broken place might be a spears length, and as much
in depth. They fought with them, who for a great space defended themselves
behind a bulwark, but in fine he wanne the passage, and followed them unto
the entrance of the city, where was a Tower, and at the foot thereof a bridge
drawn, where a good stream of water passed. This place was very strong to
combat, yea and fearful to behold the passage where the draw bridge was. They
ceased not shotyng of arrows and hurlyng of stones, so that our men could not
come near, until the Vergantines came, and by means of them they wanne that
fort with lesser pains than they imagined: for without the Vergantines it had
not been possible to have entered the City.

The enemies being now fled from that hold, our men alanded there, with the
Indian friends, who incontinent dammed up the broken place with stones and
earth. The Spaniardes of the vantgarde, took another bulwark, which was
planted in the largest and fairest streate of the City, and pursued the enemy
to another draw bridge, which remained, but with one post or beam, upon the
which many of the Indians passed over, and then took ye beam away and abode
to defend the place: but when our men approached and saw how the matter went,
Cortez commanded two pieces of Ordinance to be brought, with the which, and
with their Harquebushes, they did great hurt among the Mexicans, who began to
fainte, and lose their courage, the which being understood, certain Spaniards
swa^ over where the draw bridge was, with their weapons in their mouths. But
when the enemy saw them pass over, they began, as well from that place as
from the house tops, zoties and bulwark, which they had defended for the
space of two hours, to fly. Cortes and his whole army being passed over, he
commanded to damme up that broken place of the draw bridge, with earth,
rubbishe and stones, and proceedyng forward they came to an other bridge
which had no bulwark, but was near one of the chiefest places of the city,
and there placed a piece of ordinance wherewith they did great hurt, and
seeing them now past all the bridges, they determined to enter into the heart of
the City. When the Mexicans perceived their determination, they began to
provide every one for himself, for some fled one way and some another, but
the most went to the great temple of Idols. The Spaniardes and their friends
pursued after them, and among the throng got into the Temple, where they
slew many, and at length they went up into the high tower, and there threw
down the idols, among whom they made a great spoil.

Quahutimoc began to reprehende his men for their cowardie and ^light, who
gathered themselves together, and considering their oversight, and that there
were no horses, began a fresh to set upon the Spanyardes, and with force
and strength drove them out of all the circuit of the Temple, and made them
trust to their feet. But when Cortes saw his men come flying, he caused
them to return and to show face unto the enemy, declaryng unto them how
shameful a thing it was to fly: But seeing the strength and multitude of their
enemies, they had no other remedy but only to retire to the great market
place, yea and from thence also they were expelled, and lost a piece of their
ordinance. But being now in this extremity, there came three horsemen who
played the valiant men and made way through the troop of enemies, who at the
sight of the horses began to fly, and our men to follow with such heart and
courage, that in short time they wan the great temple again: then came other
six horsemen who joined with the other three and lay in ambu^^e, where they
flew. 30. Mexicans: The day being now far spent, and the night at hand,
Cortes commanded his army to retire, and they obeying his commandment, had
not so soon turned their backs, but an infinite number of enemies were at
their heels, who if it had not bin for the Horsemen, had slain many
Spanyardes, for they came upon them like ravening dogs without any fear, yet
with the succoure of the Horsemen, the enemy was put again to flighte, and
our men burned many houses, to avoid at their next coming the danger of
stones which were thrown from their tops. The other Captains, who were
Sandoual and Aluarado, fought valiantly on the other side of the City.

The great hurt and damage in the houses of Mexico with fire.
IN this mean while, Don Hernando of Tezcuco, went throughout his Lordship,
to allure his vassal to the service and friendship of Cortes, according to his
former promise: and whether it were seeing the Spaniards prosperity in the
seege of Mexico, or otherwise, he brought almost the whole province of
Culhuacan, which is under the gouernemente of Tezcuco, with six or seven of
his own breethren, for more he could not, although he had more than a hundred
breethren, as hereafter shall be declared. One of them named Iztlixuchilh
being a valiant young man, of the age of four and twenty years, he appointed
general Captain over fifty thousand men of war, well armed and trimmed
according to their fashion. Cortez did friendly receive and welcome them,
giving them great thanks for their aid and good wills. Of these new-come
men, he took into his own host thirty thousand, and divided the residue
equally among the other Captains.

This was a sorrowful news to the Mexicans, to hear of the succoure which
Don Hernando had sent to serve Cortes, and with holden the same from them,
yea and also among them were come kinsmen, breethren, and fathers to many of
them which were in Mexico in the service of Quahutimoc.

Two days after that these men were come, there came also men of Xochmilco,
and certain husbandmen of the Mountains, who spoke the O^omitlh speech,
beseeching Cortes to pardon their long tarrying, offering also both men and
vittayles for the seege. Cortes was pleased with their coming and gentle
offer, for they being his friends, he was assured of them of Culhuacan, and
said unto them, within these three days (God willing) I will combat the City,
therefore against that time I pray you prepare your selves accordingly, and
therein shall I know whether you are my friends or no: and with this answer
they departed, promising to fulfill his request, as they did in deed. This
done, he sent three Verga^tines to Sandoual, and other three to Aluarado, for
to disturb any succoure that might come from the land to the City, and
likewise to defend and aid the Spanyardes at all times, when they would land
upon the calsey, to combat the City, for he well understood how profitable
those vessels would be near unto the bridges.

The Captains of the Vergantines ceased not night and day to run the coast
and Towns of the lake, where they took many boats from the enemies, laden
with men and victual, and permitted none to come into the City, nor yet any
to come out.

The day appointed to the enemies for the combat, Cortes made his prayers
unto God, and then informed each Captain what he should do, and came forth
with twenty horsemen, three hundred Spanyardes, and a great number of Indians,
with their pieces of Ordinance, and where in three or four days before they
had not skirmished, time served the Mexicans at will to open al those places
which were dammed up before, and also to build better bulwarks tha^ those
which were thrown down, attending with that horrible noise accustomed. But
when they saw the Vergantines on each side, their joy was turned into
sorrow, and began to fainte, the which our men understood well, and
therewith alanded themselves upon the calsey, and wanne the bulwark and the
bridge. Our army proceedyng forward, set upon the enemies, until they came to
another bridge, the which was likewise won in short time, and this pursued
from bridge to bridge, always fighting, until they had driven them from the
Calsey and streets.

Cortes for his part lost no time, for he with ten thousand Indians labored
to damme up again the sluses and broken places of the bridges, making the way
plain both for Horsemen and footmen: it was so much to do, that all those
ten thousand Indians were occupied therein from the morning until the evening.

The other Spaniards and Indian friends skirmished continually, and slew many
of their enemies. Likewise the Horsemen so scoured the streets, that the
enemies were forced to lock them up in their houses and Temples. It was a
notable thing to see how our Indians played the men that day against the
Citizens: sometimes they would challenge them the field: other times they would
conuite them to supper, and show unto them legs, arms, and other pieces of
ma^s flesh, saying behold your own flesh which shall serve for our supper and
brekefast, and to morrow we will come for more, therefore fly not, you are
valiant fellows, yet it were better for you to dye fighting than with hunger.
And after all this speech, every one of them called upon the name of his own
Town with a loud voice, setting fire upon their houses. The Mexicans were
replenished with sorrow, to see themselves so afflicted with Spanyardes, but
yet their sorrow was the greater, to hear their own vassals so rail
against them, saying and crying at their own doors, victory, victory,
Tlaxcallan, Chalcho, Tezcuco, Xochmilco, and other Towns: the eating of their
flesh grieved them not, for they did the like.

Cortes seeing the Mexicans so stout and hard hearted, with full determination
either to defend themselves or else to dye, thereupon he bethought himself
upon two things, the one was, that he should not obtain the treasure which
he had seen in the time of Mutezuma: the other was, that they gave him
occasion totally to destroy the City. Both these things grieved him much, but
especially the destruction of the city. He ymagined with himself what he
might do, to bring them to acknowledge their error, and the hurt that might
fall upon them, and for these considerations he plucked down their Towers, and
brake their idolles. He burned also the great house wherein he was lodged
before, and the house of foul which was near at hand. There was not one
Spanyard who had seen that magnificall building before, but lamented sore the
sight: but to agreeue the Citizens, it was commanded to be burned. There was
never Mexican, that thought any human force, how much less so few
Spaniards, should have entered into Mexico in despite of them all, and to set
fire upon their principallest edifices within the City. While this house was a
burning, Cortes gathered his men, and retired to his Camp. The Mexicans would
feign have remedyed the fire, but it was too late, and seeing our men retire,
they followed with their noise accustomed, and slew some of our men, who were
laden with the spoil, and came behind the rest. The horsemen relieved our
men, and caused the enemy to retire, in such wise, that before night al our men
werein safety and the enemies in their houses, the one sort full of sorrow,
and the others wearied with fight and travel. The slaughter was great that
day, but the burning, and spoil of houses was greater, for besides those
which we have spoken of, the Vergantines did the like where they went, and
the other Captains also were not idle where they were appointed.

Things that happened to Pedro de Aluarado through his bold attempt.
PEdro de Aluarado, would pass his army to ye market place of Tlalulco, for he
take much pain and stood in peril in susteyning ye bridges which he had
gotten, having his forte almost a league from thence. And again, he being a man
of a haughty stomach, thinking as well to get honor as his general, and
likewise being procured by his company, who said, that it were a shame for
them if Cortez should win that market place, being more nearer unto them,
than unto him: whereupon he determined to win those bridges which as yet were
vnwonne, and to place himself in the market place. He proceeded with all his
army until they came to another broken bridge, which was sixty paces of
length, and two fadome deep, the which with the help of the Vergantines, he
wan in short space, and gave order to certain of his men to damme it up
substancially, and he himself pursued his enemies, with fifty Spaniardes. But
when the Citizens saw so few in number, and al footmen, (for the horses
could not pass the s^^ce so soon,) they came upon them so suddenly and
fiercely, that they made our men to turn their backs, and trust to their
legs, yea and our men fell into the water, they knew not which way. They slew
many of our India^s, and four Spaniards, who forthwith they sacrifised, and
eat their flesh in the open sight of all the army.

Aluarado saw his own folly, in not beleauing Cortes, who had always
forewarned him, not to proceed foreward, until he had made the way sure behind
him: but Aluar^do his counselors paid their counsel with life Cortes sorrowed
for the same, for the like had happened unto him, if he had given credit to
their counsel. But as a prudent captain, he considered the matter better, for
every house was then an Island, the calsey broken in many places, and the
zoties or house tops beset with stones, for these and such like places used
Quahutimoc. Cortes went to see where Aluarado had pitched his camp, and also
to rebuke him for that which was past, and to advise him what he should do: But
when he came and found him so far within the liberty of the City, and the
dangerous places which had passed, he did highly commend his valiant and
good service: he also co^muned with him of many things concerning the siege,
and then returned to his own camp.

The triumph and sacrifice which the Mexicans made for their victory.
COrtez delayed the time to pitche his camp in the market place of Mexico,
although daily his menn entrede and skirmished with in the City, for the
causes before alleged, and likewise to see if Quahutimoc would yield himself.
And also the entry could not be but very dangerous, for the great multitude
of enemies that ^illed up the streates.

Al his company Spaniardes ioyn^ly, with the kings Treasurer, seeing the
determination of Cortes, and the hurt already received, besought and also
required him to pass his camp unto the market place: who answered them, that
they had spoken like valiant men, but as yet (quoth he) it is not time
convenient, and we ought to consider better of the matter: for why? the
enemies are fully determined to end their lives in defense of that place. But
his men replied so much, that he was compelled to grant to their request,
and proclaimed the entrance for the next day following. He wrote also in
his letters to Gonsalo de Sandoual, and to Pedro de Aluarado, the instructions
of the things that they should do, which was in effect, to Sandoual, that
he should remove his camp with all his fardage, as though he would retire
and fly, and that upon the calsey he should have ten horsemen in ambushe,
behind certain houses to the intent that when the Citizens should epsy the^
fly, and would pursue after, the^ to pass betwixt them and home with the said
horsemen, and after the hurt done among them, in this sort, that then he with all his army should come where Pedro de Aluarado aboade, with other ten
horsemen, a hundred footmen, and the Nauye of Vergantines, and leaving with
him his men, should then take three of the Vergantines, and to procure to win
that broken bridge, where Aluarado of late received the foil: and if he
fortuned to win that place, that then he should damme it up, and make it
sure, before he passed any further: and the like order he gave unto him for all
other broken places that he should pass.

Unto Aluarado he gave commission, that he should pass as far into the
City as he might possible, requyring him also to send unto him eighty
Spaniardes. He also appointed the other seven Vergantines, to pass into both
ye lakes, with three thousand Canoas. He divided likewise all his army into
three companies, because they had three ways to enter into the city. By the one
of these ways or streates, entered the Treasurer and Auditor, with seauentye
Spaniardes, twenty thousand Indians, eight horsemen, twelve laborers with
pickeaxes and Shouels, and many other idle fellows, to carry earth and stones,
and to fill up the broken places, and to make the way plain.

The second streate he commended to George de Aluarado and Andres de Tapia,
with eighty Spaniardes, ten thousand Indians, two pieces of Ordinance, and
eight horsemen. Cortes himself took the third way, with a great number of
friends, and a hundred Spaniardes footmen, of the which were twentye five
with Crossebowes and Harquebushes, and commanded his horsemen which were eight
in number, to abide there behind, and not to follow after, until he should send
for them. In this order, and al at one instant, they entered the City, showing
the hearts of valiant men, greatly annoying the enemy, and wan many bridges,
but when they came near unto ye town house called Tianquiztli, there gathered
together such a number of the Indian friends, who before their eyes scaled,
entered, and robbed their houses, that they thought assuredly, that ye same day
the city had bin won. Cortez commanded that they should proceed no
further, saying, that they had done sufficientlye for that day, for also he
feared afterclappes. He likewise demanded whether all the broken bridges were
made sure, in the which (quoth he) consists the peril and victory. But those
that went with the Treasurer, following victory and spoil, had left a bridge
not well dammed up, but very hollow and false, the which was of twelve paces
broad, and two fadom in depth. When Cortez was advertised hereof, he went
thither to remedy the same, but he was no sooner come, when he saw his men
fleeing, and leaping into the water, with fear of the cruel enemies, which
followed, who leapt after them into the water, to kill them. There came also
along the calsey many Indian boats of enemies, who took many of ye Indian
friends and Spaniards alive. Then Cortes and other fifteen persons, which were
with him, served for no other purpose but to help out of the water those that
were fallen, some came wounded, and others half drowned, and without armor:
yea and the multitude of enemies so beset Cortes, and his fifteen companions,
who were helping their me^, and so occupied in the same, that they had no
regard to their own peril. A kind hearted captaine^
Whereupon certain Mexicans laid hand upon Cortes, who truly they had carried
away if it had not bin for one Francisco de Olea his servant, who cut off at
one blow the arms of them that had hold of him, and he by the enemies was
immediately slain, so that he died to save his masters life. Then came Antonio
de Quinionez captain of the guard, who caught Cortes by the arm, and by force
plucked him out of the throng of enemies, with whom valiantly he fought. But
the^ with the fame that Cortez was prisoner, came many spaniards, among who^
was one horseman, who made some room, but in short space they thrust him
through the throat with a lance, and made him to retire. The fight ceased a
little, and Cortes had a horse brought unto him, on the which he lightlye
amounted, and gathering his men together, came to the streate of Tlacopan,
which was large and fa^re. There died^ Guzman his Chamberlayne, giving a horse
unto his master, whose death was much lamented among them all, for he was a
man valiant, honest, and well-beloved. There fell also into the water two horses,
the one was saved, but the other was killed by the Indians. As the Treasurer
and his company were Combatting a bulwark, the enemies threw out of a window
three Spaniards heads unto them, saying, the like they would do with their
heads, if they went not from thence the sooner. They seeing this sight, and
likewise considered the great hurt and spoil made among them, began to retire
by little and little.

The Mexican Priests went up into the Towers of Tlatelulco, and made their
fires in chafing dishes, and put thereunto the sweet gu^me of Copalli in token
of victory, and forthwith stripped fifty Spaniards captives as naked as they
were borne, and with their fine rasors opened them in the breasts, and plucked
out their hearts for an offering to the Idols, and sprinkled their blood in
the air. Our men seeing before their eyes the doleful sight, would fain have
gone to revenge the cruel custom. But as time then required they had enough to
do, to put themselves in sauetie through the great troop of Indians which
came upon them, who now feared neither horse nor sword. This day as ye have
heard, were forty Spaniards sacrificed, and Cortes wounded in one of his
legs, and thirty more of his men: they l^ste a piece of Or^inance, and four
horses. Also that day was slain above two thousand Indian friends, and many
Canoas lost and the Vergantines in great danger, and the captain and master
of one of them were wounded. Whereof the captain died within eight days, the
same day were also slain four of Aluarado his men, that day was an
unfortunate or dismal day, and the night heavy, sorrowful and replenished with
lamentable grief among the spaniardes and their friends. On the other side,
the Mexica^s tryumphed with joy, and made great bonefiers, blewe their horns,
stroke up their drums, daunced, banqueted, and drank themselves drunk: they
also opened their streats and bridges, as they were before, and placed their
scout and watch about the City. And as soon as it was day, the king
Quehutimoc, sent two Christians heads, and two horse heads into all the
comarcanes there about, to signifye their victory and to require them to
forsake the Christians friendship, promising in short space to make the like
end of all those that remained, and deliver the country from war, these
things encouraged some provinces to take armor against Cortes being his
allied friends, as Maliualco and Cuixco. This news was soon blown abroad
into many provinces, whereupon our men feared rebellion among their new
friends, yea and mutiny in their own camp, but it pleased god that it fell
out otherwise. The next day Cortes came out again to fight, to show face to
the enemies, but he turned again from the first bridge, without doing any great
act.

The determination of Cortez to destroy the city of Mexico.
CHichimecatl, a noble man of Tlaxcallan, (who had brought the Timber of ye
Vergantines, from whence it was wrought, and was placed in the company of
Aluarado at the beginning of the siege of Mexico,) seeing that the Spaniards
fought not as they were wont to do, he alone with ye men of his own country,
went forth to co^bate the City, being a thing which toofore he had not
attempted, gave assault against those which defended a certain bridge, and with
great noise cried and named his City and lynage, and in short space wanne the
bridge, where he left four hundred archers, and followed after the enemy,
who of industry fled, thinking to take him at his return, and at length the
enemy returned upon him, where they made a fair skirmishe, for the fight was
equal. There were many hurt and slain on both sides, so that with the dead
carcasses they supped at will. But they thought to overthrow him at the
bridge, not knowing of ye four hundred archers which were there to attend
Chichimecatls coming, by means of whom, he passed at pleasure, to the great
grief of the Mexicans, yea and remained not a little amazed to see the valor
and bold attempt of the Tlaxcaltecas.

The Spaniards likewise highly commended the fact, for where our men combated
not as they were wont to do, the Mexica^s ymagined that the cause was
cowa^dize, infirmity, or want of vittayles: whereupon one day at the sun
rising, they set upon Aluarado his Camp, which being espied by the watch, they
began to cry arm, arm, who came forth as well footmen as horsemen, and put
them to flight, at which retire many of the Mexicans were drowned, and others
sore hurt and wounded. Then said the Mexicans, that they desired to talk with
Cortez, who came unto a draw bridge to know what they would have, unto whom
sometime they said, that peace was their request, and other times they demanded
truce, but finally required that the Spaniards should depart from that
Country. All this policy was but to feel what strength and courage our men
had, and to have truce for a certain time, for to provide them of such
necessaries as they wanted, for their determinate purpose was, to dye in the
defense of their country and religion. Cortes answered, that truce was not
conueniente for either party, but peace was laudable at al times, the which
for his part, although he had beseeged the City, should not be denied:
therefore he willed them to wey his plentiful estate of vittayles, and their
own need and necessity of the same. They being in this communication with
their interpreters, appeared an ancient old man on the top of the Bulwark,
who in the sight of them all, plucked bread out of his satchell piece by piece,
and began to eat, giving them to understand, that they stood in no need of
vittayles, and so made an end of their talk.

The seege of this City seemed a long time to Cortes, for in near fifty
days that he had begun the same, yet could not he bring his desire to pass,
yea and much marvelled, that the enemies could endure so long a season with
daily skirmishing, and also how they refused peace and concord, knowing how
many thousands of them had bin slain, and ended their miserable lives with
hunger.

Yet once again he sent this last message unto them, that if they would not
yield themselves, then he having them environed by land and water, would slay
the^ all, and not permit any kind of victual to come unto them, so that
their extremity should be so great, that they should eat one another: their
answer was, that first the Spanyardes should taste of the same cup, so
that threatening increased their courages, and occupied themselves in carrying
stones to the market place, and many other streets, to stop the way against
the Horses and their masters.

Cortes, although it grieved him to destroy totally so beautiful a City, yet
he determined to bring all the houses of the streets that he should win to
be equal with the ground, and to stop with them the Channels of water. He
co^muned the matter with his Captains, who liked well of his intent, although
it was a troublesome thing. He also advertised the Gentlemen Indians his
friends of his determination, who highly commended his device.

Cortes seeing the towardness of all his army, he called and prepared all his
laborers, with their pikeaxes and shouels, so that in these affairs, and in
setting his men in good order, he spent four days, and then he began to
co^bate the street, which goes directly to the market place, then fainedly
the Citizens desired peace. Cortes stayed, and asked for their King: they
answered, that they had sent for him, whereupon Cortes tarried an hour, and
then they began to revile him, and to throw stones, and shot at him. The
Spaniards seeing this, gave the onset, and wanne a forte, and came into the
chief place of the City. They cleansed the streets of the stones which they
had laid to disturb their passage, and stopped so up the water street in
that place, in such wise, that never after it was opened again, and threw
down all the houses, making the entrance into the City an open plain high
way, and then retired to their camp. Also six days arowe they did the like,
without receiving any hurt, saving the last day two horses were hurt.

The next day Cortes laid an ambush with fifty horsemen, and sent before him
the Vergantines but he himself with thirty horsemen, abode in certain great
houses in the Market place. They fought that day in many places of the City,
and at the retire, one shot of a handgun, which was the token that those which
lay in ambushe should come forth. The enemies followed our men, that seemed to
flee with marvelous great courage. But they were not so soon passed the
snare, when Cortes came forth with his thirty horsemen, saying, upon them,
upon them: By this only mean were s^^ine above five hundred Mexicans, besides
the prisoners.

Our Indian friends had a good supper that night with man's flesh, which as
yet they would not be persuaded to leave. Certain Spaniards went up into a
Tower of Idols, and there opened a sepulcher, where they found five hundred
Castlins in gold: With this overthrow the Mexicans remained in such fear,
that all their threa^nings and triumphs were turned into mourning: and ever
after when they saw our men retire, they would not follow them, fearing the like
danger, so that this was a mean, the sooner to win Mexico.

The hunger and infirmity which the Mexicans suffered with great courage.
TWo poor souls who were vexed with hunger, came in the night season out of
the city unto Cortes his Camp, who certifyed, how the Citizens were in great
necessity, and so many dead with hunger and sickness, that there were heaps
of dead bodies in the houses; only to keep close their extreme misery: and
said also, that in the night season many came out to fish between the houses
with fear of the Vergantines, and others came out to seek for wodde, herbs,
and roots to eat.

Cortes hearing these news, determined to know the troth thereof, so that the
next night he commanded the Vergantines to go round about the City, and he
himself with fifteen Horsemen, a hundred footmen, and many Indian friends,
placed themselves betwixt certain houses, with order to his espyes, to
advertise him what they should see. It was no sooner day, but many poor
folk came out to seek for food, and when Cortes had intelligence thereof, he
made a great slaughter among them, whereas at that time of unarmed men, women,
and children, A cruel ^act of Cortez.
were slain to the number of eight hundred: and she Vergantines on their side
made another spoil. The pitiful noise being heard into the City, the Citizens
were astonyed, and knew not what to do, fearing the like ambushe that they had
seen and ^ealt the day before, and also wondered, that at such an hour not
accustomed, ye Spanyardes were so nigh. The next day following, being S. James
his even, Cortes entered again into the City, according as he had done before,
and wanne the street of Tlacopan, where he burned the rich and fair houses
of king Quahutimoc, which were motted round about: so that now of four
parts of the city, three parts were won, and the Spaniardes might safely
pass from Cortes his camp, to the camp of Aluarado, by reason that all the
houses were burned, and beaten down plain with the ground.

But yet the poor Mexicans would say to the Indians of Tlaxcallan, go to, go
to, make have, A ^^^e p^^phe^^e.
burn and destroy these houses, for time will come that ye shall build them
again at your own cost. For if we have victory then shall ye build them for
us, and if we be overcome then shall ye build them for these strangers.

Within four days after, Cortes entered the city again, and also Aluarado on
his side, who to show his haultie stomach, labored all that was possible to
get two towers of the temple of Tlatelulco, the which at the length he wan,
although he lost three horses in the co^bat.

The next day followyng, the horsemen walked up and down in the great market
place at pleasure, the poor Mexicans beholding that sorrowful sight from their
houses. And as the Spaniardes went walking in the city, they found heaps
of dead bodies in the houses, streates, An extreme penur^^.
and in the water: they found also the bark of trees and roots gnawen by the
hungry creatures, and the men so lean and yellow, that it was a pitiful
sight to behold. Cortes yet again required them to yield, and they although
they were so lean of body were strong in heart, and answered that he should
not speak of any friendship, nor yet hope of their spoil, for when no
fortune would favor them, then they would either burn their treasure, or
throw it into the lake, where they should never profit thereby, and that they
would fight while one alone should remain alive. At Cortes his next entry
into the city, he found the streates full of women, children, old folk, and
many miserable sick persons which were perishyng for want of food.

Cortes commanded that none of his army should do any hur^e unto such
miserable creatures. The principal folk who were whole and sound, they
stood in their zoties or house tops, without weapon, and clothed in ma^tels.
It was thought that they kept a certain holy day, peace was again offered,
but they answered with dissimulation. The next day followyng Cortes required
Aluarado on his side to combat a streat of.1000. houses that was not yet won,
and that he would do the like on the otherside: for a little space the
Citizens defended themselves, but their defense endured not, but were driven to
fly, being not able to resist the force of their contraries. So that the
Spanishe army wan also that streate, and slew 12000. Citizens, the murder was
so great because the Indian friends would show no mercy or compassion upon
them, although they were required to the contrary. So that now the Mexicans
having lost this streate also, the houses that were not beaten down could
scarcely hold the people yt were alive, the streates also being so full of dead
carcasses and sick bodies, that our men could not pass but must needs
tread upon them. Cortes desirous to see what remained of the city to win,
went up into a high tower, and having well vewed the City, he judged that of
eight parts one remained yet to win. And ye next day following he assaulted the
same, with special commandment given to his army, not to kill any but only
such as should resist.

The sorrowful Citizens bewayling their unfortunate fate and destiny, besought
the Spaniards to make an end, and to kill them all out of hand. Then certain
of the horsemen called Cortes in great have, who went unto them incontinent,
hopyng of some agreement of peace: and standing at the brymme of the water near
unto a draw bridge, the Mexicans said, oh captain Cortes, considering that
thou art the child of the Sun, why do thou not entreat the Sun thy
father, to make an end of us: oh thou Sun that can go round about the
world in a day and a night, we pray thee make an end of us, A sorrowful tale.
and take us out of this miserable life, for we desire death to go and rest
with our God Quetcauatlh who tarieth for us. After these speeches they made a
lamentable cry, calling upon their Gods with loud voices. Cortes answered
what he thought good, but yet could not persuade them to yield, truly it was
a pitefull sight to behold.

The imprisonment of Quahutemoc.
COrtes seeing the great extremity that these poor wretched people were in,
thinkyng now that they would yield unto him, therevppon he spoke to an
uncle of Don Hernando de Tezcuco, who was taken prisoner three days before,
whom he desired to go to the king and treat of peace: this Gentleman refused
the message, knowing the determinate will of Quahutimoc, but through much
entreatie he granted to his request. So the next day followyng Cortes entered
into the City, and sent that Gentleman and certain Spaniardes before him.
The Indian guarde of that streate received him with the honor which unto such
a noble man did appertain. He proceeded forward toward the king, and being
come where he was, he declared unto him his embassage. When Quahutimoc had
heard his tale, An eu^^^ reward.
he was so moved with ire and choler, that forthwith he commanded him to be
sacrificed, and gave the Spaniardes for their answer blows with stones,
staves and arrows, saying also that they desired death and no peace, and
sought so stoutly that day, that they slew many of our men, and one horse.
Likewise on their side many were slain.

The next day Cortes entered the city again, but he fought not, hoping then
that they would submit themselves, but yet the Citizens had no such thought.
He came near unto a certain bulwark on horseback, and spoke unto certain
Gentlemen with whom he was acquaynted, saying that now within a short space
he could make an end of their final destruction, but yet of meare compassion
he wished it not, for the love which he bare unto them, so that they would in
time render themselves: wherefore (quoth he) entreat ye the king to do the
same, and in so doing ye shall be well used, and have victuals sufficient. The
Ge^tlemen hearing these words, fell on weping, and answered, that now they
knew well their error, and felt their loss and destruction, notwithstanding
they were bound to obey their king and Gods. But yet (quoth they) abide a
while, and we will certify Quahutimoc what you have said, and in short space
they went and returned again, saying that the next day without fail their
Lord would come and talk with him in the markette place. With this answer
Cortes returned to his camp, and thought at their meeting to conclude an
honorable peace. So against the next day he caused a Canapie and chair of
estate to be set in the markette place, according to the Mexican use, and
also a dinner to be prepared. The day followyng came Cortes at the hour
appointed, with many of his men armed, but the king came not: nevertheless he
sent five noble men to treat of the matter, excusing the king, saying he was
not well at ease. Cortes welcomed those Gentlemen, and was glad of their
coming, hoping thereby to conclude and make some good end. And when they had
dined and well refresshed their hungry bodies, Cortes gave them victuals, and
desired them to return again to the King, and to declare unto him that
without his presence the conclusion could not be certain. They went and
returned again within two hours, and brought unto Cortes certain mantels
made of cotton woll, very good and well wrought, with answer that the king
would not come in any wise, both for shame and fear. And the next day these
messengers came again, saying that the king would come to the place appointed.
But yet he came not, although Cortes attended his coming more than four
hours: who seeing the mockery, he forthwith sent Sandoual with his
Vergantines one way, and he himself went an other, combatting the houses and
fortes that yet remained, where he found small resistaunce, so that he might
do what he pleased. There was that day slain and taken prisoners above.40000.
persons, and then he retired to his camp. The lamentable cry and mourning of
the women and children would have made a stony heart relent, the stench also of
the dead bodies was wonderful noisome. That night Cortes purposed to make an
end the next day of the wars, and Quahutimoc pretended to fly, and for that
purpose had enbarked himself in a Canoa of twenty ores. When the day appeared
Cortes, with his men, and four pieces of ordinance, came to the corner where
those that yet remained were shut up, as cattle in a pound. He gave order to
Sandoual and Aluarado what they should do, which was, to be ready with their
Verga^tines, and to watch the coming out of the Canoas which were hidden
betwixt certain houses, and especially to have regard unto the kings person,
and not to hurt him, but to take him a live. He commanded the residue of his
men to force the Mexican boats to go out, and he himself went up into a
tower, inquiryng for the King, and there found Xihuac^a, governor and
Captain general of the City, who would in no wise yield himself. Then
came out of the City a great multitude of old folks, men, women and
children to take boat. The throng was so great with have to enter the Canoas,
that many by that means were drowned in the lake. Cortes required his me^ not
to kill those miserable creatures: But yet he could not stay the Indians his
friends, who slew and sacrificed above fiftene thousand. After this, there was
a great rumor among the common people, that the king would fly, making a
piteous moan and saying that they sorrowful creatures knew not whither to go:
But yet procuryng to go into the Conoas, which were so full that there was no
room for the^, by reason thereof many were drowned.

The men of war stood in the house tops and zoties beholding their
perdition. All the nobility of Mexico were enbarked with the king. Then Cortes
gave sign with the shot of a handgunne, that his captains should be in a
readiness, so that in short space they wanne fully and wholly the great City
of Mexico. The Vergantines likewise brake in among the fleet of boats,
without any resistaunce, and every one sought where h^ might best succor
himself, the Royal Standarte was beaten down. Garcia Holguin, who was
captain of a Vergantine, had espied a great Canoa of.xx. ores deep laden with
men. And one of his prisoners said unto him, that the king went in that
great Canoa. Holguin being glad of the news, gave chase to that Canoa and
ouertooke him. In his foreship he had three crossebowe men. And when Quahutimoc
who stood on the puppe of the Canoa ready to fight, saw those bows ready
bente, and many drawn swords, he yielded himself, declaryng that he was the
king. Garcia Holguin being a glad man of his prisoner, took and carried him
unto Cortes who received him reverently. When Quahutimoc came near unto him,
he laid his hand upon Cortes his dagger, saying, I have done all my
possibility to defend me and mine, according to my duty, hoping not to have
come to this estate and place where now I stand: And considering that you may
do with me what you please, I beseech you to kill me, and that is my only
request. Cortes comforted him with fair words, giuyng him hope of life and
seniory, and took him up into a zotie, requiring him to command his subjects
to yield and render themselves: he obeyed his request. At that time there was
about three score and ten thousand persons, who in seeing their Prince,
threw down their weapons, and submitted themselves.

The taking of Mexico.
IN the order before declared, wanne Hernando Cortes the famous city of
Mexico, on tuesday being the.xiij. of August, An. 1521. in remembrance whereof,
and of the great victory, every year on that day they make a sumptuous feast
and solemn procession, wherein is carried the standart royal, with the which
the city was won. The siege endured three months, and had therein.200000.
Indians. 900. Spaniardes.80. horses.17. pieces of ordinance, 13. Vergantines,
and 6000. Canoas. In this siege were slain fifty Spaniardes and six horses,
and no great number of the Indians their friends. There was slain on the
contrary side a hundred thousand, and some affirm many more: but I speak not
of them that died with hunger and pestilence.

At the defense of the city were all the nobility, by reason whereof many were
slain. The multitude of people was great, who eat little, drank salt water,
and slepte among the dead bodies, where was a horrible stenche: for these
causes the disease of pestilence fell among them, and thereof died an infinite
number. Whereupon is to be considered, their steadfast determination, for
although they were afflicted with such hunger, that they were driven to eat
boughs, ryndes of trees, and to drink salt water, yet would they not yield
themselves. But at the last they would have submitted them, and then their
king Quahutimoc would no^, because at the beginning they refused his will and
counsel, and also with their general deaths, should appear no cowardice, for
they kept the dead bodies in their houses to keep that secret from their
enemies. Here also is to be noted, that although the Mexicans eat man's
flesh, yet they eat none of their own City or friends, as some do
think: for if they had, there would not so many have died with hunger. The
Mexican women were highly commended, not only because they aboade with their
husbands and Fathers, but also for the great pains they took with the sick
and wounded persons, yea and also they labored in making slings, cuttyng
stones fit for the same, and throwyng stones from the soties, for therein
they did as much hurt as their men. The City was yielded to the spoil, and
the Spanyardes took the Gold, Plate and Feathers, the Indian friends had all
the rest of cloth and other stuff.

Cortes commanded great bonfiers to be made in token of victory, and also to
mortify the horrible stenche of the dead bodies, whom he likewise commanded
to be buried, and some of the prisoners men and women he caused to be marked
in the face, for the Kings slaves, and pardoned all the residue. He commanded
the Vergantines to be brought ashore, and appointed one Villa fuerte, with.80.
men to guarde the^, fearyng least the Mexicans should set fire or otherwise
destroy them. In this business he occupied himself four days, and then
removed his camp to Culhuacan, where he rendered hearty thanks to all the
Gentlemen his friends, promysing to gratify their good and faithful service,
desiryng them to depart home to their houses, considering ye war was at an
end, whereupon they departed almost all in general, both rich and iocond with
the spoil of Mexico, and also to remain in the favor and grace of Cortes.

Marvelous signs and tokens of the destruction of Mexico.
NOt long before Hernando Cortes came unto the new Spain, did many nights
after the midnighte appear in the air, and in the same port and place where
Cortes entered into that land, great lightning of fire, which amounted upward,
and suddaynely vaded away. The Mexicans at that time saw flames of fire toward
the orient, where now Vera Crux stands, with a great and thick smoke, that
seemed to touch the heaven and earth: this sight was fearful unto them.

They also saw the figures of armed men fight in the air one with another, a
new and strange sight for them, and a thing that filled their heads with
ymaginations: for when there was a prophecy spoken of among them, how that
white men with beardes should come and rule their kingdom in the time of
Mutezuma. The Lords of Tezcuco and Tlacopan were much amazed, saying, that the
sword which Mutezuma had, was the arms of those folk, whose figures they
had seen in the air, with their apparel and attire. Mutezuma had much add
to pacify them, fayning that the weap^n and apparel was of his forefathers,
and because they should see the troth thereof, he gave them the sword, and
willed them to break it if they could, and they proving to break the same
and could not, they marvelled thereat, and also were resolved of their opinions.

It should seem, that a little before these things happened, some of Mutezuma
his subjects found a chest of apparel and a sword in it on the sea coast,
which came floting out of some ship that had wracked there about, and
brought it to their prince. Others affirm, that the cause of alteration among
the noble men, was, when they saw the sword and apparel that Cortes had sent
unto Mutezuma by Teudilli, seeing it a thing so like the attire of the figures
which they had seen in the air, but howsoever it was, they believed with
these new tokens, that their Kingdom should have an end, when they saw those
strangers come into their Country.

The same year that Cortes came into Mexico, appeared a vision unto a certain
Malli, which is to say, a slave taken in the wars to be sacrificed, who at
the time of his death and Sacrifice, bewailed his sorrowful end, calling
upon the God of Heaven, who at that instante saw in spirit a vision, and
heard a voice, bidding him not to fear that death, for the God whom he had
called upon, would have mercy upon him, willing him also to say unto the
pristes and ministers of the Idols, that their wicked sacrifice and
bloudsheding was near at an end, and that there was a people at hand, that
should take away all that wicked and abominable religion.

This Malli was sacrificed in the midst of the market place of Tlatelulco,
where at this day is the place of execution.

They remembered, and noted well the words of the Malli, and the vision which
they called a breath from heaven.

The earth also brake open, out of the which issued a marvelous great
stream of water, with many great fishes, which they judged and held for a
strange pronostication.

The Mexicans did report, that when on a time Mutezuma came triumphantly with
victory of Xochnuxco, said unto the Lord of Culhuacan: Now (quoth he) Mexico
is strong and invincible, for I have in subjection Xochnuxco, and other
provinces, so that now I am without fear of any enemy. The Lord of Culhuacan
answered, saying, trust not good King too much, for one force forces
another, with the which answer, Mutezuma was not a little offended. But when
Cortes had taken them both prisoners, then he called to remembrance the
former talk, and held that saying for a prophecy.

The building up again of Mexico.
COrtes pretended to reedifie again the City of Mexico, not only for the
situation and majesty, but also for the name and great fame thereof, and also
to build up that which he had beaten down, by reason whereof he traveled
to make this City greater, better, and to be more replenished with people. He
named and appointed Judges, Aldermen, Attourneys, Towne-clearke, Notaries,
Skauengers, and Seriants, with all other officers, necessary for the common
weal of a City. He divided the City among the Conquerors, having first taken
out places for Churches, market places, townehouse, and other necessary
plottes to build houses, profitable for the common weal. He also separated
the dwellings of the Spaniards from the India^s, so that the water passes and
makes division betwixt them. He procured many Indians to come to the building
of the City, for avoiding charges, although therein he had somewhat to do, by
reason that many kinsmen of Quahutimoc were not as yet come under obedience.

He made Lord of Tezcuco, Don Carolus Iztlixuchitl, by the consent of the
City, in place of Don Hernando his brother, who was deceassed, and commanded
many of his vassals to labor in the works, because they were Carpenters,
masons, and builders of houses. He promised also to them that were naturals of
the City of Mexico, plottes to build upon, inheritance, freedom, and other
liberties, and the like unto all those that would come and inhabit there,
which was a mean to allure many thither. He set also at liberty Xihuaco
the general Captain, and made him chief over the Indians in the City, unto
whom he gave a whole street. He gave likewise another street to Don Pedro
Mutezuma, who was son to Mutezuma the King. All this was done, to win the
favor of the people. He made other Gentlemen Seniors of little Islands and
streets to build upon, and to inhabit, and in this order the whole
situation was reparted, and the work began with great joy and diligence: but
when the fame was blown abroad, that Mexico should be built again, it was a
wonder to see the people that resorted thither, hearing of liberty and
freedom, the number was so great, that in a whole league compass was nothing
but people both men and women. They labored sore, and eat little, by reason
whereof, many sickned, and pestilence followed, whereof dyed an infinite
number. Their pains was great, for they bare on their backs, and drew after
them stones, earth, timber, lyme, brick, and all other things necessary in
this sort, and by little and little, Mexico was built again with a hundred
thousand houses, more stronger and better than the old building was. The
Spanyardes also built their houses after the Spanish fashion. Cortes built his
house upon the plotte where Mutezuma his house stood, which renteth now
yearly four thousand duckates a year. Pamfilo de Naruaez accused him for the
same, saying, that he had spoiled the woddes and mountains, and spente
seven thousand beams of Ceder trees in the work of his own house. The number
seems more here than there, Seven thousand Ceder beams.
for where all the Mountains are replenished with Ceder trees, it is a small
matter. There are Gardines in Tezcuco, that have a thousand Ceder trees for
walls and circuit, yea and there are Ceder trees of a hundred and twenty
foot long, and twelve foot in compass from end to end. They built fair
dockes covered over with arches for ye Vergantines, whereas (for a perpetual
memory) all the thirteen Vergantines do remain until this day. They d^mmed
up the streets of water, where now fair houses stand, so that Mexico is not
as it was wont to be, yea and since the year of 1524. the lake decreaseth, and
sometime casts out a vapor of stench, but otherwise it is a wholesome and
temperate dwelling, by reason of the Mountains that stands round about it,
and well provided through the fertility of the Country, and commodity of the
lake, so that now is Mexico one of the greatest Cities in the world, and the
most noble in all India, as well in arms as policy. There are at the least
two thousand Citizens, that have each of them his horse in his stable, with
rich furniture for them. There is also great contractation, and all sorts of
occupations. Also a money house, where money is daily coined: a fair schole,
which the Vizeroy Don Antonio de Mendosa caused to be made. There is a great
difference betwixt an inhabitant of Mexico, and a Conqueror, for a Conqueror
is a name of honor, and has lands and rentes, and the inhabitante or only
dweller pays rent for his house. When this City was a building, and not
throughlye furnished, Cortes came from Culhuacan to dwell there. The fame of
Cortes, and majesty of Mexico, was blown abroad into far provinces, by
means whereof, it is now so replenished, as I have before declared, yea and
has so many Spaniards, who have conquered above 400. leagues of land, being
all governed by the princely seat of Mexico.

How the Emperor sent to take account of Cortes of his government in the
new Spain.
IN these days Cortes was the man of the greatest name of all the Spanish
nation, although many had defamed him, and especially Pamfilo de Naruaez, who
was in the Court of Spain accusing him. And where, of long time the Counsel
of India had received no letters from him, they suspected, yea and believed
whatsoever evil was spoken of him. Whereupon they provided the Admiral Don
Diego Colon, for Governor of Mexico, who at that time went to law with the
king, pretending the said office and many others, with condition to carry at
his own coast a thousand men to apprehend Cortes, They provided also for
Governor of Panuco, one Nonio de Gusman, and Simon de Alcazaua portingall, for
governor of Honduras. To kindle more this mischief, and to set this business
forward, one John de Ribera, the Attorney of Cortes, was a sit and an
earnest instrument against his master, and the cause was, for falling out
with Martin Cortes, father unto Hernando Cortes, about four thousand Duckates
which Cortes had sent by him to his father, which money the said Ribera his
Attorney kept to his own use, and therefore raised many slanders against his
master, yea and credit was given to his tales, The revvard of a knave.
but on a night he had a morsel of bacon given him upon a skaffolde,
wherewith he was choked in the chief time of his business. These new
officers, and their provisions, were not so secretly obtained, but the matter
was as secretly talked in the Court, which at that time was abiding in the
City of ^^ol^d^, and the procedings seem not just unto the friends of Cortes.
The Commendador Pedro de Pina opened the matter to the Licenciat Nouez, and
unto father Melgareto, whereupon they reclaymed of the Counsels determination,
beseeching them to stay for a season, to see what news should come from
Mexico. Also the Duke of Betar tendered the cause of Hernando Cortez, for that
Cortez by promise of faith and troth, was assured in marriage to his brothers
daughter, named the Lady I^ne de Zuniga, who aplaked the Emperor his anger,
and the said Duke became surety to answer in all causee for him.

The matter standing in this estate, there arrived in Spain Diego de Zoto,
with a whole Coluerin made of silver, and 70000. castlins in gold, the news
whereof was blown over all Spain. And to say the troth, this present was ye
cause, that Cortes was not put out of his office, but a Judge of residence was
sent thither to take an account of him. Now a wise and a learned man was sought
for that purpose, yea such a one as could rule the matter, for some soldiers
are oftentimes unmannerly: whereupon they thought the Licenciat, Jews pouce de
Leon a fit man, who had bin Lieutenante to Don Martin de Cordoua, Earl of
Alcaudete, and chief governor of the city of T^lledo. This Licenciate with
power sufficient, was sent unto the new Spain, who carried in his company as
assistant, the batcheler Marcus de Aguillar, who had ruled in time past, in a
worshipful office of Justice in the Island of Santo Domingo.

With prosperous weather they departed from Spain, and in short time arrived
at Vera Crux, Cortez having news of their arrival by foot posts within two
days. And upon Midsomer day came letters to Cortes from the Licenciate Ponce,
with another letter from the Emperor, whereby he understood ye cause of their
coming. He returned back incontine^t an answer, and desired to know which
way he would come to Mexico, either by ye way inhabited, or else the other way
which is nearer. The Licenciate replied, that he would for a while abide in
Vera Crux, to refresh himself, being seasicke, and a man yt had not
heretofore at any time passed the seas, thinking that Cortes meante to have
done justice on certain offenders, yea and also to have taken him by the way:
wherefore he suspected, that Cortes had sent, because he would know which
way he meant to come, whereupon he secretly took post horse, with certain
Gentlemen, and other religious persons that came in his company; and passed
through the Towns, although it was the farther way, and made such have, that
in five days he came to Iztacpall^pan, refusing the entertaynement and
provision of meat and lodging that Cortes had prepared by his Gentlemen, that
went both the ways to meet him.

In Iztacpallapa^ they received him with great feast and majesty, but after
dinner, the Licenciate fell a vomiting, and the most of his company, and after
the vomit, they fell into a flixe. They thought that certain herbs was the
cause thereof, which were in a dishe of curdes. The Licenciate was somewhat
greedy of the curdes, and took the dishe, and offered it to father Thomas
Ortiz, no (quoth the Steward) his reverence shall have another dishe, no
(quoth father Ortiz) I will none of these, nor yet of any other, of which
words there were afterward Verses made, suspecting somethyng of the curdes:
but truly there was no hurt, or any evil thing put in them, (as
hereafter shall be declared) for the Comendador, Proano, who was then chief
Sheriff, did eat of all those dishes, yea in the same dishe that the
Licenciat eat of, who neither vomited nor yet received any hurt or
alteration. But I think, that they coming hoate, weary and hungry, did eat
too much, and drank also cold water, whereby their stomachs revolted, and
thereof followed the flixe with vomit. On the behalf of Cortes there was
presented to the Licenciat a rich present, but he refused it.

Cortes with all the flower of Gentlemen in Mexico, came to receive him, and
giuyng him the right hand, they went together until they came to Saint
Frances abbay, where after their prayers made, Cortes demanded to see the
kings provisions, who answered, that the next day he would show them unto
him: then they accompanied him to his house, where he was well lodged.

The next day followyng, all the magistrates of the City met the Licentiat
in the cathedral Church, and by act, before the notary, he presented his
authority from the Emperor. He took the Vares of Justice from the Judges and
Sargeants, and incontinent restored them again, and said with gentle speech,
this rod of the Senior governor, I will have for my self. Cortes with all
the other Magistrates kissed the Emperors letters, and put them upon the
crown of their heads, in toke^ of great obedience, saying, that they would
observe and obey all that was therein contained, as the commandment of their
king and Lord, requyring the same to be set down by act and testimony.

After these things done, they proclaimed the residence and account of justice,
of Hernando Cortes, to the intent that all persons who could accuse him of any
vnrightful dealyng, should come and make their complaint, and to have remedy
for the same. There should you then see the stir and talk among them, every
officer fearyng his own cause, with desire to see the end of their business.

The death of the Licenciat Luys Ponce.
THe Licenciat coming one day from Saint Frances abbay from service, fell into
an extreme burning fever, and lay him down in his bed, where he remained
the space of three days, as a man out of his wits, and the fever still
increasing, so that on the seventh day he yielded up the ghost. In the time of
his sickness he received the communion, and made his last will and
testament. He left for substitute in his office, the bacheler Marcus de
Aguillar. Cortes made as great sorrow for his death, as if he had been his
own father, his funeralles were celebrated with great pomp.

The enemies of Cortes published, that he died of poison. But the Licenciat
Pero Lopez, and Doctor Hoieda, who were his Physicians, A mad dance.
swore that he died of a burning fever, and showed a further consequence, that
the euenyng before he deceased, he desired them to play the measures upon a
lute, and as he lay in his bed, showed with stirryng his feet the compasses
and points of the dance. It was a thing which diverse persons saw, and
forthwith he lost his speech, and that night toward the dawning of the day he
yielded up his spirit. I think that few men do die dau^sing, as this Lawier
did. The number of a hundred persons came out of Spain with the Licenciat,
whereof the most part died by sea and on the land. It was suspected to be a
pestilence, for one of them infected another. There were in his company many
Gentlemen and each of them had an office. There was a Friar who was a very
slanderous fellow, and reported that Cortes had poisoned the Licenciat, and
also that the Licenciat had an express order from the Emperor to cut of
Cortes his head, as soon as he had taken the Vare of Justice from him. The
subtle Friar, had thought to have gotten money of the one, and thanks of the
other, and at the end had nothing.

How Cortez came into Spain.
WHere one Alonso de Estrada governed the state of Mexico, as substitute of
Marcus de Aguillar, according to the Emperors commandment, Cortes considered
with himself that it was not possible for him to have again his office,
except he went personally to the Emperors court, where he had many
adversaries and few friends, so that he was afflicted on every side: yet he
in fine determined to go into Spain, as well for business of importance of
his own, as also matters touching the Emperor and his new kingdoms whereof I
will rehearse particularly some.

As touching his own causes, first he being a man of good years, went to
marry, hoping to have children, unto whom he might leave the profit of his
labor and pain: also to appear before the King his master face to face, and
to inform his Majesty what Lands and Kingdoms he had won and brought
unto his royal crown: To signify likewise unto him, of the dissension among
the Spanyardes his subjects in Mexico, and to answer for himself, to any
false reports which had been made against him: And finally, to receive a
condign reward for his worthy and faithful service. Cortes being in these
imaginations, there was brought a letter unto him, from the reverend father
Garcia de Loaisa ghostly father unto the Emperor, and afterward was ordained
Cardinal, in the which letter he conuited him earnestly to come unto Spain,
to the intent that the Emperors Majesty might both see and know him,
assuring him of his friendship. After the receyte of this letter, he made all the have possible to depart upon his journey, ceasing from his voyage which
he had in hand, for to inhabit the river De las Palmas. Before his departure
he dispatched two hundred Spaniardes, and three score and ten horsemen, with
many Mexicans for the country of Chichimea, to inhabit there, finding the
land rich of silver mines, as it was reported, giuyng unto those men express
order, that if the people of that province did not entertayne them with
friendship, that then they should accept the^ as enemies, and forthwith to make
war, and to take them for slaves, for that they are a barbarous people. He
wrote his letter to Vera Crux, to prepare with all speed two good ships,
and for that purpose he sent Pero ruiz de Esquiuel, who was a Gentleman of
Civil: But he went not on the journey, for a month after, they found him
buried in a little Island of the lake, with one hand out of the grave, which
was eaten with dogs and foul: he was buried in his dublet and his hose: he
had one only wound in his forehead: And a Negro, his slave, who went in his
company, was never heard of, nor yet the Canas and Indians that went with
him, so that the truth of his death was never known.

Cortes made an Inuentary of his moveable goods, which was valued at two
hundred thousand Castlins of gold: he left for governor of his own estate,
the Licenciat Altamiran^ his kinsman, with other two friends: he furnished two
ships, and proclaimed free passage and victuals unto all those that would go
in his company: he shipped for his own account a thousand five hundred marks
of silver, twenty thousand Castlins in good gold, and ten thousand Castlins of
base gold. He took in his company Gonsalo de Sandoual, Andres de Tapia, and
other of the chiefest of the conquerours. He brought with him a Son of
Mutezumas, and another Son of Maxixcas, who was become a Christian, and named
Don Lorenso, with many other Indian Gentlemen of Mexico, Tlaxcallan, and other
cities: eight players with a cudgel, twelve tenis players, with certain men
and women of that country, who were white of color, and other dwarfes and
deformed persons. He brought also wild beasts, as Tigres, and other strange
beasts called Aiotochtli, and one Tlaquaci. Moreover he brought a great number
of mantels made of feathers and Conny hear, Targets, bushes or tuffes of
galant feathers, and looking glasses of stone. In fine, he came like a great
Lord, and arrived in Spain, in the end of the year 1528. the Court being
then in Tolledo. The news of his arrival was blown through out all Spain,
and every one desirous to see him.

The honor which the Emperor showed unto Hernando Cortes, with reward.
THe Emperor received Cortes magnifically, and to give him the greater honor,
he went and visited him at his own lodging.

The Emperor being in a readiness to pass into Italy, to be there crowned
with the Imperial crown, Cortes went in his majesty's company unto the City
of Saragoza, whereas his Majesty calling to remembrance his worthy service,
and valor of his person, made him Marquis del valle de Huaxacac, according to
his desire, on the.vj. of July, An. 1528, and Captain general of the new
Spain, with all the provinces and coast of the south sea, chief discouerer
and inhabiter of the same coaste and Islands, with the twelfth part of all
that after that time should be discovered, for a sure inheritance to him and
his discendentes: he offered unto him also the habit of the order of
Knighthoode of Saint James, the which offer Cortes refused, because there was
no rent given with the habit, but he besought his Majesty to grant unto him
the government of Mexico, the which request the Emperor denied, because that
no Conqueror should think that the office of government and justice is due
unto him, for the like demand was desired of the king Don Fernando, by
Cristou^l Colon who first discovered the India, and also the great Captain
Gonsalo Hernandoz de Cordoua, who conquered Naples. Cortes deserved much, and
also the Emperor gave him much, to honor him as a most bountiful and
grateful King, who never takes away that which once he gives. He likewise
gave unto Cortez all the kingdom of Michuacan, but he had rather have had
diverse other towns which he demanded, many other great favors and rewards
he received at the Emperors hands, but the principal are those before
declared.

The Marriage of Cortez.
WHen it was known in Spain, that the lady Catherin Xuares, wife unto Cortes,
was deceassed in India, by intercessours he was assured unto the Duke of Beiar,
his brothers daughter, who was named the Lady Jane of Zuniga: her fathers name
was Don Carolus de Arrellano, Earl of Aguilar. This Lady was a bewtifull Dame,
and her brethrene noble personages, who were highly in savor with the
Emperor. And Cortes to match with so honorable an house and lynage he judged
himself fortunate and well married.

Among many Iewelles which Cortes brought with him, were five most rich and
fine Emeraldes, which were valued at a hundredth thousand Ducats: The rich
Emeraldes.
the one was wrought like unto a Rose, an other like a Cornet, an other like a
fish with the eyes of gold, which was a marvelous piece of work, being
wrought among Indians: an other piece was wrought like unto a bell, with a
great and a rich pearl for the clapper, garnished with gold, engraven about
with letters, which said, Blessed is he that created thee. The fifth was made
like a cup with the foot of gold, and had four little chains of gold, that
were joined all at the top together, in a great pearl, and the brimme of this
cup was of gold, with this verse engraven round about, Inter natos mulierum
non surrexit mayor. For this only piece the Merchantes of Geneua did offer
forty thousand Ducates, for to sell the same again to the great Turk. But at
that time Cortes would not give it for any money, although afterward he lost
them all in the wars of Argel, being there with the Emperor. It was told
Cortes that the Empress desired to have those pieces, meaning to demand them
of him, and that the Emperor should pay for the same, for which cause he
sent them to the Lady his new wife, with many other Iewelles before he came at
the Court, and there, when he was enquired for them, he answered, and excused
himself, for then certaynely he gave such Jewels unto his Espouse, that the
like never Lady had in Spain. And after he was married to the Lady Jane of
Zuniga, he departed with her to the new Spain, with title of Marquis.

How the Chancery was first placed in Mexico, and certain Diuelishe
pretenses wrought against Cortes.
BEfore Cortes his coming into Spain, Pamfilo de Naruaez his old enemy went
up and down in the Court, procuring the conquest of the river De Palmas and
Florida, where at the last he died, and always when he saw time convenient he
made complaints against Cortes, yea and to the Emperors own hand he delivered
a scrole of many articles, among the which was one, wherein he affirmed that
Cortes had as many bars of gold and silver, as in Biscay were bars of yren,
and offered to prove the same: but although it was not true, yet it was
suspicious. He also earnestly procured that he should be punished, saying that
he had plucked out one of his eyes, and killed with poison the Licenciat Luys
ponce de Leon, and Francisco Garay. Through his many and importunate petitio^s,
it was determined to send to Mexico, Don Pedro de la Cueua, who was both
fierce and severe, and Lord steward of the Emperor his house, and afterward
made general of the ordinance, and chief Comendador of the order and
Knighthood of Alcantara, who findyng the accusation true, should cut off Cortes
his head.

But as God would, in the mean season came the testimonial from the Doctor
Hoieda, and the Licenciat Per^ Lopez, Physicians, who had cured the persons
that were reported to have been poisoned, whereupon that commission ceased. And
when Cortes came into Spain, Don Pedro de la Cueua would many times laugh and
jest with him, saying, From far places long lies.

The Emperor and his council of India provided a Court of Chancery in
Mexico, as chief place, where as all controversies and matters of right
throughout the new Spain might there be determined, and also to correct the
mutimes, Before the Judges came, Cortez vva^ gone to Spain.
and parts taking among the Spanyardes: likewise to take residence and
account of Cortes, and to be satisfied both of his service and offenses.
Moreover that they should visit the officers, and royal Treasorie there.
Munio de Gusman was appointed president and gouernoure, with other four
Licenciates for Judges to accompany him. He departed toward Mexico Anno 1529.
and at his coming, he began to understand in his regimente and office, with
the Licenciate John Ortiz, for the other three Judges died by the way. Cortes
being now absente, and upon his journey toward Spain, this new Judge made
a terrible residence and condemnation against him, and commanded all his
goods to be sold by out-thrappe, for a great deal less than his goods
were worth, and in his absence they called him by Proclamation: but if he had
bin there present, his life had bin in danger, although face to face some
respect is had, and it is an ordinary rule that the Judge shows rigor
against him that is absent. This hatred was not only against Cortes, but also
against his friends, for he apprehended Pedro de Aluarado, who was newly
come from Spain, because he spoke in the favor of Cortez, laying to his
charge the rebellion of Mexico, when Naruaez was there. He also apprehended
Alonso de Estrada, and many others, doing manifest wrongs unto them.

In short space the Emperor had more complayntes against Nunio de Gusman, and
the other Judge, than had bin heretofore against any other, whereupon he was
put out of office in the year 1530. His wrongful dealing in justice was not
only proved in Mexico, but also in the Court of Spain, with many persons that
were come from thence, so that the next president and Judges that went
thither, did pronounce Nunto de Gusman and his fellow for partial Judges, A
good sentence.
and enemies unto Cortes, and condemned him to pay all his goods which were
evil sold. But when Nunio de Gusman understood that he was put out of
office, he then was afraid, and took his journey against the Teuchichimecas,
seeking after the Town of Culhuacan, from whence the Mexicans descended. He
carried in his company five hundred Spanyardes, whereof the most were horsemen,
and many of them went as prisoners, and against their wills.

In Mechuacan he took prisoner the King Caconcin, who was a great friend unto
Cortes, a seruitor unto the Spaniards, and vassal to the Emperor, and as the
fame goes, he took from him ten thousand marks of plate, and much gold,
and afterward burned him, and many other Gentlemen, Abominable fact.
and principal persons of that kingdom, because they should not complain,
saying, that a dead dog biteth not. He took from thence six thousand
Indians for the service of his army, and with them conquered Xalixco, which is
now called the new Gallizia. He abode there, until the Vizeroy Don Antonio de
Mondoza, and Chancery of Mexico, caused him to be apprehended, who sent him
prisoner into Spain, to give account of his office. If Nunio de Gusman had
bin so good a governor and Judge, as he was in blood a Gentleman, he had then
enjoyed the best plot of all the West India, but he behaved himself evil,
both with the Indians and Spaniards.

The same year that he came from Mexico, went thither for president Sebastian
Ramirez, who was a Bishop, and had in time past bin presidente in Santo
Domingo, and the Licenciates John de Salmeron, G^sc^ Quiroga, Francisco Ceynos,
and Alonso Maldonado, for Judges to accompany him.

These Judges governed well the land, and caused the City of Angels to be
inhabited which the Indians called Cuetlaxcoapan, that is to say a Snake in
water. The reason was, because they have two fountaynes, the one of evil
water, and the other of good. This City stands twenty leagues from Mexico,
in the high way to Vera Crux. The Bishop set the Indians at liberty, and
therefore many Spaniards departed from thence, who had inhabited there
before, and went to seek their living at Xalixco, Hunduras, Quahutemallan,
and other places where war was.

The return of Cortez to Mexico.
AT this season arrived Cortes at the rich Town of Vera Crux, and when his
coming was published, how he came with title of Marquez, and had brought his
wife with him, an infinite number of Indians came to visit him, and almost all
the Spaniards of Mexico, so that in few days there came a thousand persons of
his own nation, who made their complaints unto him, how they were undone, and
that the Judges which had bin there, had destroyed both him and them, and asked
his judgment whether that now they might kill both them and theirs. Cortes
hearing their odious request, reprehended them, and also gave them hope shortly
to relieve their necessity with new discoueries, and in this order fearing
some mutiny, he held them in pleasure and pastime.

When the president heard how Cortes was visited of the Spanyaryds, they
commanded forthwith every one of them should immediately return to Mexico,
or else, where their dwelling places were upon pain of death, yea and they
were about to apprehende Cortes for a stirrer of uproar, and to send him
back again prisoner into Spain. But when he saw how soon these Judges were
moved, he commanded to proclayme himself openly in Vera Crux Captain
General of all the dominions of the new Spain, and there caused the Emperors
letters pattentes to be read, which thing being known to the Mexican Judges,
it caused them to wring their noses. After this diligence ended, he departed
toward Mexico with a great company of Spaniards and Indians, among whom were a
good company of horsemen: but when he came to Tezcuco, the President sent to
command him not to enter into Mexico, upon pain of loss of his goods, and
his body to be at the Kings pleasure.

He obeyed their commandment with great wisdom, being a thing convenient
to the service of the Emperor, and pro^fite of the land, which he had won
with great toil and labor: but yet he abode in Tezcuco with a greater
majesty and court, than the President in Mexico, and wrote unto him, that he
should consider his good will and whole intent, and not to give occasion to the
Indians to rebel, and for the Spaniards he might assure himself.

The Indians understanding ye discord betwixt the President and Cortes, slew as
many Spaniards as they could get at advantage, so that in few days there
wanted above two hundred of the Spanish nation, being slain as well in Towns,
as in the high ways, yea and also they had communed among themselves to rebel
in deed. But when the Bishop and the Judges heard this news, they began to
fear the matter, and confidering that they had no better remedy, nor other
sure defense, but only ye name valor, person, and authority of Cortes, they
sent to desire him to come unto Mexico, whereupon he observed their
commandment and request, and went toward the City, well accompanied with
men of war, so that heshewed himself in estate a general captain. All the
Citizens came out to receive him and the lady Marquis his wife: his entry into
the city was a day of great pleasure among them. Then the president and
judges entered into counsel for to remedy the great hurt which had been done
by the Indians. Cortes took the matter in hand, and apprehended many Indiano,
of whom some he hurned, others were torn with dogs, he did such correction,
that in short time all the country was quiet, and the high ways without
danger, a thing worthy of great thanks.

The letters that the Indians used in Mexico.
THere has not bin found letters at any time in the Weast India, only in the
new Spain were used certain figures which served for letters, with the which
they kept in memory, and preserved their antiquities. The figures yt the
Mexicans used for letters are great, by reason whereof they occupy great
volumes: they ingraue them in stone or timber, and paint them upon walls, and
also upon a paper made of cotton wool, and leaves of the tree Metl. Their
books are great and folden up like unto our broad clothes, and written upon
both sides. There are some books rolled up like a piece of flannel. They
pronounce not. b. g. e. f. Therefore they use much. p.e.l.x. This is the Mexical
speech, and Nahual, which is the best, playnest, and most^ eloquent, in all new
Spain. There are some in Mexico that do understand each other, by whistling,
which is ordinarily used among lovers, and thieves, a speech truly to wonder
at, and none of our men could come to the knowledge thereof.

The order how to reckon.
Ce One Ome Two Ei Three Naui Four Macuil Five Chicoace Six Chicome Seven
Chicuei Eight Chiconaui Nine Matlac Ten Matlactlioce Eleven Matlactliome
Twelve Matlactlomei Thirteen Matlactlinaui Fourteen Matlactlinacui Fifteen
Matlactlichicoace Sixteen Matlactlichicome Seventeen Matlactlichicuei
Eighteen Matlactlichiconaui Nineteen Cempoalli Twenty

Every number is simple, until you come to six, and then they count, six and
one, six and two, six and three. Ten is a number by himself, then you must
count ten and one, ten and two, ten and three, ten and four, ten and
five.

Then you count, ten five and one, ten five and two, ten five and three.
Twenty goes by himself, and all the greater numbers.

The Mexican year.
THe Mexicans year is three hundred sixty days, for they have in their year
eighteen months, and every month contains twenty days. They have other
five odd days, which goes by themselves, in the which they used to
celebrate great feasts of cruel and bloody sacrifice, with much devotion.
And reconing after this sort, they could not choose but err, for they could
not make equal the punctual course of the Sun. Yea the Christian year is not
perfect, although we have learned Astronomers. But yet these simple Indians
went near the mark.

The names of the months.
Tlacaxipeualiztli. Tozcuztli. Huei Tozeuztli. Toxcalt. Ecalcoaliztli.
Tocuilhuicintli. Hueitecuilhuitl Miccailhuicintli. Veymiccailhuitl.
Vchpaniztli. Pachtli. Huei Pacheli. Quecholli. Panquecaliztli. Hatemuztli.
Tititlh. Izcalli. Coavitleuac.
The names of days.
Cipactli A Spade Hecatl Air or Wind Calli A House Cuez Pali A Lizart Coualt
A Snake Mizquintli Death Macatl A wild Heart Tochtli A Conny Atl Water
Izcuyntli A Dog Ocumatli An Ape Malinalli A Brom Acatlh A Cave Ocelotl A
Tigre Coautli An Egle Cozcaquahutl A Bussard Olin A Temple Tepatlh A Knife
Quiauitl Rain Xuchirl A Rose

Although these twenty names ferue for the whole year, and are but the days
of every month, yet therefore every month begins not with Cipactli, which
is the first name, but as they follow in order, and the five odd days is the
cause thereof. And also because their week is of thirteen days, which
changes the names, as by example, Cecipactli can go no further tha^ unto
Matlactlomeiacatl, which is thirteen, and then begins an other week: and
we do not say Matlactlinaui Ocelotl, which is the fourteenth day, but we say
Ceocelotl which is one, and then reckon the other six names, unto twenty: And
when all the twenty days are ended, begin again to reckon from the first name
of the twenty, but not from one, but from viij. And because ye may better
understand the matter, here is the example.

Cecipactli. Omehecatl. Ei Calli. Naui Cuezpali. Macuilcouatl Chicoacen
Mizquinth. Chicome Macatl. Chicuei Tochtli. Chiconauiatl. Matlaciz Cuintli.
Mailactlioce Ocumatli. Matlactliome Malinalli Matlactlomei Acatlh.
The next week following does begin his days from one. And that one is the
foureteenth name of the month and of the days, and says.

Ceocelotl. Macuil Tecpatl. Omecoautli. Chicoacen Quiauitl. Eicozcaquahutli.
Chicome Xuchitl. Naui Olui. Chicoei Cipactti.

In this second week, Cipactli came to fall on the eighte day, being in the
first week the first day.

Cemacatl. Ometochtli. Eiatl. Nauiizeuintli. Macuil Ocumatli.
And so proceed on to the third week, in the which this name Cipactli
enters not, but Macatl, which was the seventh day in the first week, and had
no place in ye second, and is the first in the third. This reconing is no
darker, than ours, which we have in a.b.c.d.e.f.g. For they also change with
time, and run in such sort, that. a. which was the first letter of this
month, comes to be the fifth day of the next month, and the third month
he counts to be the third day, and so orderly does the other six letters.

The accounting of years.
THese Mexicans had another order to reckon their years, which exceded not
above four in number, as one, two, three, four, wherewith they accounte a
hundred, five hundred, a thousand, and as many more as they lust. Those four
figures or names are, Tochtli, Acatlh, Tecpatlh, Calli, and do signifye, a
Conny, a Cave, a Knife, and a House, saying.

Ce Totchtli One year Ome Acatlh Two years Ei Tecpatlh Three years Naui
Calli Four years Macuil Tochtli Five years Cicoacen Acatlh Six years
Cicome Tecpatlh Seven years Chicuei Calh Eight years Chiconaui Tochtli Nine
years Matlactli Acatlh Ten years Matlactlioce Tecpatlh Eleven years
Matlactliome Calli Twelve years Matlactliomei Tochtli Thirteen years

So that the reconing passes not above thirteeue, which is one week of the
year, and ends where he began.

Another Week.
Ce A catlh One year Ome Tlepatlh Two years Ei Calli Three years
Naui-Tochtli Four years Macuil Acatlh Five years Chicoacen Tecpatlh Six
years Chicome Calli Seven years Chicuei Tochtli Eight years Chiconaui Acatlh
Nine years Matlactli Tecpatlh Ten years Matlactlioce Calli Eleven years
Matlactliome Tochtli Twelve years Matlactliomei Acatlh Thirteen years The
third week of years.
Ce Tecpatlh One year Ome Calli Two years Ei Tochtli Three years Naui Acatlh
Four years Macuil Tecpatlh Five years Chicoacan Calli Six years Chicome
Tochtli Seven years Chicuei Acatlh Eight years Chiconaui Tecpatlh Nine
years Matlactli Calli Ten years Matlactliome Tochtli Eleven years
Matlactliome Acatlh Twelve years Matlactliomei Tecpatlh Thirteen years The
fourth Week.
Ce Calli One year Ome Tochtli Two years Ei Acatlh Three years Naui Tecpatlh
Four years Macuil Calli Five years Chicoacen Tochtli Six years Chicome
Acatlh Seven years Chicuei Tecpatlh Eight years Chiconaui Calli Nine years
Matlactli Tochtli Ten years Matlactlioce Acatlh Eleven years Matlactliome
Tecpatlh Twelve years Matlactliomei Calli Thirteen years

Each of these weeks, which our men call Indition, does conteyne thirteen
years, so that all the four weeks make two and fifty years, which is a
perfect number in the reconing, and is called the year of grace, for from
fifty two years, to fifty two years, they used to make solemn feasts, with
strange Ceremonies, as hereafter shall be declared. And when fifty two years
are ended, then they begin again, by the same order before declared, until
they come to as many more, beginning at Ce Tochtli, and so forward. But always
they begin at the Conny figure. So that in the form of reconing they keep and
have inmemorye, things of 850. years, and by this Cronicle they know in what
year every thing happened, and how long every King raygned: how many children
they had, and all things else that importerd to the estate of the government
of the land.

The Indians believed that five ages were past, which they called Suns.
THe Indians of Cullua did believe that the Gods had made ye world, but they
knew not how, yet they believed that since the creation of the world four
Suns were past, and that the fifth and last is ye Sun that now gives light
to the world.

They held opinion that the first Sun perished by water, and at the same
time all living creatures perished likewise.

The second Sun (say they) sell from the heavens, with whose fall all living
creatures were slain, and then (said they) were many Giantes in that
Country, and certain monstrous bones, which our men found in opening of
graves, by proportion whereof, some should seem to be men of twenty spannes
high.

The third Sun was consumed by fire, which burned day and night, so that
then all living crealures were burned.

The fourth Sun finished by tempest of air or wind, which blew down
houses, trees, yea and ye mountains and Rocks were blowe^ asunder, but the
lignage of mankind perished not, saving that they were converted into Apes.
And touching the fifth Sun, which now reigns, they know not how it shall
consume. But they say that when the fourth Sun perished, all the world fell
into darkness, and so remained for the space of five and twenty years
continually, and at the fiftenth year of that fearful darkness, the Gods
did form one man and a woman, who brought forth children, and at the end of
the other ten years, appeared the Sun which was newly borne upon the
figure of the Conny day, and therefore they begin their account of years at ye
day, and reckoning from the year of our Lord 1552, their age or Sun is
858. so that it appears that they have used many years their writing in
figures: and they had not only this use from Cetochtli, which is the
beginning of their year, month, and day of their fifth Sun, but also they
had the same order and use in the other four Suns which were past: but
they let many things slip out of memory, saying, that with the new Sun,
all other things should be likewise new. They held also opinion, that three
days after this last Sun appeared, all the Gods did dye, and that in
process of time the Gods which now they have, and worship, were borne. And
through these false opinions, our Divines did soon convert them to the
knowledge of the true laws of God.

The nation of the Indians called Chichimecas.
IN the land now called new Spain, are diverse and sundry generations of
people: but they hold opinion, that the stock of most antiquity, is the
people now called Chichimecas, which proceeded out of the house of
Aculhuacan, which stands beyond Xalixco, about the year of our Lord. 720.
Many of this Generation did inhabit about the lake of Tenuchtitlan, but their
name ended by mixture in marriage with other people. At that time they had no
King, nor yet did build either house or Town. Their only dwellings was in
caves in ye Mositaynes. They went naked, they sowed no kind of grain, nor used
bread of any sort. They did mainteyne themselves with roots, herbs, and
siluester fruits: and being a people cunning in shooting with the bow, they
killed dear, hares, connyes, and other beasts and foul, which they eat
also, not sodden or roasted, but raw, and dried in the Sun. They eat also
Snakes, Lizardes, and other filthye beasts, yea and at this day there are some
of this generation that use the same diet. But although they lived such a
bestiall life, and being a people so barbarous, yet in their devilish religion
they were very devout. They worshipped the Sun, unto whom they used to
offer Snakes, Lizards, and such other beasts. They likewise offered unto their
God all kind of foul, from the degree of an Eagle, to a little Butterfly.
They used not sacrifice of ma^slaughter, nor had any Idolles, no not so much
as of the Sun, whom they held for the sole and only God. They married but
with one woman, and in no degree of kindred. They were a stout and a warlike
people, by reason whereof, they were Lords of the land.

The Coronation of the Kings of Mexico.
ALthough one brother was heir to an other among the Mexicans, and after their
deceasse, did inherit the Son of the eldest brother, yet they took no
possession of the state nor name of King until they were anointed and Crowned
openly.

As soon as any King of Mexico deceassed, and his funerals ended, then were
called to Parliamente the Lord of Tezcuco, and the Lord of Tlacopan, who were
the chiefest estates, and then in order all other noble men, who owed any
service to the Mexican Empire. And being come together, if any doubt of the
inheritance of ye crown happened, then the matter was decided with all have:
then the new King being known, he was stripped stark naked, except a cloth
to cover his privy parts, and in this sort was carried among them, to the
great Temple of Vitzilopuchtli with great silence, and without any joy or
pleasure: Two Gentlemen of the City whose office it was, led him up the
stairs of the Temple by the arms, and before him went the Princes of Tezcuco
and Tlacopan, who that day did wear their robes of Coronation, whereupon was
painted their arms and title. Very few of the Laytie went up into the
Chapels, but only those that were appointed to attire the new king, and to
serve in other Ceremonies, for all the residue stood upon the steps and
below, to behold the Coronation. These Magistrates being above in the
Chapel, came with great humility and reverence, kneelyng down upon their
knees before the Idol of Vitzilopuchtl, and touched the earth with one finger
and then kissed the same. Then came the high priest clothed in his pontifical
vestmentes, with many others in his company, who did wear surplices: and
without speaking any word, they painted or colored the Kings person, The
ointment.
with ynke made for the purpose, as black as any cole. After this Ceremonye
done, they blessed the anointed King, and sprinkled him four times with a
certain holly water, that was made at the time of consecration of the God,
made of dowe or paste, with a sprinckle made of boughs of Cane leaves, Ceder,
and willow leaves. Then they put upon his head, a cloth painted with the bones
and skulles of dead men, and next they clothed him with a black garment, and
upon ye another blewe, and both were painted with ye figures of dead men's
skulles and bones. Then they put about his neck certain laces, whereat did
hang the arms of ye Crown. And behind his back they did hang certain little
bottels full of powders, by virtue whereof he was delivered from pestilence and
diseases, according to their opinion: yea and thereby witches, nor witchcrafts
could not hurt him, nor yet evil men deceive him. In fine, with those
relickes he was sure from all peril and danger. Upon his left arm they
bound a little bag of incense, and then brought unto him a chaffyng dishe of
imbers made of the bark of an Oak tree. Then the king arose, and with his own
hand threw of the same incense into the chaffing dishe, and with great
reverence brought the same to the God Vitzilopuchtli, and after he had smoked
him therewith, he satte him down, then came the high Priest and took his oath
to mainteyne the religion of the Gods, to keep also all the laws and
customs of his predecessors, to maynteyne justice, and not to agrauiate any
of his vassals or subjects, and that he should be valiant in the wars, that
he should cause the Sun to give his light, the clouds to yield rain, the
rivers to run, and the earth to bring forth all kind of grain, fruytes,
and other needful herbs and trees. These and many other impossible things
the new king did swear to perform: and then he gave thanks to the high
priest, and commended himself to the Gods and to the lookers on, and they who
brought him up in the same order, carries him down again. Then all the people
cried, the Gods preserve the new king, and that he may reign many years in
health with all his people. But then some began to dance, other to play on
their instruments, showing outwardly their inward joys of heart. And before
the king came to the foot of the steps, all the noble men came to yield
their obedience, and in token of loving and faithful subjects they presented
unto him feathers, strings of snayle shelles, colors, and other Iewelles of
gold and silver, also mantels painted with death, and bare him company unto a
great hal within the compass of the temple, and there left him. The king
sits down under his cloth of estate, called Tlacatecco, and in four days
departs not out of the circuyte of the temple, the which he spendes in
prayers, sacrifice and penance, he eats then but once a day, and every day he
bathes himself, and again in the night in a great ponde of water, and then
lettes himself blood in his ears, and senseth therewith the God of Water,
called Tlaloc: he likewise senseth the other idols, unto whom he offers
bread, flowers, Papers and little Canes died in the bloudde of his own tongue,
nose, hands, and other parts of his body. After the four days expired, then
come all the Noble men to bear him company to his palayce with great triumph
and pleasure of all the City, but after his consecration few or none dare
look him in the face.

And now with the declaryng of the acts and Ceremonies that the Mexican Kings
are crowned, I shall not need to rehearse of other kings, for generally they
all do use the same order, saving that other Princes go not up to the top of
the Temple, but abide at the foot of the steps to be crowned, and after
their Coronation they come to Mexico for their confirmation, and then at their
return to their country, they made many drunke^ feasts and banquets.

The opinion of the Mexicans concerning the Soul.
THe Mexicans did believe that the Soul was immortal, and that they received
either joy or pain according to their deserts and living in this world, unto
which opinion all their religion did attain, and chiefly appear at their
burials. They hold for an assured faith, that there were nine places appointed
for souls, and the chiefest place of glory to be near unto the Sun, where
the souls of those which were good men slain in the wars, and those which
were sacrifised were placed, and that all other sorts of evil persons their
souls above on the earth, and were divided after this sort, children that
were dead borne went to one place, those which died of age or other disease
went to another, those which died of sodden death to another, those which died
of wounds or contagious diseases went to an other place, those which were
drowned went to another, those which were put to death for offense by order of
justice, as for robbery and adultery to another: Those which slew their
fathers, mothers, wives or children, to another place by themselves, also those
who slew their masters or any religious person went to another place. The
common sort of people were buried, but Lords and rich men had their bodies
burned and their ashes buried. In their shreudes they had a great difference,
for many dead bodies were buried better apparelled than when they were on live.
Women were shrewded after another sort. And he that suffered death for
adultery was shrewded like unto the God of leachery, called Tlazoulteutl, he
that was drowned like unto the God of water named Tlacoc, and he that died with
drunkenness was shrewded like unto the God of wine called Ometochtli. But the
Soldier had an honorable shrewde like unto the attire of Vitzilopuchtli, and
the like order in all other sorts of deaths.

The burial of Kings in Mexico.
WHen any King of Mexico happened to fall sick, they used foorth-with to put a
visor upon the face of Tezcatlipuca, or Vitzilopuchtli, or some other Idol,
which Visor was not taken away, until they saw whether the king did amend,
or else die: But if he chaunsed to die, then word was sent throughout all his
dominions to bewail his death, and also other posts were sent to call the
Noble men that were his nighest kinsmen, and to warn them within four days
to come unto his burial.

The dead body was laid upon a fair matte, and was watched four nights,
with great lametation and mournyng: then the body was washed, and a lock of
hear cut from the crown of his head, which was preserved as a great relicke,
saying that therein remained the remembrance of his soul. This done, a fine
Emerald was put into his mouth, and his body shrewded in seuentene rich
mantles, of colors, both rich and costly wrought. Upon the upper mantle was
set the devise or arms of Vitzilopuchtli or Tezcalipuca, or of some other
idol, in whom the king had great confidence in his life time, and in his
temple should the body be buried. Upon his face they put a visor, painted with
foul and Devilish gestures, besette with many iewelles, precious stones, and
pearls. Then they killed his slave, whose office was to light the Lamps and
make fire unto the Gods of his pallayce. These things done, they carried the
dead body unto the Temple: some followed him with doleful tune, others song
the death of the king by note, for so was the custom.

The Noble men and Gentlemen of his household carried Targets, Arrows, Mases,
and Ensigns to throw into the fire where the body should be buried in the
Temple. The high Priest and all the Clergy received him at the Temple gate,
with a sorrowful song, and after he had said certain words, the body was
thrown into a great fire made for the purpose, with all the jewels that he had
about him, and all the other things which was brought to honor the burial:
also a dog newly strangled with an arrowe, which was to guide him his way.
In the mean while that the King and dog were burning, the Priests sacrificed
two hundred persons, howbeit in this Ceremony there was no ordinary tax, for
sometimes they sacrificed many more: they were opened with a rasour of flinte in
the breasts, and their hearts taken out and thrown into the fire where the
Kings body was. These miserable persons being sacrificed, and their bodies
thrown into a hole, they believed assuredly that those should serve for his
slaves in another world: some of them were dwarffes, monstrous and deformed
persons, with some women. They placed about the dead body of the King before
his burial, Roses, Flowers and sundry dishes of meat and drink, and no
creature durst touch the same, but only ye Priests, for it seemed to be an
offering.

The next day followyng, all the ashes were gathered together, and the teeth
with the Emerald that was in his mouth, the which things were put into a
chest, painted on the inside with horrible figures of devils, and the lock of
hear which was cut from his crown, and another lock of hear which was
preserved from the time of his birth. Then the chest was lockte, and an image
of wood made and clothed like unto the Kings person, which was set on the top
of the chest. The obsequies endured four days, in the which the wines and
daughters of the king offered great offerings at the place where his body was
buried, and before the chest and his image.

On the fourth day after the burial, fiftene slaves were sacrificed for his
soul, and on the twentieth day other five persons were also sacrificed,
likewise on the sixty three, and fourscore, which was like unto the years
mind.

The order of burial of the Kings of Michuacan.
THe kingdeme of Michuacan is almost as great as the Empire of Mexico, and
when any king of that country happened to be visited with sickness, and
brought to such extremity, that hope of life were past, according to the
opinion of Physicians, then would he name and appoint which of his Sons
should inherit the estate, and being known, the new king or heir,
incontinent sent for all the governors, Captains, and valiant soldiers, who
had any office or charge to come unto the burial of his Father, and he that
came not, from thencefoorth was held for a Traitor and so punished. When the
death of the^ old King was certain, then came al degrees of Estates and
brought presents to the new king, for the approbation of his kingdom, but if
the King were not thoroughly dead, but at the point of death, then the gates
were shut in, and none permitted to enter, and when his life was departed, then
began a general cry and mournyng, and they were permitted to come where
their dead king lay, and to touch him with their hands: this being done the
carcass was washed with sweet waters, and then a fine shyrte put upon him,
and a pair of shoes made of a Dear skin put on his feet, and about his
ancles were tied certain belles of gold, about his wrestes of his hands were
put Manyllias of Turkies, and other bracelets of gold, likewise about his
neck they hong other collers of precious stones and gold, and rings in his
ears, with a great Turkise in his nether lip. Then his body was laid upon
a large hear, whereon was placed a good bed under him: on his one side lay a
bow with a quyuer of arrows, and on his other side lay an image made of fine
mantels of his own stature or bigness with a great tuffe of fine feathers,
shoes upon his feet, with bracelets and a collar of gold. While this work was
a doing, others were bufied in washyng the men and women which should be
slain for to accompany him into Hell: these wretched folk that should be
slain were banqueted and filled with drink, because they should receive
their death with less pain. The new king did appoint those who should die
for to serve the king his father, but yet many of them had rather been without
his service, notwithstanding some simple souls esteemed that odious death for
a thing of immortal glory. First seven Gentlewomen of noble parentage were
appointed to die, the one to have the office of keeper of his tewels which he
was wont to were, another for the office of cup bearer, another to give him
water with a basen and ewer, another to give him always the vrinall, another
to be his Cook, and another to serve for landres. They slew also many women
slaves, and free maidens for to attend upon the Gentlewomen, and moreover one
of every occupation within the city. When all these that were appointed to die
were washed and their bellies full with meat and drink, then they painted
their faces yellow, and put garlandes of sweet flowers upon each of their
heads. Then they went in order of processio^ before the bear whereon the dead
king was carried, some went playing on instruments made of snayle shelles,
others played upon bones and shelles of seaturtils, others went whistlyng and
the most part weping: the Sons of the dead king and other noble men carried
upon their shoulders the bear where ye corse lay, and proceeded with an easy
pace toward the Temple of the God Curicaueri: his kinsmen went round about the
bear, singyng a sorrowful song. The officers and household servants of the Court
with other Magistrates and rulers of justice bare the Standartes and diverse other
arms.

About midnight they departed in the order aforesaid out of the Kings palayce
with great light of fire brandes and with a heavy noise of trumpets and
drums. The Citizens which dwelt where the corse passed, attended to make
clean the streate. And when they were come to the temple, they went four
times round about a great fire made of the woodde of Pine tree, which was
prepared to burn ye dead body: then the bear was laid upon the fire, and in
the mean while that the body was burning, they mawled with a clubbe those
which had the garlandes, and afterward buried them by four and four, as
they were apparelled behind the Temple.

The next day in the morning, the ashes, bones and Jewels was gathered and
laid upon a rich mantle, the which was carried to the temple gate, where the
priests attended to bless those Diuelishe relickes, whereof they made a dowe
or paste, and thereof an image which was appareled like a man, with a visor on
his face, and all other sorts of Jewels that the dead King was wont to wear,
so that it seemed a gallant idol. At the foot of the temple stayres, they
opened a grave ready made, which was square, large, and two fadome deep, it
was also hanged with new mattes round about, and a fair bed therein, in the
which a religious man placed the idol made of ashes, with his eyes toward
the east part, and honge round about the walls Targets of gold and silver,
with bow and arrows, and many gallant tuffes of feathers with earthen vessels,
as pottes, dishes and platters, so that the grave was filled up with household
stuff, chests covered with leather, apparel, jewels, meat, drink, and
armor. This done, the grave was shut up and made sure with beams, bordes, and
floored with earth on the top.

All those Gentlemen which had served or touched any thing in the burial,
washed them selves, and went to dinner in the Court or yard of the Kings
house without any table, and having dined, they wiped their hands upon certain
locks of Cotton wol, hanging down their heads, and not speaking any word,
except it were to ask for drink. This Ceremony endured five days, and in
all that time no fire was permitted to be kindled in the City, except in the
Kings house and Temples, nor yet any corn was ground, or market kept, nor none
durst go out of their houses, showing all the sorrow that might be possible
for the death of their King.

The order of Matrimony among the Indians.
IN Tlaxcallan and many other Cities, was used as a principal Ceremony and
token of marriage, that the Bridegroom and his Bride, against the day of
marriage, had their heads polled, which was to signify, that from that day
forward, al childishe orders should be laid aside, and from that time new
hear might grow, to declare another kind of life. The chiefest knotte of
marriage used in Michuacan was, that the Bride do look directly upon her
spouse, for otherwise the Matrimony was not perfect nor auaylable.

In Mixteoapan which is a great province, they use to carry the Bridgrome to
be married upon their backs, which is to be understood, that he goes against
his will, but yet they take hands, in token that the one shall help the other,
and then they knitte both their mantels together with a great knotte,
signifying that they ought continually, while life lasts, to dwell together.

The Indians called Macatecas, consu^me not their Matrimony in twenty days
after their marriage, but abide in fasting and prayer all that while,
sacrificing their bodies, and annoynting the mouths of the Idolles with their
own proper blood.

In Panuco the husbands buy their wives for a bow, two arrows, and a net,
and afterward the father in law speaks not one word to his son in law
for the space of a whole year. And when the husband happens to have any
child, he lies not any more with his wife in two years after, for fear least
she might be with child again before the former child were out of danger,
although some do suck until twelve years of age, and for this consideration
they have many wives. Likewise there is an order among them, that no woman may
touch or dress any thing being with their menstruall ordinary.

Diuoremcent was not permitted without a just cause and authority of Justice,
among those who were openly married, but the other sort might be as easily
forsaken as taken.

In Mechuacan was not permitted any diuorcemente, except the party made a
solemn oath, that they looked not the one on the other steadfastly and directly
at the time of their marriage. But in Mexico they must prove how the wife is
barraine, foul, and of a naughty condition: but if they put away their wives
without order and commandment of the Judge, then the hear of the offenders
head is burned in the market place, as a shame or punishment of a man without
reason or wit.

The pain of adultery was death, as well for the man as the woman: but if the
adulterer were a Gentleman, his head was decked with feathers after that he was
hanged, and his body burned, and for this offense was no pardon, either for man
or woman, but for the avoiding of adultery they do permit other common women,
but no ordinary stews.

Of the Judges and order of Justice.
IN Mexico were twelve Judges, who were all noble men, grave, and well learned
in the Mexican laws. These men lived only by the rentes that properly
apperteyne to the maintenance of Justice, and in any cause judged by the^, it
was lawful for the parties to appeal unto other twelve Judges, who were of
the princes blood, and always abode in the Court, and were mainteyned at the
Kings own cost and charge. The inferior Judges came ordinarily once every
month to co^sult with the higher. And in every fourscore days came the
Judges of every province within the Mexican Empire, to consult with the Judges
of Mexico, but all doubtful causes were reserved to the King, only to pass
by his order and determination. The Painters served for notaries, to paint all the cases which were to be resolved, but no suit passed above fourscore days
without final end and determination. There were in that city twelve
Sergeants, whose office was to arrest, and to call parties before the Judges.
Their garments were painted mantels, whereby they were known a far off. The
prisons were under ground, moist and dark, the cause whereof, was to put the
people in fear to offend. If any witness were called to take an oath, the
order was, that he should touch the ground with one of his fingers, and then
to touch his tongue with the same, which signified that he had sworn and
promised to speak the troth with his to^g, taking witness thereof, of ye earth
which did maintain him. But some do interpret the oath, yt if the party swear
not true, that then he might come to such extremity, as to eat earth.
Sometime they name and call upon the God of the crime, whose cause the matter
touched.

The Judge that takes bribes or gifts, is forthwith put out of his office,
which was accounted a most vile and shameful reproach. The Indians did
affirm, that Necaualpincintli did hang a Judge in Tezcuco, for giving an
unjust sentence, he himself knowing the contrary. The murder is executed
without exception.

The woman with child that wilfully casts her creature, suffers death for
the same, because many women did voluntary use that fact, knowing their
children could not inherit. The punishment of adultery was death.

The Thief for the first offense was made a slave, and hanged for the second.
The traitor to the King and common weal, was put to death with extreme
torments.

The woman taken in man's apparel dyed for the same, and likewise the man taken
in woman's attire. Every one that challe^ged another to fight except in the
wars, was condemned to die. In Tezcuco the sin of Zodomy was punished with
death, and that law was instituted by Necaualpincintli, and Necaualcoio, who
were Judges, which abhorred ye filthy sin, and therefore they deserved great
praise, for in other provinces ye abominable sin was not punished, although
they have in those places common stews, as in Panuco.

The order of cruel Sacrifice used among the Indians.
AT the end of every twenty days, is celebrated a festival feast called
Tonalli, which falls continually the last day of every month, but the
chiefest feast in the year, when most men are sacrificed and eaten, is at the
end of every fiftye two years. But the Tlaxcaltecas and other commonweals,
do celebrate this feast every fourth year.

The last day of the first month is called Tlacaxipeualiztli, on the which day
were slain a hundred slaves, which were taken in the wars, and after the
sacrifise, their flesh was eaten in this order. All the Citizens, gathered
themselves together in the high Temple, and the^ the Ministers or Priests came
and used certain ceremonies, the which being ended, they took those which
were to be sacrifised, by one and one, and laid them upon their backs upon a
large stone, and then the slave being on live, they opened him in the breast,
with a knife made of flinte stone, and took out his heart, which they threw
immediately at the foot of the Altar, as an offering, and anointed with the
fresh blood, the face of the God Vitzilopuchtli, or any other Idol. This done,
they plucked of the skins of a certain number of them, the which skins so
many ancient persons put incontine^t upon their naked bodies, al fresh and
bloody, as they were sleane from the dead carcasses. And being open in the
back part and shoulders, they used to lace them, in such sort that they came
fit upon the bodies of those that ware them, and being in this order
attired, they came to dance among many others. In Mexico the king him self
did put on one of, these skins, being of a principal captive, and daunced
among the other disguised persons, to exalte and honor the feast, and an
infinite number followed him to behold his terrible gesture, although some hold
opinion that they followed him to co^template his great devotion. After the
sacrifise ended, the owner of the slaves did carry their bodies home to their
houses, to make of their flesh a solemn feast to all their friends, leaving
their heads and hearts to the Priests, as their duty and offering. And the
skins were filled with cotton wool, or straw, to be hong in the temple, and
kings pallayce, for a memory.

The slaves when they went to their sacrifice, were apparelled in the habit or
devise of the Idol unto whom each of them did commend himself: and moreover
they decked them with feathers, garlands and flowers. Many of these sort of
people, do go to the slaughter with joyful countenance, dancing, demanding
alms through the City for their sacrifice, all the which alms is due unto
the priests. When the green corn was a foot above the ground, they used to
go unto a certain hill which was appointed for such devotion, and there
sacrifised two children, a boy, and a girl of three years of age, to the
honor of Tlaloc god of water, beseeching him therefore deuoutlye, to have
always a care to provide them water: these children were free borne, and
therefore their hearts were not taken out of their bodies, but after that their
throtes were cut, their bodies were wrapped in a new mantel, and then buried in
a grave of stone.

The feast of Tozoztli was, when the fields of Maiz were grown two foot
high, then a certain sum of merchandise was gathered among the dwellers in
the town, wherewith were bought four little slaves betwixt the age of five
and seven, and they were likewise sacrificed to the god Tlaloc, for continual
shoures of rain. And those dead bodies were shut up in a cave appointed for
the same purpose. The beginning of this sacrifice of four children was, at the
time when in four years space it rayned not, in the which season ye springs
were dried up, and al green things perished: wherefore they were forced to
leave the country, and went to inhabit at Nicaragua. In the month and feast
of Hueitozotli, when the corn fields of Maiz waxed ripe, then every one in
general gathered his handful of Maiz, and brought it unto the temple for an
offering, with a certain drink called Atuli, which is made of the same Maiz.
They brought also the sweet gum Copalli to sense the gods which do cause the
corn to grow: and all that night they ceased not dancing without
drunkenness. At the beginning of summer they celebrate an other feast called
Tlaxuchimcaco, with all kind of Roses and sweet flowers that might be gotten,
and thereof they used to make garlands to set upon the Idols heads, and so
spente all that day in dancing. And to celebrate the feast called
Tecuilhuitli, all the gentlemen, and principal persons of each province, do come
unto the City, on the evening of the feast, and then they apparel a woman
with the attire of the Gods of salt, who daunced among a great company of her
neighbors. But on the next day she was sacrificed with all the Ceremonies
and solempnitie accustomed, and all that day was spent in great devotion, burning
of incense in the fire pannes of the temple.

The merchants who had a temple by themselves dedicated to the god of gains,
made their feast upon the day called Miccailhuitl, wherein they slew many
slaves in sacrifice, which they had bought, and banqueted that feast with man's
flesh, dancing all the day. The feast of Vchpaniztli they sacrificed a woman,
and afterward her body was flayne, and her skin put upon an Indians back,
who daunced two days a row with all the townsmen, which were apparelled in their
best attire to celebrate ye feast. The day of Hatamutztli ye feast is kept in
Mexico, where they enter into ye lake with a great number of Canoas, and there
they drown a boy and a girl in a little boat, which they cause to be sonke, in
such sort, that never after that boat appears again: and they hold opinion y
those children were in company with the Gods of the lake. So that, that day
was spente in feasting in the temples, and annoynting the Idols cheeks, with
gum called Vlli. There were some Images that had their faces two inches thick
with that gum.

The order of certain religious women.
ON the back side of every great Temple, in every City was made a great
Hall or lodgyng, standing alone, where as many women did eat, drink, lodge,
and lead their lives. And although such houses had no orders, they abode
there sure enough. These women which lay in the houses of the Gods, were of
sundry intentions. But none of them came to abide there al their life time,
although among them were some old women. Some entered into those religious
houses being sick and disseased, hoping there to recover their health: others
came thither through pure need, and necessity, to be there relieved: other
some came thither to be good and virtuous: and some entered into the religion,
hoping that the Gods would give unto them riches, and long life. But
generallye their coming thither was, to have good husbands, and many
children: each of them vowed the time that she would or meant to abide in that
order, and after that time expired they married.

The first thing that they did coming into the religion, was to polle their
heads, to be known from others. Their offices were to spinne cotton wool and
feathers, and to weaue cloth, for to apparel the Gods and themselves, to
swepe the yard and lodgings of the temple (for the stayres and high chapels,
the ministers themselves did make clean) they used also to let them blood in
certain parts of the body, to offer to the Devilish Idols. On every festiual
day they went on procession with the priests, but it was not lawful for them
to presume to go up the stayres of the temple, nor yet to sing. They lived on
alms, for their kinsefolke being rich, did mayntaine them with alms as a
charitable service done unto the Gods: their food was boiled flesh, and hot
bread, to the intent that they should offer thereof to the Gods, that they
might taste of the smoke of that victual: they used to eat in community, and
lay altogether in one dormitorye, as a flock of sheep: they lay always in
their clothes, for honesty sake, and also to be the sooner ready in the
morning to serve the Gods, and to go to their work. And yet I know not why
they should put off their clothes, for they went almost naked. On the holy days
they used to dance before the Gods, and she that either talked or laughed with
any religious or secular person, was reprehended for the same. And if any of
them committed whoredom, then both the man and the woman were slain, yea they
believed that all such offenders flesh would rotte and consume away, and
especially those which had lost their Virginity in the time of their religion.
So that with fear of punishmente and infamy, they were good women all the
while that they aboade there.

How the Devil appeared to the Indians.
THe Devil did many times talk with the priests, and with other rulers and
particular persons, but notwith al sorts of men. And unto him to whom the Devil
had appeared, was offered and presented great gifts. The wicked spirit
appeared unto the^ in a thousand shapes, and fashions, and finally he was
conversant and familiar among them very often. And the fools thought it a
great wonder, that Gods would be so familiar with mortal men. Yea they not
knowing that they were Devils, and hearing of them many things before the had
happened, gave great credit and belief to their illusions and deceites. And
because he commanded them, they sacrificed such an infinite number of
creatures. Likewise he, unto whom he had apeared, carried about him painted,
the likeness wherein he showed himself the first time. And they painted his
image upon their doors, benches, and every corner of the house. And as he
appeared in sundry figures and shapes, even so they painted him, of infinite
fashions, yea and some foul, grieslye, and fearful to behold, but yet unto
them, it seemed a thing delectable. So this ignorant people giving credit to ye
condemned spirit, were grown even to ye highest hill of cruelty, under the
cou^our of devout and religious persons, yea they had such a custom, that
before they would eat or drink, they would take thereof a little quantity, and
offer it unto the sun and to the earth. And if they gathered corn, fruit, or
roses, they would take a leaf before they would smell it, and offer the same.
And he that did not observe these and such other ceremonies, was judged one yt
had not god in his heart, yea and (as they say) a man out of the gods favor.

The Viceroys of Mexico.
THe greatness of the new Spain, the Majesty of Mexico, and the quality of
the co^querers, required a man of noble blood to govern, whereupon the
Emperor sent thither Don Antonio de Mendosa, brother unto the Marquis de
Moniar, for viceroy, at whose ariual there returned from thence Sebastian
Camires, who had governed that country with great discretion and worthy
commendation. In recompense whereof the Emperor made him president of the
chancery of Valladolid, and bishop of Culuca. Don Antonio de Mendosa was
appointed viceroy in the year.1534. who carried with him many artificers very
expert in their sciences, likewise through his intercession, a money house was
erected in Mexico: he also caused silk to be made and wrought in that
country, and planted many Mulbery trees for the same, although the Indians
little care for such things through their slothfulness and great liberty.
This viceroy Don Antonio, called all the Bishops, clergy, and learned men
together, to consult upon ecclesiastical matters, which tended to the doctrine
of the Indians. At that instant was decreed, that the Indians should be
instructed only in the latin tongue, which they learned very well and also the
Spanishe tongue. They learn the Music with good will, especially the ^laute:
their voices are not good for the prick song. At that season was also decreed,
that no Indian should take order of Priesthood. The viceroy Don Antonio built
certain towns with Roman pillars, in honor of the Emperor, and caused his
name to be graven in Marble. He also began the ^ay or wharfe in the port of
Medellin, a costly and necessary work: he also reduced the Chichimecas to
ciuel living: he spente much money in the entrance of Sibola, without any
profit, and also thereby remained an enemy to Cortes. He likewise discovered
much land on the south coast near Xalixco: he sent also ships to Molluca,
for spices, which were lost: he behaved himself very prude^tdently in the
rebellion time of the Indians of Piru.

The Emperor commanded him afterward to go unto the Piru for viceroy,
considering the licenciat Gasca, who governed there, was returned into Spain,
and likewise having understood his good government in the new Spain, although
some complaints were made of him. It grieved Don Antonio de Mendosa, to
depart from the new Spain, where he found himself well beloved among the
Indians, who had cured him of sundry disseases with bathes of Herbs, where
before he was stark lame, and also possessed of lands, Cattle, and other rich
things, which he was loath to leave. Likewise he desired not to have to deal
with other new men, whose conditions he knew not, although he knew that the
Piruleros were stubborn and unruly fellows. But of necessity he was
compelled to take that journey by land from Mexico to Panama, which stands
five hundred leagues distant, in the year a 1851. And that year came Don Luys
de Valasco for viceroie to Mexico, who was a Gentleman wise and discrete in his
government. The office of viceroy in the new Spain, is a charge of great
honor and profit.

The conversion of the Indians.
OH how greatly are those Indians bound to praise God, who being servants of
Satan, and lost Sheep, yet it pleased the goodness of the Almighty to have
compassion of the^, who has given them light to come out of darkness, and
brought them to the knowledge of their cruel and abominable life, and has
now given unto them the holy Ghost in baptism: oh most happy Cortes, thy
pains was well employed, oh valiant Conquerors, your names shall live for
ever. I am now bold to say, that all that land which is conquered in the new
Spain, the people thereof are generally converted unto the faith of Jesus
Christ: oh what a great felicity is it unto those blessed Kings who were the
beginners thereof.

Some do say, that in the new Spain only are converted Christians six
Millions. Others hold opinion of eyghte Millions. And othersome do assuredly
affirm, that above ten Millions are Christened. But in conclusion, I am
assured, that within the limittes of four hundred leagues, there are none
unchristened.

The conversion began with the Conquest, but with the diligence in prosecuting
the wars, little good was done, until the year 1524. and then the matter
went forward effectuallye, by reason that certain learned men went
thither for the same purpose.

At the beginning it was a troublesome thing to teach them, for want of
understanding the one of the other, wherefore they procured to teach the
children of Gentlemen which were most aptest, the Spanishe tongue, and they
likewise learned the Mexican speech, in the which language they daily
preached. It was at the first a paynefull thing to make them leave those Idols
in whom they had ever believed, yea and the Devil gave them cruel wars
in spirit, and many times, in appearing in diverse forms unto them,
threatening, that if they did call upon the name of Jesus Christ, it should not
rain, and that all their delight and pleasure should be taken from them,
provoking them still to Rebellion against the Christians, but his wicked
counsel would not prevail.

Through great punishmente they have left off the horrible sin of Sodomy,
although it was a great grief to put away their number of wives.

There are now in the new Spain eight Byshoprikes, whereof one is an
Archbishoprike.

The death of Hernando Cortes.
THere was a great contention between Hernando Cortes, and Don Antonio de
Mendosa, the Vizeroy, as concerning the province of Sibola, for each of them
pretended a title unto the same through the Emperoures gift, the one by means
of his office of Vizeroy, and the other by his office of Captain General,
upon the which matter they grew into such hatred, that perfyte friendship
could never after take place between them, although at the beginning they
were familiar and loving friends: but malice grew to such extremity, that
each of them wrote indecently against other, to the Emperor their master,
the which their doyngs blemished both their credites.

Cortes went to law with the Licenciat Villa Lobos the Kings Attorney,
about certain of his vassals, and also the Vizeroy assisted against him as
much as he might. Upon consideration whereof, he was enforced to come into
Spain in Anno 1540. and brought Don Martin his son and heir, being a
child of eyghte years of age, and his son Don Luys, to serve the Prince: he
came very rich, but not so rich as the first time. He entered into great
friendship with the Cardinal Loaisa, and the Secretary Cobos, but it prevailed
not, for the Emperor was gone into Flanders about matters of Gant.

In the year 1541. the Emperor personally went to the seege of Argell with
a mighty army, and Cortez with his two sons went also thither to serve him
with a good company of men and Horses, but it pleased God to raise up such a
tempest, wherewith the most part of the fleet perished. Cortes then being in
the Galley of Don Henrike Enrikes, called the Esperanca, and fearing to lose
his rich emraldes and other Jewels at the time that the Galley was driven by
violence of weather upon the shore, he then bound about him the said five rich
emraldes, esteemed in a hundred thousand Duckates, yet notwithstanding through
the throng of people, and have to escape out of oc^e and mire, the Jewels fell
from him, who could never hear more of them, so that the present wars cost
him more than any other, except the Emperoures majesty, although Andrea de
Oria lost eleven Galleys.

But the loss of treasure grieved him not so much, as the excluding him out of
the Counsel of the wars, where as other young Gentlemen of less knowledge
and ability were accepted, which was a cause of great murmuryng among the
host. And where in the counsel of war it was determined to leave the seege
and to depart, it grieved many, whereupon Cortes made an open offer, that he
alone with the Spanishe nation would presume to take Argell, having but the one
half of the Tudescos and Italians, if it would please the Emperor to
grant unto him the enterprise. The Souldyers on the land did hyghly commend
his courage, but the Sea men would give no ear unto him, so that it is
thought that the offer came not to the Emperoures knowledge. Cortes went up
and down in the Court a long season, being sore afflicted in a certain suit
about his vassals, and also the process and allegations of Nunio de Guzman,
laid unto his charge in his residence. The whole process was seen in the
counsel of Indias, but judgment was never pronounced, which was a great
hearts ease for Cortes. And then he departed from the Court toward Civil,
with determinate will to pass unto the new Spain, and to end his life in
Mexico, and also to receive the Lady Mary, Cortes his daughter, who was come
from India, and promised in marriage unto Don Aluar Perez Osorio, with a
hundred thousand Duckates in dowry, and her apparel, but the marriage took
no effect, through the fault of Don Aluar and his father.

He then fell sick of a flixe and indisgestion, which endured long, so that
on his journey toward the City of Civil, he departed this transitory life,
in a little Village called Castilleia de La Cuesta, which stands a mile from
the City of Civil, on the second of December Anno 1547. being threescore
and three years of age:

His body was deposited with ye dukes of Medina Sidonia.

He left a Son and three Daughters begotten of the Lady Jane de Zuniga his
wife, his Son was called Don Martin Cortes, who did inherit his fathers
estate, and was married unto the Lady Ana de Arellano, his cousine, daughter to
the County De Aguilar, by order of his father.

The daughters unto Cortes were named as follows, the lady Donea Maria, Donea
Catalina, and Donea Iuana who was the youngest. He had another Son by an
Indian woman, and he was called Don Martin Cortez. He had also another base
son by a Spanish woman, who was named Don Luys Cortez, and three daughters by
three several Indian women.

Cortez buylt an hospital in Mexico, and gave order for a College to be also
erected there. He builte also a Temple in Coioacan, where he willed in his
Testament that his bones should be buried at the charges of his Son and
heir. He situated four thousand Ducates of rent, which yields yearly his
houses in Mexico for the purpose aforesaid, of the which four thousand
Ducates, two thousand should be to maynteyne the Studients in the College.

FINIS.
A Table expressyng the Chapiters which are contained in this History.
THe birth and lynage of Hernando Cortez. Fol. 1. The age of Cortes when he
passed into India. 2 The time that Cortes abode in Santo Domingo. 5 Things that
happened to Cortes in the land of Cula. 6 The discovery of the new Spain.
10. The inuentory of the treasure that G^^ialua brought. 12 The determination
of Cortes to prepare a fleet for discovery. 16 The navy and men that Cortes
carried to the Conquest. 20 The oration made by Cortes to his Soldiers. 24 The
entrance of Cortes into the ^^and of Acusamil. 25 The Indi^^s of Acusamil gave
nevves of bearded men. 29 A miraculous chance how Aguillar came to Cortes. 31
The Island of Acusamil. 35 The religion of the people of Acusamil. 40 The
battle of Po^onchan. 41 The battle of Cintla. 43 The Lord Tauasco yields to
the Christians. 46 Questions demanded by Cortes of the Cacike Tanasco. 48
How the Indians of Potonchan brake down their Idols. 50 The good
entertaynement that Cortes had in Saint John de Vlhua. 51 The talk of Cortes
with Teudilli. 55 The present by Mutezuma unto Cortes. 58 How Cortes knevv
of discord in the country. 61 How Cortes went to survey the country
with.400. men. 64 How Cortes rendered up his office by policy. 67 How the
Soldiers chose Cortes for their Captain general. 69 The receeuing of Cortes
into Zempoallan. 72 The talk of the Lord of Zempoallan with Cortes. 76
Things that happened unto Cortes in Chiauizt^^n. 80 The message sent by Cortes
to Mutezuma. 83 The rebellion done by the industry of Cortes. 85 The fundation
of the rich town of Vera Crux. 88 The taking of Tizapansinca. 90 The
presen^e that Cortes sent to the Emperor Charles for his fifth part. 92
Letters in general from the Magistrates of Vera Crux to the Emperor. 97 An
uproar among the Soldiers against Cortes, and the correction for the same. 100
Cortes caused all his ships to be sunk, a worthy fact. 102 How the
inhabitants of Zempoallan brake down their Idolles. 104. How Olintlec
exalted the mighty power of Mutezuma. 107 The first encounter that Cortes had
with the men of Tlaxcallan. 11^ How there joined a hundredth and fifty
thousand men against Cortes. 116 The threatenings of the Indian camp against
the Spaniardes. 120 How Cortes cut off the hands of fifty espies. 124 The
Embassage that Mutezuma sen^ unto Cortes. 126 How Cortes vvanne the City of
Zimpanzinco. 129 The desire that some of the Spanierdes had to leave the
vvarres. 132 The oration made by Cortes to his Soldiers. 13^ How Xicotencatl
came for Ambassador to Cortes his camp. 136 The receiving of Cortes into
Tlaxcallan. 136 The description of Tlaxcallan. 141 The answer of the
Tlaxcaltecas touching the leauyng of their Idolles. 145 The discord between
the Mexicans and the Tlaxcaltecas. 147 The solemn^ receiving of the Spaniardes
into Chololla. 148 The conspiracy of the Cholollans against the Spaniardes.
152 The punishment for conspiracy. 155 The sanctuary among the Indians was
Chololla. 158 The hill called Popocatepec. 160 The consultation of Mutezuma
concerning the coming of Cortes into Mexico. 162 Things that happened to
Cortes in his journey tovvarde Mexico. 164. The solemn pomp vvherevvith
Cortes was received into Mexico. 160 The Oration of Mutezuma to the
Spaniardes. 172 The Majesty and order vvhervvith Mutezuma was served at his
table. 175 The foot players that played before Mutezuma. 178 The tennys play
in Mexico. 179 The number of vviues that Mutezuma had. 181 A house of foul
which were only preserved for the feathers. 183 A house of foul for
havvking. 184 The armory of Mutezuma. 186 The gardens of Mutezuma. 187 The
court and guarde of Mutez. 188 The great subjection of the people to their
King. 189 The situation of Mexico. 192 The market place of Mexico. 196 The
great temple of Mexico. 201 The Idols of Mexico. 204 The charnell house of
Mexico. 206 How Cortes took Mutezuma prisoner. 207 The recreation of hunting
which Mutezuma used. 212 How Cortes began to pluck down the Idols of
Mexico. 214 The exhortation made by Cortes to Mutezuma and the Citizens for the
abolishing of Idolles. 215 The burning of the Lord Qualpopoca and other
Gentlemen. 219 The cause of the burning of Qualpopoca. 220 How Cortes put a
pair of gyues on Mutezuma his legs. 221 How Cortes sent to seek for the
mines of gold in diverse places. 223 The imprisonment of Cacama king of
Tezcuco. 227 The sorrowful oration that Mutezuma made unto his noble men, to
yield them to the Emperor. 230 The gold and Jewels that Mutezuma gave unto
Cortes for his first tribute. 233 How Mutezuma required Cortes to depart from
Mexico. 235 The fear that our men stand in to be sacrificed. 230 How James
Velasques sent Pamfilo de Naruaez against Corte^. 241. The substance of a
letter that Cortes vvrote unto Naruaez. 244 The talk of Naruaiz to the
Indians, and his answer to Cortes. 246. The talk that Cortes had with his
own Soldiers. 249 The requests of Cortes to Mutezuma. 251 The imprisonment
of Pamfilo de Naruaiz. 252 The rebellion of Mexico. 256 The cause of the
rebellion. 259 The threatenings of the Mexicans against the Spaniardes. 261 The
great danger that our me^ were put in by the strangers. 26^ The death of
Mutezuma. 266 The combat betvveene the Spaniardes and the Indians 268 How the
Mexicans refused the offer of peace and amity 271 How Cortes fled from
Mexico 274. The battle of Otumpan. 280 The entertaynement of the Spaniardes at
their return to Tlaxcallan. fol. 283 The protestation and request of the
Soldiers to Cortes. 286 The oration made by Cortes in answer to his
Soldiers demand. 289 The vvarres of Tepeacac. 292 The great authority that
Cortes had among the Indians. 294 The Verga^tines that Cortes caused to be
buylte, and the Spanyerdes which he had to besiege Mexico. 296 The
exhortation of Cortes to his Soldiers. 298 The exhortation made to the Indians
of Tlaxcallan. 301 How Cortes took Tezcuco. 302 The Spaniardes which were
sacrifised in Tezcuco. 307 How the Verga^tines were brought from Tlaxcallan
to Tezcuco. 310. Of the docke or trenche which was made to lanche the
Vergantines. 311 The order of the host and army to besiege Mexico. 314 The
battle and victory of the Vergantines against the Canoas. 316 How Cortes
besieged Mexico. 320. The first skirmishe within the City of Mexico. 322 The
great hurt and damage in the house of Mexico by fire. 327 Things that happened
to Pedro de Aluarado through his bold attempt. 329 The triumph and sacrifice
which the Mexicans made for victory. 331 The determination of Cortes to
destroy Mexico. 336 The hunger and infirmity which the Mexican^ suffered
with great courage. 340 The imprisonment of Quahatimoc. 343. The taking of
Mexico. 347 Marvelous signs and tokens of the destruction of Mexico. 349 The
buylding up again of the City of Mexico. 351 How the Emperor sent to take
account of Cortes his government. 354. The death of the Licenciat Luys Ponce.
358 How Cortes came into Spain. 359 The honor which the Emperor shevved
unto Cortes with reward. 361 The marriage of Cortes. 362 How the Chancery
was first placed in Mexico. 364 The return of Cortes to Mexico. 367. The
letters which the Indians used in Mexico. 369 The Mexican year. 371 The
Indians believed that five ages were paste, etc. 377 The nation of the Indians
called Chichimecas. 378 The Coronation of the Kings of Mexico. 379 The opinion
of the Mexicans concerning the soul. 382 The burial of kings in Mexico. 383
The order of the burial of the kings of Michuacan. 386 The order of Matrimony
among the Indians. 389 Of the judges and order of Justice. 391. The order of
cruel sacrifice used among the Indians. 392 The order of certain religious
women. 396 How the Devil appeared to the Indians in a strange form. 398 The
viceroys of Mexico. 399 The conversion of the Indians. 401 The death of
Herna^do Cortes. 40^
FINIS.

