The 4. of November.

THE PEACE OF FRANCE. OR THE EDICT, WITH THE Articles of Peace, granted by the
French King unto his Subjects of the Reformed Religion.

For the establishing of a firm and general Peace throughout the whole
Kingdom of FRANCE.

Given at his Camp before Mompellier the nineteenth day of October. 1622.

Faithfully Translated out of the French Copy.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold at his Shop
under S. Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in Pope's Head Alley at the Starte.
1622.

THE PEACE OF FRANCE, OR THE EDICT, WITH THE Articles of Peace; granted by the
French King, unto his Subjects of the Reformed Religion.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navare. To all those which shall
see these presents Greeting. As a Christian and Godly Prince which fears God,
ought to abhor the effusion or shedding of the blood of man, who is created
in the Image of God: So is he likewise bound and tied not only to shun the
occasions of Civil and Domesticke war, for to reunite his Subjects, and to
make them live under the Laws of (...) Religion, have afterward gotten better
inspirations, and acknowledged their faults, and have taken their Refuge to Our
Clemency and Bounty, by their most humble Petitions, which they have sent
unto Us by express Deputies, desiring Us to grant them pardon, and to abolish
the memory of all things past, and to receive and hold them hereafter as Our
other loyal Subjects, in Our favor and countenance. We inclining always
rather to Clemency and Mercifulness, then to go on with rigor, and Our just
Arms; Notwithstanding, that We have advanced much by the same, and were
likely to get more.

And having regard unto their submissions and duties, and being desirous to
settle the Peace in Our Kingdom, and to reunite all our Subjects in Amity and
Concord amongst themselves, and to cause a general and uniform Obeisance to
Us, and for other weighty reasons and considerations moving Us thereunto. With
the advice of the Princes, Dukes, Peers, Officers of Our Crown, and the
principal Councellers of Our State. We have said, ordained, and declared, We
say, ordain, and declare by these Presents, signed by Our own hand.

We will and are pleased;
I.
THat the Edict of Nantes, the Declarations, and secret Articles which are
Registered in Our Courts of Parliament, shall be kept in good faith to Our
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion in all points, as they have well
and duly enjoyed the same in the time of the late King Our most honored and
renowned Lord and Father (whom God absolve) and likewise since Our coming to
the Crown, until these troubles happened.

II.
THat the exercise of the Catholic Apostolic, and Roman Religion shall be
settled and established in all places and quarters within this Kingdom, and
the Countries under Our obeisance, where it has ceased, and be there freely
and peaceably continued without any trouble, forbidding (...)

authority, and shall willingly open the gates unto Us, shall enjoy the
contents of this Declaration.

VI.
WE expressly forbid herewithall Our Subjects of the pretended reformed
Religion all kind of general and particular Assemblies, circuits, Counsels,
lesser Synods and all other of what quality soever they may be, upon pain of
high Treason, unless they have an express permission of us: being only
permitted unto them the meetings at their Consistories, Colloquies, and Synods,
for mere Ecclesiastical affairs, expressly prohibiting them to treat of any
politic affairs, upon the penalty aforesaid.

VII.
Our aforesaid Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, shall be discharged
of all acts of Hostility, of all general and particular Assemblies, circuits,
and of all other things generally, being contained in the Articles 76. and 77.
of our Edict of Nantes, since the first of January. 1621. until this present:
therein not comprehending the execrable cases which are specified, and declared
in the 86. Article of the said Edict, of which the Judges may determine as the
matter shall require if any complain.

VIII.
ANd concerning that which is happened at the Town of Privas, We will it to be
abolished particularly to the Inhabitants of the said place, and likewise to
the Lord of Brison.

IX.
ANd for those which are accomptable, and other Officers touching the dealings
of their charges, the Articles 78. and 79. of the said Edict of Nantes, shall
be entierly kept and observed.

X.
ANd particularly concerning the Judgments, and Sentences given against those
of the said Religion which have borne Arms, they shall be discharged thereof
according to the Articles 58. and 59. and 60. of of the said Edict. So likewise
We have strengthened and confirmed, We strengthen and confirm the Judgments
given by the Counsels and Judges, established by the (...)

to be made in what manner soever. We charge Our Procurators or Atturnies
General, and their Substitutes to set hand thereunto and to use to the same
effect all their best endeavors and aids required unto the same. For such is
Our pleasure. In witness whereof, We have caused Our Seal to be affixed on
these presents. Given in the Camp before Mompellier, the nineteen day of
October, in the year of Grace 1622. and of Our Reign the thirteen.

It was Signed Lewis, And lower by the Kings Command de Lomenie.
Then sealed with yeallow wax upon a double tail.
FINIS.
LOVIS par la grace de Dieu Roy de France et de Navarre. A tous ceux qui ces
presents lettres verront, Salut. Comme tout Prince Chrestien et craignant Dieu
doit auoir en horreur l'effusio^ du sang de l'homme cree a l'image du tout
puissant, aussi est il tenu et oblige non seulement d'euiter les occasions de
guerre civil et domestique pour revnir et fair viuxe ses subjects sous les
loix de l'Estat en bonne concord et obeissance; la mesme bonte Divine qui a
cognu nostre coeur, depuis quil luy a pleu nous appeller au regime et
gouuernement de ceste monarchy Francoise, est Judge de nostre interieur: Et
chacun scait aussi que nos arms ont este autant iustes que forcees et
necessaires pour le soustien et defense de nostre Authorite; soit contre ceux
qui du commencement sous diverse pretextes empruntes, ont excite le trouble
durant nostre minorite, ou depuis contre nos subjects saisans profession de la
Religion Pretendue Reformee, abuses et surpris de l'artifice d'aucuns d'iceux,
qui ont cuide profiter autant de lour simplicite, que de la division public
de nostre Royaume; ores que nostre intention n'ait iamais este autre (a
l'exemple des Roys nos predicesseurs d'heureuse memoire) que de les maintenir
en bonne paix et union dans le deuoir et obeissance qui nous est deue sous le
benefice de nos Edits, et de les traicter comme nos bons et fidelles subjects,
quand

de leurs benefices et tous autres droits le deuoire que leur apartiennent.

3.
Comme aussi l'exercice de la Religion pretendue Reformee sera restabli aux
lieux ou il estoit suiuant nostre Edit, declarations et concessions: et les
sieges de Justice, burauex de recepte, et officiers de finances seront
restablis en mesme estat es villes ou ils estoyent establis auant ces derniers
mouuemens: hormis la chamber de Nerac qui sera establis en tell lieu que nous
auiserons bon estre; apres auoir entendu les remonstrances des Deputes de
nostre province de Guyenne.

4.
Voulons aussi que toutes fortifications nouuelles, des villes places chasteaux
et forteresses tenues par nos dits subjects de la Religion pretendue Reformee,
et specialement celles qui ont este faites en l'Isle de Re et Oleron soyent
entierement demolies et racees, demeurans les antiennes, les murailles, tours,
portaux, losses et contrescarpes en leur estat: auec defense a toutes lesdittes
villes de plus fortifier de nouueau: et que pour leffect desdites demolitions,
l'ostages des principaux habitans desdites villes, seront mis es mains de ceux
qui nous plaira d'ordonner pour lexecution du dit racement.

5.
Afin que les Officiers de nostre couronne ou autres commissaires deputes
puissent fair executer le contenu cydessus suiuant les instructions qui leur
en seront donnees, entendons que toutes les villes de ladite Religion pretendue
Reformee qui dans quinze iours apres la publicatio^ des presents se
soumettront a nostre obeissance, et nous ouuriront volontairement les ports,
iouissent du contenu de la present declaration:

6.
Defendons tresexpressement a nosdits subjects de la Religion pretendue
Reformee toutes sorts d'Assemblees generales et particulieres, cercles,
conseils, abredges de Synodes, et toutes autres de quelques qualites quelles
puissent estre, a peine de crime de leze majesty, s'ls n'ont express
permission de nous: ains seulement leur sont permises les assemblees des
Consistoires, Colloques, Synodes, pour pures affairs Ecclesiastiques, auec
inhibitions tresexpresses, die traiter d'aucune affair politic, sur les
peines que dessus.

7.
Demeureront aussi nosdits subjects de la Religion pretendue Reformee,
decharges de tous acts d'hostilite, de toutes assemblees generales et
particulieres, cercles, abredges, et de toutes autres chooses generalement
quelconques contenues es Articles 76. et 77.

executer it content (...) do^nons mandemen^^ (...) les geus tenans nos course
de (...) l'Edit, Baillifs, Seneschaux, ou leaves (...) touts autres nos ^^ciers
et officers (...) des, queces pre^^^ ils facent (...) ^trer chacun en d^^^ soy,
et le con^^^^ (...) der et obseruer inuiolablement (...) teneur sans y
contreuenir ^y souffriry est^^ (...) enaucune maniere. Enjoig^^^ (...) generaux
et leurs substituts (...) fair pour cest effect toute^ instances (...)
requisitions necessaires, ^ar tell est nostre (...) tesmoigne dequoy nous auous
fair met^re nostre (...) ces presents. Done au camp de Mompell^^^ 19 iour
d'Octobre l'an de grace 1622. et nostre (...) le 13.

Sign LOVJS Et plus bas par le R^^ De Lomen^^
Et seeles sur double queu^e de cire (...)
FINIS.

