THE FRENCH Kings Declaration and Confirmation of the Proclamation of Nantes,
by his Mtie. granted to those of the pretended reformed Religion.

Faithfully translated out of the Coppie printed at Paris by Francis du Carroy
and Thomas Menard 1613. By J. B.



Imprinted at London for John Barnes, and are to be sold at his Shop near
Holborne Conduit. 1613.

The Confirmation of the Proclamations of Nants, granted by his Majesty to
those of the pretended reformed Religion.
JEWS, by the grace of God King of France and of Navarre: To all those, etc.
Our greatest desire since our coming to this Crown, for which we do
continu^lly implore the grace of God; and where^^ the Queen Regent, our most
honorable ^ady and Mother, has continually most ^arefully labored; has
tended to be able to maintain and preserve all our Subjects in rest, peace,
and tranquillity; and in good amity, unity, and concord one with another a
matter importing the principal foundation of the upholding of this estate. To
thi^ effect, so soon as it pleased God to visit v^ with the sinister accident
of the death of ou^ most honored Lord and Father of gloriou^ memory, we
resolved our self to imitat^ and walk in the same ways that he had taken, to
attain to the same end: And hauin^ found, that after he had by his valor
restored this estate into the ancient eminenci^ thereof, he had with great
care, labor, an^ foreiudgement; and for a foundation of a assured quietness,
and perfect reconciliation among all his Subjects: and namel^ to take from
those of the pretended reformed Religion, all occasion of fear and mistrust,
which they might conceive concerning the liberty and safety of their Person
Consciences, Honors, Goods, and Families made, and decreed the same which is
contained in his Proclamation given at Nan^ in April. 1598. by the observation
where of, and of the secret Articles, Briefes, an^ Rules, made in consequence
thereof, had happily ruled and governed his people in peace, even to his
decease. As also, one of the first actions that we undertook in our reign,
tended to dispatch our Letters of declaration of the xxij. of May 1610.
importing a confirmation of the said Proclamation, and of the secret Articles,
Rules, and Decrees, given to the execution and interpretation of the same;
which at the same instant we sent to all our Parliamentes to be verified: and
soon after, we sent into all the Provinces of our Realm, some of the
principal of our Counsel, and other qualified persons whom we chose, as well
Catholics, as of the pretended reformed Religion, to cyment and set fast the
entier establishment and execution of the said Proclamation, and of the favors
graun^ed in suite thereof: having ever since, continued employing whatsoever
our care and authority to this effect.

But it is come to pass, that our good meaninges have not wrought that effect,
which we might have desired, among all our Subjects; of whom some, namely of
those of the said pretended reformed Religion, by some shadows which they
lightly conceived through certain diverse accurrences, are entered into
ielowsies and mistrustes one of another; whereof have ensued, that they have
suffered them selves to be carried, to the augmenting of the ordinary guardes,
stirring up and making provision of Armor, assembling of Soldiers, houlding
of Assemblies and Counsels; with other actions, wholly contrarying the tenor
and observation of the said Proclamation: Whereto nevertheless, we are
content to believe; that they have been induced rather by some apprehension
that they have taken of them selves, and under false shadows and pretenses,
then of any bad minds or intentes: as having always acknowledged those of the
said Religion in general, to have been very well affected to the good of our
service, and fast and assured to the regard, fidelity, and obedience, that
they owe unto us.

But as this evil may draw after it most dangerous consequeces, we have
thought it necessary to provide, and remedy it, and to reestablish that good
love, intelligence, and society that ought to be indifferently among all our
said Subjects, to the maintenance of their common quiet; which as it seems,
can not be more assuredly brought to pass, then by the exact observation of
the said Proclamation, secret Articles, Briefes, and other Acts, made in suite
of the same; and withal, giving a new assurance to our said Subjects of the
said pretended reformed Religion, of our good inclination in their behalfes,
and of that intent that we have to preserve, maintain, protect, and make them
inuiolably to enjoy all the favors, grauntes, and graces, that have been
granted unto them as well by the said Proclamation, as since the same, even as
they did in the life time of the late King until his decease, as also all that
have since by us been granted unto them.

For these causes and others, thereto us moving, having put this affair in
deliberation to our Counsel, wherein were assistant the Queen Regent, our most
honored Lady and Mother, the Princes of our blood, and other Princes, with
many Officers of our Crown, and principal Counsaylours of our Counsel: By
the advice thereof, we have said and declared, and do say and declare; will,
and it is our pleasure, that the aforesaid Proclamation of Nantes, together
with our Declaration of the xxii. of May 1610. with all the particular
Articles, Rules, Decrees, and other Law dispatches in consequence and in
interpretation or execution of the same, shall be again read and published in
all our Courts and Bayliwickes of them depending, having to the same end, and
so long as need shall require, confirmed them; and by these presents signed
with our own hand, do confirm them.

WE will and ordain, that the whole shall be received, and inuiolably
observed, without any contrarying in any sort or manner whatsoever. And in as
much as the breaches hereof made by some of our said Subjects, proceeded
rather of the suspicious and mistrustes where with they were slightly carried
away, then for want of any affection, will, or obedience; which they always
testified unto us in all occasions that have been offered: as also hoping that
hereafter, they will contain them selves in their duties under the observation
of our Proclamation and Decrees; We will, mean and it is our pleasure, that
all Decrees, Acts, and other Expeditions, that have been given and made
against them, as well in general as in particular, for any cause or occasion
whatsoever, shall be void and as not made, so as by occasion or in suit of the
same, they shall not incur any reproach, danger, or damage; neither be
hereafter molested, or called in question. And hereupon, we do impose silence
to all our Atturnies general, their substitutes, and all others: As also, we
do expressly forbid all our said Subjects conformably to the seventy seventh,
and eighty two Articles of the said Proclamation, hereafter to make any
callinges of Assemblies, or holding of any provincial Counsels, or other
leauies, or gathering of Arms, or men of War, or any other actions directly
or indirectly, repugnant to our said Proclamations or Declarations, under pain
of disobedience, and to be punished as disturbers of the public peace.

We also command our well-beloved and trusty Counsaylours, the people holding
our Court of Parliament of Paris, and all other our Courts of Parliament, and
Chambers of Proclamation established throughout this Kingdom, that the
aforesaid Proclamation of Pacification, secret Articles, Briefes, Declarations,
and other Letters patentes to them sent in consequence of the same; together
with these presents, they cause immeadiatly to be read and published in all
places accustomed in such cases, and the Contents of the same to cause to be
kept and observed, and inuiolably to be maintained; ceasing, and causing to
cease, all troubles and hinderaunces to the contrary.

We also do enjoin all our Atturnies general, diligently to set to their
hands: And in case there shall hereafter, be any gainesayers to cause such
seueere proceedinges against them, that the example of their punishment may be
a restraint to others: For such is our pleasure.

In witness whereof, we have caused to put our Seal to these Presents.

Given at Paris the 15. of December the year of grace 1612. and of our reign
the third. Signed JEWS.
And upon the fould; By the King being in his Counsel, the Queen Regent his
mother present.

DE LOMENIE.



FINIS.

