THE SCORNFVL LADY.

A Comedy.

As it was Acted (with great applause) by the Children of Her Majesty's Revels
in the BLACK FRIARS.

Written by FRA. BEAVMONT and IO. FLETCHER, Gent.

LONDON

Printed for Miles Partrich, and are to be sold at his Shop at the George near
St. Dunstons Church in Fleet-streete. 1616.

The Scornful Lady: A COMEDY.
Actus primus,
Scaena prima.
Enter the two Louelesses, Sauill the Steward, and a Page. Eld. Lou. BRother,
is your last hope past to mollify Moorecrafts heart about your Morgage?


Young. Love. Hopelesly past: I have presented the Usurer with a richer draught,
then ever Cleopatra swallowed; he has sucked in ten thousand pownds worth of my
Land, more then he paid for at a gulpe, without Trumpets.


El. (...). I have as hard a task to perform in this house.


Yo. Lo. Faith mine was to make a Vserer honest, or to loose my land.


El. Lo. And mine is to persuade a passionate woman, or to leave the Land.

Sauill make the boat stay, I fear I shall begin my unfortunate journey this
night, though the darkness of the night and the roughnes of the waters might
easily dissuade an unwilling man.


Sauil. Sir, your fathers old friends hold it the sounder course for your body
and estate, to stay at home, and marry, and propagate, and govern in your
Country, then to travel for diseases, and return following the Court in a
nightcap, and die without issue.


El. Lo. Sauill, you shall gain the opinion of a better servant, in seeking to
execute, not alter my will, how soever my intents succeed.


Yo. Lo. Yonder Is Mistres Yongloue brother, the grave rubber of your mistres
toes.


Enter Mistres Yongloue the waiting woman. El. Lo. Mistres Yongloue.


Young. Mr. Louelesse, truly we thought your sails had been hoist: my Mistres
is persuaded you are Se^-sicke ere this.


El Lo. Loves she her ill taken up resolution so dearly? Did thou move her
for me?


Young. By this l^ght that shines, there is no removing her, if she get a ^iffe
opinion by the end. I attempted her to day when they say a woman can deny
nothing.


El. Lo. What critical minute was that?


Young. When her smock was over her ears: but she was no more pliant then if
it hung about her heels.


El. Lo. I prithee doliuer my service, and say I desire to see the dear cause
of my banishment; and then for France.


Young. I Will do it: hark hither, is that your Brother?


El. Lo. Yes, have you lost your memory?


Young. As I live he is a pretty fellow.

Exit.
Yo Lo. O this is a sweet Brache.


El. Lo. Why she knows not you.


Yo. Lo. No, but she offered me once to know her: to this day she loves youth
of eighteen; she heard a tale how Cupid ftrooke her in love with a great Lord
in the Tilt-yard, but he never saw her; yet she in kindness would needs
wear a willow garland at his wedding. She loved all the Players in the last
Queens time once over: She was struck when they acted lovers, and forsook some
when they played murderers. She has nine Spurroyals, and the servants say she
hords old gold; and she herself pronounces angerly, that the Farmers eldest
son, or her Mistres husbands Clark that shall be, that marries her, shall
make her a iointure of fourscore pounds a year; she tells tales of the
s^ruing-men.


El. Lo. Enough, I know her brother. I shall en^reate you only to salute my
Mistres, and take leave, we will part at the staiers.


Enter Lady and waiting woman. La. Now Sir, this first part of your will is
performed: what is the rest?


El. Lo. First let me beg your notice for this Gentleman my Brother.


La. I shall take it as a favor done to me, though the gentleman has received
but an v^timely grace from you, yet my charitable disposition would have been
ready to have done him freer courtesies as a stranger, then upon those cold
commendations.


Yo. Lo. Lady, my salutations crave acquaintance and leave at on^e.


La. Sir I hope you are the n^aster of your own occasions.

Ex. Yo Lo. Sauil.
El. Lo. Would I were so. Mistres, for me to praise over again that worth,
which all the world, and you your self can see.


La. Its a cold Rome this; Servant.


El. Lo. Mistres.


La. What think you if I have a chimney fort out here?


El. Lo. Mistres another in my place, that were not tied to believe all your
actions just, would app^ehend himself wronged: But I, whose virtues are
constancy and obedience.


La. Yongloue, make a good fire above to warm me after my servants Exordiums.


El. Lo. I have heard and seen your affability to be such, that the servants
you give wages to may speak.


La. It Is true, it is true; but they speak toth' purpose.


El. Lo. Mistres your will leads my speeches from the purpose. But as a man --


La. A Simile servant? This room was built for honest meaners, that deliver
themselves hastily and plainly, and are gone. Is this a time or place for
Exordiums, and Similes, and metaphors? If you have ought to say, break
intoo't; my answers shall very reasonably meet you.


El. Lo. Mistres I came to see you.


La. That's happily dispacht, the next.


El. Lo. To take leave of you.


La. To be gone?


El. Lo. Yes.


La. ^ou ^eede not have dispair'd of that, nor have used so many circumstances
to win me to give you leave to perform my com^nd: Is there a third.


El. Lo. Yes, I had a third, had you been apt to hear it.


La. I never apter. Fast (good servant) fast.


El. Lo. It Was to entreat you to hear reason.


La. Most willingly, have you brought one can speak it?


El Lo. Lastly, it is to kindle in that barren heart love and forgiveness.


La. You would stay at home?


El. Lo. Yes Lady.


La. Why you may, and doubtlesly will, when you have debated that your
commander is but your M^stres, a woman, a weak one, wildly ouerborne with
p^ssions: but the thing by her commanded, is to see Douers dreadful cliffe,
p^ssing in a pore waterhouse; the dangers of the merciless merc^lesse twixt
that and Callis, five long hours sail, with three pore weeks victuals.


El. Lo. You wrong me.


La. Then to land dumb, unable to enquire for an Engglish host, to remove from
City to City, by most chargeable post-horse, like one that rod in quest of
his mother tongue.


El. Lo You wrong me much.


La. And all these (almost invincible labors) performed for your mistres to be
in danger to for sake her, and to put on new alleagance to some French Lady,
who is content to change language with you for laughter, and after your whole
year spent in tennis and broken speech, to stand to the hazard of being laughed
at at your return, and have tales made on you by the chamber-maids.


El. Lo. You wrong me much.


La. Louder yet.


El. Lo. You know your least word is offorce to make me seek out dangers,
move me not with toies: but in this banishment, I must take leave to say, you
are unjust: was one kiss forced from you in public by me so unpardonable? why
all the hours of day and night have seen us kiss.


La. It Is true, and so you satisfied the company that heard me chide.


El Lo. Your own eyes were not dearer to you then I?


La. And so you told vm.


El. Lo. I did, yet no singne of disgrace need to have staind your cheek: you
your self knew your pure and simple heart to be most unspotted, and free from
the least baseness.


La. I did: But if a Maids heart does but once think that she is suspected,
her own face will write he^ guilty.


El. Lo. But where lay this disgrace? The world that knew us, knew our
resolutions well: And could it be hoped that I should give away my freedom,
and venture a perpetual bondage with one I never kissed? or could I in (...)
wisdom take ^oo much lou^ upon me, from he^ that chose me for her husband?


La. Believe me; if my w^dding smock were on,
Were the gloves bought and given, the License com^,
Were the Rosemary branches dipped, and all
The Hipochrists and cakes (...) and drunk off,
Were these two arms inc^mpast with the hands
Of Bachelors, to l^ade me to the Church;
Were my feet in the door, were I John, said,
If Io^n should boast a favor done by me,
I would not wed that year: And you I hope,
When you have spent his year commodiously,
In atcheiuing Languages, will at your return
Acknowledge me more coy of parting with mine eyes,
Then such a friend. More talk I hold not now,
If you dare go!

El. Lo. I dare you know; First let me kiss.


La. Farewell sweet servant, your ta^ke performed,
On a new ground as a beginning suitor,
I shall be apt to hear you.

Eld. Lo. Farewell cruel Mistres.

Exit Lady.
Enter Young Louelesse and Sauill. Yo. Lo. Brother you will hazard the loosing your
tide to Grauesend: you have a long half mile by land to Greenewich.


El. Lo. I go: but brother, what yet unheard of course to live, does your
imagination flatter you with? your ordinary means are deuourd.


Yo. Lo. Course? why horse-coursing I think. Consume no time in this: I have
no es^te to be mended by meditation: he that busies himself about my
fortunes, may properly be said to busy himself about nothing.


El. Lo. Yet some course you must take, which for my satisfaction resolve and
open: If you will shape none, I must inform you, that that man bu^ persuades
himself he means to live, that imagins not the means.


Yo. Lo. Why live upon others, as others have lived upon me.


El. Lo. I apprehend not that: you have fed others, and consequently disposd of
vm: and the same measure must you expect from your maintainers, which will be
too heavy an alteration for you to bear.


Yo. Lo. Why i will purse; if that raise me not, I Will bet at bowling-alleys, or
man whores; I would fain live by others: but I Will live whilst I am vnhangd, and
after the thoughts taken.


El. Lo. I see you are tide to no particular employment then.


Yo. Lo. Faith I may choose my course: they say nature brings forth none but
she prouides for em: I Will try her liberality.


El. Lo. Well, to keep your feet out of base and dangerous paths, I have
resolved you shall live as Master of my house. It shall be your care Sauill to
see him fed and clothed, not according to his present estate, but to his birth
and former fortunes.


Yo. Lo. If it be referd to him, if I be not found in Carnation Iearsie
stockins, blew devils breeches, with three guards down, and my pocket ith
sleeves, i will nere look you in the face again.


Sa. A comlier wear I wusse it is then those dangling slops.


El. Lo. To keep you ready to do him all service peaceably, and him to command
you reasonably, I leave these further direcitons in writing, which at your best
leisure together open and read.


Enter Yongloue to them with a Jewel. Abi. S^r my Mrs. commends her love to
you in this token, and these words; It is a Jewel (she says) which as a
favor from her she would request you to wear till your years t^auell be
performed: which once expired, she will has^ly expect your happy return.


El Lo. Return my service with such thanks, as she may imagine the heart of a
suddenly ouer-ioyed man would willingly utter: and you (I hope) I shall with
slender arguments persuade to wear this Diamond, that when my Mistres shall
through my long absence, and the approach of new suitors, offer to forget me;
you may call your eye down to your finger, and remember and speak of me: She
will hear thee better then those allied by birth to her; as we see many men
much swaied by the grooms of their chambers, not that they have a greater part
of their love or opinion on them, as on others, but for they know their secrets.


Abi. A my credit I swear, I think it was made for me: Fear no other suitors.


El. Lo. I shall not need to teach you how to discredit their beginnings, you
know how to take exception at their shirts at washing, or to make the maids
swear they found plasters in their beds.


Abi. I know, I know, and do not you fear the suitors.


El. Lo. Farewell, be mindful and be happy: the night calls me.


Exeunt omnes praeter Yonglo^. Abi. The Gods of the winds befriend you Sir: a
constant and a liberal lover thou art; more such God send us.


Enter Welforde. Well. Let vm not stand still, we have rid hard.


Abi. A suitor I know by his riding hard, I Will not be seen.


Well. A pretty Hall this, No servant in it? I would look freshly.


Abi. You have delivered your arrand to me then: there is no danger in a hansome
young fellow: I Will show my self.


Well. Lady may it please you to bestow upon a stranger the ordinary grace of
salutation: Are you the Lady of this house?


Abi. Sir, I am worthily proud to be a servant of hers.


Well. Lady I should be as proud to be a sernant of yours, did not my so late
acquaintance make me despair.


Abi. Sir, it is not so hard to atcheiue, but nature may bring it about.


Well. For these comfortable words I remain your glad debtor. Is your Lady at
home?


Abi. She is no stragl^r Sir.


Well. May her occasions admit me to speak with her?


Abi. If you come in the way of a Suitor, No.


Well. I know your a^ble virtue will be moved to persuade her, that a Gentleman
benighted and straied offers to be bound to her for a n^ghts lodging.


Abi. I will commend this message to her: but if you aim at her body, you
will be de^uded: other weomen the households of good carriage and government;
upon any of which if you can cast your affection, they will perhaps be found
as faithful, and not so coy.

Exit Yongloue.
Well. What a skin full of lust is this? I thought I had come awoeing, and I am
the courted party. This is right Court fashion: Men, weomen, and all woe; catch
that catch may. If this soft hearted woman have infusde any of her tenderness
into her Lady, there is hope she will be pliant. But who is here?


Enter Sr. Roger the Curate. To. God save you Sir, My Lady lets you know she
desires to be acquainted with your name before she confer with you.


Well. Sir my name calls me Welford.


To. Sir, you are a gentleman of a good name. I Will try his wit.


Well. I will uphold it as good as any of my Ancestors had this two hundred
years Sir.


To. I knew a worshipful and a religious gentleman of your name in the
Bishopric of Durham. Call you him Cosen?


Well. I am only allied to his virtues Sir.


To. It is modestly said: I should carry the badge of your Christianity with me
to.


Well. What Is that, a Cross? there is a tester.


To I mean the name which your Godfathers and Godmothers gave you at the Font.


Well. It Is Harry: but you cannot proceed orderly now in your Catechism: for
you have told me who gave me that name. Shall beg your names.


To. Roger.


Well. What room fill you in this house?


To More rooms then one.


Well. The more the merrier. But may my boldness know, why your Lady has sent
you to discipher my name?


To. Her own words were these; To know whether you were a formerly denied
suitor, disguised in this message: For I can assure you she delights not in
Thalame: Himen and she are at variance, I shall return with much have.

Exit Roger.
Well. And much speed Sir I hope: certainly I am arrived amongst a Nation of
new found fools: on a Land where no Na^igator has yet planted wit, If I had
foreseen it, I would have laded my breeches with bells, knives, copper and
glasses to trade with the weomen for their virginities: yet I fear I should
have betrayed my self to an (...) charge then: here is the walking nightcap
again.


Enter Roger. Roger. Sir, my Ladies pleasure is to see you: who has commanded
me to acknowledge her sorrow. that you must take the pains to come up for so
bad entertainment.


Well. I shall obey your Lady that sent it, and acknowledge you that brought it
to be your Arts Master.


To. Iam but a Bachiler of Art Sir; and I have the mending of all under this
roof, from my Lady on her down bed, to the maid in the pease straw.


Well. A Cobbler Sir?


To. No Sir. I inculcate Divine service within these walls,


Well. But the inhabitants of this house do often employ you on errands,
without any scruple of conscience.


To. Yes, I do take the air many mornings on foot, three or four miles for
eggs: but why move you that?


Well. To know whether it might become your function to bid my man to neglect
his horse a little, to attend on me.


To Most properly Sir.


Well. I pray ye do so then: and whilst I will attend your Lady. You direct all
this house in the true way?


To. I do Sir.


Well. And this door (I hope) conducts to your Lady?


To. Your understanding is ingen^ous.

Ex severally.
Ent. Young Louelesse and Sauill with a writing. Sa. By your favor Sir you
shall pardon me.


Yo. Lo. I shall beat your favor Sir, cross me no more; I say they shall
come in.


Sa. Sir you forget one, who I am.


Yo. Lo. Sir I do not; thou art my brothers Steward, his cast off mill-money,
his Kitchen Arethmatick.


Sa. Sir I hope you will not make so little of me.


Yo. Lo. I make thee not so little as thou art: for indeed there goes no more
to the making of a Steward, but a fair Imprimis, and then a reasonable Item
infused into him, and the thing is done.


Sa. Nay then you stir my duty, and I must tell you.


Yo Lo. What would thou tell me, how Hoppes go, or hold some rotten
discourse of sheep, or when our Lady day falls? Prithee farewell, and
entertain my friends, be drunk, and burn thy Table-bookes: and my dear
spark of velvet thou and I


Sa. Good Sir remember.


Yo. Lo. I do remember thee a foolish fellow, one that did put his trust in
Almanacks, and horse-faiers, and rose by honey and pot-butter. Shall they come
in yet?


Sa. Nay then I must unfold your Brothers pleasure, these be the lessons Sir,
he left behind him.


Yo. Lo. Prithee expound the first.


Sa. I leave to keep my house 300 pounds a year; and my Brother to dispose of
it.


Yo. Lo. Mark that my wicked Steward, and I dispose of it.


Sa. Whilst he bears himself like a Gentleman, and my credit falls not in
him. Mark that my good young Sir, mark that.


Young. Lo Nay if it be no more I shall fulfill it: whilst my legs will carry
me i will bear my self gentleman-like, but when I am drunk, let them bear me
that can. Forward dear steward.


Sa. Next it is my will, that he be furnished (as my brother) with attendance,
apparel, and the obedience of my people.


Yo. Lo. Steward this is as plain as your old minikin breeches. Your wisdom
will relent now, will it not? Be mollified or -- you understand me Sir,
proceed.


Sa. Next, that my Steward keep his place, and power, and bound my brothers
wildness with his care.


Yo. Lo. I Will hear no more this Apocripha, bind it by it self steward.


Sa. This is your Brothers will, and as I take it, he makes no mention of such
company as you would draw un to you. Captains of Gallifoists, such as in a
clear day have seen Callis, fellows that have no more of God, then their
oaths comes to: they wear swords to reach fire at a Play, and get there the
oyld end of a pipe for their guerdon: then the remnant of your regiment are
wealthy Tobacco merchants, that set up with one ownce, and break for three;
together with a forlorn hope of Poets, and all these look like Carthusians,
things without linen: Are these fit company for my Mafters Brother?


Young. Lo. I will either convert thee (O thou Pagan steward) or presently
confound thee and thy reckonings, who is there? call in the Gent.


Sa. Good Sir.


Yo. Lo. Nay you shall know both who I am, and where I am.


Sa. Are you my masters Brother?


Yo. Lo. Are you the sage Master Steward, with a face like an old Ephimerides?


Enter his Comrades. Captain, Traveler. Sa. Then God help all, I say.


Yo. Lo. I, and it is well said my old peer of France: welcome gentlemen,
welcome gentlemen; mine own dear lads, you are richly welcome. Know this old
Harrygroate.


Cap. Sir I will take your love.


Sa. Sir you will take my purse.


Cap. And study to continue it.


Sa. I do believe you.


Tra. Your honorable friend and masters brother, has given you to us for a
worthy fellow, and so we hug you Sir.


Sa. Has given himself into the hands of varlets, not to be carved out. Sir
are these the pieces?


Yo. Lo. They are the Morrals of the age, the virtues. Men made of Gold.


Sa. Of your gold you mean Sir.


Young. Lo. This is a man of war, that cries go on; and wears his Colors.


Sa. In's nose.


Yo. Lo. In the fragrant field. This is a Traveler Sir, knows men and manners,
and has plowd up the Sea so far, till both the poles have knocked, has seen the
Sun take Coach, and can distinguish the color of his horses, and their
kinds, and had a Flanders Mare leapt there.


Sa. It Is much.


Tra. I have seen more Sir.


Sa. It Is even enough a conscience; sit down, and rest you, you are at the end
of the world already. Would you had as good a living Sir as this Fellow could
lie you out of has a notable gift in it.


Yo. Lo. This ministers the Smoke, and this the Muses.


Sa. And you the clothes, and meat, and money, you have a goodly generation of
vm, pray let vm multiply, your Brothers house is big enough, and to say truth,
has too much Land, hang it dirt.


Yo. Lo. Why now thou art a loving stinkeard. Fire off thy annotations and thy
rent books; thou have a weak brain Sauill, and with the next long Bill thou will run mad. Gentlemen you are once more welcome to three hundred pounds a
year; we will be freely merry, shall we not?


Captain. Merry as mirth, and wine my lovely Louelesse.


Poet. A serious look shall be a Jury to excommunicate any man from our
company.


Tra. We will have nobody talk wisely neither.


Yo. Lo. What think you gentlemen by all this Reuenew in drink?


Cap. I am all for drink.


Tra. I am dry till it be so.


Po. He that will not cry Amen to this, let him live sober, seem wise, and
die ath Little.


Yo. Lo. It shall be so, we will have it all in drink, let meat and lodging
go, they are transitory, and show men merely mortal: then we will have wenches,
every one his wench, and every week a fresh one: we will keep no powderd
flesh: all these we have by warrant under the Title of things necessary.
Here upon this place I ground it: the obedience of my people, and all
necessaries: Your opinions Gentlemen?


Cap. It Is plain and evident that he meant wenches.


Sa. Good Sir let me expound it.


Cap. Here be as sound men as your self Sir.


Poet. This do I hold to be the interpretation of it; In this word
Necessary, is concluded all that be helps to man: woman was made the first,
and therefore here the chiefest.


Yo. Lo. Believe me it is a learned one, and by these words; The obedience of my
people, (you steward being one) are bound to fetch us wenches.


Cap. He is, he is.


Yo. Lo. Steward attend us for instructions.


Sa. But will you keep no house Sir?


Yo. Lo. Nothing but drink, three hundred pounds in drink.


Sa. O miserable house, and miserable I that live to see it. Good Sir keep some
meat.


Yo. Lo. Get us good whoores, and for your part, I Will bourd you in an Alehouse,
you shall have cheese and onyons.


Sa. What shall become of me, no chimney smoking? Well prodigal, your brother
will come home.

Ex.
Yo. Lo. Come lads I Will warrant you for wenches, three hundred pounds in drink.

Exeunt omnes.
Actus 2
Scaena prima.
Enter Lady, her sister Martha, Welford, Yongloue, and others. La. Sir now you
see your bad lodging, I must bid you goodnight.


Well. Lady if there be any want, it is in want of you.


La. A little sleep will ease that complement. Once more good night.


Well. Once more dear Lady, and then all sweet nights.


La. Dear Sir be short and sweet then.


Well. Shall the morrow prove better to me, shall I hope my suit happier by this
nights rest.


La. Is your suit so sickly that rest will help it? Pray ye let it rest then
till I call for it. Sir as a stranger you have had all my welcome: but had I
known your errand ere you came, your passage had been straighter: Sir, good
night.


Well. So fair, and cruel, dear unkind goodnight.

Exit Lady. Nay Sir you shall stay with me, I Will press your zeal so far.


To. O Lord Sir,


Well. Do you love Tobacco?


To. Surely I love it, but it loves not me; yet with your reverence i will be bold.


Well. Pray light it Sir. How do you like it.


To. I promise you it is notable stinging gear indeed. It is wet Sir, Lord
how it brings down Reume?


Well. Handle it again Sir; you have a warm text of it.


To. Thanks ever premised for it. I promise you it is very powerful, and by a
Trope, spiritual: for certainly it moves in sundry places.


Well. I, it does so Sir, and me especially to ask Sir, why you wear a night
cap.


To. Assuredly I will speak the truth unto you; you shall understand Sir, that
my head is broken, and by whom; even by that visible beast the Butler.


Well. The Butler? certainly he had all his drink about him when he did it.
Strike one of your grave Cassock? The offense Sir?


To. Reproving him at Tra-trip Sir, for swearing: you have the total surely.


Well. You told him when his rage was set atilt, and so he cract your Cannons.
I hope he has not hurt your gentle reading: But shall we see these
Gentleweomen to night?


To. Have patience Sir, until our fellow Nicholas be deceast, that is, a
sleep: for so the word is taken; to sleep to die, to die to sleep: a very
Figure Sir.


Well. Cannot you cast another for the Gentleweomen?


To. Not till the man be in his bed, his grave; his grave, his bed; the very
same again Sir. Our Comic Poet gives the reason sweetly; Plenus rimarum est,
he is full of loopeholes, and will discover to our Patroness.


Well. Your comment Sir has made me understand you.


Enter Maria the Ladies sister, and Yongloue to them with a posset. To. Sir be
addressed, the graces do salute you with the full bowl of plenty. Is our old
enemy entombed?


Abi. He Is fast?


To. And does he snore out supinely with the Poet?


Mar. No, he out-snores the Poet.


Well. Gentlewoman, this courtesy shall bind a stranger to you, ever your
servant.


Mar. Sir, my S^sters strictness makes not us forget you are a stranger and a
Gentleman.


Abi. In sooth Sir were I changed into into my Lady, a Gentleman so well endued
with parts, should not be lost.


Well. I thank you Gentlewoman, and rest bound to you. S^e how this foul
familiar ch^wes the Cudde: From thee and three and fifty, good l^ue deliver me.


Mar. Will you sit down Sir, and take a spoone?


Well. I take it kindly Lady.


Mar. It is our best banquet Sir.


To. Shall we give thank,?


Well. I have to the Gentlewoman already Sir.


Mar. Good Sir Roger keep that breath to cool your part o'th posset, you may
chance have a scalding zeal else: and you will needs be doing, pray tell
your twenty to your self. Would you could like this Sir?


Well. I would your Sister would like me as well Lady.


Mar. Sure Sir she would not eat you: but banish that imagination; she is only
wedded to herself, lies with herself, and lou^s herself; and for an other
husband then herself, he may knock at the gate, but nere come in: be wise
Sir, she is a woman, and a trouble, and has her many faults, the least of which
is, she cannot love you.


Abi. God pardon her, she will do worse, would I were worthy his least grief
Mistres Martha.


Well. Now I must ouer-heare her.


Mar. Faith would thou had them all withal my heart: I do^ not think they
would make thee a day older.


Abi. Sir will you put in deeper, it is the sweeter.


Mar. Well said old sayings.


Well. She looks like one indeed. Gentlewoman you keep your word, your sweet
self has made the bottom sweeter.


Abi. Sir I begin a frolic, dare you change Sir?


Well. My self for you, so please you. That smile has turned my stomach. This
is right the old Embleame of the Moyle cropping off thistles: Lord what a
hunting head she carries, sure she has been ridden with a Martingale. Now love
deliver me.


To. Do I dream, or do I wake? surely I know not: am I rubbed off? is this
the way of all my mornings prayers? Oh ^ger, thou art but grass, and woman as
a flower. Did I for this consume my quarters in meditation, vows, and wooed
her in Heroycall Epistles? Did I expound the Owl, and undertook, with labor
and expense the recollection of those thousand Pieces, consumed in Cellors and
Tobacco shops of that our honored Englishman Ni. Br.? Have I done this, and am
I done thus too? I will end with the Wiseman, and say, He that holds a woman,
has an Eele by the tail.


Ma. Sir, it is so late, and our entertainment (meaning our posset) by this is
grown so cold, that 'twere an unmannerly part longer to hold you from your
rest: let what the house has be at your command Sir.


Well. Sweet rest be with you Lady; and to you what you desire too.

Exeunt.
Abi. It should be some such good thing like your self then.


Well. Heaven keep me from that curse, and all my Issue. Good night Antiquity.


To. Solamen Miseris socios habuisse doloris: but I alone.


Well. Learned Sir, will you bid my man come to me? and requesting a greater
measure of your learning, good night, good Mr Roger.


To. Good Sir, peace be with you.

Exit To.
Well. Adue dear Domine. Half a dozen such in a Kingdom would make a man
forswear consession: for who that had but half his wits about him would
commit the counsel of a serious sin to such a cruel nightcap?

Why how now, shall we have an Antique?

Enter servant. Whose head do you carry upon your shoulders, that you jole it
so against the post? Is It for your ease? or have you seen the S^llor? Where
are my slippers sir?


Ser. Here Sir.


Well. Where Sir? have you got the pot verdugo? have you seen the horses Sir?


Ser. Yes Sir.


Well. Have they any meat?


Ser. Faith Sir they have a kind of wholesome rushes, hay I cannot call it.


Well. And no prouender?


Ser. Sir so I take it.


Well. You are merry Sir, and why so?


Ser. Faith Sir, here are no oats to be got, unless you will have vm in
porredge: the people are so mainely given to spoonemeate: yonder is a cast of
Coach-mares of the gentlewomans, the strangest Cattle.


Well. Why?


Ser. Why they are transpa^rant sir, you may see through them: and such a house?


Well. Come Sir, the truth of your discovery.


Ser. Sir they are in tribes like Jews: the Kitchen and the Dayrie make one
tribe, and have their faction and their fornication within themselves; the
Buttry and the Laundry are an other, and there is no love lost; the chambers are
entire, and what is done there, is somewhat higher then my knowledge; but this I
am sure, between these ^opulations, a stranger is kept virtuous, that is,
fasting. But of all this the drink Sir.


Well. What of that Sir?


Ser. Faith Sir I will handle it as the time and your patience will give me
leave. This drink, or this cooling Iulip, of which three spoonefuls kills the
Calenture, a pint breeds the cold Palsy.


Well. Si^ you belly the house.


Ser. I would I did Sir. But as I am a true man, if twere but one degree
colder, nothing but an asses hoof would hold it.


Well. I am glad on it Sir: for if it had proved stronger, you had been
tongue-tide of these commendations. Light me the candle Sir, I Will hear no more.

Exeunt.
Enter Young Louelesse and his Comrades, with wenches, and two Fydlers. Yo Lo.
Come my brave man of war, trace out thy darling,
And you my learned Council, set and turn boys
Kiss till the Cow come home, kiss close, kiss close knave s.
My modern Poet, thou shall kiss in couplets. Ent. with wine.
Strike up you merry varlets, and leave your peeping,
This is no pay for Fiddlers.

Cap. O my dear boy, thy Hercules, thy Captain
Makes thee his Hilas, his delight, his solace.
Love thy brave man of war, and let thy bounty
Clap him in Shamois: Let there be deductedd out of our maine potation
Five Marks in hatchments to adorn this thigh,
Crampt with this rest of peace, and I will fight
Thy battles.

Yo. Lo. Thou shall hau't boy, and sly in Fether, Lead on a march you Michers.

Ent. Sauill.
Sa. O my head, O my heart, what a noise and change is here; would I had been
cold ith mouth before this day, and nere have liud to see this dissolution. He
that lives within a mile of this place, had as good sleep in the perpetual
noise of an iron mill. There Is a dead Sea of drink ith Sellor, in which goodly
vessels lie wract, and in the middle of this deluge appears the tops of
^lagons and black iacks, like Churches drown ith marshes.


Yo. Lo. What art thou come? My sweet Sir Amias welcome to Troy. Come thou
shall kiss my Hellen, and court her in a dance.


Sa. Good Sir consider.


Yo. Lo. Shall we consider gentlemen. How say you?


Cap. Consider? that were a simple toy in faith, Consider? whose morrals that?
The man that cries Consider, is our foe: let my steel know him.


Young. Lo. Stay thy dead doing hand, he must not die yet: prithee be calm my
Hector.


Cap. Peasant, slave, thou groom, composde of grudgeings, live and thank this
Gentleman, thou had seen Pluto else. The next consider kil^ thee.


Tra. Let him drink down his word again in a gallon of Sack.


Po. It Is but a snuff, make it two gallons, and let him do it kneeling in
repentance.


Sa. Nay rather kill me, there is but a layman lost. Good Captain do your
office.


Yo. Lo. Thou shall drink Steward, drink and dance my Steward. Strike him a
horne-pipe (...), take thy striuer, and pace her till she stew.


Sa. Sure Sir I cannot dance with your Gentlewoman, they are too light for
me, pray break my head, and let me go.


Cap. He shall dance, he shall dance.


Young Lo. He shall dance, and drink, and be drunk and dance, and be
drunk again, and shall see no meat in a year.


Po. And three quarters.


Yo. Lo. And three quarters be it.


Cap. Who knocks there? let him in.


Enter Eld. Louelesse disguised. Sa. Some to deliver me I hope.


El. Lo. Gentlemen, God save you all, my business is to one Mr Louelesse.


Cap. This is the Gentleman you mean; view him, and take his Inuentory, he is
a right one.


El. Lo. He promises no less Sir.


Yo. Lo. Sir your business?


El. Lo. Sir, I should let you know, yet I am loath, yet I am sworn to it,
would some other tongue would speak it for me.


Yo. Lo. Out with it a Gods name.


El. Lo. All I desire Sir is, the patience and sufferance of a man, and good
Sir be not moved more,


Yo. Lo. Then a pottle of Sack will do, here is my hand, prithee thy
business?


El. Lo. Good Sir excuse me, and whatsoever you hear, think, must have been
known unto you, and be your self discreet; and bear it nobly.


Young. Lo. Prithee dispatch me.


El. Lo. Your brothers dead Sir.


Yo. Lo. Thou do not mean dead drunk?


El. Lo. No, no, dead and drowned at sea Sir.


Yo. Lo. Art sure he is dead?


El. Lo. Too sure Sir.


Yo. Lo I, but art thou very certainly sure of it?


El. Lo. As sure Sir as I tell it.


Yo. Lo. But art thou sure he came not up again?


El. Lo. He may come up, but nere to call you brother.


Yo. Lo. But art sure he had water enough to drown him?


Eld. Lo. Sure Sir he wanted none.


Young Lo. I would not have him want, I loved him better; here I forgive thee:
and ^aith bec plain, how do I bear it?


El. Lo. Very wisely Sir.


Yo. Lo. Fill him some wine. Thou do not see me moved, these transitory
toys nere trouble me, he is in a better place my friend, I know it. Some
fellows would have cried now, and have cursed thee, and fallen out with their
meat, and kept a pudder; but all this helps not, he was too good for us, and
let God keep him: there is the right use on it friend. Off with thy drink, thou
have a spice of sorrow makes thee dry: fill him another, Sauill, your Masters
dead, and who am I now Sauill? Nay, let us all bear it well, wipe, Sauill,
wipe, tears are but thrown away: we shall have wenches now, shall we not
Sauill? Drink to my friend Captain.


Sa. Yes Sir.


Yo. Lo. And drink inumerable.


Sa. Yes forsooth Sir.


Yo. Lo. And you will strain cursie and be drunk a little.


Sa. I would be glad, Sir, to do my weak endeavor.


Yo. Lo. You may be brought in time to love a wench too.


Sa. In time the sturdie Oak Sir.


Yo. Lo. Some more wine for my friend there.


El. Lo. I shall be drunk anon for my good news: but I have a loving brother,
that is my comfort.


Yo. Lo. Here Is to you sir, this is the worst I wish you for your news: and
if I had another elder brother, and say it were his chance to feed more
fishes, I should be still the same you see me now, a poor contented
Gentleman. More wine for my friend there, he is dry again.


El. Lo. I shall be if I follow this beginning. Well, my dear brother, if I
escape this drowning, it is your turn next to sink, you shall ducke twice
before I help you. Sir I cannot drink more, 'pray let me have your pardon.


Yo. Lo. O Lord sir, it is your modesty: more wine, give him a bigger glass;
hug him my Captain, thou shall be my chief mourner.


Cap. And this my pennon. Sir a full rouse to you, and to my Lo. of Land here.


El. Lou. I fecle a buzzing in my brains, pray God they bear this out, and
I Will nere trouble them so far again. Heers to you Sir.


Yo. Lo. To my dear Steward, down a your knees you in^del, you Pagan; be
drunk and penitent.


Sa. Forgive me Sir and i will be any thing.


Yo. Lo. Then be a Baude: I Will have thee a brave Baud.


El. Lo. Sir I must take my leave of you, my business is so urgent.


Yo. Lo: Lets have a bridling cast before you go. Fills a new stoop.


El. Lo. I dare not Sir by no means.


Yo. Lo. Have you any mind to a wench? I would feign gratify you for the
pains you took Sir.


El. Lo. As little as to the the other.


Yo. Lo. If you find any stirring, do but say so.


Eld. Lo. Sir you are too bounteous, when I find that itching, you shall
assuage it Sir before another: this only, and farewell Sir. Your brother when
the storm was most extreme, told all about him, he left a will, which lies
close behind a chimney in the matted chamber: and so as well Sir, as you have
made me able, I take my leave.


Young. Lo. Let us embrace him all: if you grow dry before you ^d your
business, pray take a bait here, I have a fresh hogshead for you.


Sa. You shall neither will nor choose sir. My Master is a wonderful fine
Gentleman has a fine state, a very sine state Sir, I am his steward Sir, and
his man.


El. Lo. Would you were your own Sir, as I left you. Well I must cast about,
or all sinks.


Sa. Farewell Gentleman, Gentleman. Gentleman.


El. Lo. What would you with me Sir?


Sa. Farewell Gentleman.


El. Lo. O sleep Sir, sleep.

Ex. El. Lo.
Yo. Lo. Well boys, you see what is fallen, lets in and drink, and give thanks
for it.


Cap. Let Us give thanks for it.


Yo Lo. Drunk as I live.


Sa. Drunk as I live boys.


Young Lo. Why now thou art able to discharge thine office, and cast up a
reckoning of some weight; I will be knighted, for my state will bear it, it is
sixteen hundred boys: off with your husks, I Will skin you all in satin.


Cap. O sweet Louelesse!


Sa. All in satin? O sweet Louelesse.


Yo. Lo. March in my Noble Compeeres: and this my Countess shall be led by
two: and so proceed we to the will.

Exeunt.
Enter Moorecraft the usurer, and Widow. Mo. And Widow, as I say be your own
friend: your husband left you wealthy, I and wise, continue so sweet duck,
continue so. Take heed of young smooth varlets, younger brothers, they are
worms that will eat through your bags: they are very lightning, that with a
slash or two will melt your money, and never singe your purse strings: they are
colts, wench, colts, headdy and dangerous, till we take vm up, and make vm fit
for bonds; look upon me, I have had, and have yet matter of moment gyrle,
matter of moment; you may meet with a worse back, I Will not commend it.


Wi. Nor I neither Sir.


Mo. Yet thus far by your favor widow, it is tuffe.


Wi. And therefore not for my diet, for I love a tender one.


Mo. Sweet widow leave your frumps, and be edified: you know my state, I sell
no Perspectiues, Scarses, Gloves, nor Hangers, nor put my trust in Shoo-ties:
and where your husband in an age was rising by burnt figs, dreg'd with meal
and powdered sugar, saunders and grains, wormeseed and rotten reasons, and
such vile tobacco, that made the footmen mangie; I in a year have put up
hundreds incios'd, my widow, those pleasant meadows, by a forfeit morgage:
for which the poor Knight takes a lone chamber, owes for his Ale, and dare nor
beat his Hostess: nay more --


Wi. Good Sir no more, what ere my husband was, I know what I am, and if you
marry me, you must bear i^ bravely off Sir.


Mo. Not with the head, sweet widow.


Wi. No, sweet sir, but with your shoulders: I must have you dubd, for under
that I will stoop a feather. My husband was a fellow loved to toil, feed
ill, made gain his exercise, and so grew costiue, which for I was his wife,
and gave way to, and spun mine own smocks course, and sir, so little; but let
that pass. Time, that wears all things out, wore out this hu^band, who in
penitence of such fruitless five years marriage, left me great with his
wealth, which if you will be a worthy gossip to, be knighted Sir.

Enter Sauill.
Mo. Now sir, from whom come you? whose man are you Sir?


Sa. Sir, I come from young Mr Louelesse.


Mo. Be silent sir, I have no money, not a penny for you, he is sunk, your
Master's sunk, a perished man sir.


Sa. Indeed his brother's sunk Sir, God be with him, a perished man indeed,
and drowned at Sea.


Mo. How said thou, good my friend, his brother drowned?


Sa. Untimely, Sir, at sea.


Mo. And thy young Master left sole heir?


Sa. Yes, Sir.


Mo. And he wants money?


Sa. Yes, and sent me to you; for he is now to be knighted.


Mo. Widow, be wise, there is more land coming, widow be very wise, and give
thanks for me widow.


Wi. B^ you very wise, and be knighted, and then give thanks for me Sir.


Sa. What says your Worship to this money?


Mo. I say, he may have money if he please.


Sa. A thousand Sir?


Mo. A thousand Sir, provided any wise Sir, his land lie for the payment,
otherwise --


Enter Young Louelesse and Comrades to them. Sa. He Is here himself Sir, and
can better tell you.


Mo. My notable dear friend, and worthy Mr Louelesse, and now right
worshipful, all joy and welcome.


Yo. Lo. Thanks to my dear incloser, Mr Moorecraft; prithee old Angel gold,
salute my family, I Will do as much for yours; this, and your own desires, fair
Gentlewoman.


Wi. And yours Sir, if you mean well; it is a hansome Gentleman.


Yo. Lo. Sirrah, my brothers dead.


Mo. Dead?


Young Lo. Dead, and by this time souc't for Ember week.


Mo. Dead?


Yo. Lo. Drowned, drowned at sea: Man, by the ne^t fresh Conger that comes we
shall hear more.


Mo. Now by the faith of my body it mooues me much.


Yo. Lo. What, will it thou be an Ass, and weep for the dead? why I thought
nothing but a general inundation would have moved thee: prithee be quiet, he
has left his land behind him.


Mo. O, has he so?


Yo. Lo. Yes faith, I thank him for it, I have all boy, have any ready money?


Mo. Will you sell Sir?


Yo. Lo. No not outright good Gripe; marry, a morgage, or such a slight
security.


Mo. I have no money Sir for morgage; If you will sell, and all or none, I^e
work a new Mine for you.


Sa. Good Sir look before you, he will work you out of all else: if you sell
all your Land, you have sold your Country, and then you must to sea to seek
your brother, and there lie pickled in a poudering tub, and break your teeth
with biskets and hard beef that must have watering Sir: and where is your 300.
pounds a year in drink then? I^ you'^e tun up the straights you may, for you
have no calling for drink there, but with a Cannon, nor no scoring but on your
ships sides, and then if you escape with life, and take a faggot boat, and a
bottle of Vsq^baugh, come home poo^e men, like a type o^ Theames Str^t stinking
of pitch and poor John. I cannot tell Sir, I would be ^th to s^ (...).


Cap. Steweard, you are an Ass, a measel'd mungrell, and were it not again
the peace of my sovereign f^iend here, I would break your forecasting
coxcombe, dog I would, even with thy s^affe of ^ffice there, thy pen and
Inkhorne. Noble boy, the god of gold here has sed thee well, take money for thy
(...): (...) and believe, thou art cold of cons^tion, thy seat vnhealthful,
sell and be wise; we are three that will adorn thee, and live according to
thine own heart child: mirth shall be only ou^s, and only ours shall be the
black eyde beauties of the time. Money makes men eternal.


Po. Do what you will, it is the noblest course, then you may live without the
charge of people, only we four will make a family, I and a^ age that shall
beget new Annals, in which I Will write thy life my son of pleasure, equal with
Nor^ or Cali^ula.


Yo. Lo. What mean they Captain?


Cap. Two roaring boys of Rome that made all split.


Yo. Lo. Come Sir, what dare you give?


Sa. You will not sell Sir?


Yo. Lo. Who told you so Sir?


Sa. Good Sir have a care.


Yo. Lo. Peace, or I Will tacke your tongue up to your roof. What money? speak.


Mo. Six thousand pound Sir.


Cap. Take it, h'as ouerbidden by the Sun: bind him to his bargain quickly.


Yo. Lo. Come, strike me luck with earnest, and draw the writings.


Mo. There Is a Gods penny for thee.


Sa. Sir, for my old Masters sake let my Farm be excepted, if I become his
tenant I am undone, my children beggars, and my wife God knows what: consider
me dear Sir.


Mo. I Will have all in or none.


Yo. Lo. All in, all in: dispatch the writings.

Ex. with Comr.
Wi. Go, thou art a pretty forehanded fellow, would thou were wiser.


Sa. Now do I sensibly begin to feel my self a rascal: would I could teach
a School, or beg, or lie well, I am utterly undone; now he that taught thee
to deceive and cosen, take thee to his mercy: so be it.

Exit Sauill.
Mo. Come widow, come, never stand upon a knighthood, it is a mere paper
honor, and not proof enough for a Sergeant. Come, come, I Will make thee --


Wi. To answer in short, it is this Sir, No knight, no widow: if you make me
any thing, it must be a Lady; and so I take my leave.


Mo. Farewell sweet widow, and think of it.

Exit ^id.
Wi. Sir I do more then think of it, it makes me dream sir.


Mo. She Is rich and sober, if this itch were from her: and say I be at charge
to pay the Footmen, and the Tru^pett, I and the Horsemen too, and be a Knight,
and she refuse me then: then am I hoyst into the Subsidy, and so by consequence
should prove a Coxcombe: I Will have a care of that. Six thousand pound, and then
the Land is mine, there is some refreshing yet.

Exit.
Finis Actus secundi.
Actus 3.
Scaena prima.
Enter Abigall. Abi. IF he but follow me, as all my hopes tells me he is man
enough, up go^s my rest, and I know I shall draw him.

Enter Welford.
Well. This is the strangest pamperd piece of flesh toward fifty, that ever
frailty cop't withal, what a trim Lenuoy here she has put upon me: these
women are a proud kind of cattle, and love this whoreson doing so directly,
that they will not stick to make their very skins Bawdes to their flesh.
Here Is dogskin and storax sufficient to kill a H^ke: what to do with it, beside
nayling it up amongst Irish heads of Teere, to show the mightines of her palm,
I know not: there she is, I must enter into Dialogue. Lady you have lost your
glove.


Abi. Not Sir if you have found it.


Well. It was my meaning Lady to restore it.


Abi. 'Twill be vnciuell in me to take back a favor, Fortune has so well
bestowed Sir, 'pray wear it for me.


Well. I had rather wear a Bell. But hark you Mistrisse, What hidden virtue is
there in this glove, that you would have me wear it? Is It good aganst sore
eyes, or will it charm the toothake? Or these red tops, being steept in white
wine soluble, will it kill the itch? or h'as it so conceald a providence to keep
my hand from bo^ds? If it have none of these, and prove no more but a bare
glove of half a crown a pair, twill be but half a courtesy, I wear two
always: faith let us draw cuts, one will do me no pleasure.


Abi. The tenderness of his years keeps him as yet in ignorance: he is a
well molded fellow, and I wonder his blood should stir no higher; but (...)
his want of company: I must grow nearer to him.

Enter El. Louelesse disguised.
El. Lo. God save you both.


Abi. And pardon you Sir: this is somewhat rude, how came you hither?


El. Lo. Why through the doors, they are open.


Well. What are you? and what business have you here?


El Lo. More I believe then you have.


Abi. Who would this fellow speak with? Art thou sober?


Eld. Lo Y^s, I come not here to sleep.


Well. Prithee what a^t thou?


El. Lo. As much (gay man) as thou art, I am a Gentleman.


Well. Art thou no more?


El Lo. Yes, more then thou dare be, a So^ldier.


Abi. Thou do not come to quarrel?


El. Lo. No, not with weomen; I come to speak here with a Gentlewoman.


Abi. Why I am one.


El. Lo. But no^ with one so gentle.


Well. This is a fine fellow.


El. Lo. Sir I am not fine yet, I am but new come over, direct me with your
ticket to your Tailor, and then I shall be fine Sir. Lady, if there be a
better of your sex within this house, say I would see her.


Abi. Why am not I good enough for you Sir?


El. Lo. Your way you will be too good, 'pray and my business. This is another
Su^er: O srayle woman.


Well. This fellow with his bluntnes hopes to do more then the long suites of a
thousand could: though he be sour he is quick I must not trust him. Sir, this
Lady is not to speak with you, she is more serious: you smell as if you were
new ralkt; go and be hansome, and then you may sit with her Seruingmen.


El. Lo. What are you Sir?


Well. Guess by my outside.


El. Lo. Then I take you Sir for some new silken thing weaned from the
country, that shall (when you come to keep good company) be beaten into
better manners. 'Pray good proud Gentlewoman help me to your Mistres.


Abi. How many lives have thou, that thon talk thus rud^ly?


El Lo. But one, I am neither cat nor woman.


Well. And will that one life Sir maintain you ever in such bold sauciness?


El. Lo. Yes amongst a nation of such men as you are, and be no worse for
wearing Shall I speak with this Lady?


Abi. No by my troth shall not you.


El. Lo. I must stay here then.


Well. That you shall not neither.


El. Lo. Good fine thing tell me why.


Well. Good angry thing I Will tell you:
This is no place for such companions,
Such lousie Gentlemen shall find their business
Better in the the Suburbs; there your strong pitch persume,
Mingled with lees of Ale, shall re^ke in fashion:
This is no Thames street Sir.

Abi. This Gentleman informs you truly:
Prithee be satisfied, and seek the Suburbs,
Good Captain, or whateuer title else,
The warlike Eelcboats have bestowed upon thee,
Go and resorme thy self: prithee be sweeter,
And know my Lady speaks with no such swabbers.

El. Lo. You cannot talk me out with your tradition
Of wit you pick from plays, go too, I have found ye:
And for you, tender Sir, whose gentle blood
Runs in your nose, and makes you snuff at all
But three pil'd people, I do let you know,
He that be got your worships satin suit,
Can make no men Sir: I will see this Lady,
And with the reverence of your silkenship,
In these old Ornaments.

Well. You will not sure.


El. Lo. Sure Sir I shall.


Abi. You would be beaten out.


El. Lo. Indeed I would not, or if I would beaten,
Pray who shall beat me? this good Gentleman
Looks as he were o'th peace.

Well. Sir you shall see that: will you get you out?


El. Lo. Yes, that, that shall correct your boys tongue,
Dare you fight? I will stay here st^ll.

Abi. O their things are out, help, help for Gods sake,
Maddam; Jesus they foyne at one another,
Maddam, why who is within there? Enter Lady.

La. Who breeds this rudenes?


Well. This uncivil sellow:
He says he comes from sea, where I believe
H'as purged away his manners.

La. What of him?


Well. Why he will rudely, without once God bless you,
Press to your priuacies, and no de^all
Must stand betwixt your person and his business;
I let go his ill language.

La. Sir, have you ^usinesse with me?


El. Lou. Maddame some I have,
But not so serious to (...) my life for it:
If you keep this qua^ter, and maintain about you
Such Knights o'th Sun (...) this is, to defy
Men of (...) ye, you may live,
But in what some?

La. Pray stay Sir, who h'as wronged you?


(...). Lo. Wrong me he cannot, though uncivilly
He (...) his wild words at me: But to you
I think he did no honor, to deny
The haste I come withal, a passage to you,
Though I seem course.

La. Excuse me, gentle (...), it was from my knowledge,
And shall have no protection. And to you Sir,
You have showed more heat then wit, and from your self
Have borrowed power, I never gave you here,
To do these wild unmanly things: my house
Is no blind street to swagger in: and my favors
Not doting yet on your unknown deserts
So far, that I should make you Master of my business:
My credit yet, stands fayrer with the people
Then to be tried with swords: And they that come
To do meseruice, must not think to win me
With hazard of a murder: If your love
Consist in fury, carry it to the Camp,
And there in honor of some common mistres,
Shorten your youth. I pray be better temperd,
And give me leave a while Sir.

Well. You must have it.

Exit Welford.
La. Now Sir, your business?


El. Lo. First I thank you for schooling this young fellow,
Whom his own follies, which is prone enough
Daily to fall into, if you but frown,
Shall level him away to his repentance:
Next I should rail at you, but you are a woman,
And anger lost upon you.

La. Why at me Sir?
I never did you vvrong, for to my knowledge
This is the first sight of you.

El. Lo. You have done that,
I must confess I have the least curse in,
Because the least acquaintance: But there be
(If there be honor in the minds of men)
Thousands, when they shall know what I deliver,
(As all good men must share (...)) will to sham^
Blast your black memory.

La. How is this good Sir?


El. Lo. It Is that, that if you have a soul will choke it:
You Have killed a Gentleman:

La. I killed a Gentleman?


El. Lo. You and your cruelty have killed (...) woman;
And such a man (let me be angry in it)
Whose least vvorth vvaighed above all vveomens virtues
That are, I spare you all to come too: guess him now.

La. I am so innocent I cannot Sir.


El. Lo. Repen^ you mean: you are a perfect woman,
And as the first was, made for man's undoing.

La. Sir you have mist your way, I am not she.


El Lo. Would he had mist his way too, though he had
VVandered farther (...) vveomen are ill spoken of,
So he had (...) this misery, you Lady.

La How do you do Sir?


El. Lo. (...) I hope,
While I can keep my self from such temptations.

La. Pray leap into this matter, whither would ye?


El. Lo. You had a Servant that your peenishnes
Enjoined to travel.

La. Such a one I have
(...), and should be grieved 'twere otherwise.

El. Lo. Then have your asking, and be grieved, he is dead;
How you will answer for his worth I know not,
But this I am sure, either he, or you, or both
Were stark mad, else he might have lived
To have given a stronger testimony toth' world
Of what he might have been. He was a man
I knew but in his evening: ten Suns after,
(...) by a tyrant storm our beaten bark
Bulg'd under us; in which sad parting blow,
He called upon his Saint, but not for life,
On you unhappy woman; and whilst all
Sought to preserve their souls, he desperately
Embraced a wave, crying to all that see it,
If any live, go to my Fate, that forced me
To this untimely end, and make her happy:
His name was Louelesse: And I escaped the storm.
And now you have my business.

La. It Is too much.
Would I had been that storm, he had not perished.
If you will rail now I will forgiu^ you Sir,
Or if you will call in more, if any more
Come from this ruin, I shall justly suffer
What they can say: I do confess my self
A guilty cause in this. I would say more,
But grief is grown to great to be delivered.

El. Lo. I like this well: these weomen are strange things.
It Is somewhat of the latest now to weep,
You should have wept when he was going from you,
And chained him with those tears at home.

La. Would you had told me then so, these two arms had been his Sea.


Eld. Lo. Trust me you move me much: but say he lived, these were forgotten
things again.


La. I, say you so? Sure I should know that voice: this is kna^uery. I Will fit
you for it: Were h^ living sir, I would persuade you to be charitable, I, and
confess we are not all so ill as your opinion holds us. O my friend, what
penance shall I pull upon my fault, upon my most unworthy self for this?


El. Lo. Leave to love others, 'twas some jealousy
That turned him desperate.

La. I Will be with you straight: are you wrung there?


El. Lo. This works amain upon her.


La. I doc confess there is a Gentleman
H'as borne me long good will.

E. Lo. I do not like that.


La. And vowed a thousand services to me; to me, regardlesse of him: But since
Fate, that no power can withstand, h'as taken from me my first and best Love,
and to weep away my youth is a mere folly: I will show you what I determine
sir: you shall know all: Call Mr. Welford there: That Gentleman I mean to make
the model of my Fortunes, and in his chaste embraces keep alive the memory of
my lost lovely Louelesse: he is somewhat like him too.


El. Lo. Then you can Love?


La. Yes certain sir.

Though it please you to think me hard and cruel,
I hope I shall persuade you otherwise.

El. Lo. I have made my self (...) fool.

Ent. Welford.
Well. Would you have spoke with me Maddame?


La. Yes Mr. Welford, and I ask your pardon before this gentleman, for being
froward: This kiss, and henceforth more affection.


El. Lo. So, it is better I were drowned indeed.


Well. This is a sudden passion, God hold it.
This fellow out of his fear sure has
Persuaded her, I Will give him a new suit on it.

La. A parting kiss: and good Sir let me pray you
To wait me in the Gallerie.

Well. I am in another world. Maddame where you please.

Ex. W.
El. Lo I will to Sea, an't shall go hard but I Will be drowned indeed.


La. Now Sir you see I am no such hard creature,
But time may win me.

El Lo. You have forgot your lost Love,


La Alas Sir, what would you have me do? I cannot call him back again with
sorrow; I Will love this man as dearly, and beshrow me, I Will keep him far
enough from sea: and it was told me, now I remember me, by an old wise woman,
that my first Love should be drowned: and see It Is come about.


El Lo. I would she had told you your second should be hanged to, and let that
Come about: but this is very strange.


La. Faith Sir, consider all, and then I know you will be of my mind: if (...)
would redeem him, I would weep still.


El Lo. But say that I we^e Louelesse,
And escaped the storm, how would you answer this?

La. Why for that Gentleman I would leave all the world.


El. Lo. This young thing too?


La That young thing too,
Or any young thing else: why I would lose my stare.

El. Lo. Why then he lives still, I am he, your Louelesse.


La. A as I knew it S^r, and for that purpose prepared this Pageant: get you to
your task. And leave these Players tricks, or I shall leave you, indeed I
shall. Travel, or know me not.


El. Lo. Will you then marry?


La. I will not promise, take your choice. Farewell.


El. Lo. There is no ^er Purgatory but a woman.
I must do something.
Exit Louelesse.
Well. Mistres I am (...)

Enter Welford.
La. You are indeed.


Well. You have so ouerioyed me Lady.


La. Take heed you surfeit not, pray fast and welcome.


Well. By this light you love me extremely.


La By this, and tomorrowes light, I care not for you.


Well. Come, come, you cannot hide it.


La. Indeed I c^n, ^here you shall never find it.


Well. I like this mirth well Lady


La. ^ou shall have more on it.


Well. I must kiss you.


La No fir.


Well. Indeed I must.


La. What must be, must be; I Will take my leave, you have your parting blow: I
pray commend me to those few friends you have, that sent you hi^er, and tell
them, when you (...) next, 'twere fit you brought less bravery with you, and
more wit, you will never get a wise else.


Well. Are you in earnest?


La. Yes says. Will you eat sir? your horses will be ready straight, you shall
have a ^apkin laid in the buttery for ye.


Well. Do not you love me then?


La. Yes, for tha^ face.


Well. It is a good one Lady.


La. Yes, if it were not warpt, the fire in time may mend it.


Well. Me thinks yours is none of the best Lady.


La. No by my troth Sir: yet of my conscience,
You could make shift with it.

Well. Come, 'pray no more of this.


La. I will not: Fare you well. Ho, who is within there? bring out the
Gentleman's hor^es, he is in haste; and set some cold meat on the table.


Well. I have too much of that, I thank you Lady: take your Chamber when you
please, there goes a black one with you Lady.


La. Farewell young man.

Exit Lady.
Well. You have made me one. Farewell: and may the curse of a great house fall
upon thee, I mean the Butler. The D^uell and all h^s works are in these women:
would all of my sex were of my mind, I would make vm a new Lent, and a long
one, that flesh might be in more reverence with them.

Enter Abigall to him.
Abi. I am sorry Mr. Welford.


Well. So am I, that you are here.


Abi. How does my Lady use you?


Well As I would use you, scuruily.


Abi. I should have been more kind Sir.


Well. I should have been undone then. 'Pray leave me, and look to your sweet
meats: hark, your Lady calls.


Abi. Sir I shall borrow so much time without offending.


Well. You Are nothing but offense: for Gods love leave me.


Abi. It Is strange ^y Lady should be such a tyrant.


Well. To send you to me. 'Pray go stitch, good do, you are more trouble to me
then a Term.


Abi. I do not know how my good will, if I said love I lied not, should any
way deserve this.


Well. A thousand ways, a thousand ways: sweet creature let me depart in peace.


Abi. What creature Sir? I hope I am a woman.


Well. A hundred I think by your noise.


Abi. Since you are angry sir, I am bold to tell you, that I am a woman, and a
ribbe.


Well. Of a roasted horse.


Abi. Conster me that.


Well. A Dog can do it better. Farewell Countess, and commend me to your
Lady: tell her she is proud, and scuruy; and so I commit you both to your
tempter.


Abi. Sweet Mr. Welford.


Well. Avoid old Satanus: Go daube your ruins, your face looks fowler then
a storm: the footcman stays you in the Lobby Lady.


Abi. If you were a Gentleman I should know it by your gentle conditions? are
these fit words to give a gentlewoman?


Well. As fit as they were made for ye: Sirrah, my horses. Farewell old Adage,
keep your nose warm, the Reume will make it horn else.

Ex. Well.
Abi. The blessings of a prodigal young heir be thy companions Welforde,
Marry come up my gentleman, are your gummes grown so tender they cannot bite?
A skittish Filly will be your fortune Welford, and fair enough for such a
packsaddle. And I doubt not, (if my aim hold) to see her made to amable to
your hand.

Ex. Abigal.
Enter Yo. Louelesse and Comrades, Moorcraft, Widow, Sauil, and therest. Cap.
Save thy brave shoulder, my young puissant Knight, and may thy back-sword bite
them to the bone, that love thee not: thou art an errant man, go on. The
circumcisde shall fall by theeLet land and labor fill the man that tils, thy
sword must be thy plough, and Jove it speed. Mecha shall sweat, and Mahomet
shall fall, and thy dear name fill up his monument.


Yo. Lo. It shall Captain, I mean to be a worthy.


Cap. One worthy is too little, thou shall be all.


Mo. Captain I shall deserve some of your love too.


Cap. Thou shall have heart and hand to noble Mooreraft, if thou will lend me
money. I am a man of Garrison, be ruled, and open to me those infernal gates,
whence none of thy evil angels pass again, and I will style thee Noble; nay
Don Diego, I Will woe thy Infanta for thee, and my Knight shall feast her with
high meats, and make her apt.


Mo. Pardon me Captain, you are beside my meaning.


Yo Lo. No Mr. Moorecraft, it is the Captains meaning
I should prepare her for ye.

Cap. Or provoke her. Speak my modern man, I say pro^oke her.


Po. Captain I say so too, or stir her to it. So says the Critics.


Yo. Lo. But howsoever you expound it Sir, she is very welcome, and this shall
serve for witness. And widow, since you are come so happily, you shall deliver
up the keys, and free possession of this house; whilst I stand by to ratify.


Wi. I had rather give it back again believe me,
It Is a misery to say you had it. Take heed.

Yo. Lo. It Is past that widow, come, sit down; some wine there: there is a
scur^y banquet if we had it. All this fair house is yours Sir. Sauill.


Sa. Yes Sir.


Yo. Lo. Are your keys ready, I must ease your burden.


Sa. I am ready Sir to be undone, when you shall call me to it.


Yo. Lo. Come come, thou shall live better.


Sa. I shall have less to do, that's all, there is half a dozen of my friends
ith fields, sunning against a bank, with half a breech among vm, I shall be
with vm shortly. The care and continual vexation of being rich eat up this
rascal. What shall become of my poor family? they are no sheep, and they
must keep themselves.


Yo. Lo. Drink Mr. Moorecraft, pray be merry all:
Nay and you willl not drink there is no society.
Captain speak loud, and drink: widow a word.

Cap. Expound her thoroughly Knight. Here God a gold, here is to thy fair
possessions: Be a Barron, and a bold one: leave off your tickling of young
heirs like trouts, and, let thy chimneys smoke. Feed men of war, live and be
honest, and be saved yet.


Mo. I thank you worthy Captain for your counsel. You keep your chimneys
smoking there, your nostrels, and when you can, you feed a man of war: this
makes not you a Barron, but a bareone: and how or when you shall be saved, let
the clarke o'th company (you have commanded) have a just care of.


Poet. The man is much is much moved. Be not angry Sir, but as the Poet sings;
Let your displeasure be a short fury, and go out. You have spoke home, and
bitterly, to me Sir? Captain take truce the Miser is a tart and a witty whoreson.


Cap. Poet you feign perdie, the wit-of this man lies in his fingers ends, he
must tell al: his tongue fills but his mouth like a nearstongne, and only
serves to lick his hungry chaps after a purchase: his brains and brimstone are
the Devils diet to a fat vserers head. To her Knight, to her: clap her abourd
and stow her. Where Is the brave Steward?


Sa. Here Is your poor friend, and Sauil Sir.


Cap. A way, thou art rich in ornaments of nature. First in thy face, thou have a
serious face, a betting, bargaining, and saving face, (...) face, pawn it to
the Usurer; a face to kindle the compassion of the most ignorant and frozen
Justice.


Sa. It Is such, I dare not show it shortly sir.


Cap. By blithe and bonny Steward: Master Moorecraft, Drink to this man of
reckoning.


Mo. Here Is e'ne to him.


Sa. The Devil guide it downward: would there were in it an acre of the great
broom field he bought, to sweep your durty conscience, or to choke ye, it is
all one to me Usurer.


Young. Lo. Consider what I told you, you are young, unapt for worldly business:
Is it fit one of such tenderness, so delicate, so contrary to things of care,
should stir and break her better m^ ditations, in the bare brokage of a
brace of Angels? or a new kirtell, though it be of satin? Eat by the hope of
surfets, and lie down only in expectation of a morrow that may undo some
easy har- ted fool, or reach a widows curses? Let out money, whose use
returns the principal? and get out of these troubles, a consuming heir: For
such a one must follow necessary, you shall die hated, if not old and
miserable; and that possessed wealth that you got with pining, live to see
tumbled to another hands, that is no more akin to you, then you to his
cosenage.


Wi. Sir you speak well, would God that charity had first begun here.


Yo. Lo. It Is yet time. Be merry, me thinks you want wine there, there is more
in the house: Captain, where rests the health?


Cap. It shall go round boy?


Yo. Lo Say you can suffer this, because the end points at much profit, can you
so far bow below your blood, below your too much bewty, to be a partner of
this fellows bed, and lie with his diseases? If you can, I will not press you
further: yet look upon him: there is nothing in that hide-bound Usurer; that man
of mat, that all d^ai'd, but aches: for you to love, unless his peris^t lungs
his dry cough, or his scuruy. This is truth, and so far I dare speak yet: he
has yet past cure of Physic, spaw, or any diet, a primative pox in his bones;
and a' my knowledge he has been ten times rowell'd: ye may love him; he had
a basta^d, his own toward issue, whipped, and then cropped for washing out the
roses, in three farthings to make vm pence.


Wi I do not like these Morrals.


Yo Lo. You must not like him then.

Ent. Eld. Louelesse.
Eld Lo. B^ your leave Gentlemen.


Yo. Lo. By my troth Sir you are welcome, welcome faith: Lord what a stranger
you are grown; pray know this Gentlewoman, and ^f you please these friends
here: We are merry, you see the worst on's: your house has been kept vvarme Sir:


El. Lo. I am glad to hear it brother, pray God you are wise too.


Yo. Lo. Pray Mr. Moorecraft know my elder brother, and Cap^ine do your
complement. Sauil, I dare svvere is glad at heart (...) you: Lord, we heard Sir
you were droun'd at Sea, and see how luckely things come about?


Mo. This money must be paid again Sir?


Yo L.o No Sir, pray keep the sale, t'wil make good Taylers measures? I am
well I thank you.


Wi. By my troth the Gentleman has stewed him in his own sauce, I shall love
^im fort.


Sa I know not where I am, I am so glad: your worship is the welcom'st man
alive; upon my knees I bid you welcome home: here ha^ been such a hu^y, such a
din, such dismal d^king, swearing, and whoring, 'thas almost made me mad: We
hauc al hu'd in a continual Turneball street; Sir blessed be Heaven, that sent
you safe again. Now shall I eat and go to bed again.


El Lo Brother dismiss these people.


Young L. Captain be gone a while, meet me at my ol^ Randeuouse in the
evening, take your small Poet with you Mr. Moorecraft, you we^e ^st go prattle
with your learned Counsel, I shall preser^ your mon^y. I was cosen'd when time
was, we are quit Sir.


Wi. B tter and better still:


Yo. Lo. What is this fellow brother?


Yo. Lo. The thirsty Usurer that supt my Land off:


El. Lo. What does he (...) for?


Yo. Lo. Sir to b Landlord of your house and state: I was hold to make a
little sale Sir.


Mo. A^ Iouer-reacht? if there be law, I Will hamper ye.


El. Lo. Pre^hee be gone, and ra^e at home, thou art so base (...) fool I
cannot laugh at thee (...), (...) c^mes of c^usening, home and spare, cate
(...) til you raise your sums again. I^ you stir far in this, I Will have you
whipped, your ears nayl'd for intelligencing, o'th pillory, and your goods
forfeit: you are a stale Cousener, leave my house: no more.


Mo. A pox upon your house. Come Widow, I shall yet hamper this young
gamester.


Wi Good twelve (...) hundred keep your way, I am not for your diet: marry in
your own Tribe Iow, and get a Brokes.


Yo. Lo. It Is well said widow: will you jogge on Sir?


Mo. Yes, I will go, but it is no matter whither:
But when I trust a wild fool, and a woman,
May I lend gratis, and build Hospitals.

Yo Lo. Nay good sir make all even, here is a widow wants your good word for
me: she is rich, and may renew me and my Fortunes.


El. Lo. I am glad you look before you. Gentlewoman, here is a poor
distressed younger brother.


Wi. You do him wrong Sir, he is a Knight.


El. Lo. I ask your mercy: yet it is no matter, his Knighthood is no
inheritance I take it: whatsoever he is, he is your servant, or would be Lady.
Faith be not merciless, but make a man; he is young and hansome, though he be
my brother, and his obseruances may deserve your love: he shall not fall for
means.


Wi. Sir, you speak like a worthy brother: and so much I do cerdit your fair
language, that I shall love your brother: and so love him, but I shall blush to
say more.


El. Lo. Stop her mouth. I hope you shall not live to know that hour when this
shall be repented. Now brother I should chide, but I Will give no distaste to your
fair Mistrisse, I will instruct her in it, and she shall do it: you hau^ bin
wild, and ignorant, 'pray mend it.


Yo. Lo. Sir every day now sp^ng comes on.


El. Lo. To you, good Mr. Sauill, and your Office, thus much I have to say:
You Are from my Steward become, first your own Drunkard, then his Bawd: they
say you are excellent grown in both, and perfect: give me your keys Sir Sauill.


Sa. Good Sir consider who you left me too.


El. Lo. I left you as a curb for, not to provoke my brothers follies: Where Is
the best drink now? come, tell me Sauill: where is the soundest whores? Ye old
he Goat, ye dried Ape, ye lamestallion, must you be leading in my house your
whores, like Fayries dance their night rounds, without fear either of King or
Constable, within my walls? Are all my Hangings safe? my sheep unsold yet? I
hope my Plate is current, I have too much on it. What say you to 300. ponnds in
drink now?


Sa. Good Sir forgive me, and but hear me speak.


El. Lo. Me thinks thou should be drunk still, and not speak, it is the more
par^onable.


Sa. I will sir, if you will have it so.


El. Lo. I thank ye; yes e'ne pursue it Sir: do you hear? get a whore soon
for your recreation: go loo^e out Captain Brokenbreech your fellow, and
quarrel, if you date: I shall deliver these k^yes to one shall have more
honesty, though not so much fine wit Sir. Ye may walk and gather Cresses sir
to cool your liver; there is something for you to begin a diet, you^ have the
pox else. Speed you well, Sir Sauill: you may ^ate at my house to prescrue
life; but keep no fornications in the stables.

Ex. omnes pre. Sauill.
Sa. Now must I hang my self, my friends will look for it. Eating and
sleeping, I do despise you b^th now: I will run mad first, and if that get
not pity, I Will drown my self, to a most dismal ditty. Exit Sauill.


Finis Actus tertij.
Actus 4.
Scaena prima.
Enter Abigall s^lus. Abi. A Less poor Gentlewoman, to what a misery has age
brought thee to? to what scuruy Fortune? thou that have been a companion for
Noble men, and at the worst of those times for Gentlemen: now like a broken
Seruingman, must beg for favor to those that would have crawled like
Pilgrims to my chamber, hut for an apperition of me: you that be coming on,
make much of fifteen, and so till five and twenty: use your time with
reverence, that your profit may arise: it will not tarry with you Ec^e si^num:
here was a face, but time that like a su^set eats our youth, plague of his
Iron teeth, and draw vm for it, h'as been a little bolder here then vvelcome:
and now to say the truth I am fit for no man. Old men in(...) house, of fifty,
call me Granam; and when they are drunk, e'ene then, when Ione and my Lady
are all one, not one will do me reason. My little L^uite has forsaken me,
his silver sound of Cytterne quite abolish't, his doleful hymmes under my
chamber vvindow, digested into tedious learning: well fool, you leap't a
Haddock when you left him: he is a clean man, and a good Ed^fier, and twenty
nobles is his state de Claro, besides his pigges in posse. To this good
Homilist I have been ever stubborn, which God forgive me for, and mend my
manners: and Love, if ever thou had care of forty, of such a piece of lape
ground, hear my prayer, and fire his zeal so far forth that my faults, in
this renewed impressi^ of my love, may show corrected to our gentle Reader.
Enter Roger.

See how neglectingly he passes by me: with what an Equipage Canonical, as
though he had broke the heart of Bellarmine, or added some thing to the singing
Brethren. It Is scorn, I know it, and dese^ue it. Mr. Rogor.


To. Fair Gentlewoman, my name is Roger.


Abi. Then gentle Roger.


To. Ungentle Abigall.


Abi. Why Mr. Reger will you set your wit to a weak woman's.


To. You are weak indeed: for so the Poet sings.


Abi. I do confess my weakness sweet Sir Roger.


To. Good my Ladies Gentlewoman, or my ^ood Ladies Gentlewoman (this trope is
lost to you now) leave your prating, you have a season of your first Mother in
ye: and surely had the devil been in love, he had been abused too, go
Dalid^; you make men fools, and wear fig breeches.


Abi. Well, well, hard hearted man; dilate upon the weak infirmities of
w^men: these are fit texts: but ^ce there was a time, would I had never seen
those eyes, those eyes, those orient eyes.


To. I they were pearls once with you.


Abi. Saving your reverence Sir, so they are still.


To. Nay, nay, I do beseech you leave your cogging, what they ate, they are,
they serve me without Spectacles I thank vm,


Abi. O will you kill me?


To. I do not think I can,
You Are like a Coppy-hold with nine lives in it.

Abi. You were wont to bear a Christian fear about you:
For your own Worships sake.

To. I was a Christian fool then: Do you remember what a dance you led me?
how I grew quaum'd in love, and was a dunce? could expound but once a quarter,
and then was out too: and then at prayers once (out of the stinking stir you
put me in) I praid for mine own royal issue. You do remember all this?


Abi. O be as then you were.


To. I thank you for it; surely I vvil be wiser Abigall: and as the Ethnic
Poet sings, I will not loose my oil and labor too. You Are for the worshipful I
take it Abigall.


Abi. O take it so, and then I am for thee.


To. I like these tears well, and this humbling also, they are Symptoms of
contrition, as a Father says. If I should fall into my fit again, would you
not shake me into a quotidian Coxcombe? Would you not use me scuruily again,
and give me possets with purging comsets in it? I tell thee Gentlewoman, thou
have been harder to me then a long chapter with a pedigree.


Abi. O Curate cure me: I will love thee better, dearer, longer, I will do
anything, betray the secrets of the maine household to thy reformation. My
Lady shall look lovely on thy learning; and when true time shall point thee
for a Parson, I will ennuert thy eggs to penny custards, and thy tithe goose
shall grase and multiply.


To. I am mollified: as well shall testify this faithful kiss: and have a great
care Mistres, Abigall, how you depresse the spirit any more with your rebukes
and monks: for certainly the edge of such a folly cuts it self.


Abi. O sir you have pierst me through. Here I vow a recantation to those
malicious faults I ever did against you. Never more will I despise your
learning never more pin cards and cunny tails upon your Cassock, never again
reproach your reverend nightcap, and call it by the mangie name of murrin, never
your reverend person more, and say, you look like one of Baals Priests a
hanging; never again, when you say grace, laugh at you, no^ put you out at
prayers: never crampe you more with the great Book of Martyrs; nor when you
ride, get soap and thistles for you. No my Roger, these faults shall be
corrected and amended, as by the tenor of my tears appears.


To. Now cannot I hold if I should be hanged, I must cry to. Come to thine
own beloved, and do even what thou will withme, sweet, sweet, Abi. I am thine
own for ^uer: heers my hand, when To. proves a recreant, hang him in the
Bel-ropes. Ent. La. and Mar.


La. Why how now Mr. Roger, no prayers down with you to night? did you hear
the bell ring? You are courting, your slock shall fat well for it.


To. I humbly ask your pardon: I Will clap up Prayers (but staic a little) and
be with you again.

Ex. Roger. Ent. El. Lo.
La. How dare you being so unworthy a Fellow,
Presume to come to move me any more?

El. Lo. Ha, ha, ha.


La. What ailes the fellow.


Eld. Lo. The fellow comes to laugh at you. I tell you Lady, I would not for
your Land, be such a Coxecome, such a whining Ass, as you decreed me for when
I was last here.


La. I joy to hear you are wise Sir, it is a rare Jewel
In an elder Brother: pray be wiser yet.

El. Lo. Me thinks I am very wise: I do not come a woeing;
Indeed I Will move no more love to your Ladyship.

La. What make you here then?


El. Lo. Only to see you, and be merry Lady: that's all my business. Faith
lets be very merry. Where Is little Roger? he is a good fellow: an hour or two
well spent in wholesome mirth is worth a thousand of these puling passions. It Is
an ill world for Lovers.


La. They were never fewer.


El. Lo. I thank God there is one less for me Lady.


La. You were never any Sir.


El. Lo. Till now; and now, I am the prettiest fellow.


La. You talk like a Tailor Sir.


El. Lo. Me thinks your faces are no such fine things now.


La. Why did you tell me you were wise. Lord what a lying age is this, where
will you mend these faces?


El. Lo. A hogs face soust is worth a hundred of vm.


La. Sure you had some Sow to your Mother.


El. Lo. She brought such fine white pigs as you: fit for none but Parsons
Lady.


La. It Is well you will allow us our Clergy yet.


El. Lo. That shall not save you. O that I were in love again with a wish.


La. By this light you are a scuruy fellow, pray be gone.


El. Lo. You know I am a clean skind man.


La. Do I know it?


El. Lo. Come, come, you would know it; that's as good: but not a snap, never
long for it, not a snap dea^e Lady.


La. Hark ye Sir, ha^ke ve, get ye to the Suburbs, there is horseflesh for such
hounds: will you go Sir?


El. lo. Lord, how I l^u'd this woman, how I worshipped this pretty calfe with
the white face here: as I live, you were the prettiest fool to play withal,
the wittiest little varlet, it would talk: Lord how it talk^; and when I
angered it, it would cry out, and scratch, and eat no meat, and yet would say,
Go hang.


La. It will say so still, if you anger it.


El. lo. And when I asked it, if it would be married, it sent me of an errant
into France: and would abuse me, and be gladi^ it did so.


La. Sir, this is most unmanly, 'pray begone.


El. Lo. And tw^e (even when it twitterd to be a^ me) I was vnha^some.


La. Have you no manners in you?


El. Lo. And say my back was melted, when the gods knows (...) kept it at a
change: Feure Flaunders Mares would have been easier to me, and a Fencer.


La. You think all this is true now.


El. Lo. Faith whether it be or no, it is too good for you.
But so much for our mirth: Now have at you in earnest.

La. There is enough Sir, I desire no (...).


El. lo. Yes faith, we will have a cast at your best parts now,
And ^en the devil take the worst.

La. Pray Sir ^o more, I am not much affected with your com^dations: it is almost
dinner, I know they stay you at the Ordinary.


El. lo. E'^ne a short Grace, and then I am gone: You are a woman, and the
prou^st that ever loved a C^ach: the scornfull^st, scuru^t, and most (...)
woman; the greediest to be praised, and never moved, though it be gro^e and
open; the most envious, that at the poor f^me of another face, would eat
your own, and more then is your own, the p^int b^nging to it: of such a self
opinion, that you think none can dese^ue your glove: and for your mali^e, you
are so exce^ent, you might have been your Tempters tutor: Nay, (...) c^y.


La. Your own heart knows you wrong me: I cry for ye?


El. lo. You shall before I leave you


La. Is all this spoke in can?


El. lo. Yes, and more as so^ as I can get it out.


La. Well, out with it.


El. lo. You are, let me see.


La. One that has used you with too much respect.


El. lo. One that has used me (since you will have it so) the basest, the most
Footboy like, without respect of what I was, or what you might be by me: you
have used me, as I would use a jade, ride him off's legs, then turn him into
the Commons: you have used me with discretion, and I thank ye. If you have
many more such pretty Servants, pray build an Hospital, and when they are
old, keep vm for shame.


La. I cannot think yet this is serious,


El. lo. Will you have more on it?


La. No faith, there is enough if it be true:
Too much by all my part: you are no Lou^r then?

El. lo. No, I had rather be a Carrier.


La. VV^y the gods amend all.


El. lo. Neither do I think there can be such a fellow found in the world, to
be in love with such a froward woman: if there be such, they are mad, Jove
comfort vm. Now you l aue all, and I as new a man, as light, and spirited, that
I feel my self clean through another creature. O'tis brave to be ones own
man. I can see you now as I would see a Picture, sit all day by you and never
kiss your hand: hear you sing, and never fall backward; but with as set a
temper, as I would hear a Fiddler, rise and thank you. I can now keep my
money in my purse, that still was gadding out for Scarfes and Wastcoats: and
keep my hand from Mercers sheepskins finely. I can eat Mutton now, and feast
my self with my two shillings, and can see a Play for eighteen pence again:
I can my Lady.


La. The carriage of this fellow vexes me. Sir, pray let me speak a little
private ^ith you, I must not suffer this.


El. lo. Ha, ha, ha, what would you with me?
You will not ravish me? Now, your set speech.

La Thou perjurd man.


El. lo. Ha, ha, ha, this is a fine Exordium:
And why I pray you p^jurd?

La. Did you not swear a thousand thousand times you loved me best of all
things?


El. lo. I do confess it: make your best of that.


La. Why do you say, you do not then?


El. lo. Nay (...) swear it,
And give sufficient reason, your own usage.

La. Do you not love me now then?


El. lo. No faith.


La. Did you ever think I loved you dearly?


El. lo. Yes, but I see but rotten fruits on it.


La. Do not deny your hand, for I must kiss it, and take my last farewell:
now let me die so you be happy.


El. lo: I am too foolish: Lady, speak dear Lady.


La. No let me die.

She swounes.
Ma. O my sister.


Abi. O my Lady, help, help.


Mar. Run for some Rosasolis.


El. lo. I have played the fi^e ass: bend her body, Lady, best, dearest,
worthiest Lady, hear your servant: I am not as I showed: O wretched fool to
fling away the Jewel of thy life thus. Give her more air, see she begins to
(...), sweet Mistres hear me.


La. Is my servant well.


El. lo. In being yours I am so.


^a. Then I care not.


El. lo. How do ye, reach a chair there: I confess my fault not pardonable,
in pursuing thus upon such tenderness my wilful error: but had I known it
would have rought thus with ye, thus strangely; not the world had won me to
it, and let not (my best Lady) any word spoke to my end disturb your quiet
peace: for sooner shall you know a general ruin, then my faith broken. Do
not doubt this Mistres: for by my life I cannot live without you. Come come,
you shall not grieve, rather be angry, and heap i^fliction on me: I will
suffer. O I could curse my self, pray smile upon me. Upon ^y faith it was but
a trick to try you, knowing you loved me dea^ly, and yet strangely that you
would never show it, though my means was all humility.


All. Ha, ha.


El. lo. How now?


La. I thank you fine fool for your most fine plot: this was a sub^ile one, a
(...) device to have caught Do^ls with. Good senseless Sir, could you imagine
I should swoune for you, and know your self to be an a^t ass? I, a discouerd
one. It Is quit I Thank^ you Sir. Ha, ha, ha.


M^r. Take heed sir, she may chance to swoune again?


All. Ha, ha, ha.


Abi. Step to her sir, see how she changes color.


El. lo. I Will go to h^ first, and bebetter welcome.
I am fooled, I do confess it, ^y ^o'd,
Lady fooled Madam, and I thank you for it.

La. Faith '(...) not so much worth Sir:
But if I know when you come n^xt a burding.
I Will have a stronger noose to hold the woodcock.

All. Ha, ha, ha.


El. lo. I am glad to see you merry, pray laugh on.


Mar. Had a hard heart that could not laugh at you Sir. ha, ha.


La. Pray Sister do not laugh, you will anger him,
And then he will (...) like a rude (...),
That Schooleboies had cozned of his apples,
As loud and senseless.

El. lo. I will not rai^.


Mar. Faith then lets hear him sister.


El. lo. Yes you shall hear me.


La. Shall we (...) the better for it then?


El. lo. No. He that makes a woman better by his words,
I Will have him Sainted: blows will not do it.

La. By this light h^'l beat us.


El. lo. Yo^ do deserve it richly,
And may live to have a Beadle do it.

La. Now he rai^.


El. lo. Come (...) full Folly,
If this be railing, you shall hear me rail.

La. ^ay put it in good words then.


El. lo. The worst are good enough for such a trisle,
Such a proud (...) of Cobw^b lawne.

La. You (...) Sir.


El. lo. I would til the bones cracked, and I had my will.


Mar. We had best mussell him, he grows (...).


El. lo I would twere (...) in the next great sickness to have the dogs
spared; those harmless creatures, and knock i^ head these hot continual
plagues, weomen, that are more (...). I hope the stat^ will think on it.


La. Are you w^l sir?


Mar. He looks as though he had a grecuous fit ath Colic.


El. lo. (...) will you cure me?


Abi. He heat a trencher for him.


El lo. Durty December do. Thou with a face as old as Erra Pater, such a
prog^osticating nose: thou thing that ten years since has left to be a woman,
outworne the expectation of a Bawd; and thy dry bones can reach at nothing
now, but gords or ninepinnes; pray go fetch a trencher, go:


La. Let him alone, 'is cracked:


Abi. I Will see him hanged first, 'is a beastly fellow, to loose a woman of my
breeding thus; I marry is a: would I were a man, I Would make him eat his knaves
words.


Eld. L. Tie your she Otter up, good Lady Folly, she stinkes worse then a
beare-bayting.


La. Why will you be angry now?


Eld. L. Go paint and purge, call in your kennel with you: you a Lady?


Abi. Sir, look to it against the quarter Sessions, if there be good
behavior in the world, I Will have thee bound to it.


Eld. L. You must not seek it in your Ladies house then: pray send this Ferret
home, and spinne good Abigall. And Maddame, that your Ladyshippe may know, in
what base manner you have used my service, I do from this hour hate thee
heartily: and though your folly should whip you to repentance. and waken you at
length to see my wrongs, it is not the endeavor of your life shall win me: not
all the friends you have in intercession, nor your submissiue letters, though
they spoke as many tears as words; not your knees grown toth' ground in
penitence, not all your state, to kiss you: nor my pardon nor will to give you
Christian burial, if you dye thus: so farewell. When I am married and made
sure, I Will come and visit you again, and vex you Lady. By all my hopes I Will be
a torment to you, worse then a tedious winter. I know you will recant and sue
to me, but save that labor: I Will rather love a Fever and continual thirst,
rather contract my youth to drink, and safer dote upon quarrels, or take a
drawn whore from an Hospital, that time, diseases, and Mercury had eaten,
then to be drawn to love you.


La, Ha, ha, ha, pray do, but take heed though.


Eld. L. From thee, false dice, lades. Cowards, and plaguey Summers, good Lord
deliver me.

Ex. Eld. Love.
La. But hark you servant, hark ye: is he gone? call him aine:


Abi. Hang him Padocke.


La. Art thou here still? fly, fly, and call my servant, fly or nere see me
more.


Abi. I had rather knit again then see that rascal, but I must do it.

ex. Abi.
La. I would be loath to anger him too much: what fine foolery (...) this in a
woman, to use those men most frowardly they love most? If I should loose him
thus, I were rightly served. I hope is not so much himself to take it ^h
heart: how now? will he come back?

ent. Abi.
Abi. Never he swears whilst he can hear men say there is any woman living: he
swore he wood ha me first.


La. Did thou entreat him wench?


A^i. As well as I could Madam. But this is still your way, to love being
absent, and when he is with you, laugh at him and abuse him. There is another
way if you could hit on it.


La. Thou say true, get me paper, pen, and ink, I Will write to him, I Would be
loath he should sleep in's anger.

Women are most fools, when they think they are wise^.

ex. omnes.
Music. Enter young Louelesse and Widow, going to be married: with them his
Comrades. Wi. Pray Sir cast off these fellows, as unfitting for your bare
knowledge, and far more your company: is it fit such Ragamuffins as these are
should bear the name of friends? and furnish out a civil house? you are to be
married now, and men that love you must expect a course far from your old
carrire: If you will keep vm, turn vm toth' stable, and there make vm
grooms: and yet now I consider it, such beggars once set a horse back, you
have heard will ride, how far you had best to look to.


Cap. Hear you, you that must be Lady, pray content your self and (...) upon
your carriage soon at night, what dressing will best take your knight, what
wastcote, what cordial will do well in the morning for him, what tryers have
you?


Wi. What do you mean Sir?


Cap. Those that must switch him up: if he start well, fear not but cry S.
George, and bear him hard: when you perceive his wind grows ho^, and wanting,
let him a little down, `is ^eet nere doubt him, and stands sound.


Wi. Sir, you hear these fellows?


Yo. L. Merry companions, wench, merry companious:


UUi. To one another let vm be companions, but good Sir not to you: you shall
be civil and slip off these base trappings.


Cap. He shall not need, my most sweet Lady grocer, if he be civil, not your
powdered Sugar, nor your Reasens shall persuade the Captain to live a Coxcome
with him: Let him be civil and eat in the Arches, and see what will come ont.


Po. I et him be civil, do: undo him: I, that's the next way. I will not
take (if he be civil once) two hundred pounds a year to live with him: be
civil? there is a trim pe^swasion.


Cap. If thou be civil Knight, as Jove defend it, get thee another nose,
that will be pulled off by the angry boys, for thy conversion: ^he Children thou
shall get on this Ciuilian cannot inherit by the law, they are Ethnickes, and all
thy sport mere Morrall lechery: when they are grown having but little in vm,
they may p^ooue Haberdashers, or gross Grosers, like their dear damme there:
prithee be civil Knight, in time thou may read to thy household and be drunk
once a year: this would show finely.


Yo. L. I wonder sweet heart you will offer this, you do not understand these
Gentlemen: I will be short and pithy: I had rather cast you off by the way of
charge: these are Creatures, that nothing goes to the maintenance of but Corn
and Water. I will keep these fellows just in the Competency of two Hens:


Wid. If you can cast it so Sir, you have my liking; if the^ eat less, I
should not be offended: But how these, Sir, can live upon so little as Co^ne
and Wa^er. I am unbelieving.


Yo. L. Why prithee sweet heart what is your Ale? is not that Corn and Water my
sweet Widow?


Wid. I but my sweet Knight, where is the meat to this, and clothes that they
must look for?


Yo. L. In the short sentence Ale, is all included: Meat, Drink, and Cloth:
these are no ravening footmen, no fellows tha^ at Ordinaries dare (...) their
eighteen pence thrice out before they rise, and yet go hungry to play, and
crack more nuts then would suffice a dozen Squirrels; besides the din, which is
damnable: I had rather rail, and be confined to a Boat maker, then hue among
such rascals; these are people of such a clean discretion in their diet, of
such a moderate sustenance, that they sweat if they but smell hot meat.
Porredge is poison, they hate a kitchen as they hate a counter, and show em but
a Fetherbed they swound. Ale is their (...), and their drinking surely, which
keeps their bodies clear, and soluble. Bread is a binder, and for that
abolisht even in their ale, whose lost room fills an apple, which is mo^ air,
and of (...) Nature. The rest they take, is little, and that little, as little
easy: For like strict men of order, they do correct their bodies with a
bench, or a poor stubborn table; if a chimney (...) it (...) with some few
broken rushes, they are in down: when they are sick, that is drunk, they may
have fresh shaw, else they do despise these worldly pamperings. For their
poor apparel, it is worn out to the diet; new they seek none, and if a man
should offer, they are angry: scarce to be reconcyl'd again with him: you
shall not hear em ask one a cast doublet, once in a year, which is a modesty
besitting my poor friends: you see their (...) pe, though slender, competent:
For shirts I take it, they are things worn out of their remembrance. Lousy
they will be, when they list, and M^ngie, which shows a fin^e variety: and
then to cure em, a Tanners lymepit, which is little charge, two dogs, and
these; these two may be cured for three pence.


Wi. You have half persuaded me, pray use your pleasure: and my good f^iends
since I do know your diet, I Will take an order, meat shall not offend you, you
shall have ale.


Cap. We ask no more, let it be mighty, Lady: and if we perish, then our
own sins on us.


Yo. l. Come forward gentlemen, to Church my boys, when we have done, I Will give
you cheer in boules.

Ex^unt.
Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus 5.
Scaena Prima.
Ent^r Eld: Louelesse. Eld. lo. This senseless woman vexes me toth' heart, she
will not from my memory: would she were a m^n for one two hours, that I might
beat her. If I had bin (...), old, or ^t'had bin an even lay she might have
scorned me: but to be young, and by this light I think as proper as the
proudest; made as clean, as straight, and strong backed; means and manners
equal with the best cloth of silver Sir in the kingdom: But these are things at
some time of the Moon, below the cut of Canuas: Sure she has some Mecching
rascal in her house, some hind, that she has seen bear (like another Milo)
quarters of Malte upon his back, and sing with it, thrash all day, and ith
evening in his stockings, strike up a hornepipe, and there stink two hours,
and nere a whit the worse man; these are they, these (...) ^hind rascals that
undo us all. Would I had bin a carter, or a Coachman, I had done the deed ere
this time:

Enter Servant.
Ser. Sir there is a Gentleman without would speak with you:


Eld. lo. Bid him come in:


Enter Welford. Well. By your leave Sir.


Eld. lo. You are welcome, what is your will Sir?


W^l. Have you forgotten me?


Eld. lo. I do not much remember you.


Well. You must Sir. I am that gentleman you plea^d to wrong, in your disgu^se I
have inquired you out.


El. lo. I was disguised indeed Sir if I wronged you. Pray where and when?


Well. In such a Ladies house Sir: I need not name her.


Eld. lo. I do remember you: you s^'d to be a suter to that Lady:


Well. If you remember this, do not forget how scuruyly you vsd me: that was no
place to quarrel in, pray you think of it: If you be honest you dare fight
with me, without more viging, else I must provoke ye:


^ld. lo. Sir I dare fight, but never for a woman, I will not have her in my
cause, she is Mort^ll and so is not my anger: If you have brought a Nobler
subject for our swords, I am for you: in this I would be loath to (...) my
finger. And where you say I wronged you, (...) so ^ar from my profession, that
(...) ^y fears, to do^ wrong is the greatest: credit me we hau^ bin both
abusd. (not by our selves, for that I ho^d a spleen no (...) of Malice, and
may with man enough be lest forgotten,) but by that wilful, (...) piece of
hatred, that much (...) Lady: For whose sake, if we should leave our reason,
and run on upon our sense, like Rams: the little world of good men would
laugh at us, and despise us, fixing upon our desperate memories the neuer-worne
ou^ names of Fools, and (...). Sir it is not fear, but reason makes me tell
you: in this I had rather help you Sir, then hurt you, and you shall find it,
though you throw your self into as many dangers as she offers, though you
redeem her lost name every day, and find her out new honors with your
sword, you shall but be her mitth, as I have bin.


Well. I ask you mercy Sir, you have taken my edge off: yet I wou^d feign be
even with this Lady.


Eld. lo. In which i will be your helper: we are two, and they are two: two
sisters, rich alike, only the elder has the prouder dowry: In troth I pity
this disgrace in you, yet of mine own I am (...): do but follow my counsel,
and i will pawn my spirit, we will ou^ach em yet; the means is this.


Enter Servant. Ser. Sir there is a Gentlewoman will needs speak with you: I
cannot keep her out, she is entered Sir:


Eld. lo. It is the waiting woman, pray be not seen: sir hold her in
discourse awhile: hark in your ear, go, and dispatch it quickly, when I come
in I Will tell you all the project.


Well. I care not which I have.

Exit Welforde.
Eld. lo. Away, it is done, she must not see you: now Lady Gwiniuer, what news
with you?


Enter Abigall: Abi. Pray leave these frumps Sir, and receive this letter.


Eld. lo. From whom good vanity?


Abi. It Is from my Lady Sir: alas good soul, she cri^s and takes on:


Eld. lo. Does she so good soul? wod she not have a Cawdle? does she send you
with your fine Oratory goody Tully to tie me to belief again? Bring out the
Cat hounds, i will make you (...) a tree whore, then with my tyller bring down
your Gibship, and then have you cast, and hung up ith warren.


Abi. I am no beast Sir: would you knew it:


Eld. lo. Wod I did, for I am yet very doubtful: what will you say now?


Abi. Nothing not I:


Eld. lo. Art thou a woman, and say nothing?


Abi. Unless you will hear me with more moderation; I c^ speak wise enough:


Eld. lo. And loud enough: will your Lady love me?


Abi. It seems so by her letter, and her lamentations: but you are such
another man:


Eld. lo. Not such another as I was, Mumps; nor will not be: i will read her fine
Epistle: ha, ha, ha: is not thy Mistress mad?


Abi. For you she will be, it is a shame you should use a poor gentlewoman so
untowardly: she loves the ground you tread on: and you (hard heart) because she
iested with you, mean to kill her: it is a fine conquest as they say:


Eld. lo. Have thou so much moisture in thy whitleather hyde yet, that thou
can cry? I wod have sworn thou had been^ touchwood five year since: Nay
let it rain, thy Face chops for a shower like a dry dunghyll.


Abi. I Will not endure this Ribaldry: Farewell in the Devils name: if my Lady die,
i will be sworn before a Iurye, thou art the caus^ o^'t:


Eld. lo. Do Maukin do: deliver to your Lady from me this: I mean to see
her, if I have no other business; which before i will want to come to her, I
mean to go se^ke byrds nests: yet I may come too: but if I come, from this
door till I see her, will I think how to rail vildly at her; how to v^ her,
and make her cry so much, that the Physician if she fall sick upon it shall want
v^yne to find the cause by: and she remedil^sse die in her heresy: Farewell
old Adage, I hope to see the boys make Potguns on thee.


Abi. Thou Art a vile man; God bless my issue from thee.


Eld. lo. Thou have but one, and that's in thy left c^upper, that makes thee
hobble so; you must be ground ith breech like a top, you will nere spin well else:
Farewell Fytchocke.

Exeunt.
Enter Lady alone. La. Is it not strange that every woman's will should tracke
out new ways to disturb her self? if I should call my reason to accoumpt, it
cannot answer why I stop my self from mine ^owne wish; and stop the man I
love from his; and every hour repent again, yet still go on: I know it is
like a man, that wants his natural sleep, and growing dull, would gladly give
the remnant of his life for two hours rest: yet through his frowardness, will
rather choose to watch another man. Drowsy as he, then take his own repose.
All this I know: yet a strange peuish^s and anger, not to have the power to do
things unexpected, carries me away to mine own rui^ had rather dye sometimes
then not disgrace in public him whom people think I love, and do it with
oaths, and am in earnest then: O what are we! Men, you must answer this, that
d^ obey such things as we command. How now? what news?


Abi. Faith Madam none worth hearing.

Ent. Abi.
La. Is he not come?


Abi. No truly.


La. Nor has he writ?


Abi. Neither. I pray God you have not undone your self:


La. Why, but what says he?


Abi. Faith he talks strangely:


La. How strangely?


Abi. First at your Letter he laughed extremely:


La. What in contempt?


Abi. He laughed monstrous loud, as he would dye, and when you wrote it, I
think you were in no such merry mood, to provoke him that way: and having done
he cried ala^ for her, and violently laughed again.


La. Did he?


Abi. yes till I was angry:


La. Angry, why? why were thou angry? he did do but well, I did deserve it,
he had been a fool, an unfit man for any one to love, had he not laughed thus
at me: you were angry, that showed your folly; I shall love him more for that,
then all that (...) he did before: but said he nothing else?


Abi. Many uncertain things: he said though you had mocked him, because you
were a woman, he could wish to do you so much sauout as to see you: yet he
said, he knew you rash, and was loath to offend you with the sight of one, whom
now he was bound not to leave.


La. What one was that?


Abi. I know not, but truly I do fear there is a making up there: for I
heard the servants, as I past by some, whisper such a thing: and as I came
back through the hall, there were two or three Clerks writing great
conueyances in have, which they said were for their Mistress ioynture.


La. (...) very like and fit it should be so, for he does think, and
reasonably think, that I should keep him with my idle tricks for ever (...)
he married.


Abi. At last he said, it should go hard but he would see you for your
satisfaction.


La. All we that are called Women, know as well as men, it were a far more
Noble thing to grace where we are graced, and give respect there where we are
respected: yet we practice a wilder co^rse, and never bend our eyes on men with
pleasure, till they find the way to give us a neglect: then we, too late,
(...) the loss of what we might have had, and dote to death.

Ent. Martha.
Ma. Sister yonder is your Servant, with a gentlewoman with him.


La. Where?


Mar. Close at the door.


La. Ahlas I am undone, I fear he is betrothed.
What kind of woman is she?

Mar. A most ill favored one, with her Masque on:
And how her face should mend the rest I know not.

La. But yet her mind is of a milder stuff then mine was.


Enter Fld Louelesse, and Welford in woman's apparel. La. Now I see him, if my
heart swell not again (away thou woman's pride) so that I cannot speak a
gentle word to him, let me not live.


El. Lo. By your leave here.


La. How now, what new trick inuites you hither?
Have you a fine device again?

El. Lo. Faith this is the finest device I have now:
How do thou sweet heart?

Well. Why very well, so long as I may please
You my dear Lover: I nor can, nor will
Be ill when you are well, well when you are ill.

El. Lo. O thy sweet temper: what would I have given, that lady had been like
thee: see thou her? that face (my love) joynd with thy humble mind, had made
a wench indeed.


Well. Alas my love, wha^ God has done, I dare not think to mend: I use no
paint, nor any drugs of Art, my hands and face will show it.


La. Why what thing have you brought to show us there? do you take money for
it?


El. Lo. A Godlike thing, not to be bought for money: it is my Mistres: in whom
there is no passions, nor no scorn: what I will is for law; pray you salute
her.


La. Salute her? by this good light I would not kiss her for half my wealth.


E. lo. Why, why pray you?
You shall see me do it before you: look you.

La. Now fie upon thee, a beast would not have done I would not kiss thee of a
month to gain a Kingdom.


El. lo. Marry you shall not be troubled.


La. Why was there ever such a Meg as this?
Sure thou art madd^.

El. Lo. I was mad once, when I loved pictures: for what (...) shape and
colors else, but pictures? in that tawny hide there lies an endless mass of
virtues; when all your red and white ones want it.


La. And this is she you are to marry, is it not?


El. Lo. Yes indeed is^.


La. God give you joy.


El. lo. Amen.


Well. I thank you, as unknown, for your good wish.
The like to you, when ever you shall wed.

El. Lo. O gentle spirit.


La. You thank me? I pray
Keep your breath nearer you, I do not like it.

Well. I would not willingly offend at all:
Much less a lady of your worthy parts.

El. lo. Sweet, Sweet.


La. I do not think this woman can by nature be thus,
Thus ugly: sure she is some common Strumpet,
Deformed with exercise of sin.

Well. O Sir believe not this: for heaven so comfort me as I am free from foul
pollution with any man: my honor taken away, I am no woman.


El. lo. Arise my dearest soul: I do not credit it. Alas, I fear her tender
heart will break with this reproach: fie that you know no more ciuillitie to a
weak virgin. It Is no matter Sweet, let her say what she will, thou art not
worse to me, and therefore not at all: be careless.


Well. For all things else I would, but for mine honor: Me thinks.


El. lo. Alas, thine honor is not stained.
Is this the business that you sent for me about?

Ma. Faith Sister you are much to balm, to use a woman, whatsoever she be,
thus: ^e salute her: You are vvelcome hither.


Well. I humbly thank you.


El. lo. Mild still as the Dove, for all these injuries. Come, shall we go,
I love thee not so ill to keep thee h^re a jesting stock. Adue to the worlds
end.


La. Why vvhither now?


El. lo. Nay you shall never know, because you shall not find me.


La. I pray let me speak with you.


El. lo. It Is very well: come.


La. I pray you let me speak with you.


El. lo. Yes for another mock.


La. By heaven I have no mocks: good Sir a word.


El. lo. Though you deserve not so much at my hands, yet if you be in such
earnest, I will speak a word with you: but I beseech you be brief; for in
good faith there is a Parson, and a license stay for us in the Church all this
while: and you know it is night.


La. Sir, give me hearing patiently, and whatsoever I have heretofore spoke
jestingly, forget: for as I hope for mercy any where, what I shall utter now
is from my heart, and as I mean.


El. lo. Well, well, what do you mean?


La. Was not I once your Mistres, and you my Servant?


El. lo. O it is about the old matter.


La. Nay good Sir stay me out: I would but hear you excuse your self, why
you should take this woman, and leave me.


El. lo. Prithee why not, deserves she not as much as you?


La. I think not, if you will look
With an indifferency up on us both.

El. lo. Upon your faces, it is true: but if judicially we shall cast our eyes
upon your minds, you are a thousand weomen of her in worth: She cannot sound
in jest, nor set her lover tasks, to show her pe^uishnes, and his affection:
nor cross what he says, though it be Canonicoll. She Is a good plain wench,
that will do as I will have her, and bring me lusty boys to throw the
Sledge, and lift at Pigs of lead: and for a wife, she is far beyond you: what
can you do in a household, to provide for your issue, but lie a bed and get vm?
your business is to dress you, and at idle hours to eat; when she can do a
thousand profitable things: She can do pre^ty well in the Pastry, and knows
how pullen should be crammed: she cuts Camb^icke at a third: weaues bone-lace,
and quilts balls: And what are you good for?


La. Admit it true, that she were far beyond me in all respects, do'es that
give you a license to forswear your self?


El. lo. Forswear my self, how?


La. Perhaps you have forgot the innumerable oaths you have uttered in
disclaiming all for wives but m^: I Will not remember you: God give you joy.


El. lo. Nay but conceive me, the intent of oaths is ever understood. Admit I
should protest to such a friend, to see him at his lodging to morrow: Divines
would never hold me perjured, if I were struck blind, or he hid him where my
diligent search could not find him: so there were no cross act of mine own
in it. Can it be imagined I meant to force you to marriage, and to have you
whether you will or no?


La. Alas you need not. I make already tender of my self, and then you are
forsworn.


El. lo. Some sin I see indeed must necessarily fall upon me, as whosoever
deals with women shall never v^terly avoid it: yet I would choose the least ill;
which is to forsake you, that have done me all the abuses of a malignant woman,
contemned my service, and would have held me prating about marriage, till I had
be^ne past getting of children: then her that has forsook her family, and put
her tender body in my hand, upon my word.


La. Which of us swore you first to?


El. lo: Why to you.


La. Which oath is to be kept then.


El. lo I prithee do not urge my sins unto me,
Without I could amend vm.

La. Why you may by wedding me.


El. lo. How will that satisfy my word to her?


La. It Is not to be kept, and needs no satisfaction,
It Is an error fit for repentance only.

El. lo. Shall I live to wrong that tender hearted virgin so? It may not be.


La. Why may it not be?


El. lo. I swear I had rather marry thee then her: but yet mine honesty.


La. What honesty? It Is more preserved this way:
Come, by this light servant thou shall, I Will kiss thee on it.

El. lo. This kiss indeed is sweet, pray God no sin lie under it.


La. There is no sin at all, tri^ but another.


Well. O my heart.


Mar. Help sister, this lady swounes.


El. lo. How do you?


Well. Why very well, if you be so.


El. lo. Suce a puiet mind lives not in any woman: I shall do (...) most
ungodly thing. Hear me one word more, which by all my hopes I will not alter.
I did make an oath when you delaid me so; that this very night I would be
marrted. Now if you will go without delay, suddenly, as late as it is, with
your own Minister to your own Chapel, I Will wed you, and to bed.


La. A match dear servant.


El. lo. For if you should forsake me now, I care not, she would not though for
all her iniu^ies, such is her spirit, If I be not ashamed to kiss her now I
part, may I not live.


Well. I see you go, as sliely as you think to steal away: yet I vvil pray
for you; All blessings of the world light on you two, that you may live to be
an aged pair. Al curses on me if I do not speak what I do vvish indeed.


El. lo. If I can speak to purpose to her, I am a vill^ine.


La. Servant away.


Mar. Sister, vvil you marry that inconstant man? think you he vvil not cast
you off to morrow, to wrong a lady thus, looked she like dirt, it was basely
done. May you nere prosper with him.


Well. Now God forbid, Alas I was unworthy, so I told him.


Mar. That was your modesty, too good for him.
I would not see your wedding for a world.

La. Choose, choose, come Yo^gloue.

Ex. La, El. lo. and Young.
Mar. Dri^ up your (...) forsooth, you shall not think we are all uncivil,
all such beasts as these. Would I knew how to give you a revenge.


Well. So would not I: No let me suffer truly, that I desire.


Mar. Pray walk in with me, it is very late, and you shall stay all night: your
bed shall be no worse then mine; I vvish I could but do you right.


Well. My humble thanks:
God grant I may but live to quit your love.
Younglo^
Enter Young Louelesse and Sauill. Young lo. Did your Master send for me Sauil?


Sa. Yes he did send for your worship sir.


Yo. lo. Do you know the business?


Sa. Alas Sir I know nothing, nor am employed beyond my hours of eating. My
dancing days are done sir.


Yo. lo. What art thou now then.


Sa. If you consider me in little, I am with your worships reverence sir, a
rascal: one that upon the next anger of your brother, must raise a sconce by
the high way, and sell svvitches. My wife is learning new sir to vveaue
inckle.


Yo. lo. What do thou mean to do with thy children Sauill?


Sa. My eldest boy is half a rouge already, he was borne bursten, and your
worship knows, that is a pretty step to men's capassions. My youngest boy I
purpose sir to bind for ten years to a Ioaler, to draw under him, that he
may show us mercy in his function.


Yo. lo. Your family is quartered with discretion: you are resolved to cant
then: where Sauil shall your scene lie.


Sa. Beggars must be no choosers:
In every place (I take it) but the stocks.

Yo lo. This is your drinking, and your who^ing Sauil,
I told you of it, but your heart was hardened.

Sa. It Is true, you were the first that told me of it, I do remember yet in
tears, you told me you would have whores, and in that passion sir, you broke
our thus; Thou miserable man, repent, and brew three strikes more in a hogshed.
It Is noone ere we be drunk now, and the time can tarry for no man.


Yo. lo. You Are grown a bitter Gentlememan. I see misery can can clear your
head better then mustard. I Will be a suitor for your keys again sir.


Sa. Will you but be so gracious to me sir? I shall be bound.


Yo. lo. You shall sir,
To your bunch again, or I Will miss foully.
Enter Moorcraft.
Mo. Save you gent. save you.


Yo lo. Now Pole-cat, what young Rabets nest have you to draw?


Mo. Come, pre thee be familiar Knight.


Yo. lo! Away Fox, I Will send for Terriers for you.


Mo. Thou art wide yet: I Will keep thee company.


Yo. lo. I am about some business; Indentures,
If ye follow me I Will beat you: take heed,
As I live I Will cancel your (...).

Mo. Thou art cozened now, I am no usurer:
What poor fellow's this?

Sa. I am poor indeed sir.


Mo. Give him money Knight.


Yo. lo. Do you begin the offering.


Mo. There pore fellow, here is an angel for thee.


Yo lo. Art thou in earnest Moorcraft?


Mo. Yes faith K^ight. I Will follow thy example: thou had land and thousands,
thou spendst, and flungst away, and yet it flows in double: I purchasde,
wrung, and wierdraw'd for my wealth, lost, and was cozend: for which I make a
vow, to try all the ways above ground. but I Will find a constant meane^ to
riches without curses.


Yo. lo. I am glad of your conversion Mr. Moorcraft:
you are in a fair course, pray pursue it still.

Mo. Come, we are all gallants now, I Will keep thee company; Here honest
fellow, for this gentleman's sake, there is two angels more for thee.


Sa. God quit you sir, and keep you long in this mind.


Yr. lo. VVilt thou persevere?


Mo. Til I have a penny. I have brave clothes a making, and two horses; can
thou not h^lpe me to a Match Knight, I Will lay a a thousand pound upon my
crop-eare.


Yo. lo. Foot thit is stranger then an Afric monster,
There will be no more talk of the Cleave wars
Whilst this lasts, come, I Will put thee into blood.

Sa. Would all his damb'd tribe were as tender hearted. I beseech you let this
gent. join with you in the recovery of my Keys; I like his good beginning
sir, the whilst I Will pray for both your worships.


Yo. lo. He shall sir.


Mo. Shall we go noble Knight? I would feign be acquainted.


Yo. lo. I Will be your servant sir.

Ex^unt.
Ent El. Louelesse and Lady. El. lo. Faith my sweet Lady, I have caught you
now, mauger your s^btilties, and fine devises, be coy again now.


La. (...) sweeteheart tell true.


El. lo. By this light, by all the pleasures I have had this night, by your
lost maidenhead, you are cozend merely. I have cast beyond your wit. That
gent. is your retainer Welford.


La. It cannot be so.


El. lo. Your sister has found it so, or I mistake: mark how she blushes when
you see her next. Ha, ha, ha, I shall not travel now, ha, ha, ha.


La. Prithee sweet heart be quiet, thou have angerd me at heart.


El. lo. I Will please you soon again.


La. Welford.


El. lo. I Welford, he is a young hansome fellow, well bred and landed: your
sister can instr^ct you in his good parts better then I by this time.


La. Vdsfoote, am I fetched over thus?


El. lo. Yes in faith.
And over shall be fetched again, never fear it.

La. I must be patieut, though it torture me:
You have got the Sun Sir.

El. lo. And the Moon too, in which I^ be the man.


La. But had I known this, had I but surmiz'd it, you should have hunted three
trains more, before you had come to the course, you should have hanckt o'th
bridle, Sir, in faith.


El. lo. I knew it, and min'd with you, and so blew you up.
Now you may see the Gentlewoman: stand close.

Enter Welford and Martha. Mar. For Gods sake Sir be private in this business,
You have undone me else. O God, what have I done?

Well. No harm I warrant thee.


Mar. How shall I look upon my friends again?
With what face?

Well. Why e'ne with that: it is a good one, thou can not find a better: look
upon all the faces thou shall see there, and you shall find vm smooth still,
fair still, sweet still, and to your thinking honest: those have done as much
as you have yet, or dare do Mistres, and yet they keep no stir.


Ma. Good Sir go in, and put your woman's clothes on.
If you be seen thus, I am lost for ever.

Well. I Will watch you for that Mistres: I am no fool, here will I ^arry till
the house be up and witness with me.


Mar. Good dear friend go in.


Well. To bed again if you please, else I am fixed here, till there be notice
taken what I am, and what I have done: If you could iuggle me into my
woman-hood again, and so cog me out of your company, all this would be
forsworn, and I again an asinego, as your Sister left me. No, I Will have it
known and publis^t; then if you will be a whore, forsake me, and be shamed: and
when you can hold out no longer, ma^ry some cast Cleue Captain, and sell
Bottle-ale.


Mar. I dare not stay sir, use me modestly, I am your wife.


Well. Go in, I Will make up all.


El. lo. I Will be a witness to your naked truth Sir: this is the gentlewoman,
prithee look upon him, this is he that made me break my faith Sweet: but
thank your sister, she has soderd it.


La. What a dull ass was I, I could not see this wencher from a wench:
twenty to one, if I had been but tender like my sister, he had served me such
a slippery trick too.


Well. Twenty to one I had.


El. lo. I would have watched you Sir, by your good patience, for ferretting in
my ground.


La. You have been with my Sister.


Well. Yes, to bring.


El. lo. An heir into the world he means.


La. There is no chafing now.


Well. I have had my part on it: I have been chaft this three hours, that's the
least, I am reasonable cool now.


La. Cannot you fare well, but you must cry rost-meat?


Well. He that fares well, and will not bless the founders, is either
surfetted, or ill taught, Lady: for mine own part, I have found so sweet a
diet, I can commend it, though I cannot spare it.


El. lo. How like you this dish, Welford, I made a supper on it, and fed so
heartily, I could not sleep.


La. By this light, had I but sented out your train, ye had slept with a bare
pillow in your arms, and kissed that, or else the bed-post, for any wife ye had
got this twelue-month yet: I would have vexed you more then a ^yr'd post-horse:
and bin longer bearing, then ever after-game at Irish was. Lord, that I were
unmarried again.


El. lo. Lady, I would not undertake ye, were you again a Haggard, for the
best cast of sore Ladies in the Kingdom: you were ever tickle footed, and would
not trusse round?


Well. Is she fast?


El. lo. She was all night locked here boy.


Well. Then you may lure her without fear of loosing: take off her Cranes. You
have a delicate Gentlewoman to your sister: Lord what a pretty fury she was
in, when she perceived I was a man: but I thank God I satisfied her scruple,
without the Parson o'th town.


El. lo. What did ye?


Well. Maddame, can you tell what we did?


El. Lo. She has a shrewd guess at it I see by her.


La. Well you may mock us: but my large Gentlewoman, my Mary Ambree, had I but
seen into you, you should have had another bedfellow, fitter a great deal for
your itch.


Well. I thank you Lady, me thought it was well,
You are so curious.

Enter Young Louelesse, his Lady, Moorecraft, Sauill and two Seruingmen. El.
Lo. Get on your dublet, here comes my brother.


Yo. Lo. Good morrow brother, and all good to your Lady.


Mo. God save you, and good morrow to you all.


El. Lo. Good morrow. Here Is a poor brother of yours.


La. Fie how this shames me.


Mo. Prithee good fellow help me to a cup of Beer.


Ser. I will Sir,


Yo. lo. Brother what make you here? will this Lady do?
Will she? is she not nettel'd still?

El. Lo. No, I have cured her.
Mr. Welford, pray know this Gentleman, is my brother.

Well. Sir, I shall long to love him.


Yo. lo. I shall not be your debtor Sir. But how is it with you?


El. Lo. As well as may be man'; I am married: your new acquaintance has her
Sister: and all is well.


Yo. Lo. I am glad on it. Now my pretty Lady Sister,
How do you find my brother?

La. Almost as wild as you are.


Yo. Lo. A will make the better husband: you have tried him?


La. Against my will Sir.


Yo. Lo. He Will make your will amends soon, do not doubt it. But Sir, I must
entreat you to be better known To this converted Jew here.


Ser. Here Is Beer for you Sir.


Mo. And here is for you an angel:
Pray buy no Land, twill never prosper Sir.

El. Lo. How Is this?


Yo. Lo. Bless you, and then I Will tell: He Is turned Gallant.


El. Lo. Gallant?


Yo. lo. I Gallant, and is now called, Cutting Moorecraft:
The reason I Will inform you, at more leisure,

Well. O good Sir let me know him presently.


Yo. lo. You shall hug one an other.


Mo. Sir I must keep you company.


El. lo. And reason.


Yo. lo. Cutting Moorcraft faees about. I must present another.


Mo. As many as you will Sir, I am for vm.


Well. Sir I shall do you service.


Mo. I shall look for it in good faith sir.


El. lo. Prithee good sweetheart kiss him.


La. Who, that fellow?


Sa. Sir will it please you to remember me: my keys good sir.


Yo. Lo. I Will do it presently.


El. Lo. Come thou shall kiss him for our sport sake.


La. Let him come on then, and do you hear, do not instruct me in these
tricks, for you may repent it.


Eld. Lo. That at my peril. Lusty Mr. Moorecraft,
Here is a Lady would salute you.

Mo. She shall not loose her longing Sir: what is she?


El. Lo. My wife Sir.


Mo. She must be then my Mistres.


La. Must I Sir:


El. lo. O yes, you must.


Mo. And you must take this ring, a poor pawn,
Of some fifty pound.

El. lo: Take it by any means, it is lawful prise.


La. Sir I shall call you servant.


Mo. I shall be proud on it: what fellow's that:


Yo. Lo. My Ladies Coachman.


Mo. There Is something. (my friend) for you to buy whips,
And for you sir, and you sir.

El. lo. Under a miracle this is the strangest,
I ever heard of.

Mo. What shall we play, or drink? what shall we do?
Who will hunt with me for a hundred pound?

Well. Stranger and Stranger!
Sir you shall find sport after a day or two.

Young. Lo. Sir I have a suit unto you,
Concerning your old servant Sauill.

El. lo. O, for his keys, I know it,


Sa. Now sir, strike in.


Mo. Sir I must have you grant me.


El. lo. It Is done Sir, take your keys again:
But hark you Sauill, leave of the motions
Of the flesh, and be honest, or else you shall graze again.
I Will try you once more.

Sa. If cuer I be taken drunk, or whoring,
Take off the biggest key in the bunch, and open
My head with it Sir: I humbly thank your worships.

El. lo. Nay then I see we must keep holiday Ent. Roger, and Abigall.
Heers the last couple in hell.

To. Joy be amongst you all.


La. Why how now sir, what is the meaning of this Emblem?


To. Marriage an't like your worship.


La. Are you married?


To. As well as the next priest could do it, Madam.


Eld. Lo. I think the signs in Gemini here is such coupling.


Well. Sir Roger, what will you take to lie from your sweeteheart to night?


To Not the best benifice in your worships gift Sir.


Well. A whoreson, how he swells.


Yo. Lo. How many times to night Sir Roger?


To. Sir you grow scurrilous:
What I shall do, I shall do: I shall not need your help.

Yo. Lo. For horse flesh Roger.


El lo. Come prithee be not angry, it is a day
Given wholly to our mirth.

La. It shall be so sir: Sir Roger and his Bride,
We shall entreat to be at our charge.

El. lo. Welford get you to Church: by this light,
You shall not lie with her again, till you are married.

Well. I am gone.


Mo. To every Bride I dedicate this day:
Six healths a piece, and it shall go hard,
But every one a Jewel: Come be mad Boys.

El. lo. Thou Art in a good beginning: come who leads?
Sir Roger, you shall have the Van: lead the way:
Would every dogged wench had such a day. Exeunt.

FINIS.

