THE LAMENTABLE DEATH OF THE EARL OF BVCQVOY, General of the Emperors Army.
HAPPENED UNTO HIM IN AN HONORABLE exploit, before the Town of Newheusel.

AT PARIS, Printed by Peter Rocolet. M.DCXXI.

THE LAMENTABLE DEATH OF THE EARL of BVCQVOY, General of the Emperors Army.
HAPPENED UNTO HIM IN AN Honorable exploit before the Town of Newheusel.
AFter that the Emperor had reduced the Kingdom of Bohemia with the three
Provinces thereunto belonging under his obedience, and that both High and lower
Austria were pacified, and made to acknowledge his Majesty's Sovereignty, and
that nothing rested to be subdued but Hungaria. The said Emperor sent the
Earl of Bucquoy, his Lieutenant General, with an Army of Fifteen Thousand
men, to drive Bethlem Gabor out of Hungaria, who having taken from him the
Town Edemberg, Presburgh, and the Castle, Ostia, Filech, and other places. At
the last he planted his Camp before Newheusel, upon the seventh of June. This
place is one of the Forts of most importance in higher Hungaria, well fortified
with Soldiers, and of all things else that belongs to withstand a Siege. In
the mean time Bethlem (that knew that the siege before Newheusel would
continue long) went to Buda, there to advance (as it is thought) the great
Turks aid, (whose designs he has promised to execute in Hungaria) and to
send 3000. Hungarians and Ttansiluanians to relieve Newheusel, which by the way
were overthrown by the Baron de Setchi, and their Ensigns sent to Vianna, The
River of Tarose was a great hinderance unto the Earl of Bucquoy to prepare his
battery before the Town, for that thereon he was forced to erect his mounts
to place his Cannon upon them. But Bethlem that slept not in his designs knew
well that the loss of that place, (wherein a part of Bethlems riches and the
treasures of the Lords of Hungary are) would drive him out of the Country;
having received a great aid of Turks and Tartarians, being part of the Turks
great Army sent toward Poland, resolved by all the means that he could use
to enforce Bucquoy to raise his siege, and if it were possible, suddenly to
surprise him, before he could receive any aid from the Emperor or any other of
his friends? and to that end caused the Tartarians to march forward, (being a
kind of the most inhumane people living upon the face of the earth, men whom
no pains nor labor can weary, and most ready and prompt in their designs,
and much more in their retraicts) who being 6000. men, and Bethlem himself
following with as many Turks, Transiluanians, and Hungarians, they suddenly set
upon the Emperors army, that besieged Newheusel on all sides. At which time
the Earl of Bucquoy that forsook not the Camp for fear of the Enemy, (but
leaving the signs of an incomparable valor behind him) perceiving himself
to be surprised, as well as he could, ranged his men in order of Battle,
being resolved in that extremity not to fly nor yet to be surprised for want
of dexterity, but rather to Fight till he dyed, for the honor of God against
his enemies, and in the Emperors cause against his vsurpators. The courage of
this brave Soldier was not abashed at the sight of the Turbans and Turkish
falchions, neither yet at Bethlems forces, but resolutely determined to sell
his life dear unto them, and that if they took it from him, it should not be
so good cheap as they made account of, for to fly he saw it was a thing
unworthy and not fit for the courage of such a great Commander, (whose heart
was seated in a higher place) but resolved rather not to live, after he should
see the overthrow and dispersing of his Army, and so to become a prey unto his
enemies, as also that he could not otherwise choose, having the enemy both
before and behind him: having in comparison but a handful of men, in regard of
the puissant aid that came with Bethlem Gabor, he defended himself with so
great valor, that it was not possible to see a more furious combat, nor a more
forcible resistance then then was made on both sides, wherein that valiant
Captain almost covered with Arrows, in the middle of his Soldiers was
slain, being thrice shot, and so fell down to the ground. To the great grief
and sorrow of all his Company, who will never forget the great courage which
that valiant Captain showed in Flaunders in the face of the Hollanders, In
Bohemia to the great damage of the Bohemians, and before Prague, at the
overthrow of the battle there fought against the Prince Palatine. And lastly
in Hungaria, before the Hungarian faces.

And although this was a great loss unto the Emperor, as also the rest of his
Army by his Death was overthrown, and put to flight, the Siege before
Newheusel raised, and Bethlem Gabor thereby tryumphed against them, to the
great contentment of the Emperors enemies; Nevertheless, the said Lords place
is already supplied by three other great Captains, the Marquis of Tieffembach,
the Earl de Fugger, and the Baron de Prenner, who with great aid from the
Emperor and other Christian Princes, hope well to revenge the death of their
General.

FINIS.

