THE Proverbs of the noble and worthy soldier Sir James Lopez de Mendoza
Marquis of Santillana, with the Paraphrase of D. Peter Diaz of Toledo: Wherein
is contained whatsoever is necessary to the leading of an honest and virtuous
life.

Translated out of Spanishe by Barnabe Googe.

Imprinted at London by Richard Watkins. 1579.

To the right honorable Sir William Cecill, of the most honorable order of
the Garter Knight, Baron of Burghley, master of her Majesty's wards and
liuereis, and Lord high Treasurer of England.
WHen I had (right honorable and my especial good lord) thoroughly perused and
considered these Proverbs, or rather Aphorisms of the marquis of Santilliana.
I thought it not amiss to bestow some travail in turning them into English:
albeit I found them in some places so darkly written, and so corrupted by the
Printer, as I could sundry times hardly attain to the authors meaning. The
gentleman (if but in respect of his estate and calling deserves of all men to
be welthought of. But considering the matter whereof he entreats (which is
chiefly to train his readers to honesty and virtuous life) he meriteth at the
hands of every good man with double honor to be received and welcomed. For
there is nothing assuredly more acceptable to God, nor that in deed better
beseems man, then an upright and honest conversation. And although the chief
intent of his writing was for the institution and behavior of a Prince, yet
are his rules and instructions so general, as they may very well serve for
guides in good demeanor, to every man of what degree soever he be. My simple
translation (for the Author himself needs no defender) I most humbly commend
to the protection of your Lordship, as to him that is perfectly able to judge,
whether I have truly and faithfully followed my pattern, or no. As for such
faults as have passed, as well in the title as in the notes, being as they were
committed in my absence, and without my knowledge, I trust your lordship will
discharge me of the blame. God send your Lordship with long and happy life to
attain to the end of your good and honorable desires.

Your Lordships faithful servant Barnabe Googe.

The life of Sir James Lopez de Mendoza, Marquis of Santilliana.
SIr James Lopes de Mendoza, Marquis of Santilliana, and Earl of the Realm of
Mancanares, Lord of Vega, son of the Admiral Don Diego de Hurtado, and
nephewe to Peter Goncales de Mendoza, Lord of Alua, was a man of a mean
stature, very well limmed and proporcioned, and of a gracious countenance,
descended of great parentage, a Castilian and very ancient. He was a man of a
quick judgment, and discrete, and of so great a mind, that neither could the
weightiest matters that were dismay him, nor the dealing in matters of small
moment any whit delight him. In the staidness of his person, and the gravity
of his speech, he showed him self to be a Gentleman, and of a noble mind. He
was a man, as they use to say, very well spoken, so as he was seldom heard
to speak any thing that was not worth the noting: whether it were in matters
of learning, or of disport. He was courteous and of great interteinment to all
such as came unto him, specially learned men. After the decease of the Admiral
his father, and the Lady Eleanor of Vega his mother, being left very young and
within age, he was disseised of the Asturies of Santilliana and a great piece
of his living beside. But coming to riper years, and perceiving himself to be
greatly abused, very want and necessity, which many times awaketh a good wit,
and his great mind that could not abide to be consined, made him to use such
diligence, as partly by law, partly by swoorde, he did shortly recover his
own. He was both in his meat and his drink very temperate, having herein a
singular and special grace. Touching his inclination, he gave himself in his
life time unto two notable exercises, the one the feats of arms, the other
study and learning, neither did his warlike exercises any whit hinder his
study, nor his study was any impediment to the conference which he had with
the Soldiers and Gentlemen of his house: about the trampe and fashion of
their armor and Instruments of defense, how to offend the enemy, how to
order his battails, and how to encampe, how to assault, and how to defend
fortresses, and other like actions belonging to martial affairs, wherein he
took a great deal the more pleasure, because he had therewith been brought up
from his youth. And to the end that such as served under him might have
experience of such things as they had heard him speak off, he had always in
his house, Tilt, Turney, and Barriers, with sundry other exercises belonging to
the field, to the end that his people being always accustomed to such
martial exercises, might better away with the pains of a soldier, when they
came to it. He was a gentleman of great nobility and valor, being in his
determinations very wise and temperate, and in his execution speedy and
resolute: so as there could neither be found any rashness in his courage, or
any jot of cowardice in his devises. He had been General in many fought
Battles betwixt the Christians and the Sarazens, wherein he both wan and
lost. But the greatest and of most account, was a battle that was fought with
the Aragoneses, and one other at the river of Torotto. And these two Battles
were indeed every hot and blooddy. For fighting without any retire on either
side, there were slain an infinite number on both sides: at which services,
because this worthy ge^tleman happened to be present, though he saw his own
forces all to weak, and very unmeet to match with the enemy, yet because the
enemy was in sight, he thought it a greater shame and reproach to turn his
back without Battle, then to loose his life or the field in fighting.
Whereupon he determined to try the battle, wherein he fought with such
egernesse and courage, that although he was his self sore hurt, and all his
company defeated, yet for his own person he gained the name and reputation of a
worthy and valiant Captain. The sufficiency of this noble gentleman being
thoroughly known to King John, he was sent Lieutena^t general against the
Sarazens, which charge he took upon him with a very glad and willing mind,
continuing a long time upon the frontiers. During which season he fought diverse
battles, and had many sharp encounters, both with the king of Granada and
others of his captains, wherein he had always the better. He made many roades
into the Country, where he wan by fine force the town of Huelma, and drove the
Moors to such a streigt, that he he would have won a number of towns
more, and have done diverse worthy exploites had not the king (being by
matters of more importance at home enforced) commanded him to make an end of
the wars, and to conclude a piece upon the receyt of which commission he bare
such a hand upon them as he brought them in subjection, and caused them to pay
for yearly tribute a great quantity of gold, such as neither the king did
ever look to receive, nor the Sarazens did ever think to have paid. And
beside this yearly tribute, he compelled them to set at liberty all such
Christian prisoners as remained in their custody, all which this good Marquis
redeemed out of captivity, and brought them home to their Country. He
governed with great wisdom all such soldiers as were under his regiment,
behauing himself amongst them both as a captain and a companion, being
neither insolent in authority, nor base minded in his familiarity. For he was
always in heart of such humility and mildness, as made him to be beloved of
God, and outwardly of such gravity and countenance as caused him to be
reuere^ced of men. He bountifully bestowed upon his soldiers, what so ever
belonged unto him in right of his generallship of al such spoils and booties
as were taken, besides that which he gave the^ in their necessities out of his
own purse: and to such as showed themselves thankful for his bounty, he
used to say, that if we wish well to him that does well unto us, we ought to
give well to him that wishes well unto us. and thus maintayning his credit by
the means of his great liberality, he was of all his soldiers greatly
beloved, who fearing to offend him did always observe a perfect discipline in
the field. His rare and singular virtues being known to the king, and how
worthy he was of honor and dignity, he forthwith advanced him to the
Marqueship of Santilliana and created, him Earl of the Real of Mancenares,
addorning him with great lands and revenues. Sometimes he committed unto him
the charge of his own person, and many times the government of al his
dominions. Who had such a special grace in his governing, as the Poets of that
age accounted him for his noble behavior in court, an other Apollo: and for
his great valor in the field a 2 Hanibal. He was a great obseruer of al such
things as belo^ged to perfect ma^hood, and so great a reprehender of cowardice
and faintness of heart, that seeing on a time a Gentleman to weep, for the
great mishappes that had happened unto him, breaking forth into some choler,
he said unto him: Oh what a shame is it to see a Gentleman to shed tears for
any thing, how grievous soever it be, saving only for his offenses toward
GOD? He was a man of a great mind, which nobleness of mind was an ornament
and beauty to all other his virtues. A covetous worldling coming unto him,
and telling him that he let his lands far under the value, and promising to
make him a much greater reuenew, as one not willing to give ear to any such
matter, he made him this answer: My friend I do not understand thy
language, go speak it, I pray thee, to some other that can better understand
thee. He used always to say to those that sought to live in pleasure and
delight, that much more delightful ought to be unto us a virtuous travail,
then a life without virtue, how pleasant soever it seem. He was of such a
pitiful mind, that whosoever came to him in his extremity, being either
persecuted, or any ways troubled, should find relief and defense in his
house, not regarding any danger that might happen him for so doing. He did
evermore measure both the parties, and the cause according as in deed they
were, and not as they were supposed to be: and in this thing he had a most
singular and almost heavenly virtue, for he was never known to make any
acception of persons, nor to regard the riches, the wealth, or mightiness of
any man, but to regard every man according to the equity of his causethe
wrote in verse the Proverbs that begin, My Son whom I do dearly love. etc.
In which Proverbs are contained almost all the precepts of Moral Philosophy,
whatsoever appertains to a virtuous life. He had a very great Library, and
gave himself chiefly to the study of Moral Philosophy, Histories, and
Antiquities, he kept always about him Doctors and men of great learning,
with whom he used to confer of such things as he read. He wrote besides
diverse other treatises, as well in verse as prose, tending all to the aduauncing
of virtue, and abolishing of vice, and in such exercises he spent the most
part of his leisure. He was of great fame and renown in many other Countries
beside Spain, but always made more account of the estimation of a few
wisemen, rather then the praise of the multitude, nd because that for the most
part we see that the conditions of men are answearable to their complexions
and that they are most times evil dysosed that are evil complexioned, we
need not to doubt but that this Gentleman was greatly in favor with GOD, who
gave him so good a teacher as he was of ability to receive every kind of
virtue, and to resist without any great pain, every evil motion of sin. I
will not deny but that he was touched with such temptations, as our frail
flesh does many times assail the spirit withal, and that he was sundry times
overtaken, as well with anger as with the delight of the flesh, and that he did
sometimes offend as well in doing more then was mete, as in failing to do that
which he ought to have done, For being as he was continually co^uersant in the
wars and daily employed in sundry many matters. It should have been a matter
of great difficulty living among such a number of errors, to carry him
self clean without any error. But if it be true, that virtues do make a
merry heart, as on the other side vices breed heaviness and sorrow, seeing
that this gentleman was the most part of his time disposed to pleasantness,
it is a great deal more likely that he was rather accompanied with virtues
that bring forth pleasure, then subdued with vices, that continually do vex
men with grief. And notwithstanding that he received many misfortunes in the
wars, and that he sustained diverse griefs, as well for the death of his
Children, as of others his near kinsemen, yet he did always bear them with
such a noble mind, as he served for an example to all others how to behave
themselves in the like cases. He ended his life with great honor and
prosperity, at the age of lxv. years. And if it may be thought that me^ may
after their departure have any felicity in this world (as some suppose they
may) we may assuredly think that this gentleman had it: for he left behind
him vi. sons, whereof the eldest increased his inheritance with the estate of
a dukedom: his second son was Earl of Tendilla the third was Earl of
Curunna: the fourth was Cardinal of Spain, Archbishop of Toledo, Bishop of
Ciguenca, and one of the greatest Prelates that was in his time: To these four
and to the two others, Don John, and Don Hurtado, he left such Lordshippes,
rents, and revenues, as made five great houses, besides his own principal
house.

FINIS.
The first Chapter, of Love, and Fear.
1.
My son, whom I do dearly love,
Unto my words give ear*
Seek not by rigor for to rule,
Nor govern men by fear*
Love, and thou shall beloved be.
And by the same shall do
Such worthy things, as hated thou
shall never attain unto.
The Paraphrase.
EVery wise Orator, as Tullie in his book de Oratore teaches, ought
principally* in whatsoever matter he deals, to consider three things: That
is, to make all those that shall either hear his speech, or read his works,
to be well willing, understanding, and mindful. The speaker shall make his
audience well willing, when he labors to obtain their favor and good will
toward him. For no man will gladly give ear to such a man, as he is before
evil persuaded of: he makes his hearers to understand, when he declares the
matter, that he means to entreat off, in showing that it shall be profitable
and commodious, he causes them to be attentive, or mindeful, when he moves
or stirs them up by good means and inductions to be ready to hear, not
having their minds carried away with any other matters. All these points has
this learned gentleman (following this inscription) observed in all his
discourse. But especially in this first Proverb he has observed ye first, in
making him that shall read him, well minded toward him, procuring his favor
and goodwil, in calling him by ye name of his son and beloved. For as the
Civil law says, we can name no man by a more sweet or better name, the^ to
call him our son. He makes him to understand, in showing him how to direct
or order his life amongst the people: he makes him atte^tiue, in these words,
where he says, Give ear. And the meaning and matter of this Proverb, is the
most sweet and gracious behavior, that men of all degrees ought to use in
their conversation. And if so be, that men of great estate and calling, ought to
use this gentle behavior, much more ought they that are of mean degree to do
it. And therefore Seneca in the speech that he has with the Emperor Nero (as
he brings in, in his 9. Tragedy) when the Emperor did strive to govern
rather by fear then by love, and commanded sundry things to be done by force
and disorder, to the end the people should fear him: because Seneca did
therefore greatly blame him, the Emperor told him, that whatsoever he did,
he ought by reason for to do, for the sword was it that defended the Prince.
Seneca answered, that the faith and true allegiance of his subjects would
better defend him. The prince that is feared, is never beloved
The Emperor replied, That it is good that the Prince be feared. Seneca
answeareth: it is better that he be beloved. The naked sword (says Nero) shall
make them do what I will have the^. Beware, says Seneca, you never fall into
such an error. The Emperor answers, I will force the people to fear me.
Surely says Seneca, that which you force and compel the people to do, they
will very hardly suffer. And therefore it is not meet that any person (as is
said) especially such governors as are virtuous and just, should urge or
force any thing against the good will of the people, much less that private
persons should in their conversation one with an other do it. For (as Seneca
in his third Epistle says, whereas he shows the deliberation that a man
ought to have in the getting and keeping of his friend) If thou will be
beloved, love, or as the Proverb says, By love thou shall do, that hated
thou shall never attain unto. For there is nothing in the world that is sought
with love, either by the prince of his subject, the Lord of his tenant, or the
friend of his familiar, but it is easily obtained. For as Virgill says in his
Bucolikes. Love overcomes al things, insomuch is for the great love that the
Almighty bare unto mankind, he sent his only begotten son, to take our
flesh upon him, and to die for us, that he might bear our faults and
infirmities (as Esai says,) and suffer for our offenses. And therefore if love
could cause God to abase himself to be conversant with man, and to do that,
which might chiefly avail us, being everlasting and most perfect, and we
mortal, and imperfecte: what shall it not do in the company and conversation
of one man with an other? Whereupon Valerius in his third book in the title
of Love and delight, writes that Damon and Pithias, two of Pythagoras his
scholars, bare so great love and affection one to the other, as when Dionisius
of Sarragos would have put one of them to death, he seeing that there was no
remedy but needs he must dye, required that he might have liberty to go
home to dispose and set in order such things as he had, promising to put in
sureties for his return, at what day soever he would appoint him. Dionisius
supposing that none so faithful a friend could be found, that in such a case
would become surety, to the hazard of his life, and all that he had,
aunsweared, that he was content to give him leave and time to go to his house,
so that he put in such surety as he promised: whereupon he left him for
surety his other friend. And as the last day was now come, wherein the
condemned person was bound to return, and to suffer his determined death, all
those that were present did count a great folly in him that would in such a
case become surety, and hazard his life for an other, how great soever the
friendship was betwixt them. But the party that was surety did no whitte
distrust the fidelity of his friend, nor repent him any whitte of his
suretyshippe. Now as they were all gaping and gasing to see the end of the
matter, at the last day, and even in the last hour, comes the condemned man,
whereat Dionisius was greatly astonished, and for the great faithfulness and
love, that he saw between them, pardoned the party that he had condemned, and
desired them both, that they would vouchsafe him for a third into their
friendship. Whereby it is evident, that love is of so great a force, that it
forces such men as be true friends, to venture and give their lives the one for
the other. So that very well says the Proverb: Love, and thou shalt beloved
be. For Seneca in his third Epistle affirms, that nothing does more
trouble a man in his prosperity and wealth, then to think that they can never
be to him good and faithful friends, to whom he himself has never been
good. How many kinds of Friendshippes there be, and how some be friends
for Commodity sake, others for pleasure and delight, others for virtue and
honesty, how some be sworn friends, and what difference there is between
Love and Friendship, because I will make no long process, I leave here to
speak of. Of all which both Aristotle in his eight book of his Ethickes,
Tullie in his book of Friendship, and Seneca in his nienth Epistle, do
largely and thoroughly discourse. I should also here declare, how we should
behave our selves in getting of friends, and having once got them, how to
continue them. Whereof Seneca entreats in his 3. Epistle: whyther, for
avoiding tediousnes, I refer the Reader.

2.
Who can assoile the man that's dread
from care and deadly fear?
If any reason, mind, or wit
in him that dreads appear?
Esteem, and thou shall be esteemed:
for fear is to the sense
A grief that cannot be expressed,
a deadly pestilence.
The Paraphrase,
IN this proverb the Marquis his mind is, to prove by natural reason, that
which he has written in the former proverb, that is, that men ought to be
gentle and eurteous in their conuersations, and that they ought not to do any
thing by force or fear, but rather by love and gentleness. He also sets down
the inconvenience that follows to him that had rather be feared then loved,
saying: Who can assoyle the man that is dread from care and deadly fear, etc.
For if he that fears, have not altogether lost his discretion and
understanding, he will not fear him that he fears: For he may esily
understand, that he, that lives in dread, will seek by all the means to be
delivered of him yt he fears. For fear (as Aristotle says in the 3. book
of his Ethiks) is a continual looking for the harm that shall happen.
According to which, such as fear others, do continually look to receive harm
at the hands of those whom they fear, or to escape the evil that they look
for. They imagine how they may prevent, in doing of evil, them of whom they
think to receive evil: And therefore in the speech that Thyestes the Son
of King Pelops has with his son Philistines, where his son requires him
to forsake the place of his banishment, and to come and govern and live
together with his brother Araeus (as Seneca shows in his second Tragidie)
where Thyestes does show the reasons, that moves him rather to live in a poor
estate, then to be a man of great place and authority, saying, While I lived
in princely state and majesty, I was never free from fearing of those that
feared me, yea and many times I was afraid of the very sword that hung by mine
own side, least in the end I should come to be slain with it. And
afterward, Oh what a great happiness is it, not to be feared of any, to sleep
soundly upon the ground, and to eat in safety the meat that is provided.
Poison is presented in golden cups: meaning, that it is not given to the
poor labourer that drinks in earth or wood, but to great estates, that
drink in gold given by those that fear them, and by such as they have good
cause to fear. And therefore Tullie says, in his book of Friendship, that
in the life of Tyrants, which be such as govern by force and fear, more then
by love, there can be neither faith, love, nor steadfast friendship. To the
Tyrant all things are suspicious, and every thing ministers, unto him
occasion of sorrow and care. And it follows: Who can love him whom he
fears, or him of who^ he knows he is feared? With this agrees that, which
Boethius in his third book of Comfort writes, that such as are guarded with
men of war, stand in dread of those, whom they seem to make affraide. And
therefore well says the Proverb, That fear is a deadly grief unto the sense.
Which is verified as well in the person that fears, as in him that is feared.
It is written of Dionisius, as Boethius in his 3. book of Comfort witnesses,
that he was a great Tyrant, and such a one as by tyranny and cruelty subdued
many countries, and did many harms and mischiefs, who as he sought to
govern by tyranny and force, it is most like he was rather feared then
beloved. It is written, that a special friend of his coming to see him, told
him, that he had great cause to think him self happy, in that he had
atteyned to so great and so high estate as he was in: Dionisius made no
answer at all, but bad him to dinner, where over the chair where his ghest
should sit, he caused to be hanged, by a very small thread, a weighty and a
sharp pointed sword, in such sort as his friend being set, the sword hung
directly over the crown of his head, so as if the thread brake, it was sure to
run through him, and thus caused him to sit down to dinner: who all the while
that he sat, sweat for fear, least the thread breaking, the sword should fall
upon him and destroy him. Dionisius caused him with sundry dishes to be
deintily and delicately served: the board being taken up, he asked his ghest if
he had not pleasantly dined? Who answered him: what pleasure could I have at
mymeate, seeing the swoorde by so small a stay hanging over my head, and still
looking for the loss of my life, whenever the thread should break? Lo says
Dionisius, such is the life of all tyrants, who for the mischiefs and
tyrannies that they have done, and for fear of those whom they have offended
and wronged, do live continually in fear and in dread, and do look every
hour for either death, or some great danger, touching ye which I have made a
more large discourse in my Commentaries upon the Proverbs of Seneca, in the
Proverb that begins, He that always fears, is every day condemned. To
the which because I will not be long, I refer the reader, since the Marquis
has well concluded in this Proves, where he says, Esteem, and thou shall be
esteemed: meaning, that it lies in thine own power to be feared, or to be
loved, and that fear is a deadly grief to the sense, of which every man will
seek to rid him self with as much speed as he may.

3.
Great Caesar as the stories tell,
most cruelly was slain,
And yet the woorthiest conqueror,
that in the world did reign.
Who on the earth so mighty is,
that when he is alone,
Can of himself do any more,
then can a seely one?
The Marquis.
CAesar (most worthy prince) he that is here mentioned, was called by the
name of Julius, and of others Caius, the self same that passed the Rubicon
against Pompey, as Lucan writes in his book of the Ciuill-warres, who after
the death of Pompey and Cato, triumphing with great pomp in the city of Rome,
and taking into his hands the common treasury, behaved himself with such
pride and outrage toward the Citizens, that they could by no means abide
him: and as his hautinesse was thought of them intolerable, they conspired to
kill him, which treason of theirs they did no long time delay. The chief of
this conspiracy, were Brutus and Cassius, as is more at large set forth by
Eutropius in his book of the Emperors of Rome. Valerius Maximus does also
record the same, and John Boccace in his book of Ladies, where he entreats
of the virtues of women, commending Porcia the daughter of Cato, and wife of
this Brutus.

The Paraphrase of the doctor.
IN this Proverb the Marquis proves by familiar example, that which he has
showed in the Proverb before by natural reason. For as Aristotle says in the
second of his Rhethorikes: In the works and actions of men, that which comes
after, does commonly resemble that, which has been done before, and therefore
it is a common use with writers, when they would persuade or have their
doings well thought of, to bring in examples of things that in the like case
have happened. And for the same cause the Marquis has in this Proverb made
mention of that which happened to Julius Caesar, whose doings are largely set
out by Lucan, in his book that he wrote of the civil wars. This Julius
Caesar by force and tyranny sought to aspire (which nothing appertained unto
him) to the government of Rome, and subdued and overcame both Pompey, and all
his favorers, who fought for the laws and liberties of their country. In the
prosecuting whereof Caesar slew many, disinherited a great sort, and iniuried
a number. And for the mainteining of this his tyrannical jurisdiction, he was
forced to make himself to be feared, to the intent he might keep them from
rebelling. But for all that ever he could do, two gentlemen citizens of Rome,
whose names were Brutus and Cassius, conspired against him, and in the
Parliament house where he mistrusted no such thing, set upon him, and sieve
him, giving him, as it is written, four and twenty wounds, whereof he
presently died: and therefore the Proverb says. Great Caesar as the stories
tell: and so says Lucan, most cruelly was slain. Although he was a mighty
Prince, and had a strong and a puysant guard: yet at the time that Brutus and
Cassius traitorously murdered him, they found him without any of his friends
or servants all alone. It follows. Who on the earth so mighty is, that when
he is alone, can of him self do any more, then can a seely one? That is to
say, though a man be never so mighty, yea, though he be a king of many lands
and countries, yet is he but a man, and for his own person can do no more
then a man may do. And although we read in the second book of the Kings,
that the person of a King in an army, is of more value then a thousand
soldiers: and that the death of a Prince or a Captain, is more hurtful to an
army, then ye death of a thousand others, because of the worthiness of the
Prince or Captain: yet, as S. Hierom in one of his Epistles affirms, though
in the ordering of a battle, the worthiness of a Prince or a Captain is
chiefly considered, when it comes to the fight, not the degree, but the
dooinges of every party, is respected: for when it comes to the shout, the
force and prowess of every one is his safegarde, be he King or Emperor: If
he fight not as he ought to do, he is of none account. And though he be never
so valiant, being but one man, he can, as the Proverb is, do no more then an
other man.

4.
How many have I seen,
by love advanced hye?
But many more I have beheld
cast down for tyranny.
For virtuous minds in bondage brought,
will slack no time, but try
By all the force and means they can,
to come to liberty.
The Paraphrase.
FOr the proof and confirmation of that which goes before, the Marquis
affirms, that he has seen in his time great numbers advanced and set up by
love, and many overthrown and tumbled down, that have sought to rule by
fear, which proof in having had the experience, is the truest and certainest
that may be. For easier shall we be deceived by old records, or sooner err
in trusting our own natural reason, then fail in knowledge of the truth, in
a thing that we have had experience of. And therefore is it commonly said, that
experience is the mother and mistress of all things: and as Aristotle in the
first of his Phisickes says, If any that be wise do err, touching their
opinions in learning, they may well be called back again, and brought to the
knowledge of the truth, by natural reason and persuasion. But he that denies
that which he sees with his eyes, hears with his ears, and knows by the
trial of his other senses, with such a one we ought not to dispute: For he
that denies his senses, is altogether without sense. And therefore the proof
that is made by experience, is most strong and assured. The Marquis says,
that in his time he has seen many advanced by love. Love brings with it,
unity, Peace, and concord: where fear always causes hatred, as is
witnessed before by the testimony of Tullie, in his book of Friendship, how
great the force of friendship and concord is, may easily be known, by the
harms that arise of discention and discord. Which our Savior in the Gospel
expressly shows, where he says, That every kingdom divided within it self,
shall be destroyed. and come to nothing: and such as live in peace and amity,
do prosper and increase. And Salust in the conspiracy of Cateline says, that
by love and concord the smallest things that be, increase, and grow to be
great, where by discord, great and mighty things decay, and come to nothing.
For virtuous minds in bondage brought, will slack no time to try by all the
force and means they can, to come to liberty. It is lawful for every man by
the law of nature to defend his life, his goods and his good name, by all the
means and ways that he may: Insomuch as if any man will kill me, it is lawful
for me for the safeguard of my life, to kill the party, that does so assault
me, neither ought I to forbear (as the lawiers say) till I be stricken or
hurt, for it is yenough for me the fear yt I am in to be murdered, and that
if I kill him not, I am sure to be slain my self. In so much that it has
been the opinion of some Doctors. That if I stand in fear of a mightier man
then my self: and know that whersoeuer he meet me, he will kill me, and am
not able to stand upon my guard, nor to band with him, in this case I am not
bound to forbear, but may kill him, at the best advantage that I can take
him. The like opinion is of some Doctors that if I be wrongfully deteyned in
prison, and stand in fear of some violence or injustice, that in this case I
may lawefully break prison, and if a judge shall wrongfullie condemn me,
whereby I shall greatly be damnified in my person, and that the execution be
out against me, it shall be lawful for me to assemble my friends and my
kinsmen, and to resist the officer, using all the means I may to save my
body and my goods: yea, I may hurt the other in the defense of my goods, and
the saving of my credit. For as the Doctors say, if I remain in any place,
and know that mine enemy is coming to do me some mischief, and that it
shall be greatly hurtful and against my credit, to go from the place, that I
need not to depart, but may well tarry there: and if the other assault me,
if I kill him, I am not to be punished. And the reason is, that for the great
fear that I am in, it is lawful for me to save my self, and my credit, as
well as I may. And this is it, that the Proverb means, that virtuous minds
in bondage brought. And therefore he says, Virtuous or good men: because the
injury is not so great that is done to a rascal, or a lewd person, as that
which is done to a virtuous or a godly man. And though such a man of a virtuous
mind, will bear as much as may be, yet being unjustly wronged, and evil
dealt withal, and put in fear, he slackes no time to try by all the means
and ways he can, to come to liberty.

5.
O son, be mild and amiable,
lay lofty looks aside:
The hautie and disdainful man
the Lord can not abide.
Of wicked and malicious men
avoid the company,
For all their doings tend to strife,
and end with villainy.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb, the Marquis goes about to beat down all manner of
hautinesse and pride of mind, showing the great misliking, that the Lord
has of all such, as are proud and disdainful: As David in his Psalm says:
That the Lord resists the proud, and gives grace to those that be humble
and meek. And Solomon in his Proverbs affirms, that after pride comes
always a fall, and he that has an humble heart, shall come to great honor: and
this is it that the Proverb means, That every man ought to be amiable. That
is gentle and lowly in his speech, and not hautie, not proud, nor disdainful:
It is written in a book of the commendations of Caesar, that he never said to
any Gentleman, get you away. But come you hither. And in the first book of the
worthy acts of Philosophers, it is written, that the great Caesar passing by a
court of judgment, where happily was arrained an ancient Gentleman that had
sometime served him in his wars, which Gentleman when he perceived the
Emperor, cried unto him, and beseeched him to alight and to help him that he
might be delivered from his false accusers, the Emperor willed a learned
advocate yt stood by, to take his cause in hand, and to do the uttermost he
could for him for his sake. The poor Gentleman seeing the matter so put of,
said with a loud voice: Caesar, when you were in the field, and like to be
trodden down of your enemies, I did not in your danger serve you by a Proctor:
but with ye great hazard of my own life, I fought for ye defense of your
person, at which ba^quet I received these wounds for you: and there withal
showed his wounded body. Hard for a soldier in these days to find a Caesar.
Which words when Caesar had heard, without any pride or disdain, he presently
alighted, and coming himself to the bar, defended his cause. For he thought
it a part not only shameful, but most unthankful, if he should not have done
as he did? And when the whole assembly did greatly wonder at this noble and
worthy deed, he said, that the Prince that sought not to be beloved, of his
subjects, did never truly love the^, and to this end the Proverb shows, what
great good it brings to be loving and not high minded, and how greatly God
does hate the proud and the disdainful, who much displeases our Lord, as is
said before. And Seneca in his first Tragedy says, That the gracious and
righteous God does always hunt and persecute the proud. Proud Princes
hateful to God.
The Proverb says, Forth of wicked and malicious men avoid the company: For all their doings tend to strife, and end with villainy. There is, nothing that
more disquieteth and troubles the company and conversation of one man with an
other, then a brauling or a conte^tious person, neither does any thing more
alure men to company one with another, the^ courtesy and gentle behavior, and
therefore Chilo that was one of the vii. wise men of Athens, demau^ding whether
of the twain were best for a man to be, wrangling and contentious, or mild
and quiet: It was answered him, that the better was he that was mild and
quiet: For the friends and neighbors of such a man did rather honor him, then
fear him.

6.
And let your answers still be such,
as may procure good will,
As best beseemes a gentleman,
not froward, rude, nor ill.
O son, how little does it cost,
at all times well to speak,
How little again does it avail,
with words thy wrath to wreake?
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb, the Marquis shows the order that men ought to have in
their answers, when they be spoken to, and that howsoever it goes with us, we
ought continually to be courteous and gentle in our speech. And it is one of ye
principal graces that men can have of God, as David in his Psalms witnesses,
Thy mouth is full of grace, and therefore the Lord has blessed thee. And
though a man fall out and wrangle with thee, yet if thou answerest him gently
and mildly, not proudly nor frowardly, thou shall a great deal sooner pacify
him. For as Solomon in his Proverbs says, A soft vorde will break the bone,
and a sweet peach does pacify wrath. As Seneca in its first book yt he wrote
of Anger and Wrath, showing that great Princes, ought to be gracious and
gentle in their answers, brings for example the King Antigonus, who having
caused his men to march an unreasonable journey in a day, Princes ought to be
gentle in their speeches.
when that they all weery and ouerlaboured, were come to the place where they
should encampe, he made them, without giving them any rest, every man with
great and heavy burdens to march, which was a great way farther, close to the
wall of a town, that he meant to besiege: and as the poor men, being
ouerladen, went railing and curssing of the King, because he had made them to
take such an unreasonable journey, and after had caused them to march with so
extreme burdens, not suffering them any whitte to rest: the King perceiving
it, changed his apparel, and keepeing company with those that were scarce
laden, and those that did most revile him, he helped them to carry their
burdens, and as the soldiers felt themselves greatly eased by his company,
they mused what he was that was amongst them, and so busy to help them, for
the knew him not, by reason he had so disguised him self, at the last being
importunate with him, to tell what he was: You have hitherto says he, cursed
and rayled at the king Antigonus, for whose sake a day and night you have taken
such pains. Now speak well of him, that has made one amongst you and helped
you, in bearing part of your burdens, this gracious answer made the king to
be a thousand times better beloved of his soldiers then he was before, and
therefore the Proverb says, Here well that the answer should always be
gentle, since good words cost but a little. It auoideth quarrelling and
fighting, when any man falls out with them. In the Cronicle of the
Philosopers, we read, that one of Athens was always quarelling and falling
out with an honest quiet man one Anacharsis a Scithian, which country was of
all others of least estimation. When the Athenian for the more despite called
him a Scithian, Anacharsis, answering him gently again, and smiling, said unto
him: my country is a shame to me, and thou art a shame to thy country. The
Proverb goes farther and says, It little does avail with words thy wrath to
wreake, that is: he that threatens with words, and has a will to be
revenged, and to threaten, shall be counted but for a vaunter and a pratler, and
if he have a mind to revenge, he loses the opportunity of it by his boasting
and threatening. In a Tragedy of Seneca, Medea vitterly threatening Jason,
because he had cast her of, and married an other, the Nurse reprehendeth her,
and blames her, telling her that it is not seemly for us to be presumptious,
highminded, nor enraged with those, with whom we deal, neither ought we on
the other side so much to abase our selves as we come thereby to be counted for
outcastes and persons of no value. Among all the virtues and vices that
Aristotle does entreat of in the fourth Book of his Ethycks, he speaks of
the virtue of Magnanimity, which is for a man to stand upon his honor that
he knows, for his virtues and qualities he deserves, and to keep his
estimation, in such sort as it decay not: and to this end says the Prophet,
My honor and my glory will I give to no other. This virtue has two extremities
and vices, the one is, as Aristotle says, for a man to be vaineglorious,
proud and disdainful: which is, when he takes upon him, more then of right
to him pertains. In the other extremity and vice, are thought to offend all
such, as by reason of their base mind are nothing accounted of, nor esteemed:
and if they happen to come to any honor or preferment, they behave them selves
like sheep or mecockes. Of this virtue and the vices, the Marquis speaks in
the Proverb where he says, Let not unworthy honors please thee. For, those
that are therewith all delighted, are vaunters, vainglorious, and foolish, as
Aristotle says, where he shows the inconuenie^ces that follow to the^, that
make more of them selves, then there is cause why, saying that such honor
comes quickly to the ground. So that the man that takes more upon him then
he may, is of others by great good reason soon put from it. Of these proud
and vain vaunters speaks Job. The vain man exalts him self in his pride,
and thinks that he is borne free from subjection, as the Colte of a wild
Ass. And before he says, I would not have thee so to throw down thy self,
as to be counted an outcast. For this is not humility, but baseness and
weakness of mind, and this is it that Aristotle proves in the authority
aforesaid. And the Apostle says, that forasmuch as he was ordained the
Apostle of the Gentiles, Humility springs of Nobility.
he would honor and esteem his dignity and office, and yet for all that he
left not to be humble and meek: for humility springs not of baseness and
feebleness of mind, but of virtue and nobleness of nature. And that which the
Marquis does here disalowe, is only the baseness and vileness of the
mind, in what sort the conversation of men ought to be. Isocrates in his
Admonishments writes in this sort, Be not hautie nor disdainefull to those
that be in thy company, for even the very servants will hardly away with their
masters that are proud and disdainful. The modest and temperate behavior, is
that which al men delight in, and that is neither to be to hautie nor to base,
to hie minded nor to abject.

7
Flee Taletellers and backbiters,
that strive to please the ear:
As greedy ravening wolves, that seek
the seelly Lambs to tear,
Whose traitorous trains and paths
do nothing else at all,
But serve for snares and subtle traps,
Where heedelesse men do fall.
The Paraphrase.
IN the Proverb before, the Marquis has showed, what order men ought to
observe in their speech: in this and those that follow, he teaches how we
should behave our selves in hearing. For as the tongue ought to be bridled in
speaking: so ought the ear to be temperate in hearing, for such as are wise
and virtuous ought not to give ear to every word that they hear, but only to
such as are good and honest. For as Solomon in his Proverb says, The Prince
that is contented to hear lies and tales, shall have his court replenished
with naughty persons. For when the rest of his servants perceive that he
delights in a tatler or a taleteller, the whole company will straight addict
them selves to be liers and slaunderers, and pickethanks, for as saint Gregory
in the.xiiii. chapter of his book of Moralls says, That such as delight in
hearing of slanders and accusations, are counted to be eaters and deuourers of
men, as Solomon says, Be not present at the banquets of sinners, nor eat
thou with those that come together to feed of flesh. To come together to
eat flesh is as S. Gregory says, To gather, them selves together, to
speak evil of their neighbors. And therefore the Proverb says, that we
should flee taletellers as those that hurt and anoy Innocents, For he that
comes to diffame or slander his neighbor, An evil prince makes an evil
Court.
comes clothed with a sheeps skin, but is in very deed a ravening Woolfe.
For his intent is to infect and move the mind of him that hears him against
him who^ he slandereth. Valerius shows a way, how to reject and rid away
such slanders, and picthanks, and says that there was 2 very dear friends
having great envy, and seeking to set discord between them, came to the one
of them, and told him, that he had heard his friend speak very evil of him
Quoth the other, I cannot believe it, for he is my friend, and I know he will
not speak evil of me. The slaunderer being very earnest, and the other not
seeming to credit him, he confirmed it at last with a great oathe, that the
thing was true, that he had told him. I now believe you, quoth the other,
since you swear that my friend has spoken evil of me: but be you well
assured, it was something, that he thought should benefit me, that made him
to speak as he did. With which answer the slaunderer was clean out of
countenance, perceiving that the party, whom he would have abused, was to hard
for him. For the trains and paths of pickthankes, are not for wise men to
fall in, but for gross heads and simple people. Tullie in his Inuectiue that
he made against Salust has these words, I have seen (says he) many that in
telling of other men's faults, have more offended the hearers, then did they
that committed the faults. And therefore Backbiters, whether their accusations
be false or true, are not to be suffered. Since as Tullie says, They more
offend the minds of such as hear them, with their spiteful and evil
speech: then do those that commit the evil in deed. And therefore wise men
ought greatly to shun and to stop their ears, against all Clawbackes,
taletellers, and backbiters, and not only to banish them, but all vain and
idle talk, as Saint Bernard writes in an Epistle, touching the government of
a house, to a gentleman called Raymond, wherein he shows, what ways he
ought to use to avoid all Parasites and gesters, Gesters to be avoided.
saying: Whenever thou art troubled with Coxecombes, counterfaits, or
gesters, make as if thou did hear them, and let thy mind be upon other
matters, for if thou once answer them, and seem to take pleasure in them,
thou shall never be rid of them, thou shall show thy self to be but a light
fellow, in seeming to take pleasure in any such follyes, and shall be forced
to give them rewards, loosing and casting away (in so doing) whatsoever thou
give.

8.
Assuerus, if he had not heard,
each part with equal ear:
Had greatly abusde the sword, that he
for justice due did bear.
And into error fallen, which straight
he would have wished undone:
So had the guiltless creature died,
that no offense had done.
The Paraphrase of the Marquis.
ASsuerus was a man of so great power amongst the heathen, that he was
accounted for a Monarch, or ruler of the world: and as it is written in the
Book of Hester, Haman being in special favor with the King, taking a
displeasure against the Jews (who lived under the government of Assuerus)
procured the Kings displeasure greatly against them, but especially against
Mardocheus, so as he appointed him to be hanged. And as it was a custom that
Assuerus always used, to have many times read unto him a Book, wherein was
contained the services that any of his subjects or any other had done unto him,
where happily he chanced to hear a special service that Mardocheus had done
unto him, (what service it was I leave here to speak off, being a matter
commonly known to all such as have been studious in the scriptures). This
being understood of the king, and at the earnest request of Hester, he
commanded that Haman should be trussed up upon the same Gallows that he
had prepared for Mardocheus, whereby according to the saying of David, He fell
into the same pit, that he had dug for other. With this Proverb agrees
the saying of Solon, That every well guyded common wealth, stands upon two
feet, the one and the right foot, is the bountiful rewarding of those that
have done good service: the other the left foot, is the punishment and
correction of all disordered persons and offenders. What Prince soever wants
either this bounty in rewarding, or justice in punishing, his common wealth
shall always be lame and halting, and the good deeds and service of the
subjects, ought evermore to be recorded, and many times read to the Prince,
and the parties them selves continually to be examined.

The Doctor.
IN this proverb the Marquis shows by examples, that which he has taught in
the proverb before, and to this intent he brings in ye story of king
Assuerus, which story is written at large in the Book of Hester, which is one
of the Canonical books of the holy Scripture. Of which to make you here a
short relation, you shall understand, that this Assuerus was one of the
greatest and mightiest Princes that was in the world, and as it is written, was
Lord of an hundred and xxvii. Provinces, who took to wife Hester, a Jewish
woman, and of the lineage of the Jews, whom he very entirely loved. This
Queen had an uncle with whom she had been brought up, called Mardocheus, who
used to come daily to the Court, to learn and understand how the world went
with the Queen his Niece: and as the story tells, the Que^ne being so
advised by Mardocheus, did not discover what country man he was, neither was it
known that he was her uncle. This King Assuerus had one that was very great
about him, called Haman, who bare all the sway in the Kings house, and as the
whole company, as well the greatest as the meanest, gave honor and reverence to
Haman, being so commanded by the King, only Mardocheus would neither honor
him, nor do him any reverence, notwithstanding that the Kings servant had
many times blamed him, for not honoring of Haman, nor making obeisance to him,
as the rest of the Court' both did, and the king had commanded: and because
they saw, that he would take no warning, they complained to Haman of him: who
casting his eye upon the Jew, and perceiving plainly, that he used no
reverence toward him, conceived a great hatred against him, and for the
displeasure that he bare him, devised how he might procure the destruction,
as well of all the Jews, as of Mardocheus, and thereupon told the King, that
throughout all his dominions, there swarmed a lewd and a contemptuous kind of
people, being authors of new sects and Ceremonies, and dispisers of his
Majesty's laws and ordinances, which was a thing not before seen, that such
a kind of people should be suffered to live within his dominions, made humble
request to the King, that he might have license and authority from him, to
destroy them, promising thereby, to bring to the Kings cofers, an infinite
mass of treasure. The King answered him, that he freely gave him the treasure
that he spoke off, and for the people, he bad him do with them what he
thought good, and gave him his ring from his finger, that he might send out
letters, for the execution of his commandment. Whereupon Haman in great haste
caused letters to be directed to all the Provinces and Cities within the Kings
dominions, yt they should at a day appointed, set upon the Jews, and destroy
them, taking all their goods, and not leaving one of the^ alive: which news,
when they came to the ears of Mardocheus, were not very pleasant unto him:
whereupon he hied to the Queen, and persuaded her to go with great speed to the
King, and to sue for pardon for her woeful countrymen: which at the first she
refused to do, by reason of a law, that if any should presume to enter the
Kings chamber, without license or special commandment (except the King did
hold out, in sign of clemency, the golden scepter that he held in his hand)
should presently dye for it. Notwithstanding, at the earnest request of
Mardocheus, after that she and all the Jews in the City had fasted three days
and three nights, she got her to the king, whom when the King perceived, in
token of his favor toward her, he held forth his golden scepter, and said
unto her, Queen Hester, What have you to say to me? Demand the one half of
mine Empire, and I will give it thee? Who humbly beseeched the King that it
would please him and Haman, to come to a Banquet that she had prepared for him,
at which banquet she would declare what petition she had unto him. At the later
end of the banquet, when the king had well fed, and demanded of Hester what
her petition was, promising that if it were the half of his kingdom, he
would presently grant it: She aunsweared, O King if I have found favor in thy
sight, grant me my life, and the life of my people, for both I and my people
are betrayed and appointed to dye: if it had so been, that we should have
been sold for slaves, it had been far more tolerable, and with my sorrow I
should have satisfied my self. when the King had heard her, he was greatly
disquieted, and asked who it was that durst presume to attempt so great a
matter, and what authority he had. The Queen answered this great enemy. Of
me and my nation, is this Haman that is here present. Which when Haman heard,
he was suddenly nipped in the head, and as the King flang forth in a fury,
toward the garden, Haman came to the bed where the Queen sat, to beseech her
to have mercy upon him, because he perceived that the King was determined that
he should dye. The King returning from the Garden, and finding Haman upon the
bed, where the Queen sat, supposing that he had been too familiar with her,
began to conceive a great hatred against him, and then some that were about
him, told him that Haman had made a pair of Gallows for Mardocheus: wherefore
he commanded, that both he and his sons should be hanged thereupon. Which
shortly set down, shows the meaning of this proverb, that if Assuerus had
not given ear to Hester, showing him, yt Haman against all order of justice
had determined to destroy the people of the Jews, he had undoubtedly abused the
sword, that he for justice due did bear: and which he was bound as a King and
a good Iusticer well to use. And into error had he fallen, and wished it
straight undone: so had the guiltles creature died, that no offense had done.
Which had been a great blotte unto him. For as the civil law says: It is a
better deed to leave a fault unpunished, then to punish an innocent.

9
For very seldom shall thou find
the absent to be clear,
And guilty seldom shall thou see
the man that does appear.
Hear well the cause, and suddenly
do no man thou acquit:
Yet take good heed that in thy pause,
thou use both skill and wit.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb, the Marquis means to prove by natural reason, that which
in the other Proverb he showed by example: and the reason why we seldom find
the absent to be clear, and that we seldom guilty see the man that does
appear, Is because he that speaks evil of him that is absent, makes his
tale to seem as true as may be, and persuades him that hears him, to give
credit to his words, and though perhaps some speak in his defense, yet the
party that is absent, is always thought to be faulty: and so likewise of the
other, that the present is not found to be guilty, because he is able to
answer to whatsoever is spoken against him, and whatsoever his adversary has
set down for certain, by his denial of it, he brings it to be doubted of.
And as Tullie in his new Rethorike says, If any man be accused of any crime
or trespass, if he be not guilty, he may flatly deny it: and if he be
guilty, he may allege what great cause and reason he had to do, as he did,
and so shall he clear himself of the fault that is laid against him. No
proceeding against him that is absent.
And therefore it is a principal ground in the laws, that whatsoever is done
in judgment against him that is absent, if he do not absent himself upon
contempt, shall be nothing prejudicial to him: and the greatest bar that may
be to any process that is brought, is to say, that he was not willed to
appear. And therefore when Adam offended, and God was to condemn him for his
disobedience, and contempt: the Text says, that the Lord called and sommoned
him to answer (if any answer he could make) for himself, when he said,
Adam, where art thou? For the Lord knew well enough, in what place he was, but
because he should not say, that God had proceeded against him, without hearing
him, or calling him, being absent, and not contemptuous, he both called for
him, and heard what he could say, and finding his answer not sufficient,
condemned him, although he sought to lessen his fault as much as he could, when
he said, The woman, that thou gave me, gave me the apple that I ate. Upon
this ground also stood Medea, (as Seneca in his vii. Tragedy shows) in the
speech that she had with king Creon, the father in law of Jason, that would
have banished her his realm: when she asked, for what cause and fault she
should be banished? And that they ought not to proceed against her, without
hearing her cause, affirming that she was ready to prove her innocence, and
to purge hereselfe of any crime, that could be laid against her. And because
Creon jesting at her, said: The poor innocent woman requires to know the
cause of her banishment, meaning that she was so lewd and so wicked, that her
lewdness, and her naughtiness being so openly known, it was not needful
to arraigne her, because she was known to all men to be guilty. She
answered: A notable answer of a woman.
If thou, being a King, take upon thee to be a Judge, thou ought to hear
me: If thou take upon thee to be a tyrant, and an unjust man, thou may at
thy pleasure take my life from me. And when the King would by no means be
entreated, but that she must depart his realm, she made this notable
conclusion: that whosoever he be, that commands any thing without hearing of
the party, though the thing be just that he commands, yet he himself is
unjust in the commanding of it. And the reason of this notable saying of
Medea, is that which is before said, That according to the laws both of God,
of nature, and of man, no Judge ought to proceed against any man, without
hearing the party: and the Proverb says, You must hear the party, and
give no judgment, till you have well weyed the matter. For there must
information be had, and proof, whether it be truth, that the contrary part
alleges, and the proof and the witness well examined by good foresight and
advise: and this is it that of right ought to be done in a case of judgment,
and one of the greatest defeatings, or auoydings, as the Lawyers say, of any
process, is, if judgment have been proved or done without deliberation. And
therefore the Proverb says, See that you take good deliberation in judgment.

10.
The deed that's done by good advice,
does always firmly stand,
And seldom seen to crave amends
at any second hand.
Be ruled by counsel evermore,
whatsoever thou do intend,
And from thy side let never go
thy faithful aged friend.
The Paraphrase.
THe Marquis in this Proves concludes two things. The first is, the effect
that follows, when a thing is done with good deliberation, and brought to
pass by good advise and counsel: the second is, whose advise and counsel
in our doings we ought to follow. Touching the first, Solomon in his Proverbs
says, The determinations of a man never come to good, where counsel is not
before had. The devises that are executed by good advise, are always perfect
and good. And Seneca says, Do al thy things by good advise, and thou shall
never repent them. For a man not taking counsel nor advise in that which he
intends, it is not possible for him, that he should foresee the errors that
he shall fall in. And falling therein, for want of good foresight and counsel,
it must needs be, that he must repent himself, and say, I had not thought so
great a mischief would have followed. And as Valerius writes, that Scipio of
Africa was wont to say. It was an evil favored, and a shameful thing, for a
man in any matter (especially in such as belong to a man of war) to say, I
would not have thought it. For such things as are to be done with the sword,
ought well to be thought of before. For the errors that in wars are
committed, can never, as Scipio says, be amended. And as Vegetius in his book
that he made Of the knowledge of the Wars affirms, There is no other reason
to be yielded why the Romans did subdue the whole world, and conquered
wheresoever they came, but because they did all that they did by great
deliberation and advise, being very skillful and well trained in such things
as belonged to the wars. For what (says he) was a handful of poor Romans
to the infinite numbers of the Frenchmen? or what could so sle^der a power
prevail against the great forces and puissance of the Germans? Certain it
is, that ye Spaniards were more in number, and of greater strength and force,
the^ were the Romans. The skill of the soldier the only advancement of Rome.
They were always behind the Affricanes, both in wealth and policies. And no
man doubts, but the Greeks were far beyond them in gravity and wisdom.
Yet always did the soldier of Rome prevail, because of his skill, being
continually trained and daily exercised in the wars. For there could nothing
hap in any skirmish or battle, wherewt they had not long time before been
acquainted. Certain it is, as the Proverb says, yt that which is done by
deliberation, comes not to crave amendment at the second hand, and that from
this counsel and advise, the old stager ought never to be shut out. For as
Aristotle says in the first of his Ethickes, The young man by reason of his
small experience, can have no great knowledge in any matter, and therefore not
able to give any good counsel. And beside in his book of Rethorike, In man's
affairs and actions, the things that have passed, be commonly like to the
things that after happen: and as the young man has had no experience of such
things as have happened before, so can he never be able to judge of the
things that shall after fall out, and therefore the ancient me^ are always
able to give better counsel. And therefore Roboam the son of Solomon, for
taking the advice of young men, and refusing the old and expert fellows, did
verire worthily forgo ten parts of twelve, of his kingdom, as shall
hereafter be more at large declared. And though young men are by reason of
strength and lustiness, more able and fit for the fight, than are the old
men: yet as Tullie in his book of Age says, The great and notable exploites
are never done by force nor agilitie of body, but by counsel, authority,
and secrecy, And among the principal causes that we read, why Alexander had
always the victory and the better hand, it was the chief, that he went
always accompanied with grave and ancient counselors. For as Trogus
Pompeius in his eleventh book writes, That Alexander whenever he was in any
journey of great danger, he never called to counsel, nor made privy to his
doings the young and lusty Gallantes, but the old expert soldiers, that had
followed the wars with his father, and with his uncle, whom he used not so
much for soldiers, as for governors. And it is said that those whom he put
in his battles, were commonly of the age of threescore years and upward, to
the intent that none of them should think to run away, but to overcome, and
trusting more to their hands then their feet, should set their whole minds
upon the victory. And when diverse of his old soldiers desired him, that they
might depart, to rest and refreshe them selves, offering him their sons, that
were young and lusty to serve in their places. It is said that he answered, I
had rather to have about me the well experienced gravity of aged men, then the
frowardenesse and unadvised rashness of young men. And thus did Alexander
attain to whatsoever he desired, and was in all his doings, honorable and
virtuous, because he never suffered, as the Proverb says, The old man to
depart from his side.

11
So long the common wealth of Rome
Did floorishe strong and glad:
As they their aged senators,
At home in honor had.
But when that Tirantes once began,
To rule and bear the sway,
They never any conquest made,
But lost from day to day.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb the Marquis shows, and proves by good example and great
experience of things before passed: That which before he declared, that as
long as the Romans gave credit to the advice and counsel of their aged
Fathers, so long they prospered, and did well: and when they once ceased so to
do, their honor presently ceased and came to naught. They were governed in
those days by a certain company of men called Senators, which word and
name comes of the Latin word Senex, which signifies aged. In what sort
and by what means the Romans prospered, is plainly declared by Judas
Machabee, in the first book of the Machabees: where he says, The Romans by
their wisdom and sober behavior possessed the whole world, and ouerthrewe
the Princes that rebelled against them, and made Tributaries Galacia, and
Spain, subdued and overcame the king of the Persians, and Antiochus the king
of Asia, having in his company a hundred and thirty Elephants, sacked al their
cities, and made Tributarie unto them all their Dominions, and brought into
subjection all the countries round about them, as well far as near: So that
their very name was a terror to all that heard of it. And the only cause of
this their prosperity, was the great wisdom and foresight, the which they
had, and the great love that they bare to their country, they were governed by
three hundred and thirty Senators, which every year elected one to have the
chief authority? amongst them there was neither envy nor jealousy, and
therefore says the book, Judas the Machabee, The Romans prefer the common
profit before their own.
did enter friendship, and make a perfect league with them. For all their study
and care was to maintain their common wealth, not having any regard of any
private commodity: For as Tullie says, Two things they ought to do, that
will profit their country. The first is, that leaving apart al private
commodity, they bestow all that that they do upon the common wealth. The
second, that they be not forward in some one thing, and backward in an other.
And whilst the Romans observed this order, their common wealth increased
still greater and greater, according to the saying of Cato, whose words are
witnessed by Saint Augustine, in the seventh book of the city of God, the.ix.
Chap. Do not think: (says Cato) that our forefathers brought the common
wealth of Rome from a small thing to be great, only by the sword. For if that
were the matter, our company at this time is greater, our soldiers more in
number, and our furniture a great deal better. No, it was other matters that
advanced our ancestors, whereof we be clean without: What made the Romans
to floorishe.
they being at home, were always careful for matters abroad, and governed
uprightly and justly, their hearts were always free, and were continually
faithful counselors, they were neither entangled with riot nor vices, but we
by our disordred lusts, have brought our common wealth to be poor, and our
selves to be rich. The offices and rewards that were to be given, as
recompenses, and the encouragementes of virtue, are sold for money, or given
for favor. Our ancestors to enrich the common wealth; did make themselves
poor: But in these corrupt times of ours the case is quite altered: The
treasures of our own common wealth are small and poor, and we our selves are
become wealthy and rich, which is a thing most monstrous, and the overthrow
of all goodness. In which saying is verified and concluded whatsoever is
contained in this Proverb: When Tirantes once began to rule and bear the
sway. Which Tirants be those, that more regard their own private commodity
then their countries, they not only ceased their conquestes, but shortly lost
that, which they had won.

The second Chapter. of Knowledge and Wisdom.
12
Apply thy self with all thy force,
Some knowledge to attain:
Procure the same with study great,
With diligence and pain*
But seek not to be learned thou,
For fond desire of praise:
But skilfully to reprehende
The unskillful sinners ways.
The Paraphrase.
THe Marquis in this Proverb shows, with what care and diligence we ought to
seek for knowledge and furthermore, to what end we ought to travail and
seek for it. For as Aristotle in a book that he made of the Soul says: Our
soul or mind at the time of our birth, is as a blanke, or a clean piece of
paper that has nothing upon it, but is ready to receive any perfectness,
knowledge, or manners and therefore if it so be that: the very perfection of the
soul, is knowledge. the Marquis does to good end admonish and exhort us to
seek for this knowledge, by all the means that we may. Cato says, Seek to get
knowledge or Art: For when fortune is fickle and will fail, yet Art and science
will never forsake thee. And therefore it is written in the sixth book of
Policrates, That the Emperor Octauian, as great a Prince as he was, caused his
children to be so brought up, that if ever fortune should fail them, yet they
should have a means to get their living. And therefore he caused his sons
to be trained up in knowledge of the wars, to learn, to run, to leap,
to swim, to cast the dart, to throw the stone, both with the hand and with
the sling, and his daughters to work all manner of linen works, and woollen
works: So that if ever it should chance them to fall into poverty, they
should yet be able with their hands to get their living, and the Proverb
says more, That a man ought not to seek learning for fond desire of praise,
Learning to what end it ought to be sought.
but skilfully to reprehende the unskillful sinners ways. For the intentes of
such as seek to be learned are diverse: Some, to the end they might be counted
wise and great learned men, and for such reputed and commended in every place,
not for any good that they mean to do to others thereby: and the end of this
is vanity: Others, not for to do any good withal, nor for any desire of
praise, but for their own pleasure: the end of which is foolish curiosity.
Some again seek to be learned, to come to riches and promotion: the end
whereof is covetousness: Others seek to attain to knowledge, to profit and
benefit their neighbors withal: And the end of that is charity: Others to
be instructed and edified them selves: And the end of that is wisdom: And
these two last be they, that seek not to be learned for vaineglory, but to be
skillful reprehenders and admonishers of others.

13.
By learning shall thou understand,
What God has done for thee:
And what he daily bringes to pass,
For all in each degree.
And how to love and honor him,
This dream forgotten quiet:
Whereof within a little time.
Thou shall forgo the sight.
The Paraphrase
Here does the Marquis declare what profit and commodity comes by
knowledge, The commodity of learning.
saying, that by learning we come to know what GOD has done, and what he
does for us. The knowledge whereby we may know GOD, and what he has done
for us, is to be had by perusing the old and new Testament, wherein we shall
find, how God is the creator of all the whole world and how he created it
only of his own goodness and mercy, and how he has given us laws and
commandments, by the which we may serve and obey him, and that though a man
have of long time lived virtuously and godly, yet if in the end he offend
God, and die without repentance, that God will never remember his righteousness
nor good life, that went before: Again, if a man has been a grievous sinner
all his life time, and yet in the end repent and turn unto GOD, and die with
unfeigned repentance, the merciful Lord will never lay to his charge any
sin that he has committed: According as the Prophet Ezechiel from the Lords
own mouth testifies, We shall also therein see that all the race and
posterity of man, for the offense of our first father Adam, are adjudged and
condemned to everlasting damnation: And how GOD, for the great love that he
bare to mankind, has sent his only begotten son Jesus Christ, to take our
flesh upon him, and to suffer most cruel death for our salvation: And to pay,
as Esaias says, The price of our redemption. Also by the Scriptures we know,
what other benifites soever the Lord has done for us. Beside, the scripture
teaches us how we ought to love God with all our heart, with all our mind, and
with all our forces, and that we ought rather to die a glorious death, then to
offend him with a sinful life: and this he means when he says, The dream
is forgotten quite that soon thou shall forgo. For our life is compared to a
sleep, which we shall leave before we be aware, as Innocentius says in a book
that he wrote of the wretchedness of the state of man, where he has these
words: Tell me my brother, The vanity and misery of this life.
what goodness do thou find in these worldly delights? What does thy
glory profit thee? What does thy pleasures avail thee? These be not they
that can deliver thee from death, nor defend thee from the worms: For he that
late was lusty and glorious in his Palace, lies now dead and stinking in
his Sepulcher: he that late was tickled with the delights of the bed, lies
now torn a sunder with the worms in his grave What meanest thou to be
proud, being but worms meat and ashes? Why moylest thou for riches, that
shall shortly be distributed to the poor? As the Prophet says, They slept
their sleep, and those that were lately rich, The great good that comes by
reading the scriptures.
have now nothing in their hands. There true wisdom, knowledge of God, and
skill in the scripture, brings us to this understanding. by this a man
knows how to serve God, not regarding this transitory life, which passes as
a sleep or a dream.

14.
To Gentlemen it does belong.
To know the arts divine,
Where knowledge chiefly floorisheth,
And learning best does shine.
Assuredly he well deserves
To have the upper seat,
That garnished with wisdom is,
And decked with learning great.
IN this Proverb the Marquis shows what manner of men ought to seek for
learning and understanding, and for the better understanding hereof, we must
consider, that there be arts Mechanical and arts Liberal. Arts Mechanical
are those, that are used by men of base condition, as Shoemakers, Taylours,
Carpenters, Smithes and all other that are handicraftesmen: Arts Liberal are
those learnings, and sciences, whereunto liberal or free men, that is, noble men
or Gentlemen apply them selves, as ye seven Liberal sciences, and therefore
they are called liberal, or free, that bestow their time in these knowledges,
because they be not of base mind nor estate, neither are they subject or
bound to any vile occupation: And therefore in the old time there were none
brought up in learning, but only the children of noblemen and Gentlemen: and
therefore says the Proverb, To Gentlemen it does belong, to know the arts
divine, That is to say, to such men as are of good estate and condition.
Traian (as Policrates in his sixth book writes) who was a Spaniarde and
Emperor of Rome, in a letter that he writes to the French king, persuades
him, to bring up his children in the knoweledge of the liberal arts, saying,
that a king without learning, is like an Ass with a crown, and therefore the
kings and Emperors in the old time did commit their children to the best
learned men, that they could get. Traian was brought up with Policrates: The
emperor Nero with Seneca: and great Alexander with Aristotle. To whom (as
Policartes in the forsaid book says) King Phillip upon the birth of his
son Alexander wrote his letters in this sort: Phillip the king, sends
greeting to Aristotle the Philosopher. I understand that I have a son borne,
for which I give thanks to the Gods, not so much for his birth, as that he
happened to be borne in thy time, by whom I trust to have him so brought up, that
he shall be worthy to succeed me in my kingdom and dominions, The Proverb
says further, That he deserves pre-eminence, that is garnished with wisdom
and learning. And assuredly look what difference there is betwixt perfection
and imperfection, The diversity betwixt the learned and the ignorant.
and betwixt darkness and light, so great is the diversity betwixt a learned
man and an ignorant, and because we should understand what great honor he
deserves that is beautified with learning and wisdom, both Daniel in his
second vision, and S. Jerome in his preface to the Bible do witness, that
the learned and the wise shall shine, as the brightness of the firmament, and
those that have instructed many in godliness, shall glister like the stars
for ever and ever. And therefore great pre-eminence does he deserve, that is
garnished with wisdom and learning.

15
The head and spring of goodness al,
Is wisdom, that does show
The means for to discern the truth,
And virtue pure to know.
Who so begins in his youth
In virtue to delight,
No doubt, but when he comes to age,
Will lead his life aright.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb the Marquis shows that one of the principal causes of
wisdom and knowledge, is to fear God, as Solomon in his proverbs says, The
beginning of wisdom, is the fear of God, and wisdom and knowledge the
foolish do abhor, and therefore he says, That wisdom is more worth then
the weapons of the mighty, of greater value then precious stones, and more
fine the^ pure gold. For by wisdom we are able to discern betwixt good and
evil, betwixt virtue and vice, to which end leaving to speak of the doctrine
and rules of the holy Scripture, whereby we are taught to flee from all sin
and wickedness and to embrace and follow vertuousnesse) Aristotle has
written three books: In the one of them he entreats of the rules and orders
that are requisite for the guiding of a country and city, which book is
called the Politiques: In the other he shows how a man ought to govern his
house, his wife, and his children, and this book is called the Aeconomikes.
The third, teaches how a man should govern him self, wherein there is a
medlie of rules and observations, by which a man may know the virtuous, and
discern and severe them from the vices. And specially in this book he
shows, that all manner of virtues are gotten by use and custom, and that a
man by using a long time to live virtuously, it comes at length to be
natural unto him, and although a man be naturally inclined to vice, yet if he
accustom him self to virtue, he shall leave his evil inclination and become
virtuous. And this is it that the Proverb says, Who so begins to live
well in his youth, it is a sign that he shall not do amiss in his age. But
it is not one virtuous act alone, that can be called a beginning, as Aristot.
says, no more then can one swallow show a spring. And the greatest presumption
by which we may conjecture (as Aristotle in the second of his Ethickes says)
whether a man shall prove virtuous or no, is the pleasure or the heaviness
that he takes in his well doing. For if he be joyful, and take delight in the
virtuous acts that he does, it is a token that he will prove well in his age,
and be very virtuous. But if he go about them, with an evil will, and seem
to take no delight therein, it is a sign that his virtues will not long
endure. And therefore as the wise man says: By the pleasantness and
heaviness of a child in his youth, we shall easily guess what he will be in
his age.

16.
That most renowned Solomon
for wisdom chiefly sought,
Whereby his Empire and his state
to order good he brought.
He gouernd of himself alone,
and never did debate,
Nor counsel callde for any thing,
that longed to his state.
The Paraphrase.
AS it is written in the third Book of the Kings, Solomon the son of
David, after the death of his Father, was chosen to be King. And the first
thing that ever he did, because he would lay a good foundation, he went to a
hie Mountain, that was near about him, called Gabaon, to offer sacrifices to
the Lord. And that night the Lord appeared to him in his sleep, and said unto
him, Ask what thou will, that I may give it thee. And Solomon said. Thou have
showed unto thy servant David my father great mercy, in that thou have given
him a son to sit upon his seat, and to succeed him in his kingdom: And
now, O Lord my God, it is thou that have made thy servant king, in stead of
David my father, and I am but young, and know not how to go out and in, and thy
servant is in the midst of thy people, which thou have chosen, and verily the
people are so many, as can not be told, nor numbered for multitude: Give
therefore unto thy servant an understanding heart, to iugde thy people, that I
may discern betwixt good and bad. And this pleased the Lord well, that Solomon
had desired this thing. And God said unto him, Because thou have asked this
thing, and have not asked long life, neither have asked riches, nor the soul
of thine enemies, but have asked understanding and discretion in judgment:
Behold I have done according to thy petition, for I have given thee a wise and
an understanding heart, so that there has been none like thee before thee, nor
after thee shall any arise like unto thee. This story serves here for this
Proverb, that shows, how Solomon sought chiefly for wisdom, by which
without debating of any matters, or calling of any counsel, he was able
sufficiently to govern his kingdom and dominions.

17.
If thou be eloquent, great praise
thereof to thee will rise,
But much more commendable it is
to be discrete and wise.
For he that wisdom has, will all
his life obedient be
Unto the rules, he learned has
in sweet Philosophy.
The Paraphrase.
THe Marquis here shows in this Proverb, what is the mark that a man ought
specially to shoot at, and says, that although it be a goodly thing for a man
to be eloquent, and to have a good tongue, yet it is a great deal more worthy
praise, to be wise. Eloquence is a fine and sweet kind of speaking, by the
pleasantness whereof, it draws men to the opinion of the speaker: The
figures, and rules whereof are set forth by Tullie in his Rethorike: And if
this eloquence be joined with wisdom and knowledge, it is a special
ornament: but if a man have more words then wit, he shall be counted a vain
iangler and a pratteler. And therefore says Tullie, That far better is
wisdom void of eloquence, then foolish pratteling without discretion.
Wisdom among all the moral virtues, that Aristotle in his Ethics entreats
of, is the most principal virtue, or rather, as he says, the only virtue,
meaning that all the virtues are chained and linked together in one. And
therefore the Philosophers commonly say, that whosoever has one, has al. For
if he have one virtue, he must needs have wisdom thoroughly, he that has
wisdom thoroughly, has all virtues: therefore he that has one virtue, has
all virtues. Wisdom, as the Philosophers say, consists of three parts: the
first is memory, to remember such things as has passed: the second knowledge,
to know such things as are present: the third, providence, to foresee such
things as are to come. And he that has these three parts, may be counted
wise, and a servant obedient to moral Philosophy. For as I said before,
wisdom contains in her self all moral virtue: And as Aristotle says, It
is a thing impossible for a man to be wise, and not to be good. And therefore
the Proverb says, The wise man is all his life obedient to moral
Philosophy.

18
Roboam being one that had
no skill, but did assay,
In every thing to strive against
the stream, did soon decay:
For vexing and molesting of
his subjects kept in thrall,
When least he looked for such a change,
they quite forsook him all.
The Paraphrase of the Marquis.
ROboam was the son of Solomon, and King of Israel, who after his fathers
decease, did use such tyranny over his subjects, that very woorthily he was
deprived of the most part of his government.

The Doctor.
TO prove the harms and mischiefs, that he that wants wisdom runs
into, the Marquis here brings in the Story of Roboam, the son of Solomon:
Of whom it is written in the third Book of the Kings, that after the death
of Solomon, the people assembled together to make him King, and spoke unto him,
saying, Thy Father made our yoke grievous, now therefore make thou the
grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke, that he put upon us,
lighter, and we will serve thee. And he said unto them, Depart yet for the
space of three days, and then come again to me. And the people departed. And
King Roboam took counsel with the old men, that stood before his Father,
while he yet lived, and said, What counsel give you, that I may have matter
to answer this people? And they said unto him, If thou be a servant to this
people this day, and follow their minds, and answer them, and speak gently
unto them this day, they will be thy servants for ever. But he forsook the
counsel that the old men had given him, and called unto his counsel young
men, that were grown up with him, and waited on him, and said unto the^. What
counsel give you, that we may answer this people? And the young men, that were
grown up with him, answered him, saying, Thus shall thou say unto the people:
My little finger shall be weightier then my fathers whole body, and where as
my father did lade you, and put a grievous yoke upon you, I will make it
heavier. At which words the people greatly disdaining, ten tribes of them
presently forsook him, and chose Jeroboam for their king. Whereby is concluded,
that Roboam, because he was not wise, nor advised, nor careful, to prevent
such mischiefs as might happen, ouershooting himself shamefully in his foolish
answer, was worthily forsaken and rejected of his people: as is mentioned in
the Proverb.

19.
My son, serve God with all thy heart,
for why, his wrath from hie
Does fall, and whiske through all the world
in twinkling of an eye.
For when he list, he casts down
such as he blessed late,
And does advance the godly man
to great and hie estate.
The Paraphrase.
THe Marquis shows in this Proverb the profit and commodity that comes
of serving and fearing God, and the hurtes and inconveniences that follow to
such as offend him according to the daily lessons of the church. The soueraign
power of God is showed, in casting down the mighty out of their seat, which
are those that heap to them selves his displeasure, and in exalting the humble
and the meek, which are those that fear him. For as David in one of his
Psalms says: The Lord throws down one, and lifts up an other, for the
vessel is in the hand of God: And of such as serve and fear God, he says, I
have not seen the just forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread: And of
those that offend, and fall into his displeasure, he says, I have seen the
wicked in prosperity, and flourishing like the Cedars in Libanus, and within a
while I went by the place where he was, and behold, he was perished, and not
to be seen. And therefore well says the Proverb, The Lord brings the
mighty to the ground, that offends him, and provoke his displeasure, and
aduaunceth to honor the poor man that fears him. And upon this is the whole
Scripture in a manner grounded: that is to wit, that God promises everlasting
joy, and sufficiency of worldly goods to all those that serve him, and
everlasting destruction both of life and goods, to those that offend, and
provoke his wrath.

20.
Be conformable to the time,
and season that does fall:
For otherwise to be, is cause
of grief and loss of all.
Abhor presumption as a monster
and an enemy
To knowledge, that is only light
and lamp of magestie.
The Paraphrase.
IT is written of David the King, that for fear of falling into the hands of
Saul, he fled into an other country near adjoining, where they well
understood that he was anointed king over Israel: And when they had taken
him, and brought him before the King of the country, whose name was Achis,
because they should not detain him in prison, nor gratify Saul with the
delivery of him, he feigned him self to be mad, and wryed his mouth, as one
that had been possessed with a spirit, and fomed at the mouth: and this was
counted for a great wisdom and discretion in David, because he framed him
self according to the time and season, whereas if he had done otherwise, he
had cast away him self. And Cato says, That it is a great point of wisdom,
to counterfaite folly in some place: and in an other place, It is good for a
man to seem half out of his wit and enraged, when time and reason requires. As
Aristotle in his third Book of Ethics witnesses, where he speaks of
Fortitude: At some time again it shall behooue him to show him self to be
humble and meek, yea and also fearful, as Aristostle in the very same book
writes. The like is to be observed in the virtues of Temperaunce,
Liberality, and all other virtues, in knowledge of which circumstances,
Wisdom does chiefly consist. Again the Proverb says, That a man ought to
abhor presumption, as the enemy, and contrary to the clear Lamp of
Knowledge. Whereupon Saint Hierome in one of his Epistles writes after this
sort.

Amongst all other things, that the Romans wisely devised, this was one, That
whenever any of their Captains returned with victory to Room, least he
should be puffed up with pride and vainglory, for the worthynesse of his person,
or brought into a fools paradise, forgetting himself, for the great honor and
triumph that was done unto him, they thought good, that as they honored him
three manner ways, for the overthrow that he wan: so the self same day, to
make him remember him self, and to let fall his Pecockes tail, they likewise
dishonored him with three notable dispights. The honor (which was done to all
conquerours) that they did unto him was in three manners: The first was, that
all the people of the City, came out to meet and receive him, with great joy
and gladness: The second, all the Prisoners that he had taken, went before
his Chariot, with their hands bound behind them. The third, they put upon him
a shert of the God Jupiters, and set him in a Chariot of Gold, which was
drawn with four white Horses, in which sort they carried him to the Capitol,
with great honor, joy, and showtes of the people. And with these three sorts
of honor, they joined these three reproaches, to the end he should not wax
proud nor insolent. The first was, they placed by him cheek to cheek, a
ragged and an unseemly knave: and thus they did to signify, that any man
though his state were never so base nor miserable, might by virtue attain to
the like honor: The second, this beggarly companion, did now and then buffet
him, to the end, he should not be too proud of his honor, and ever as he
struck him, badde him to remember that he was a man, and should dye: The
third dishonor was, that it was lawful for every man to give him the
shamefullest words they could devise. And this the Romans did as I said
before, to the end the Conqueror should abhor presumption, which is the
adversary of the Knowledge, that clear and comfortable light.

21.
For time is it, that all things makes,
and time does all things mar:
And when dame Fortune pleased is,
such things as hurtful are,
Fall out to our commodity,
and many times do please:
While such things as commodious are,
do turn to our disease.
The Paraphrase.
THis is the only difference betwixt everlasting things, and transitory
things: The everlasting things, endure for ever: the transitory things, as
with time: they come, so with time they decay, and therefore in the proves
before, the Marquis gives us advice, and exhorts us to be conformable to
the time and season; And that reason that makes him so to say, is, that as a
thing is in one time wrought and done, so is it in an other time undone and
destroyed. For as Solomon in his Eccleastes says, There is a time to be borne
and a time to die, a time to build, and a time to pluck down: neither ought we
as ye proverb says, to be offended, if things fall not out according to our
desire, for when it pleases Fortune, such things as seem displeasant unto us;
shall redound to our commodity. For the better understanding whereof, we must
consider what is the true signification of this word (Fortune) of which there
be many and sundry opinions. For some, those yt be heathen people, as Boethius
in his first book Of Consolation says, will needs have this Fortune to be a
Lady, and a great goddess, under whose government and at whose disposition,
are all the treasures and riches of the world: and farther they say, that she
has all manner of persons in the, world upon a wheel, and that her condition
and nature (for she is a woman) is, never to be long of one mind, but sometime
of great and honorable personages, to make poor and miserable creatures, and
again of poor and miserable caitiues, to make hye and mighty Princes, still
whirling about her unsteadfast wheel, as pleases her. Aristotle has also the
like manner of speech in his Book Of good Fortune, where he affirms, that
there are diverse and sundry opinions about Fortune. But all their opinions
are far differing from our Christian faith. For as Boethius in his first
Book Of Consolation, And Saint Augustine in the fourth Book Of the City of
God, do unite, this Fortune and destiny, are no other things, then the
providence of God, and therefore to speak like a good Christian, that which the
Proverb here says: When as it pleases Fortune, etc. is as much to say, as
when it pleases the providence of God, the things that be hurtful unto us,
shall turn to our profit, and such things as are profitable, to our hurt and
destruction. Whereof there is a very good example in the holy Scriptures, in
the first Book of Moses, where it is written, that the Children of Jacob, for
the malice that they bare to Joseph their brother, threw him into a deep
pit, and after sold him to certain Merchants, who sold him to an officer
of King Pharaoes, that upon the vnfull accusation of his wife, kept him a long
time in Prison, from whence he was sent for by King Pharao, and after that he
had declared the meaning of his dream and foreshewed the coming of the dear
and the barren years, he was made the greatest man about him, which was the
cause that the patriarch Jacob with all his house escaped the great famine, and
came to live honorably in Egypt and thus did it please fortune, that is to
say, God, that the hurtful things, that is, the imprisonment of Joseph, and
all the other harms and miseries that he sustained, should turn to the
profit of himself, his father, and his brethren. So likewise do the things
that appear good and profitable, many times fall out to be hurtful and evil
unto us, as to have great store of money, is a profitable thing, and yet it
often falls, that their throats are cut for it, that have it: and so does a
profitable thing become hurtefull.

22.
My son, the wiseman and his life,
still set before thy face:
And speak no evil of thy Prince,
in any secret place;
Look that thy tongue and judgment both
such nets do warily shun:
For why, the very walls them selves,
Will witness what is done.
The Paraphrase.
THE Marquis in this Proverb shows, that if a man be not able of him self
to rule and order his life, he should seek out, and set before his eyes, same
wise and notable man, according to whose doings he should in every point frame
his life, as Seneca writes to Lucilius, and it is one of the chiefest lessons
that he could devise to give him, for the framing of his life aright. He
wills him, that he should always imagine him self to be in the presence of
some good man, for example sake either Cato or Lelius, for either of them were
both virtuous and wise: and that he should frame al his thoughts, and direct
all his deeds, according to the life and virtues of them, and so should he
never do amiss, and this is it, that is meant in ye proverb, Follow the wise
man and his law. The law of the wiseman is his discretion, for as Aristotle
says, The just and the virtuous man is a law unto him self, for he
measures the times, and disposes his things, according as the time and reason
does require. And the Proverb says more, Speak thou no evil of thy Prince:
according to the doctrine of the Apostle Saint Paul, We are bound to fear
God, and to honor the King. We ought to serve the King as our natural Lord,
and we offend God grieuou^ly, in dissobeying of him: In so much as some
Doctors of law are of opinion, that whosoever obeys not the Kings
commandment finds deadly, according to that is written in the second of the
Kings, He that obeys not the Prince, shall dye for it. And therefore as it
is a grievous and great sacrilege, to blaspheme the name of God: so is it a
damnable and horrible offense to speak evil of the King: and against such as
shall so offend, it is very well provided, both by the constitutions of the
Emperors, and by the laws and statutes of Spain. And the Marquis says, That
we ought not only to forbear to speak evil of the Prince abroad and in
company, whereby it may come to his ear, but also we ought not to do it in
secret. For Solomon says in his Proverbs. The Prince not to be evil spoken
of.
Speak no evil of the Prince iu any wise, for if thou do, be sure the
very birds of the air will disclose it. The Birds of the air, as some
Doctoures teach, are the Spyrtes and Diuelles, according to the saying of our
Lord and Savior in the Gospel, where he tells the parable of the seed,
that fell by the high way, and the Birds of the air devoured it. The The
birds of the Air says our Savior, are the lewd and wicked spirits, that
take out of the heart of man the word of God. And in this sort is the
aforesaid allegation to be understood, that the birds of the air will
discover it, that is to say, the wicked spirits, who shall reveal the treason
that thou haste spoken in secret, and this is it, that the Proverb means,
when it says. The very walls will witness bear.

The third Chapter of Justice.
23.
From Justice see thou varrie not,
for duty, love, nor fear:
Let no good turn at any time
procure thee to forbear.
Or for to swerve in any point,
from sentence just and right:
In giving dew correction to
the faithless fautie wight.
The Paraphrase.
AS Aristotle in the first Book of his Ethics affirms, that the cleerest
and most bewtifull virtue of all others, The duty of a Justice.
is Justice, whose brightness does far exceed either the day star, or the
evening star: and therefore he says, That Justice comprehends in it self
all other virtues. And Saint Augustine says in his fourth Book Of the City
of God, that Justice being taken away, the kingdoms of the earth are nothing
else but great companyes of thieves, nor the companyes of thieves any other
then small kingdoms. And therefore says the wise man in his Ecclesiastes,
Follow justice, all you that are Judges on the earth. Whosoever is a Judge,
ought to be as a Balance, and just weight, in all his doings, and neither for
fear, friendship, nor any other respect, to forbear the executing of upright
Justice. And therefore Valerius shows in his sixth book, that where as a
certain Judge forbear to do justice, because of the love that he bare to ye
party that was accused, A good example.
Cambises caused his skin to be plucked over his ears, and to be nailed to the
bench where he sat, commanding his son to be set in the place, and to give
the sentence, that his father should have given: which was such a terror to
all those that came after, that from that time forward, they could never be
brought by fear or friendship, to give any other judgment, then that which
was just and upright. And so has God in his laws commanded, Thou shall do
Justice to the pore as well as to the mighty, neither shall thou have any
respect of persons. One of the seven wise men of Athens, as it is written in
the lives of the Philosophers, was wont to say, that the laws, where good
Iusticers wanted, were like unto Eobwebs, where flies and such weak Creatures
do hang and stick fast: but the great and the strong do break through
without any stop. Who soever will deal in justice as he ought to do, must have
no respect of persons, but must punish as well the evil doeings of the great
ones, as the offenses of the meanest sort.

24.
This is the just and certain line,
that safely us does guide:
And shows the true and perfect path,
by measure truly tried.
She chosen was by God him self,
sent down from heaven hye,
The Prophet does confirm* that she
descended from the sky.
THe Marquis here shows how great the excellency of Justice is: and Tully
writes in the dreme of Scipio, that for such as have well governed in the
common wealth, and uprightly and truly administered Justice, there is prepared
in an other world more hyer and glorious places then for us, because of the
labors and toils that they have sustained, for the preserving of their
country. And as Aristotle writes in his Ethics Justice is an external good,
and is properly to give to every man that which is his. There are many that
can use them selves well in such matters as touch their own commodity, but
not in things that are to the behoof of others. And therefore Justice is a most
excellent virtue, and the very line and straight path yt leads us to heaven,
and as the Prophet says, Righteousness (which is God) looks continually down
from heaven, for to give every man according to his deserts: glory and reward
to such as do well, and correction and punishment to such as have done evil. And
y^ al men are bound to do Justice, Elianus proves by a pretty tale in his story
of the Romans, where he shows that Traian the Emperor, going with a great
army against his enemies, there meets him a widow, that with piteous cries
and lamentatio^s, falling down at his fete, besought him that she might have
Justice of certain that had slain her son. Traian made her answer, that as
soon as he returned from his journey, he would do her justice. And what,
says she, If you never return, who shall do me justice? That shall, quoth
Traian, my successor. The widdowe answered, What is that to thee if thy
successor do well: when thou art to receive the reward of thine own doings,
and are bound to do me justice: thy successor shall be bound to do Justice to
such as suffer wrong in his time, neither shall the justice of an other man be
an excuse for thee. The Emperor being touched with these words, A good Emperor.
alighted from his horse, and departed not from thence, till he had thoroughly
satisfied the poor woman. For the continual remembrance of which his worthy
deed, the people set up his image in brass in the midst of Rome, because he
showed the true and perfect Justice, that was elected by God.

25.
How worthy was the famous act
of Lentus noble knight,
Who all affection set aside,
and love forgotten quight,
Contented was (though guiltless he)
of any trespass done,
The cruel torturs of the law
to suffer with his son?
The Marquis.
LEntus, as Valerius in his sixth book declares, was a Senator of Rome, by
whom the city was strengthened with good and profitable laws. Amongst a
number of others, he made a law, that whosoever was taken in adultrie, should
lose his eyes. It happened that a son of his was taken for the same offense.
Upon whom when the father observing the laws that he had made, would without
qualifying or discharging of any point, presently have executed the punishment:
the whole city being moved with compassion toward the young man, did
earnestly sue for his pardon, with whose importunate and instant requests, the
father being overcome, granted. Yet because the offense should not remain
unpunished, he first caused one of his own eyes to be plucked out, and after
one of his sons: which both is and ought to be a great example to all such as
bear the sword of Justice.

26.
Frondinus to the end he would
preserve the law he made,
Without delay did cast himself,
upon the piercing blade.
And therefore ought we to enforce
our selves to live upright.
If that we will correctours be
of others oversight.
The Marquis.
FRondinus was a Citizen of Rome, as Valerius in his sixth book, and John
Galensis in a Breuiate that he made of the four principal virtues, writes:
Contentions and quarellings arising many times amongs the Citizens of Rome,
about the debating of their matters, there was a law made amongst them, that
whosoever should come to the Capitol with a weapon, should suffer death.
Frondinus forgetting himself, coming from the field with his sword about
him, came into the Capitol, which when one of the standers by perceived, he
blamed him, and told him, that he had broken the law that he made. Nay,
quoth he, thou shall see that I will confirm the law that I made, and
suddenly thrust himself through with his own swoorde, whereas he might well
with some colorable reason have escaped the punishment.

The fourth Chapter of Patience and moderate Correction.
27.
Be not to hasty nor to quick,
in rage without respect,
But bear a te^perate hand, when thou
the offender do correct.
For moderate correction
is good, and free from blame:
Where cruelty, that does exceed.
deserves reproach and shame.
THe Marquis does show the moderation that a man ought to have in giving of
correction, and says, Whenever we punish the evil doings of any man, we
ought not to do it furiously, nor hastily, but with temperance and reason,
whereof Valerius has diverse notable examples, but specially in his fifth
book, he writes of one Archita of Toranto, a man of great possessions, that
he was a long time absent from his Country, about the study of Pythagoras
his doctrine. And when he returned home, and had surueyed his manours and
possessions, he found the^ to be greatly spoiled and decayed: whereupon
calling to him his steward, he said unto him. Surely if I were not at this
present furiously bent against thee, I would punish thee according to thy
deserts, and make thee an example to all unfaithful varlets. So that Archita
chose rather to leave the great negligence and evil dealing of his Steward
unpunished, then hastily and furiously to correct him in his wrath. The same
Valerius does also in the same book tell us, that this Archita being
extreme angry with one of his servants, for a villaynous part that he had
played, would not in any wise punish him himself, but committed the
punishment of him to Spensippus a friend of his, to the end that he, not
moved with wrath, should use measure and temperance in the corecting of him.
Seneca writes also of the very same Archita in his third Book of Anger,
that being on a time greatly offended with one of his slaves, he caused him to
be stripped stark naked, thinking to have scourged him: and as he was ready
to strike him, he plucked back his hand, and restrained himself, wherewith
a friend of his happening to come in, and asking what the matter was, I thought
(quoth he) to have scourged this fellow, but feeling my self to be in a
rage, I thought it no meet thing to punish any man in mine anger. And this
is the meaning of the Proverb, where it says, That moderate Correction is
good, and free from blame: And when it is out of measure, deserves reproach and
shame.

28
The man that seeks to make amends*
refuse not to relieve,
Nor let it ever thee delight,
the woeful wretch to grieve.
A base and beastly mind it is
to follow him that flies,
And valiant is it, to assail
the tyrant that destroys.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb, the Marquis shows how men ought to behave themselves
toward such as have offended, and are sorrowful for it. For according to the
saying of the Prophet, God desires not the death of a sinner, but to have him
to turn and be saved. And the chiefest lesson that old Anchises (as Virgil in
the sixth book of his Eneados writes) did will his son to take heed unto,
was to seek in all his exploites to maintain peace, as much as he might, to
pardon such as were sorrowful for that they had done, and to use the swoorde
against proud and disdainful tyrants. And to say true, it is not the part of
a man, to persecute any man that is in misery, to follow him that flies, nor
to strive with such as are weak and unable. And therefore Job says unto God,
Will thou show thy power against a leaf, that trembles with the wind? And
persecute a straw that is dry and withered? Meaning, that it was not a thing
beseeming the majesty of God, who was almighty, to persecute so miserable a
creature, as he was. And the Proverb says, That it is a point of manhood, to
assail him, that minds to do mischief, And to invade with the sword, as
Anchises says to Enaeas, the proud and contemptuous persons, not suffering
them to use their tyrannous mind in doing of evil, as the Civil law
teaches, touching the duty and behavior of a Conqueror or governor, that
they ought to take such order in every Province, that the wealthy and the
mighty oppress not the poor and the needy, and that they hinder not such as
go about to defend and chearish them. And this is the very meaning of the
Proverb, where it says, That it is the sign of a valiant mind, to resist
all such, as seek to do wrong.

29.
It does declare a noble mind,
for to forgive a wrong,
And with a perfect patience, to
forbear and suffer long,
The mercy that with measure meets
is virtue great to praise,
Restorer of thy state with life,
and lengthner of thy days.
The Paraphrase.
AMong the rest of the virtues that Aristotle in the fourth Book of his
Ethickes speaks of, Magnanimity, or greatness of mind is one. And the
special grace of this virtue is, that such as have it, can not be touched
with any injury or reproach. For if injury be offered unto them, a noble
mind makes no account of it, but rather disdaines him that offers it, as a
vile and an unworthy person. Tullie writes in his Book of the virtues of
Caesar, that he was of so great a courage, and so noble a heart, that where
he was very mindful of all other things, he never would remember any
injury done unto him. And Saint Augustine, in one of his Epistles says, that
he that has a great mind, and a noble and gentlemanly heart, does not
only, not bear in memory, an injury done unto him, but also denies, that
he received any injury. And Seneca in one of his Epistles says, that if a
man of a noble and valiant mind, be at any time injured, he ought to behave
himself as Plato did, who when one had given him a blow in the mouth, neither
sought for amends, nor labored to revenge, but denied, that any injury was
done unto him. The same Seneca in his book of wrath tells, that the
Atheniens having sent their Ambassadors to king Phillip: the king, after their
message declared, required of them to know what thing he might do, that might
be most acceptable to the people of Athens. Wherewith one churlishe knave
amongst them, called Democritus, stepped forth and told him, that the
greatest pleasure that he could do to the city of Athens, The great modesty
and magnanimity of king Phillip.
was to go hang him self, and when all the company that stood by, were
greatly offended with this lewd answer, and were about to have torn him in
pieces, the king would by no means that they should hurt him, but let him
alone, and said unto the Ambassadors, Go tell your masters of Athens, that
much more proud are they that do utter such words, then those that hear
them, and not revenge them: neither is there any other cause of this, but the
modest clemency and virtue.

30.
What man is there alive, that may
So great offender be,
But if that he be judged by rules
of love and charity:
His trespass shall appear such as
May pardon well deserve?
For mercy is the shield, that does
The guilty only serve.
The Paraphrase.
SAint Isidorus says, Evil is that justice that pardons not the frailty of
man: And a little after, Do not desire to condemn, but to correct and amend.
Beware of rigor in the executing of justice, and think of mercy in giving of
sentence. And Saint Gregory in his Pastoral says, That justice without
mercy, and mercy without justice, are both imperfect. And therefore although
a man have offended and done amiss, if he be not froward, obstinate, and
without grace, being judged with love and charity, his offense shall be found
tolerable, and the severity of justice, beng tempred with pity, shall bring
the offendour to repent and amend.

31.
I always judge him worthy praise,
that pardons graciously:
For mercy doubtless is to man
a crown of honor high.
On the other side I do mislike,
the sword with blood to stayne,
The stroke whereof unjustly dealt,
cannot be called again.
The Paraphrase.
TO forgive, and show mercy to such as offend, we are stirred up both by the
law of nature, the holy Scriptures, and the gracious admonition of our
Savior. The law of nature does move us to be merciful, as Seneca in his
first book of Mercy writes, and hereof we have a natural example in the
king of Bees, whom nature has framed without a sting, having taken away his
weapon, to the end he should be neither fierre, nor cruel, nor a revenger
of injuries, and that men might take examples of these little poor creatures.
The Scripture moves us to mercy, as it appears in the Epistle of Saint
James, where he says, that judgment shall be given without mercy, to such as
show no mercy. Our Savior exhorts us to mercy, where he says: Blessed
are all those that are merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. The Proverb
says, That the punishment of the sword is misliked for if it be once done, it
is past all redress. And therefore Salust in the Conspiracy of Catiline
says, that we ough^ to try every way, that may be, before we come to the
sword, even as the Physicians do, who uses all the medicines that may be,
before they cut of the member. And if so be that Princes may give sufficient
correction without the death of the offendour, they ought to do it. For if it
be once done, it is to late to say, I would it were not.

32.
I do not mean that loathsome crimes,
and heinous pardon crave:
Or that the wholesome laws, or good
decrees restraint should have:
For such a man ought not to live,
as murdereth wilfully:
True justice always does command,
that he that killes, shall die.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb are limited and interpreted the Proverbs that go before.
For such as ought to forgive, are either private persons or officers, in the
common wealth. As they be private persons, they are bound to release the
extremity, but not the injury, for they may require a recompense at the law:
But if they do not, their reward shall be the greater. According to the saying
of our Savior in his Gospel, Forgive, and you shall be forgiven. And touching
the examples that are in the proverbs that go before: if they be officers and
in authority, they cannot pardon an offense that is done against a common
wealth, nor trespass, that is done betwixt neighbors: But they may use a
moderation and discretion, according to the circumstances of the matter, as if
the party grieved be a slave, or free born, if he be a gentleman, or a common
person, if the offense were in words, or upon proposed malice, or ignora^tly,
and not wilfully done, if he murdered with poison, or with the sword. In such
cases the Judges and those that be in authority are wont to have great
consideration: for he that kills with poison, by treason, or secretly, his
offense is more horrible the^ his that kills by cha^cemedlie. And therefore
it is provided by the laws of Spain, that if the Prince upon special
consideration does pardon a man that has killed, such cases are always
excepted: for he that murdereth after any of the aforesaid manners, is not
to be suffered, nor pardoned: and this is the effect of the Proverb.

33.
To pardon such a kind of man,
were very cruelty:
And quite contrary to the rule,
of all humanity.
Nor name of pity does deserve,
that suffers vilannie.
But is the overthrow of laws,
and all authority.
The Paraphrase.
THe meaning of this Proverb, is declared in the Proverb that goes before.
For it is a great cruelty, and contrary to al humanity, to pardon such a
one as murdereth by treason, or villanously, and it would be the decay and
destruction of all justice and authority. For as S. Augustine in his book Of
the city of God says, Justice is of such an excellency, as the lewdest
people that be, cannot live without it, much less those that be good and
virtuous. Likewise Saint Augustine, as has been alleged before, says, Take
justice away, and your kingdoms are nothing else but great companies of
thieves, and therefore it is ordained in the statutes of Spain, that if there
be in any Province or Country, great numbers of evil disposed persons, and
if they happen to take one of them, though the party deserve not to die, yet
it shall be lawful for the Justice to hang him, for a terror and example to
the others. And if he otherwise do, it deserves not the name of pity, But of
evil sufferance, and the hinderance and overthrow of laws and authority.

The fifth Chapter of Temperance.
34.
As much as it deserves praise,
with temperance to feed.
Which does our mortal life sustain,
and serves for our need:
So much abhorred ought to be
the greedy glutton great,
That thinks there is no other life,
but for to drink and eat.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb, and certain others that follow, the Marquis shows the
order that we ought to observe in eaeating and drinking: and these two, being
the chiefest sustainers of our life, a man has as much a do as may be, to
use a moderation and temperance in them. For as Aristotle in the second book of
his Ethics says, These two do only sustain our mortal life, and are
always desired as things of most pleasure: and because we have so great
delight in them, as the things wherewith we have been accustomed from our
birth, it is very hard and painful to be restrained of them. But those that
exceed and observe no measure therein, are counted of Aristotle in the first
of his Ethickes, to live like Dogs, and to choose the life of monsters. The
same Aristotle in his Ethics, tells us of a great glutton, that was called
Philoxenus, who put all his felicity in eating and drinking: and the earnest
request that he made to the Gods, was that they would make his neck as long as
a Cranes neck, to the end his delight might be the greater, in the long going
down of his meat, and his drink. For he took that for the chiefest pleasure
that was.

35
Great honor does this temperance,
deserve at all assayes,
Since it a virtue always is,
of great and special praise:
For heat and fury great it does
by honesty assuage,
And stays the frantike flame, that in
the youthful years does rage.
The Paraphrase.
WE do read, that many have greatly offended more by excess in eating and
drinking, then for any other offense. For example sake, let us look upon our
first Father Adam, who for a gluttonous desire of eating, brought both himself
and al his posterity to destruction. Lot, the brother to Abraham, by too much
drinking, as it is written in Genesis, shamed not to lie with two of his
daughters. And therefore is Temperance and sobriety worthy of great honor,
being a virtue of greatest comme^dation. The maids of Rome that were appointed
to attend upon their Gods, to the end they should be sober and temperate, did
never eat more the^ three meals in a week: and Valerius writes in his first
book, that the women of Rome, to keep themselves chaste and sober, did never
drink wine. Of such sobernes and temperance was the great Alexander (as
Vegetius writes in his book Of the art of wars) that he was so far from
setting his delight in eating and drinking, that he never used to eat but as
he travailed. We likewise read, that hard by the camp of Hanniball, there
grew an appletree, being as full of apples as it might hang: And so great was
the continence and temperance of the soldiers, that the tree after their
departure remained as full of fruit, as it was when they first encamped. For
they counted it a great shame and dishonor, to eat any thing that was
deyntie, while they were in the field. And of Julius Caesar the Emperor, we
read that his diet was gross and common, as herringes, sprattes, cheese, and
green figs, and that he did eat at all times, and in all places, whenever
he was hungry, and with this temperance and modesty, he bridled the fury and
disorder that follows of to much eating and drinking. Gluttony provoke
Lechery.
For the belly, being stuffed with good meats and wines, does presently
yield to the rage of riot and Lechery. And therefore says Solomon in his
Proverbs, That wine ought not to be given to Princes: For where drunkenness
has place, no secret can be kept, And therefore the Proverb says,
Temperance stays the raging lust of youth, and of small and temperate
feeding, there arises neither disordinate lust, nor other evil. Saint
Augustine did ever use to say, that he lived not to eat, but did eat for to
live, and this is the Temperance which, as the Proverb says, is worthy of
honor.

36.
But seeldome poverty is seen,
such persons to molest:
As are of heedfull government,
and slothfulness detest,
But idleness and gluttony
where once they do infect,
No virtue ever do regard,
nor honor do respect.
The Paraphrase.
SAint Bernarde in an Epistle that he writes of the ordering and governing of
a house, to one Raimond a gentleman, does specially amongst other things exhort
him, to have a careful eye to his living, and to his expenses, and to take
heed that his receipts be greater then his charges. For if his expenses and his
revenues be one as much as the other, he shall be sure to be ouershoes and
undone before he be aware: and therefore his counsel is, that he that is wise,
should always set his belly and his purse at discord, and upon their
strife be taught to know whose part he should take. The belly proves his
purpose by the present delight that he feels, and the purse proves his by
the trial of the present harm and the misery to come: and far better is it
for a man to provide and be careful before he come in need, then to seek
for help, when he is in misery. And this is it that is meant by the
Proverb, That poverty is seeldome known to come to a person of good
government: And gluttony, and sloth, where they once come, have never regard
to Nobility. For as Saint Bernarde says, The negligence and poverty of the
Master of the house is, as it were, a burning and consuming fire in the top
of it.

37
His time he may not idly spend,
that seeks for to gain.
For knowledge is not gotten, but
by industry and pain.
So ought thou for to rule thy life,
and order such to keep:
As thou prefer a gaineful watch,
before a harmefull sleep.
The Paraphrase.
SOlomon in his Proverbs wills the slugard and the loyterer, that he go to
the Emoth, and consider her order and her tratrauayls, which having neither
Captain, nor governor, seeks and provides in Summer for her living, and
gathers and lays up in the Harvest time, as much as shall suffice he to
live by in the winter: And says, that if a man will take pains and be
diligent, his harvest shall flow like a fou^tayne, and poverty shall presently
fly from him, and therefore does the Proverb bid, To prefer a gaynefull
watch before a harmeful sleep. For learning is not to be got without travel,
for all men have not knowledge by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. But he
that will atteine to knowledge, must seek and take pains for it, and he that
will come to be able to live, must as the Proverb says, prefer a good
watching, before an evil sleep.

38.
For procreation only, and
increase of mortal kind,
Forsake the chaste virginity,
with wise and sober mind.
Consider that this vain delight
was once the woeful fall
Of Solomon, for which he lost
both wit, and grace and al.
The Paraphrase of the Marquis.
THe perfection and profoundnesse of Solomon the king of Israel, as well in
natural judgment, as in knowledge of the law, is both at this day
sufficiently known, and shall be always hereafter manifest, who in his latter
age being waxen effeminate, and altogether ruled by women, laid aside his
obedience to GOD, and became an idolatour, as may be seen at large in the
book of the kings.

The Doctor.
THe Marquis having in his Proverbs before, declared the inconveniences that
men fall into by gluttony, and excess in eating and drinking, does show us
in this Proverb, and a few that follow, the inconueuiences and harms that
proceed of carnal and fleshly lust: For where as men cannot live for ever,
nor always continue, and that it is incident and common to them, that some be
borne, and some die: it is therefore of necessity provided by nature, that men
should have the company and use of women, and so break the bonds of
virginity: And this ought to be done with great modesty and consideration,
as the Proverb here shows: For a man to lie with any other then his own
wife, though it be with intent of increasing the world, is heinous and deadly
sin, Yea, if a man lie with his own wife upon a fleshly desire, and not for
procreation, he does offend: For a man ought not to have the use of a woman
for any other end, then for the increasing of posterity: Or for avoiding of
whoredom, he may use his own wife. And those that do otherwise, do fall into
that filthy sensuality, that brought Solomon to all his misery, whereof the
Marquis has partly spoken above.

39.
And for the selfsame grievous sin,
Was David brought full low:
And in the midst of mortal plagues,
was taught his fault to know*
The lofty Tarquin in his pride,
Was punished therefore,
And from the stately gates of Rome,
Was thrust for evermore.
The Paraphrase of the Marquis.
David that most holy Prophet, and king of Israel after Saul, was a man that
did many worthy and notable acts, and a man of great wisdom, he does
greatly set forth the glory and Majesty of GOD in his Book of Psalms.
Notwithstanding he did grievously fall and offend in fleshly and beastly
affection, committyng most horrible adultery: howbeit he afterward turned
to GOD with great repentance, and with great grief and mourning bewailed his
offense. He committed adultery with the wife of Vrias, who was mother to
Solomon, for the which grievous offense, the Lord was more offended with him,
then for all that ever he did, as is to be seen at large in his life.

The Doctor.
SExtus Tarquinius was the son of Tarquinius the King, as Liuie in the first
of his Decades writes. The like is affirmed by Saint Augustine in his book of
the City of GOD, Valerius Maximus, and many other ancient writers. No less
was Lucretia famous for her virtue, then was this Tarquine to be abhorred for
his wickedness. Amongst many that have written of the worthiness of this
Lady, none does so greatly delight me, as M. John Galensis, in a book that
he wrote of the four principal virtues, who^ I only determine to follow. His
words as I have translated the^ out of the Tuscan tongue are these: Well
worthy of immortal and everlasting remembrance, is the noble and virtuous
Lady Lucretia: Who refusing to live any longer, did rip out the stain of the
villainy and violence done unto her, with the death of her own person: The
manner whereof S. Augustine tells in his book of the city of God, saying, that
Sextus Tarquinius came with Collatinus the husband of Lucretia, to a house of
his, called Collatinu^, where they found Lucretia virtuously disposed amongst
her maidens and women: the only Paragon of her time, and most commended of all
others, was this Lucretia: Whom when the son of Tarquinius king of the Romans
had thoroughly beheld, he was presently inflamed with disordinate and wicked
love toward her: whereupon within a few days after, accompanied only with
one man, he returns unknown to Collatinus, unto the aforesaid place, where
he was honorably entertained and received of Lucretia: who made him great
cheer, and lodged him according to his estate, supposing that she had had her
friend, and not her enemy in her house. Tarquinius being now a bed, and al a
fire with the flames of beastly desire, perceiving that they were all fast a
sleep in the house, taking his swoorde in his hand, leapeth out of his bed,
and goes directly to the chamber of Lucretia, whom he found fast a sleep:
where laying his hand upon her breast, he said unto her, Lie still Lucretia, I
am Sextus Tarquinius, if thou make any noise, thou shall die for it.
Wherewithal the Lady being with great fear awaked, and seeing no succor
about her, nor any way too escape death, Tarquinius begins to disclose unto
her his great affection, and sometime with fair words, entreating her, and
sometime again terribly threatening her, assaieth all the ways that he can
devise to bring her to grant to his desire: But when he saw that she was by no
ways to be removed from her steadfast and chaste mind, and that the terror
of death could nothing prevail, he casts about again, and thinkeeth to
boorde her on an other side, and says unto her, I will tell thee what I will
do, if thou will not consent unto me, I will first kill thee, and afterward
kill an evil favored knave that I have here in the house, and lay him in
bed with thee, whereby it shall be reported to the world, that thou were taken
in shameful and filthy adultery. And with this fear he overcame the chaste
mind of the virtuous Lady, and having obtained his desire, with great
disdain departed. Wherewith the poor Lucrecia, being now overwhelmed with
sorrow and pensiveness, for her great and grievous mishappe, sends with all
speed possible to her father, her husband and all other their friends at
Rome, earnestly desiring them to come unto her with as much haste as they
could. Who when they were come, Lucrecia, all heavy and sorrowful in her
bed, at their entering into the house, fell into a great weeping, and when her
friends began to salute her, and to bid her be of good comfort: Alas, quoth
she, What comfort can there be to a woman that has lost her chastity? and
lookeing steadfastly upon her husband, she cried out, and said, O
Collatinus, the feet of a stranger has been in thy bed: But I swear unto
thee of a truth, only the body is defiled, for the mind was never consenting,
and that shall my death presently declare: And therefore I require you all to
show your selves men, and not to suffer this horrible act to remain
unpunished. Sextus Tarquinius was he, whom I received, not as an enemy, but as
a supposed friend, who has this last night deprived me (and you also, if you
be men) of al joy. When she had uttered these words, they all began to
comfort her, and to tell her that her offense was nothing, being forced and
constrained thereunto, and that where there was no consent, there could be no
offense. Whereunto Lucrecia replied, and said, As for that, look you to
those things that concern your selves, I, though I do clear my self of
being guilty of any offense, yet do I not discharge my self of punishment.
There shall never chaste woman take occasion to be evil by the example of
Lucrecia: And with these words, plucking out a knife that she had secretly
hidden, and thrusting it to her heart, she fell down dead, whereat both her
husband and Brutus her father, making great lamentation, presently drew out
the knife out of the wound, being al stained and embrued with blood: which
knife Brutus taking in his hand, swear to revenge the injury and the death of
his daughter, and to destroy both Tarquin the king, his wife, and his children,
either by fire, by sword, or by all the ways that he might, and never to
suffer any of the kindred to reign in Rome. With which he gave the knife to
Collatinus, and so from one to another: Whereby this mourning changed into
wrath, and desire of revenge: they all made promise to follow Brutus, and
taking with them the body of Lucretia, they brought it to Rome, and laid it in
the midst of the market place, to the end that the horror of so strange a
fact, might stir up the people to revenge it. At the sight whereof, the
people were straight in arms, and following Brutus, they thrust out of Rome
Sextus Tarquinius, who after miserably died in prison.

4^
No less was worthy Scipio,
Commended for the deed:
That from his chaste and worthy mind,
Did worthily proceed.
Then for his valiant manly acts,
Esteemed in his days,
By which he to his Country got,
A never dieyng praise.
The Paraphrase of the Marquis.
Cornelius Scipio, as Valerius rehearses in his third book, having taken the
City of Carthage, was told by his soldiers that in the sack of the Town
there was taken a young maiden, of woonderful beauty and great parentage, who
was affianced to a Gentleman of the nobility: which as soon as he
understood, he commanded that the Damsel, her husband, and her parents,
should be brought before him, and caused the young maid safe and untouched to
be delivered unto them, giving with the maid in marriage, a great mass and
quantity of Treasure, that was offered for their ransom.

41
Shun idleness, and give thy self
To honest exercise.
That neither wicked vice, nor lewd
Alurementes of the eyes,
Have power or force at any time,
To bring thy heart in thrall:
For to subdue the raging flesh
Is (sure) no matter small.
The Paraphrase.
SAint Hierome says, in a certain advice that he gives to a friend of his,
Be always busy in some labor or other, that the Devil may find thee
occupied. And the reason is, because idleness is the root and groundwoorke (as
the Proverb says) of all manner of sin, specially, of lechery, which
springs sooner of idle imaginations, then any sin beside: Whereupon Seneca in
his fourth Tragedy, brings in the old Nurse, who seeks to dissuade
Phaedra from the beastly love that she bare to her son in law Hippolytus,
where Phaedra says that there was no blame nor fault in her, since Cupid the
God of love had so mortally wounded her, and that there was none to be blamed
for it, but the God himself. The Nurse aunsweareth, That brainsicke and wicked
persons, the better to cloak and color their naughtiness, and that they
might the freelier attain to their letcherous purposes, have vainly imagined
a Godhead to be in love, saying that there is a GOD of love, whose power
extends not only to men, but even to the very Gods: which, says the nurse,
is a false and shameful devise. For whosoever has abundance of wealth, and
lives at pleasure, giving him self to idleness, banqueting, and surfeiting,
passing his life in dalliaunce and disport, such a one does love continually
torment: if it be not so, ask of the Lady Venus, how chance she has so
cold entertainment in the poor laborers houses, where you shall seldom or
never see any of them go mad for love? And the only reason of it is, that they
are continually painefully laboring and travailing to get their living, not
having any time to be idle or evil occupied. To live in the flesh, as the
Divines say, and not to follow the flesh, is a work more proper to God then
to man, and cannot possibly be done without great labor and virtuous
exercises: And therefore the Proverb says, It is no small matter to subdue the
flesh: That is to say, for a man to conquer him self. And therefore those
that first devised Monasteries, and religious orders, did above all other
things ordeyne, that they should never be idle, nor have any thing to occupy
their minds withal but virtuous exercises, and this is the effect of the
Proverb, where it says: Shun idleness, and give thy self to honest
exercise.

42.
For not yenough it is, to flee
From actions lewd or il,
But also from the motion to
offend in thought or will.
So much we ought for to eschew,
The foul and wicked thought:
Because it is the only seed,
And root of doing naught.
The Paraphrase.
THE faults that we here commit are of two sorts, either they are done by
chance, and unwittingly, or they are done upon knowledge, which cannot be
without imagination: Also our thoughts and imaginations are, as the Doccours
say, of two sorts. One is the first motion that we have to offend, and this
because it is not in our power, being, as we be naturally, inclined to deadly
sin, is not to be reckoned for sin: But if we take pleasure in our evil
thoughts, and continuing in them, determine to put them in execution as soon
as we may have time and place, this is as great an offense as if we had already
done it, according to the saying of our Savior in the Gospel, Whosoever
looks upon a Woman, to lust after her, has already committed adultrie in
his heart. For the evil thought was the seed and causer of the sin, and
would, if time had served, have performed the deed. And therefore Seneca in
his fourth Tragedy, bringing in the Nurse, that disswadeth Phedra from her
evil pretense that she had to play the Whore with her son in law, makes
her to say thus, O worthy and most renowned Lady, descended of the
worthy Stock of Jupiter, and wife unto Theseus, banishe speedely from thy
noble and chaste breast this most heinous and shameful imagination, quench
quickly the raging flames of this unnatural desire, make not thy mind to be
the woorker of so wicked and Diuelishe a devise: whosoever resists this
frantic and fond affection of love, the same may be well assured that he
shall conquer and overcome it: But he that nourishes the sweet poison, that
is, the wicked thought, and delights in it, it is very hard for such an one
to refuse the yoke, to which they have once submitted their neck. And this is
it that the Proverb here says, That we ought not only to flee from doing
of evil: But also from thinking of evil, for of evil thoughts, there never
springs, as is said, good seed.

43
A goodly ornament to man,
I do account the wife,
Where as she is obedient,
To reason all her life.
In marriage look thou be not led,
By fancy or opinion:
But in thy choice beeware and wise,
With heed and great discretion.
The Paraphrase.
SOlomon says in his Proverbs, that the man that happens upon a good wife,
is blessed of the Lord, and the tale of his years shall be doubled, that is, he
shall live twice so long as he should have done. And in an other place, he
says, That no better lot can happen to a man, then a good wife. And this is it
that the Proverb says, That the wife is an ornament to her husband, when
she will be ruled by reason. In what sort this obedience ought to be, the
Apostle teaches, saying, Let the husband be the head of the woman, and as the
head has the pre-eminence and principality over all the rest of the members,
so ought the husband to have over his wife, who as Aristotle in his
Oeconomikes does say, ought not to be used of her husband like a Slave, but
as his companion, and his fellow: And the husband according to the doctrine of
the Apostle, Is bound to use her well, and to love her, and she to honor and
fear him. Fear (as Aristotle in the book above mentioned says) is of two
kinds. The one is called a servile fear, the other a sonnely fear. The
servile is that, which is had for fear of punishment, and not for any love:
and this is the fear that the Slave has of his master, who as he serves
against his own will and by force, he does it more for fear, then for love.
The Sonnely fear, is a meddlie of fear and love together: And this is the
fear that the son has of his father, and that the wife ought to have of her
husband, for if the wife fear her husband, and does what soever he
commands her, she ought not to do it for fear of any punishment that she
should have if she did it not, but for fear of displeasing and offending her
husband, and to the end her husband should think well of her, in seeing her
willingness in doing whatsoever he commands her. And this is the meaning
of ye proverb A godly ornament to man, I do account the wife, where as she is
obedient to reason all her life. That is, when she shall love and reverence her
husband, and while she keep her self honest and chaste, looking carefully to
such things as be about the house, as Aristotle at large discourses in his
said book of Oeconomykes, and Solomon in the end of his Proverbs, whither
because I would be short, I refer the reader. The Proverb says further,
That in marriage a man ought not to follow his fancy. The choice of a wife.
Wherein there are two things to be understood. The first, that he take a wife
of a good and virtuous kindred, according as a Philosopher once answered, when
it was asked of him, what manner of wife were best to be chosen. Marie, quoth
he, such a one whose mother and grandmother thou knew to be honest and
chaste: for as the parents have been, such will commonly the daughter be. So
likewise in marying, a man ought to choose a wife of like degree and state to
him self, and such a one as is answerable to his years, according to the old
Proverb, Like good, like blood, like age, makes a good marriage. And as Ovid
says, The Oxen that are unequally matched, will never draw well together. And
therefore the Proverb says, Choose thy wife with heed, and great discretion.

44.
For such as seek a wife for goods,
and do not greatly way
Her virtues, nor her honesty,
do seek their own decay.
A harm it is that has no help,
such marriage for to make,
Wherefore, my son, let never such
a fault thee overtake.
The Paraphrase.
IT is generally agreed upon amongst the Philosophers, that good is divided
into two kinds, the one of them profitable and commodious, the other honest.
And where profit on the one side, and honesty on the other side meets, we
ought always to prefer honesty before profit. And as their opinion is, the
virtues are contained under the kind of honest goods, and worldly goods,
under the kind of profitable goods. And he that refuses a virtuous wife for
her want of worldly wealth, and takes a wife for riches, not regarding her
virtues, trespasseth against reason, and seeks his own disquietnesse and
harm; that will never be recovered. For the goods that he has, shall
quickly be consumed, and he shall be plagued at home with a froward fool. For
as the wise man in his Proverbs says, A wise and a virtuous wife, raises and
sets up the house, but a foolish woman brings it to ruin: for she will
waste and consume the goods that she brought with her, and whatsoever her
husband besides by his traualle gets: neither is it good to take a wife of
greater pare^tage then he himself is, but only to regard, that she be virtuous,
and equal in degree to himself. For as it is written in the Chronicle of the
Philosophers, Cleobolus one of the seven wise men of Athens, did ever say, that
the wife ought to be of no greater blood than her husband. For if thou take
a wife of hier degree then thy self, thou shall always be sure to have thy
wives kindred to be as Lords over thee. And therefore the Proverb says, My
son, beware thou never commit such a folly.

45.
The beauty and the favor sweet
of women could I praise,
If them I found accompanied
with wisdom any ways.
But very hardly or by hap,
they agree together right,
And many times they are the marks
of persons that be light.
The Paraphrase.
MOst certain it is, that the more good things do meet together, the better it
is. As to have a wife that is honest, beautiful, and wise, is far better
then to have one that is honest, and neither wise nor well favored. But
because they seldom happen together, nor are not far distant from
looseness, you shall very hardly see a very fair woman to be very wise,
and as Ovid says, hautinesse, and disdain, is naturally incident to fair
women. Pride is always the companion of beauty. And herein is verified that
which the Poets in their fables have written, and also Seneca in his seventh
book declares, that the Goddess Venus the better to hide her whordome,
enclosed herself and her mate within a very dark house, and yet not so
close, but the jealous Sun was peping in with his bright beams at the small
cranies and holes, where he discovered all. Whereat the good Lady taking
great displeasure with the Sun, because he had so discourteously handled her,
laid her heavy curse upon him, causing that all the womankinde that were
descended from the Sun, should be as good as ever twigged. Now of the lineage
and kindred of the Sun, are all welfauoured and beautiful Dames, and
therefore, because you shall hardly find a fair woman, that is not foolish and
dishonest, it is said, that the curse of Venus did light upon them. And this is
the signification of this tale. And Solomon says in his Proverbs, That
beauty in a woman without wisdom, is like unto a ring of gold in the snoute
of a sow. And this is it, That beauty and wisdom seldom meet, nor are
far distant from lightness.

46.
Yet here withal I do not count
the kind of women all,
To be unprofitable, or
of use or value small:
For why, I know they have been praisd
of diverse worthily,
And that their virtues have been pende
in many an history.
The Paraphrase.
PYthagoras, and his followers, were of opinion, that there were two chief
heads, the one the author of all goodness, the other the author of evil.
And unto these two they referred al things yt were wrought in the world, and
said, that of the God of goodness, proceeded and came the light, and all
things that were good and perfect: of which number they accounted Man. Of the
God of evil, sprang darkness, and all imperfect things: amongst which they
reckened the woman. And in very deed, having respect to man, the woman is an
imperfect creature, although not so imperfect* but by teaching she may be
brought to some perfection, and to be profitable in her kind. For as Aristot.
says in his Oeconomikes, and they be also the words of saint Isidore, that to
bring things to a perfection, it behooves to have the man, the woman, and the
ox that ploweth. And in the name of the woorking ox, he includes all manner
of Instruments that are necessary about an house. And further, he says, that
it proceeded of the great wisdom and discretion of nature, that man was made
of more perfection then the woman, because he was to command, and she to obey,
and that man was of more actiuitie and ability then the woman, because his
office was to trauail in matters abroad, and without doors, and hers only to
sit at home, and to keep that which is brought in. And therefore the Proverb
says, that the woman is not unprofitable, nor imperfect. Neither ought we to
think, that because some women have been to blame, therefore they are all to
be condemned. For as the nurse says to Hippolytus, as Seneca in his fourth
Tragedy shows, where Hippolitus says, that if there had never been other
evil woman but Medea, the wife of Aegeus, her only villainies were sufficient
to cause all other women to be abhorred. Whereto the nurse answers, that it
were greatly against reason, that the offense of one or two should be the blame
of all the rest: And therefore says the Proverb, that notwithstanding the
faults of a few, the virtues of women have been highly commended and set out
with the pen.

47.
For, setting here aside that sweet
and blessed worthy rose,
That over all the rest does shine,
and far beyond them goes:
The daughter of the thundering God,
and spouse unto the hiest,
The light and lamp of women all,
who bare our savior Christ:
48.
Many Ladies of renown
and beautiful there be,
That are both chaste and virtuous,
and famous for degree.
Amongst the blessed holy saints,
full many a one we find,
That in this compass may be brought,
for lives that brightly shinde.
49.
What should I of Saint Katheren
that blessed martyr tell:
Among the rest of Virgins all,
a flower of preecious smell?
Well worthy of remembrance is
her beawty, and her youth:
And eke no less deserves praise
her knowledge in the truth.
The Marquis.
SAint Katherin was a virgin, and a holy Martyr, and among the whole company of
Saints of special commendation, touching whose life and death, being a thing
so commonly known, I refer the Reader to the book called The Flower of Saints.

50.
We find that Hester wanted neither
beawtie great, nor grace:
Whose noble mind was joined with
the favor of her face.
Of Judith likewise do we read,
the beauty great to be:
And how she virtuously behaude
her self in each degree.
The Paraphrase of the Marquis.
HEster the Queen, was the wife of King Assuerus, of whom it shall not be
needful to speak much, considering that in the Paraphrase to the proverb of
Assuerus, in the beginning of the Book, there has been enough said. It is
sufficient to know that she was a holy woman, and a devout servant of God,
as appeared by her virtuous life, and by the earnest Prayers that she made
unto God, in the case of Hamon and Mardocheus. Judith (as her Book testifies,
which is one of the 24 books of the Bible) was reputed among the Jews, for a
woman of singular wisdom, and of great honesty in life: who slew the great
Holofernes, that being sent by the King Nabuchodonosor with a great and puisant
Camp, had besieged the City of Jerusalem, as her Book at large declares,
where it also appears by what great policicie (after she had slain him)
she conveyed his head, passing through the watch of the Camp, to the aforesaid
City. This only fact (renowned Prince) struck such a fear and terror to the
hearts of the enemies, as they speedily and without order, to their great loss,
brake up their siege. So as she is greatly commended in the Scripture, for
her beauty, and for her noble and valiant stomach.

51.
The famous worthy women, that
among the heathen war,
No reason that of good report
among the rest we bar.
For why? their valor and renoume
was woundrous in their days:
And therefore not to be depriude
of due deserved praise.
52.
In Athens and in Thebes too
were Ladies great of fame.
The Trojans, Sabynes, Greeks and Arge
had many a worthy dame.
The Laurentines, the Amasons
may triumph for the same.
And Rome of virtuous women can,
remember many a name.
53.
No fairer creatures could be seen,
then Vagnes and Diana:
Daphnes, Dido, Anna, and
the virtuous Lucretia.
Nor vnrembred let we pass
Virginia, the same
Whose passing chastity procurde
her everlasting fame.
The Paraphrase.
VAgnes as Statius in his Book of the Wars betwixt the Thebanes and the
Argians reports, was the chief among the Argian Ladies, that went altogether
to King Creon with humble petition, for the delivery of the dead bodies of
their husbands and kinsemen, that were slain at the battle of Thebes,
fighting against Ethiocles the Son of Oedippus, and nephew to King Layus, who
was of the lineage and stock of Cadmus: Who having received a flat denial, went
altogether to Theseus, that then was Duke of Athens, declaring unto him with
great exclamation, the great cruelty and extremity that was showed unto them.
Theseus who was then newly come from the wars of the Amasons (as John Boccace
the poet of Florence, in his Book of Theseus, at large discribeth) vowed, that
before he entered the City, he would go out of hand with his whole forces
against Creon, requiring him yet before by his Ambassadors, to grant unto the
poor Ladies, this their so just and reasonable request: which when he
disdainfully refused to do, he made wars upon him, and slew him, whereby the
gentlemen of Argos, by the industry and diligence of the virtuous Vagnes, came
in the end to be honorably buried. At the end of this battle, wherein
Creon was slain by the hands of Theseus, begins the story of Arcyt and
Palemon, the servants and great lovers of Emilia the sister of Hypolitus, which
because of the tediousnes, and that the matter makes nothing to our purpose, I
here pass over. Diana was counted the goddess of Chastity, a Lady that set
all her delight upon the feeld in the chase and hunting of wild beasts.
Lucretia and other the famous Ladies of Rome, are sufficiently mentioned, as
well by Lyuy, and Valerius in their stories, as by Saint August. a man of more
credit, in his Book Of the City of God, and John Boccace in the fall of
Princes, and commendation of worthy women, where it is showed how she, being
the wife of Collatinus, was violently forced by Sextus Tarquinius, whereupon
with a knife, or a sword, she slew her self, saying, I free my self from
the fault, but not from punishment: which I here but briefly touch, because
I have written thereof before in the story of Sextus Tarquinius. Daphnis was
daughter to Peneus, a Virgin, dedicated to Diana the Lady of Chastity, who as
Ovid writes, being greatly desired of Phoebus, and not consenting nor able to
withstand the force of her furious lover, commending her self to all the
gods, but specially to Diana whom she served, was (as the Poets feign)
transformed into the Laurel, a tree of continual greenenesse, sweet of
savor, and of a delectable shadow. The moral whereof being declared by
diverse Authors, as Friar Thomas of Capua in his Moralls upon the Metamorphosis,
John Boccace, in his Genealogy of the heathen gods, and Master John the
Englishman, commenting upon the same Book, I here leave to declare, as a
thing to long to entreat off. It may suffice that she was counted among the
heathen for a maiden of singular beawtie. Anna was mother to the Virgin Mary,
and wife to Ioachim, a woman of great sanctity and vertuousnesse of life. An
other of the same name was sister to Queen Dido, a woman of great commendation
among the heathen, both of them as well she of the Hebrews as the Heathen, were
worthy to be had in continual memory. Dido as appears by her true story, was
the daughter of King Belus, sister to Pigmalion, and wife of Sichaeus, who
after the death of her husband made a vow never to marry again, and forsook
the country where her husband was murdered, by the means of her traitorous
brother Pigmalion, and coming into Africa, founded the stately City of
Carthage. Where while she purposed to live a sole and a chaste life, being
required in marriage by the King Hiarbas, and utterly refusing, she was by the
said Hiarbas strongly besieged, and brought to so hard a point, that seeing no
other way to escape, and to preserve her chastity, chosing rather to die then
to live thus violated, threw her self, into a great flame of fire, and so ended
her days. This story although Virgill do otherwise declare, yet is he not,
considering the liberty of a Poet, greatly to be blamed. Virginea with what
earnestness she was required by Appius Claudius, to consent to his dishonest
and unlawful lust, is sufficiently declared by Liuie in his second Decade, and
likewise by John Boccace in his Book Of the fall of Princes, where it is at
large declared, with how great constancy the chaste maiden preserved her
virginity.

54.
Prefer a life with liberty,
above all other things:
A virtue great it is, and worthy
of the pains it bringes.
A shameful great reproach it is,
without it for to fly:
An honorable thing it is
for such a good to dye,
The Paraphrase.
THe ancient Philosophers were of opinion, that all the Virtues were to be
reduced into the number of four, which they named Cardinal or principal
virtues, whereof they accounted to be chief Fortitude or manhood, which as
Aristotle in the third of his Ethics testifies, is so much the more
excellent and praiseworthy, as the subject and matter wherewith it dealet, his
dreadful and difficult: for manhood has for his object or contrary, Death,
which is, as Aristotle says, the last of all dreadful and terrible things,
beside the great dangers, and sharp and cruel adventures: So as by reason of
the difficulty or hardness of the object, there are but few that happen to
attain to this virtue. And as it is written in the Civil law, those that lose
their lives for the liberty of their country, are counted to live for ever:
for much better is it for a man to dye freely in fight, for the liberty of
his Country, then escaping to live with a shameful and cowardly flight. And
as the Proverb here says, and they be the very words in effect of Aristotle
in the 3. of the Ethics, The death that is honorable, is to be preferred
before a dishonorable life, which the Marquis does plainly set forth by
examples following.

55.
Oh, what a death had Cato dyed
if it had lawful been:
And had not by the just decrees
of God been made a sin.
No less do I the worthy fact
of Mucius here commend:
That Lyuie in his story has
so eloquently pende.
The Paraphrase.
AFter that Pompey was overthrown by Caesar at the battle of Pharsalia, and
had retired him self to Lesbos, where his wife Cornelia lay, and passing from
thence to Egypt, was slain by ye hands of Photinus and Achillas, at the
commandment of king Ptolomei, who was at that time his servant. Cato, who saw
that the side of Pompey went in such sort to wrack, as was not by any means to
be recovered, fled unto the city of Vtica: where, fearing by some misaduenture
to fall into the hands of Caesar his mortal enemy, he presently dispatthed
him self. Mucius Sceuola was a man of great courage among the Romans, who
when Porsenna the King had with a great power besieged the City, determined
with a noble mind to raise the siege: and to bring his matter to better
effect, went secretly alone out of the City, with full intent to kill the
King, and happening to spy in the Camp, a Secretary of the Kings appareled
in Princely roabes, supposing that it was the King, thrust him through the body
with his swoorde, whereupon being presently taken by the Guarde, and such as
stood by, he was shackeled and brought before the King, who demanding of him
what foolish presumption had brought him to this misery? he answered, that
not only he, but diverse others, to the number of an hundred more, had
professed by solemn oath, for the deliverance of the City, to do their
uttermost endeavor in killing of the king: Whereupon Porsenna, giving credit to
the words of Mucius Sceuola, presently raised his siege, commanding that
Sceuola should forthwith be burned: who when he was brought unto the fire,
thrusting out his hand with a valiant courage into the flame, there held it,
til such time, as the whitenes of the bones, the flesh being scorched away,
appeared, and when he was asked, what made him to use such cruelty to his own
flesh: he answered, that since his hand had failed of his virtuous purpose,
it was good reason, that it should suffer such punishment for so great an
offense.

56.
For (son) if thou do much esteem
thy self, and seekst to live,
Thou never shall receive the crown,
that mighty Mars does give:
But if thou do abandon all
faint heart and foolish fear:
Thou shall not want the honor, nor
the state thou seek to bear.
The Paraphrase.
ACcording to the true opinion of both the Astronomers and the Catholic
divines, we are not in such sort constrained by the stars to do any thing,
as we be thereby deprived of our own will, to do of necessity that which
they foreshowe, but by inclining us to do certain actions, they move al our
bodyly forces to do such things as they signify. Which does not so far
enforce us, but that as Ptolomy says in his Centiloquium, A wise and a
virtuous man, may rule and reign over the stars. That is, though the stars
do stir and move a man to do evil, yet the party him self has
sufficient power, if he will, to do well. But the old people, being ignorant
of this virtue, and seeing the Planet Mars did move men to be venterers and
soldiers, held opinion, that he was the only god of battles, and that he
advanced and rewarded all such as were valiant and venterous: which old manner
of speaking, is here by the Marquis at this time followed. And most certain it
is, that such as make much of them selves, do shun as much as they may, the
coming into any peril or danger. Of which sort of people Seneca in his first
tragidie speaks, where he says, That great years and gray hears, happens
to faintharted, and such as love to sleep in a whole skin. For such manner of
persons will be sure to commit themselves to no hasard nor danger, whereby they
are incapable of any virtue or honor. For Honor as Aristotle in the fourth of
his Ethics says, is a reverence, that is given to men in reward and
recompense of their virtues. And therefore the Marquis says, That whosoever is
so valiant, as not to regard his life in any virtuous attempt, shall be sure to
receive the crown of Mars: that is, the renown and reward of a virtuous
mind, which he shall quickly attain unto if he repress fear. And where as
there are in the virtue of Fortitude two extremes or vices, the one in
ventering to far, the other in fearing to much: the Marquis has not here
said, If thou restrainest boldness, as he says, If thou abandonest fear:
because as Aristotle in the third of his Ethics affirms, and as daily
experience teaches, the nature of man is more inclined to fearfulness then to
boldness, and therefore those that seek to be valiant and virtuous, ought
more to travel in the repressing and abandoning of fear, then in the restraint
or temperaunce of boldness. And therefore to good purpose says the Marquis
in this Proverb, If thou abandonest or forcest fear, and not corrage, and
because as it is said abooue, it is in every man's power and will to be
virtuous, it is here well said of the Proverb, Thou shall not want the
honor, nor the state thou seek to bear.

57.
Detest an evil life, that's led
with foul reproach and shame:
And always ready be to dye,
with honorable name.
For life cannot be lent for loan,
nor let from day to day:
Nor can the appointed hour be shund
nor skaped any way.
The Paraphrase.
THE Emperors did in their laws carefully provide for the behoof and good
estate of their Subjects, to set down rewards and encouragements, for such
as were honest and virtuous, and to devise punishments and corrections, for
such as were wicked and evil disposed. And it is very well thought, as has
been said before, that such as valiantly lost their lives, either in defense
of their faith, or for the liberty of their country, are rewarded with
everlasting life: or if any man dye in the defense of his own honesty, he
shall continually be well thought of, and commended. But such as cowardly
forsake the feelde, and run away from the wars, the laws have appointed to
dye, and are accounted for wretches and villains, whether they dye or live,
and their shameful and reproachful life, is more grief to them then any death
that can be devised, especially an honest death, and this is the meaning of
the Proverb, Detest an evil life etc. For as Aristotle in the 3. of his
Ethics says, A man is borne to honor and liberty, which two things, we ought
always to keep and maintain, and to covet by all means we can, to
diehonestly, and to live virtuously. The Proverb says further, that life can
not be borrowed. For as Job says, The Lord has rated the days of our life,
which can not be lengthened: And therefore no man may shun the appointed
hour that God has determined. And hereupon arises the tale among the Poets,
of the three sisters of destiny, whereof the one of them called Clotho,
carries the distaffe, the other named Lachesis, spinneth, and draws out the
threede, which the third sister, Atropos, windeth up upon the reele. And as
Seneca in his first Tragedy says, These three sisters are so cruel and hard,
that it was never seen, that the threede which they had once wound up,
could ever be got back again. These sisters of the Destiny do signify in
deed the posting time of our transitory life, whereof the day once past, can
never be called back again. And therefore says Seneca, these three
vnliberall Ladies do rule by assured order, and may neither shorten nor
lengthe^, otherwise then is appointed. Therefore ought every man to apply
himself to die well, since the time of his death can by no manner of means be
altered.

58.
King Codrus rather chose to have
the conquest then to live,
And never did his noble mind
refuse his life to give,
To save a valiant company
of such as him did serve,
The life is always well bestowed
that does such praise deserve.
The Paraphrase.
COdrus being (as both saint Austine and Valerius report) the king of Athens,
when as he was to fight with Pelops duke of the Lacedaemonians, and had answer
of his Idols, to whom he sacrificed, that the side whose captain was slain
should have the victory, preferrin, glike a worthy gentleman, the lives and
prosperity of his poor subjects far above his own, apparailing himself in
a base and simple habit, and rushing into the thickest of the enemies, was
presently slain. Of whom Virgil writes, that he chose rather to die with the
victory, then to live with the overthrow.

59.
Take no delight to hear thy deeds
commended to thy face,
A thing that wisdom always has
accounted for disgrace,
And if thou do reproachful words
of any man sustain,
It is no commendation, to
to report the same again.
The Paraphrase.
Under the virtue of Fortitude is taken and included all manner of virtuous and
godly actions, that are done without respect of praise. For a man ought not to
look for the praise of the people, as a recompense for his good deed, and
specially if it be done in his own presence, which for two causes is to be
disliked. The one, because that glory nor praise is no perfect recompense or
reward for any virtue: For as Boecius says, Praise or glory is naught else
amongst the multitude, but a tickeling and bewitching of the ears. The other
reason is, that praises and commendations before the face, does rather seem a
kind of flattering and clawing, then a praise. The Proverb says further,
That if thou do reproachful words of any man sustain, It is no
commendation, to report the same again. The meaning of it is, that no man that
is of great mind or courage, ought to speak of the injurious and evil words
that has been offered him, but shall rather be counted both wiser and
valianter, if he dissemble them, and seem not to wey them, as it is written in
the third book Of the lives of the Philosophers: where a Philosopher being
railed at, and reviled, made this answer, Thou, quoth he, have learned to
speak evil, and I have learned, to make no account of lewd speech. And more
is he to be commended, that bears evil words, then he that offreth them.

60.
Likewise the praising of thy self,
thine acts and special grace,
Does never thee advance, but all
thy doings does deface.
For if the deeds that here thou do,
be only done for praise,
An error great thou do commit,
and walkst the crooked ways.
The Paraphrase.
SOlomon is his Proverbs says, Let a stranger commend thee, and not thine
own mouth. And Cato says, Neither praise nor dispraise thine own doings:
for thy praise in thine own mouth is a great disgrace unto thee. And those
that praise themselves, because as Tullie says, it seems to proceed of
pride, do thereby bring themselves into hatred and evil will. So as if any
man shall set soorth his own doings, to the end to be commended and
honored, and shall thereby be reputed to be a man of great vanity and folly,
his error as the Proverb says, shall appear to be great.

61.
Such things as wonderful do seem,
but seld or never tell,
For all men have not heads alike,
To judge thy credit well.
And many words to use does show,
no great perfection,
It Is better for to show thy deeds,
and let thy tongue alone.
The Paraphrase.
THe chances that are wonderful, are those that do seldom happen, which
though a man has seen with his own eyes, yet will not the common people (who
never believe more then is subject to their gross senses) give credit to him
that shall report them, but shall be counted a liar and vain prater for
telling of them. And therefore if a man be not driven by necessity to tell it,
it is much better for him to keep his tongue. For as Isocrates says, I have
many time repented for words that I have spoken, but for keeping silence,
never. And every man's perfection does rather stand in the proof of his
works, then in his words, according as Saint Luke writes in the beginning of
the Acts of the Apostles, touching our Savior, where he says, that our
Lord Jesus Christ began to do and to teach: where he places his works
before his words, which is the meaning of the Proverb, And many words to
use does show no great perfection, it is better, etc.

The sixth Chapter of Liberality and Franknesse.
62.
Be frank and free at all assayes,
with speed bestow thy gift:
The goodliest grace in giving, is
to be short and swift.
Well understand the quality
of that thou do bestow,
Which seen, thou shall be able soon
the quantity to know.
The Paraphrase.
AS Seneca says in his book of Benefits, we are not borne to live only to
our selves, but to benefit and profit our kinsmen, our friends, our
neighbors, yea, and every other person that we can. Since nature, as the
civil law says, has linked all men in a consanguinitie and duty each to
other. And therefore we are bound being of ability, to be liberal and
bountiful to such as live in want and necessity, though as the Doctors say,
it ought to be done by order and degrees, as first to consider our parents,
next our children, then our kindred, and after them our friends, and so
thorowout as they be in degree. And if so be we have some of our kindred that
be of the householde of faith, and others that be not, the Apostle wills us
(if our power be not sufficient to serve them both) rather to relieve those
that be of the faith, then the others, and this great virtue, Liberality has,
as Aristotle writes in the fourth of his Ethickes, certain circumstances: As
that he that gives ought, to consider to whom he gives, and to what end he
gives, and to look that the things which he gives, be not of the basest of
his substance, as Caine did, who offered unto God the very worst and vilest of
his flock, whereas Abel offering the best that he had, his Sacrifice was
accepted, and Caines refused. Likewise, he is to consider, to whom he gives.
For to give to such as have no need, is to cast away that, which is given. It
must also be known, whether the party to whom we give, be able to work, and
can by his labor sufficiently maintain himself. For to give to such a one,
were to rob another, that is not able to labor, nor has any mean to get
his living, and yet, as the lawiers say, if a man be well borne and descended
of a good house, so as he cannot, considering his parentage, without great
shame and disparagement, give himself to any base trade of life, although he
be of ability for body to travel and labor, yet is it a good turn to
relieve him, because he is in the same case with him that can neither labor
nor has means to get his living, A right Spanish stomach.
for with his honesty he cannot abase himself to any vile occupation, and
therefore is to be considered. Moreover we ought to regard the manner and intent
of our liberality, which ought not to bestowed for any vaunt or vayneglorie,
as appears by the example in the Gospel, where our Savior, being present in
the temple, there comes in together, to offer, a proud wealthy Pharisey, and
a poor virtuous widdowe. The rich Miser offers of his great substance,
great and precious presents: the poor widow turns out of the bottom her
purse, and her heart, a poor silly Farthing. Our Lord demands, which of the
twain had offered most, and gave sentence with the poor widow, because the
mind of the giver, who only gave it in respect of the service of God, and not
for any vaunt, or vaineglory, as the rich man did. Beside all this, we ought
to give that, which we give, with a willing and a cheerful mind, as the
Apostle says, For the Lord does love a cheerful giver, and such a one, as
is not slack nor slow in the bestowing of his benefits. For he gives
double, as the common proverb is, that gives soon: and as Solomon says in
his proverbs, Say not unto the poor man, go, and come again to morrow, when it
is in thy hand to help him presently. For as Aristotle in the fourth of his
Ethics says, Liberality stands not in the giving of many and sumptuous
gifts, but in the habit of him that gives, whatsoever it be that is given:
that is to say, in the cheerful and bountiful mind of the giver, which all are
here briefly comprehended by the Marquis: Be frank and free. etc.

63.
By worthy liberality
great Alexander wan
His fame and high renown, when all
the world he ouerran.
And likewise Titus for his frankenes
great, and acts of fame.
Amongst the worthy conquerours
obteind a worthy name.
The Paraphrase.
ALexander king of the Macedons, and one of the 3. monarchies of the world, was
a Prince of great liberality and franknes, of whom Seneca writes in his Book
of Benefits, That when as a poor minstrell came unto him, and beseeched him
to bestow a penny upon him, the king presently gave him a whole town, and
when the poor fellow, half astonished, told that so great a gift was not
fit for him: Alexander answered him, he did not regard what was meet for
such a fellow to receive, but what was seemly for so great a Prince to
give. Titus was Emperor of Rome, a Prince of a noble mind, and of great
liberality, who as it is reported by Eutropius in his life, and other ancient
Authors had proclaimed, that whosoever had any suit unto him, what soever it
were, it should be granted, and when some of his counsel misliking it, had
told him, that it would be a means to discredit him, when he should not
be able to perform that which he promised. He aunsweared them, that it was not
convenient, that any person should depart from the face of a Prince with a
discomforted and heavy heart. It is also reported of him, that being set at
Supper, and calling to remembrance that he had not bestowed any thing upon any
man that day, looking with a discontented countenance, he said unto those
that were with him, Alas my friends, I have utterly lost this day: meaning that
the time is never well spente of Princes, wherein they are not giving to some
body.

64.
But Midas with his mass of gold,
was had in great disdain,
And he and al his treasures thought
to be but fond and vain,
The foul unprincely answer of
Antigonus the king,
With stayne unto his state, his name
to infamy did bring.
The Paraphrase.
MIdas, as Ovid in his Metamorphosis declares, was king of Phrigia, who
received with great interteinement the Gods, Jupiter, and Mercury, as they
happened to come by him, who willing to make him some recompense for his good
will toward them, bade him to ask of them whatsoever he most desired. Midas
being a most miserable wretch, and covetous as the Devil, desired of them,
that whatsoever he touched, and whatsoever touched him, might presently turn
into gold: which was by and by granted him, whereby he became in a short time
to be wonderful rich, but when the fool was in the midst of his Paradise,
the very drink and meat that should sustain him, turning into gold, he died,
(as it is reported) of famishment. The moral of this tale, I here mean not to
meddle with, because it has been touched by many great and learned
Philosophers and Poets. It suffiseth to know, that it notes and reprooueth
the shameful and most wicked vice of covetousness and filthy avarice.
Antigonus the king is greatly blamed of Seneca, in his book of Benefits: of
whom he writes, that when a poor man desired of him a great quantity of
gold, he made answer, that it was a great deal too much, and not meet for
him to require: and when the poor soul desired him to give him but a penny,
he answered again, how that was too small a thing for a king to give. And thus
not regarding how foully this dishonorable niggardlines, and pinchpining does
blemish the name of a Prince, the covetous Antigonus made these answers to the
poor miserable fellow, which deserve for ever to be recorded, as a foil and
counter show to the noble Emperors Alexander and Titus.

65.
I like not him that's prodigal,
nor such I list to praise:
And yet the man that well deserves,
I hurt not any ways.
The troth is, that I much mislike
to live in need and want:
But ten times more a miser, that
is covetous and scant.
The Paraphrase.
THE Prodigal man, as Aristotle in the fourth book of his Ethikes says, is
he that spends more then is needful, and where it is needelesse. Who,
perceiving the virtues of the liberal man, that spends that which is meet,
and where it behooves, and that the couetuous miser is condemned, for not
spending that, which he ought: takes himself straightwayes for a liberal
and a virtuous Gentleman: and says, that he uses money, as it ought to be
used. And this is a vice greatly to be avoided, for the mean betwixt these
two extremes of Prodigality, and Couetuousnesse, is the virtue Liberality.
Howebeit, true it is, as Aristotle says, the lesser vice of the twain, and
more to be borne withal, is Prodigality. For the prodigal man profits
those to whom he gives, although he hurts himself: But the Churl and the
miser neither profits himself, nor any man else. Besides he that is
prodigal, will sooner come to be virtuous, and liberal, the^ the covetous, for
two reasons. The one is, that by reason of his great expenses falling in to
need and want, he will quickly see what hurt he receives by too much
spending, and will from that time forward learn to be wiser, and to keep
his money the better. The second is, that with the time of his spending, he
waxes aged, and people in their old years be more sparing and thriftie, then
in their youth, because the hope of gaming is now taken from them, which in
youth does always encourage them. But, the covetous person cannot be brought
to the virtue, by neither of these reasons. For the older he waxes, the more
miser he waxes, and therefore if we mislike a man, that by reason of his
prodigality comes to be poor, we ought a great deal more to detest a Misar
that by covetousness grows to be rich. For as Salust says in his book of
Catiline, Couetuousnesse has utterly banished both faith and honesty, and
clean destroyed all arts and knowledges. Whereby it has brought in pride and
cruelty, contempt of God, and a general Merchandise of such things as
should freely be given. Covetousness is always infinite, and never
satisfied with abundaunce, nor diminished with want. And therefore Though the
prodigal be to be mislyked in necessity, and want: yet ten times worse, a
miser that is covetous and scant.

66.
The great Darius easllyer was,
destroyde for all his might,
And of his valiant adversary
subdued, and put to flight:
Then might Fabricius moved be,
with covetous desire,
Whose heart with filthy auaryce
could not be set on fire.
The Paraphrase.
FRabricius, beside a number of other his noble, virtuous, and worthy acts,
excelled in the virtue of liberality, of who^ it is reported by Valerius in
his nienth book, that when he was presented by the state of Beneuento, with a
great mass of money, he returned the embassadoures with their treasure home
again, as one that contented himself with the benefit of his Temperance, and
held himself satisfied with that small wealth which he had, supposing it to
be a sufficient riches: For he did always say, that riches consisted not in
much having, but in little coveting.

67
To help a man in misery,
our duty us does bind:
And not to do it when we may,
is odious and unkind.
A noble mind will never stayne
it self with such a blotte,
Nor suffer such a great offense,
nor such a filthy spotte.
The Paraphrase.
THE Prophet David says in his Psalter: Blessed is that man, that has
compassion upon the poor and the needy: For in the time of his necessity,
the Lord shall deliver him. And Solomon in his Proverbs says, That who so
has pity upon the poor, and relieueth, them lends upon usury to GOD,
who shall restore him with great gain, that which he has disbursed. And
therefore the Proverb says, To help a man in misery, our duty us does
bind. Where Duty is taken for a work of Mercy, as Seneca accounts it in
his Book of Duties, and farther it says, Not to succor when we may, is
odious and unkind. For as Solomon in his Proverbs says, Whosoever stops his
ear at the cry of the poor, shall cry for help himself, and not be
heard. And therefore it is not to be thought of a noble mind, but if he see
a man in misery or distress, he will follow the advice of the Prophet
Esaie, who says: Break thy bread to the hungry, and carry home to thy
house the sorrowful and the poor, where thou see a man bare and naked, cloth
him, and despise not thine own flesh, Solomon says in his Proverbs, He that
has pity upon the poor, shall be happy. And this is the meaning of this
Proverb. A noble mind will never stain, etc.

The seventh Chapter of Truth.
68
Truth honor thou, and always love,
step not from her aside,
But frame thy friendship after her,
that ever may abide.
The Image fair of holy life,
and daughter true is she,
As faithful sister unto virtue,
chief is honesty.
TRuth is of so great a worthiness and excellency, that God himself, as it
appears in the Gospel, is called the Truth. This truth has two extremities.
The one, called vain boasting, which is when men brag of themselves, more then
they are able to perform: the other is named Ironia, when men publishe of
themselves, that which is not in them. Men ought to love and honor the truth
after one of these two manners, either where it concerns only them, and
therein men ought to beware, that they neither exceed, nor do less then that
which is reason. The other is, when it touches an other, and in this case, to
reverence the truth, is as much to say, as to perform whatsoever is promised,
and to be true of our word, as well to our enemies, as to our friends, as we
are bound by the Civil law: for there is no greater duty betwixt man and
man, then to keep their faith and promise justly one with the other, without
the which, all traffic and dealing amongst men must of necessity cease. And
therefore the Proverb says, Truth honor thou, and always love, step not
from her aside. And farther, that we ought to frame our friendship after
truth. Friendship, according to the mind of Aristotle in his Ethickes, is in
one of these three sorts, either for profit, for pleasure, or for honesty.
Friendship for profit, as Seneca says, is Merchantes friendship, which
never endures longer than there is hope of gain. Friendship for pleasure,
lasts as long as delight and pleasure lasts, and as delights do alter
with years, and such things as seemed pleasant at some age, are thought
displeasant in an other: Therefore this Friendship can never long continue.
Friendship for honesty, is that which is grounded upon truth and virtue: and
as virtue, truth, and honesty, are things everlasting and unchangeable, so
the friendship that is grounded upon them, cannot but continue for ever. This
friendship floorisheth in the time of prosperity, and continues and
remains in the time of misfortune and adversity, and therefore he says:
That she is the daughter of holiness, and that honesty is the faithful
sister unto the most sovereign virtue. Honesty, (as Plato reports, and as
it is brought in by Tullie in the beginning of his offices) is of such an
excelling beauty, as if she might be seen with men's eyes, the whole world
would be in love with her. Who because she is steadfast, assured, sound, and
everlasting, is said to be The faithful sister to sovereign virtue.

69.
Attilius knowing well before,
That he should surely dye
If unto Carthage he returned,,
Observing faithfully
His troth and word, deferd no time
For to return again,
Where as he suffered torments great
By death and deadly pain.
The Paraphrase.
MArcus Attilius, as S. August. writes in his 1. book of the City of God,
and also Tullie in his Book of duties, being prisoner among other Romans, in
Carthage, and sent unto Rome, to persuade an exchange of prisoners: when he
came to the city, and having declared his message, was demanded to give his
opinion what he thought best to be done, after that he had thoroughly
considered that the Roman prisoners were old, and impotent men, and that the
Carthaginians were all young and lusty fellows: his advise was, that they
should in no wise make any exchange, and when his friends, understanding
that his counsel was allowed, labored by all means they could to keep him
from going again. He told them that he had given his faith and his word to
the Carthaginians, that he would return himself with the answer, and therefore
notwithstanding that he knew and was sure that his going thither should be
harmefull and dangerous, coming into the hands of his cruel and dealy
enemies, yet considering that he had promised, he would perform it, and so in
deed did, whereas he suffered most cruel death, with great torture and
torments.

The eight Chapter of Continence in coveting.
70
Of worldly goods possess no more,
nor farther seek to have.
Then may suffice thy need, and clear
thy conscience after grave.
All overplus with heed avoid,
for more then meet is naught,
And nothing can continue long,
that on the earth is wrought.
The Paraphrase.
SOlomon says in his Proverbs, that the prayer which every man ought to make
unto God, is this Poverty nor riches lord give thou unto me, but only that with
is sufficient for my maintenance, least by having to much, I be tempted to
forget God, and to say, Who is the Lord? and having on the other side to
little, I be forced by misery and want, to blaspheme the ^ame of my God. And
this authority of Solomon is in a manner the full Co^mentarie of this
Proverb. Likewise Aristotle in the tenth of his Ethickes says, To seek to
possess a mean and moderate wealth, is the perfection that a man attaineth
unto. And Seneca in a book that he made of the quietness and satisfyng of the
mind, moves this question, What quantity of the goods of fortune a man ought
to enjoy to, and what is the mean and temperate state of riches? That a man
ought to seek for and possess so much as may keep him from poverty, and
yet to be not far from it: And this is it that preserves a man from falling,
as the pillar, which is the conscience, being the greatest rest and quietest
that a man can carry with him. The Proverb says, Nothing can continue long,
that on the earth is wrought. The world it self must end, and all thing that
therein is created: we see that nothing endures long, beauty decays,
favor fails, strength abateth, and life it self but a small time lasts.
The greatest princes that be, must away, and though the whole world be subject
to them, yet are they them selves but subjects to misery, to casualtie, to
sorrow, to sickness, and to death, and must die as an other man: all our
pomp, our vanities and follies must have an end, we have no continual
abiding place, as saint Paul says, but must al away, some to heaven, some to
hell, according as they have here behaved them selves: And therefore is it a
great madness for any man to set his felicity in so fickle an estate, that he
knows can not long time endure, and to behave him so fondly for the small
time that he is here, as to live hereafter in torments, that shall never end.

71
The more thou gettest continually,
the more thou still do crave,
Now judge (of twain) which is the best,
if that thou reason have:
To be a Lord of riches great,
with grief and toil and care,
Or quietly to live content
with small and decent share?
The Paraphrase.
SVbstaunce and riches do never satisfy the appetite nor desire, but as
Cassiodorus writes in an Epistle, as in a dropsy, which is a disease that
causes continual thirste, the more a man drinks the thirstier he remains:
So if covetousness be not bridled, the more riches we get, the more we
desire: and therefore the Proverb here wills, that a man should way with
himself, whether it be better to possess great riches with trouble and
tormente, or to enjoy a reasonable living with contentation and quietness.
For as Seneca in his Epistle to Lucilius says, There is no man that is loved
or favored of God, but he that contemns and despises riches. The possession
whereof, says Seneca, I do not take from thee, but would that thou should
enjoy the^ without fear, which to attain unto, thou have no other way, but to
live happily and quietly with the^, esteeming them as things transitory, that
soon may be forgone. And he that possesses them in such sort possesses them
with quietness and contentation.

72.
The riches that we here possess
With have away do flee:
And as the tides with floods and ebbes,
They move continually.
Seek thou the treasures of the mind,
Which stand like brazen walls,
Both firm and sure, a safe defense
Whatsoever thee befalles.
THe riches and wealth of the world, are the things that are most accounted
of amongst the goods of fortune, which do sometime increase, and sometime
decrease, as Boethius in the person of Fortune speaks, saying, that the
servants (which are these temporal goods) do still attend upon their
mistres, which is Fortune, with whom they do always both come and go, and
therefore says Boethius, that Fortune has the whole world upon her tottering
wheel, bringing whom she list aloft, and casting others down, making poor
men of such as were rich, and rich men of such as were poor. And therefore
the Marquis here warns us, that we apply all our forces to the obteining of
moral goods, that is to say, Virtues, which are in deed the perfection of
the Soul, as Aristotle in his book of the Soul, writes. And these, says the
Proverb, stand like brazen walls, both firm and sure, a safe defense,
whatsoever thee befalles, as much to say, as they never leave nor forsake a
man: As Tullie declares in his Paradoxes, where he brings in Bias the
Philosopher, one of the seven wise men of Athens, who, when the City was taken
by a Tirant, and the people fleeing, had taken with them as much as they
could carry, only Bias meddled with nothing, and when one of his neighbors did
ask him how chance he took none of his goods with him: he answered him,
that all which was his, he carried about him, not counting any thing to be his,
but the virtues of the mind, esteeming the goods of the world to belong as
well to any others. And this is the meaning of this proverb, Seek thou the
treasures of the mind, etc.

73
Seek not ambitiously to reign,
nor rule with tirranny,
But both her works and ways see that
thou shun advisedly:
And choose the mean estate, among
the which it is best to live:
So shall thou pass with pleasure all
the time that God does give.
The Paraphrase.
A Tyrant is he, as Aristotle in the seventh of his Politiques says, that
comes to the Crown by force or by policy, who endures no longer then he
is of force or power, as Medea said unto Creon in the second Tragedy of
Seneca, Tyrants and evil governors do not endure for ever, and as Agamemnon
says unto Pyrrus in the speech that they had about the death of Polixena,
Their gouernme^ts that are by force, continue no long time, but the gentle and
mild government is that which endures. And therefore the Proverb says, Seek
not ambitiously to reign, nor rule with tyranny, and that we ought to forsake
her paths, and her works, and choose to live among the meanest sort, which is
the best and the quietest life. Which is that which is said in the Proverb
before, that Seneca wrote in his Epistle to Lucilius, That there is no man
esteemed or accounted of GOD, but those that despise and contemn the pomp and
wealth of the world.

74
For think not that the lofty state,
nor throne of high degree
Does make a man the perfecter,
or hapier to be.
It rather does his cares increase,
and gives him grief and pain,
And on his neck, that erst was free,
does cast a careful chain.
The Paraphrase.
NOworldly wealth, but specially no tyrannical government, can bring a man to
perfection, or to live happily, but rather draws with them fear, danger,
vexation, and cares, and as Boethius says, The Tirants that are always waited
upon with their guard, to terrify and amase others, are alwais afraid them
selves of those, who^ they suppose to fear. And Tullie in his book of
Friendship says, that in the life of the Tirant, there is neither faith, love,
nor any long enduring goodwill, of every thing is he ielous, and each thing
ministers unto him cause of care, and disquietnesse. And further he says, Who
can ever love him, whom he fears, and of whom he knows that he is feared?
And this is the meaning of the Proverb, The lofty states, nor throne of high
degree, does make a man. etc. Touching the which, Boethius in his third book
of Consolation writes of Dionisius of Sarogosi, who from a mean man was
advanced to the Crown, to whom, when his friend came upon a time to see him,
and greatly praised the happiness of his estate, telling him that he ought to
account him self most happy, that had attained to so high a dignity: Dionisius
bidding him to a dinner, caused him to sit down, where over his head was
hanging a terrible Sword with the point downewarde, who with the fear and
agony that he was in for falling of the sword, made but an unpleasant dinner,
sitting all the time upon thorns: After he was risen, Dionisius asked him, if
his dinner were not pleasant unto him: Such a pleasure (quoth the poor
fellow) GOD keep me from, that every moment looked to have a Swoorde upon my
pate: and such (quoth Dionisius) is the life of every Tyrant, even as full of
pleasure as has been thy dinner: for the highness of his state increases his
misery, and chaineth him with the chain of thraldom, touching the which I
have spoken at large before in the second Proverb.

75
Seek that which thou may easily have,
and care not for no more,
For thou shall see from time to time,
if that thou watch therefore,
The lofty states and mighty powers,
come topsie-turuy down:
And he that late a Miser was,
with joy to wear the crown,
The Paraphrase.
Boethius in his second book of Consolation says, that nature contenteth her
self with a very small thing: and if you shall at any time ouercharge her with
things that are superfluous, the more you charge her, the more hinderance,
hurt, and displeasure you do unto her. And therefore the Proverb says, that
we ought to seek that, which we may honestly and easily attain unto, and no
more. For if we will well mark it, as Boethius in his first book of
Consolation says, We shall see a man in one hour hoysed up a lofte, and in
the self same hour cast down again, and an other advanced in his place:
for solace and sorrow succeed one the other. And as Seneca in his second
Tragedy says, have their turns. And this is it, that the Proverb says,
That lofty states and mighty powers, come topsey turuy down. etc.

76
Trust not unto the state of those,
that hastily mount a hie:
But look to see them fall as fast
as ever they did fly.
For be thou sure the wicked man,
shall never long endure:
His happy fortune shall him fail,
when most he thinks her sure.
The Paraphrase.
SOlomon says in his Proverbs, That the goods which are hastily gotten,
will as swyftly be gonne. So that the sudden rising aloft, has always his
fall and great mischief at hand: For as David says in his Psalms, Never
trouble nor frette thy self at the prosperity of the wicked, nor at the
advancement of the unrighteous, for they shall suddenly be plucked up by the
roots, and those that faithfully abide in the Lord, shall inherit the land.
And again, I have seen the wicked floorishing like the Cedar of Libanus, and
within a while after there was no remembrance of his being. And therefore
says the Proverb, Be sure, the wicked man, shall never long endure.

77
If that thou will abundance have,
live to thy self content
With only that which nature finds,
to be sufficient.
I have not seen men troubled much
their living for to get:
But many for to mount alofte,
Their hearts asunder fret.
The Paraphrase.
SEneca says, in an Epistle to Lucilius, that he is not poor that has but a
little, but he that desires much. For great riches is it to nature, to have a
little with contentation and joy, for a very small thing does nature require,
and a little suffiseth her: And therefore the Proverb says, I have not seen
men take any great pain or travail to live in the world, but miserably do
they moile and toil, and fret their hearts asunder, that seek to clime aloft.

78
Then let us well the matter way,
what if thou do possess,
Great store of goods obtained here,
by fraud and wickedness?
What great assurance have thou now,
that thee may certify
Thou shall not come by chance or hap
to beg before thou die?
The Paraphrase.
TVllie says in his Philippicaes, that the goods which are wickedly gotten,
will evil fauouredly be spent: And therefore there is nothing that can assure a
man of ye continuance of his state, for a thousand misfortunes may happen that
may make a rich man a beggar. And therefore Seneca says, that we ought to
possess those riches we have without care, so as it may never grieve us,
though we loose all we have, taking them not for our own, but as strangers
and things lent unto us, and for the time that we have enjoyed them, we ought
as Boethius says, to give thanks that we have been benefited by them as by
external goods, neither ought we to complain if we loose them. And this is
the effect of the Proverb, where it says, What great assurance have thou now,
that thee may certify? etc.

79
How many rich men have we seen,
in little time decay,
And from their great and lofty states,
slipped down and fallen away?
How many have been laughed to scorn,
For putting of their trust
In this fond fickle honor here,
now tumbled in the dust?
The Paraphrase.
WIth great wisdom says David in his Psalms, If riches happen to abound,
set not thy heart upon them, least if we fortune to forgo them, we should
sorrow and torment our selves for them: For whatsoever happen unto us, it is
always best to say with Job, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away:
Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever. And so shall no man be scorned nor
derided, for any thing that he has lost, or may loose.

80
And thus if I have told the truth,
In these precepts of mine:
Seek not for riches nor desire,
the thing that is not thine.
And if thou do demand of me,
to whom they do belong:
To fortune: thus I answer thee,
that list not to be long.
The Paraphrase.
OF goods there are two sorts, outward and inward. The outward goods be
such as fortune gives, and these be none of our own, according to the saying
of Bias before alleged: but our own goods are those, that be within us,
which are the Moral virtues, which are not subject to any change of fortune:
For when all the gifts of Fortune fails, yet learning and virtue remains,
which never leave nor forsake a man, but maintain and accompany him all his
life time, according to the opinion of Cato in his Philosophy. This being, as
it is very true, we ought not so with carke and care, to heap, to regard,
and scrape up riches, which belong not unto us, and may many ways be taken
from us, do what we can to keep them. And therefore our Savior has warned
us, that we should lay up our treasures in heaven, where neither rust nor
mooth can come, and where no thieves can break in, to steal it. This can we
not do with our goods of the world, but howsoever we dispose them, they are
subject to chance and casualties, that may happen.

The nienth Chapter. Of Envy.
81
Let not the envious man in life,
a pattern be to thee,
Nor walk thou in his froward paths,
nor keep him company.
It is not for a virtuous mind,
such error to commit:
Nor does a noble heart beseem
so ill to use his wit.
The Paraphrase.
Envy, as Aristotle in the second of his Rethorikes says, is a sullenness
and grief of that men have, to see either honor or any good thing to happen
to any that is of the same calling that they themselves are, and it is one of
the vilest natures that can be in a man: so as many times the envious person,
without any just cause at all, becomes a mortal enemy to his neighbor,
according to the saying of Saint Gregory in his Pastoral, where he says,
That the envious man, being not able to clear his heart from the venim that is
there congealed, discovers himself, and falls to working of mischiefs
openly. Whereupon our Savior Christ says in his Gospel, That there is no
Prophet without honor but in his own Country. For his own kindred and
companions, for the great disdain they have of his estimation, do seek by
all the means they can to discredit and deface him, which is not for a
virtuous mind, nor does a noble heart beseem. For it is for a noble and
gentlemanly heart to behave himself as the good Moses did, who when certain
envious persons, to move him to displeasure, came unto him, and told him that
two of the common people did prophecy in his tent, Moses very graciously
answered them, that he wished to GOD, that every one of the people were able
to prophecy, which mild speech proceeded from a noble and a valiant mind.

82.
Naught else does envy bring to pass
nor other seed does sow,
Then murders, mischiefs, cruelties,
and subtle overthrow.
As by the Scripture does appear,
where cursed Caine did kill
Poor Abel (that offended not)
upon malicious will.
The Paraphrase.
ABel and Caine were brothers, as Moses in the first of his five books
writes. The cruel murder of Caine done upon Abel, and the cause thereof, is
in the same Book at large described. And therefore, to make any, long
Paraphrase upon it, were but a thing superfluous. And it is well known, that
envy, the root of mischiefs, was the first deviser of that so shameful and
horrible a fact.

The tenth Chapter of Thankfulness.
83.
Good turns that have been done to thee,
have still before thine eye,
And when to recompense the same
it in thy power does lie,
Require them with a cheerful heart
And waying well in mind
What friendship has been shewde to thee
be never thou unkind.
The Paraphrase.
SEneca in his Epistle to Lucilius writes, that the unthankful man is he,
that returns a good turn without interest: in whose opinion we are bound not
barely to return the benefit which we have received, but to do it with
recompense. For as Valerius in his fifth book writes, He that does not
thankefully recompense a good turn, does clearly bereave men of the doing and
receiving of pleasures, without the which, the life of men is rather a death,
then a life. And this is it that the Proverb says, Good turns that have been
done to thee, have still before thine eye. etc.

84.
O what a shameful stain it was,
to Ptolomei the king,
The noble Pompey traitorously
unto his death to bring.
And Ezekias, for his great
unthankfulness did pay,
When by the wrath of God he should
have died before his day.
The Paraphrase.
PTolomey was king of Egypt, who as Lucan writes, was servant to Pompey the
Emperor of Rome, at whose hands he received his kingdom. And as the Civil
wars began to wax hot betwixt the two mighty Princes, Caesar, and Pompey,
(after the battle of Pharsalie) Pompey retired from the fields of Philippos,
to a place in Lesbos where he had appointed his wife Cornelia to lie: but
perceiving the people of the Country not to be such as he might trust, he
went by Sea from thence to Egypt, where he committed himself to the hands of
Ptolomey, who conspiring with Photinus, and Achillas, (two mischievous persons)
betrayed him, and after they had slain him, presented his head unto Caesar, at
the sight whereof, Caesar, as the story tells, could not refrain from
shedding of tears. Whereupon master Frances Petrarch in one of his Sonets thus
writes.

Caesare poiche'l traditor d'Egitto,
Lifece il don de l' honorata testa.
Celando l'allegrezza manifesta,
Pianse pe gliocchi fuor, si come e scritto.
Which in our vulgar speech is thus,

Caesar, when as the false Egyptian had
Presented him with worthy Po^peys head,
Hiding his joy with colored cou^tnance sad,
His fained tears forthwith, they say, he shed.
Of the reproaches of this Ptolomey, all hystories are full. And because as I
have said, Lucan sets out this matter more at large, it is needless to make
any long discourse thereof, since this Book requires no such exquisiteness,
nor entreats of any foreign story. Ezechias being of the tribe of Judas,
was king of Jerusalem, the servant and greatly beloved of God: who, when
Senacharib king of the Assirians had besieged the City, and fent Rabsacah his
messenger unto him, and to the rest of the people, willing them to yield
themselves, and promising them their lives, threatening them, that if they
otherwise did, he would assuredly put them all to the sword, and that neither
their God, nor any other God beside, should be able to deliver the^, as they
might see by the experience of a number of other mighty countries that he had
conquered and brought in subjection: Ezechias being afraid of the hugeness of
the army, and of the great power of Senacharib, showed unto Rabsacah the
temple of Jerusalem, with all the vessels and ornaments thereof, and all the
Jewels of his own house, which had been gotten together, and laid up by his
predecessors: but the Lord knowing the weakness and faintnes of Ezechias, and
foreseeing that he was determined to yield himself into the hands of
Senacharib, or at his appointment to Rabsaces, being greatly offended with him,
sent unto him the Prophet Esaias, to let him understand, that he should
presently die: but such and so great was his sorrowful lamentation and
mourning, as it pleased the almighty to reuerse the sentence.

The eleventh Chapter of Friendship.
85.
The man that council good can give
and will thee reprehend,
And warn from every evil act,
choose thou to be thy friend.
And think thy self thrice happy, when
thou such a friend can have,
That will thee well instruct, and from
all ill aduises save.
The Paraphrase.
FRiendship, as Aristotle in the eight of his Ethikes, says, and as has been
said before upon one of the Proverbs, is of three sorts, for delight, for
profit, and for honesty. Friendship of delight, is the friendship of
flatterers, and iesters which endures but a small while: for when the pleasure
ceasseth (as testers are not at all times, nor of all men liked) this
friendship straight ways ends. An other friendship there is, grounded
upon profit, and is, as Seneca terms it, merchaunt friendship, for it
endures no longer then there is hope of profit: And those that use this kind
of friendship, do it, as Seneca says, more upon the profit, then in
respect of the person. The Fly always attends upon the honey, and the
Woolfe upon the Carrion. Which kind of people are more in love with the pray,
and the spoil, then with the man. The third kind of friendship setieth it
self only upon honesty, and groundeth her self upon virtue, and this
endures as well in adversity, as in prosperity. This is the allonely true
friendship, which the Proverb counsels us to choose, and this is that which
Aristotle says causes in friends but one heart and one mind: and this
friend, whose friendship is grounded upon honesty, is he, that well
reprehendeth, and is no flatterer, nor will consent to any wickedness nor
evil, but gives counsel with out affection, justly and uprightly,
persuading always to virtue and godliness of life, and all the actions and
doings of such friends as are knit in this friendship, do ground them selves
as the Proverb says, upon goodness and honesty of life.

86.
And he that is thy friend, I wish
and warn in any case,
Thou keep and use him as a friend,
in every time and place.
I speak not of the flatterer,
who under color sweet:
Of sugared speech and pleasant shown
with gift of gall does greet.
The Paraphrase.
IN this Proverb is mention made of the division of friendship, before
specified, and it shows that the friendship that is upon profit, which is
the dissembling and flattering friendship, is not in very deed the true
friendship. For there is no perfect friendship, but that which is grounded upon
virtue and honesty, which friend above all others we ought to esteem: and of
such a friend speaks Aristotle, where he says, What pleasure has any man
in his life, though he have all the felicities in the world, if he want a
friend? For, to live happyly and quietly, it behooves a man to have one, to
whom he may safely open all his doings, and with whom he may be as bold as
with him self. We read in the Cronicle of the Philosophers, that Aristotle
being demanded what he accounted a friend to be: made answer, that it was
one mind in two bodies. Of this assured and perfect friend does the
Proverb here speak.

87.
If thou conceal thy thoughts, and that
thy mind in secret lies:
Thou shall be sure to be esteemde
and taken to be wise.
Often have I found my self by speech
in thrall and trouble brought:
But never yet for keeping of
my tongue, I suffered ought.
The Paraphrase.
CAto in his morrall Philosophy says, That the first and principal virtue
that a man should have, is to have a sober and a modest tongue, for much is he
in favor with God, that is able to hold his tongue, when time and cause
requires. Isocrates in his Oration says, that in two things only, speech
is to be preferred before silence: the one is, in speaking that, which is to a
public commodity: the other, in uttering that, which necessity forces. In
all other things he says: that silence is far to be preferred before
speech: but specially a man ought to keep his own secrets. For as Seneca
says, If thou art not able to keep thine own secrets, how can thou require
an other man to do it? And therefore the Proverb says, Thou shall be counted
discrete and wise, if thou kepest thy secrets to thy self, and that a man
brings him self in subjection by speech, but shall never be harmed by
silence.

88.
But yet I would not have thee here,
to be so straightly tied:
That from thy dear and special friend
thou should thy doings hide.
For why? it were to great offense,
to abuse his friendship so:
And even the redyest way it were,
to make thy friend thy foe.
The Paraphrase.
SEneca in his third epistle sets down, the way and mean how to get
friends, and being gotten, how to keep them, saying to Lucilius, Way with thy
self a long time the worthynesse of the party whom thou do choose for thy
friend, and when thou have found him to be meet for thy friendship, commit
all thy doings and all thy devises unto him, and be as bold of him as of thy
self. With thy friend says Seneca, imparte all thy cares and all thy
thoughts, and in so doing thou shall have him faithful unto thee: but if thou
growest once into jealousy, and hidest any thing from him, thou give him
cause to be unfaithful, for diverse in fearing to be deceived, have taught
others to deceive, and therefore the Marquis says, The readiest way it were
to make thy friend thy foe.

89.
See thou thy life be always such,
in deed and eke in show:
As thou regardest not a whit,
though all the world did know.
Unto thine honor and thy name,
have always special eye:
To shun the thing thou ought to shun
and all offense to fly.
The Paraphrase.
SEneca in the aforesaid Epistle says, That he which dare not trust his
friend as much as him self, he is greatly deceived, as one that knows not
perfectly the force of freindship, howbeit he says beside, Live thou in such
sort, that thou committest nothing, neither in deed nor thought, that thou
should be ashamed to show thy friend: meaning, that a man might to have
no filthy nor dishoneste thoughts in his mind, but such as can minister no
cause of offense to any man, not though it were to his very enemy.

The twelfth Chapter of Duty to Parents.
90.
Great reverence to the parents
evermore we ought to give:
And with obedience honor them,
as long as they do live.
The Lord him self has promised assuredly that he
That does the same, with long and happy life, shall blessed be.
The Paraphrase.
SEtting aside the laws both of God and man, we see that even by very nature
men are moved to honor, love, and fear their parents, and that we shun to
offend them, for the benefit of nature that by them we have received, as we
are taught by the Civil law. Besides, our Savior Jesus Christ entreating of
the Commandments, has not promised long life for the fulfilling of any of
them, save only for this, where he says, Honor thy father and thy mother,
that thou may live long and many days upon the earth: As it is also written
in Ecclesiasticus, He that honoreth his father, shall receive joy and comfort
of his own children, and shall live a long and an happy life. And again, The
blessing of the father makes steadfast the state of the children, but the curse
of the mother brings them to destruction, Whereupon says the Proverb, The
Lord him self has promised, etc.

91.
By motherly persuasions
Veturia did assuage
(And with her presence pacify)
the Roman in his rage.
On the other side the beastly lust
of that same monster vile,
With incest and with murder did,
his hateful heart defile.
The Paraphrase.
VEturia was an honorable Matrone of Rome, and mother to Coriolanus, a man of
great wisdom and valor, to whom for his great deseruings, the common wealth
of Rome was not a little beholding, howbeit as it is no new thing amongst men,
to have their good deeds requited with unthankfulness, he was most unkindly
and unjustly banished by his own Country men: the cause why, I find not
apparent, for malice never minds reason, neither does evil will at any time
regard Justice. But to return to the matter of Coriolanus, being thus
banished, goes straightwayes to the Volscians, who at that time were in arms
against the Romans: and as virtue in all places gets estimation, so was he
received and interteined with great honor amongst them, and for his valor,
within a very small time chosen to be their general. Whereby it came to pass
(as Valerius writes) that eue^ him, whose profit and good turns his Citizens
could not away with, now were they, the case being altered, driven to dread
as their mortal enemy, and besieger of their town: And being thus by the
siege sore distressed (which is always more grievous to great and populous
Cities, then to small towns) they were constrained to send unto Coriolanus,
most humbly requiring him to leave his siege, and to depart from the City,
and whereas their Ambassadors, being the chief and principal men of the
City and of the Capitol, with cold entertainment, were neither heard nor
answered, they continued their suit, and with humble submission sent out their
priests and clergy, being araied in their deuoutest vestures: but as the
other were returned, so were these sent back, with very hard speeches and euel
entertainment, whereupon the whole City bewayling their miserable case, and
crying out for the cruel answer, that (justly deserved) they had receued.
Venturia the mother of this Coriolanus staudeth up, and taking with her
Volumnia he sons wife, with her and her Children she goes directly to the
Camp of the Volscians, whom when Coriolanus a far of perceives, having in
his company a galant company of Gentlemen, he comes forth to meet her,
though not a little disquieted, because his mind gave him that their coming
was only to move him for the raising of his siege, and as soon as he came
near unto them, alighting from his horse, he came toward his mother to
embrace her. But she, putting him a little back from her with her hand, with
a heavy countenance said unto him these words, Before thou come near
me, and before I receive thine embracinges, let me understand whether I be
come unto my son, or to my enemy? or whether I shall enter into thy tent as
a mother, or as a sorrowful captive? Alas, to what extremity is my wretched
Age come, to see thee first bannished and expulsed thy City, and now a
cruel enemy and spoyler of thy Country that nourished thee? how could
thou come into these parts with so deadely and reuengefull a mind? how
could thou enter into these territories, and not let fall thy furious
displeasure and threatenings? How happened it, that at the sight of Rome thou
saydest not unto thy self, Lo hear within these walls is enclosed my native
soil; my patrimony, my mother, my wife, and my children? Unhappy woman that
I am, who am well assured, that if I had never borne thee, Rome had never by
thee been besieged: And if I had never been delivered of a son, I had
happily dyed both free and at home in mine own country. I speak not these
words, because I am not able to suffer any thing that shall be more
reproachful to thee, nor for the grief of mine own captivity, whose misery
can not be long by reason of my age, but only for these, that be here
present, thy miserable wife and poor distressed infants. When Ventruria had
thus ended her sorrowful complaint, Coriolanus embracing her with tears in his
eyes, said these words: Mine own sweet Mother, my rage and fury is conquered
and appeased, and is turned at your request from this mine unnatural and
unthankful country: wherewith he presently discamped, and brake up his siege.
Whereupon Valerius in the same Chapter says, That the heart, that was full of
wrath and revenge, for the injury that he had sustained, and was now in
assured hope of present victory, upon the only sight of his mother, and upon
his virtuous compassion, changed his intent of bloody wars, into a sweet
and healthful peace. Long were it to write, how greatly virtuous children have
always been governed by duty and reverence to their parents. Touching Nero
of whom mention is made in this proverb, where he says, The beastly lust of
that same monster vile etc. How loathsome and horrible the lecheryes of this
shameful tyrant was, and what, and how great his disobedience was to his
own natural mother, is to be seen in the story of his life, where who so
list may read it. And therefore I mean to stand no longer upon this proverb,
but to conclud, affirming that reverence ought of bounden deutie to be given
to the Parents, for which the Lord has promised in the fourth of his
Commandments, a long and blessed life upon the earth. I could here bring in,
if I were disposed, a great number of testimonies, as well from the
Philosophers, as from the holy Patriarchs and Prophets. But because the old
saying is, The tedious tale offends the ear, and briefest words we gladiest
hear. And therefore let this that I have said, suffice the Reader, which I
take to be enough for the understanding of the Proverb.

92.
And here we may not ouerslip
the wicked Absolon,
But call to mind his froward heart,
and fond presumption.
For never have we seen nor shall,
that he that is unkind,
Does any grace with GOD above,
or any favor find.
The Paraphrase.
ABsalon was the son of David, a man of passing beauty and singular
proportion, who found the means by certain of his servants to murder his
brother Amon for the deflouring of Thamar his sister, and turning her
dishonestly out of his house. For which murder David was greatly offended,
howbeit upon fatherly compassion, and at the humble suit and request of Ioab,
who was a special friend to Absalon, he pardoned him. But Absalon, whether it
were because he found not the like countenance at his fathers hand as he was
woonte to do, or that he was set on by some wicked servants and leude
Councellers, or whether it was the motion of his own evil disposed mind, he
presently withdrue himself (as if he wont with his fathers favor) from
Jerusalem, and came to Hebron, and with the sound of the Trumpet, calling
together the people of Israel, without any regard of his duty to his father,
he made him self King, with presumption to depose him, and to set vy him
self, and to that intent he allured unto him a great number of the tribes of
Israel, and entered into open arms against his father. But God, who could never
away with the disobedience of the child to his father, turned all his devises,
force, and power to his own confusion, for at the joining of the battles,
the fight being fierce, there was slain to the number of twenty thousand, and
Absalon him self galloping up and down, and passing through a thick wood, was
hanged by the hear of the head upon the bough of an Oak, his Moyle running
from under him, and being found so hanging, was slain by Ioab and certain of
his servants: whereby the good father obtained the victory of his disobedient
son, where it plainly appeared, that God him self, abhorring his rebellious
fact, fought against him, as is more largely declared in the second Book of
the Kings, which I have here but briefly touched, to show that the
disobedience to the father, is greatly displeasing of God.

The thirtienth Chapter, of Age.
93.
Let not old age thee discontent,
since that it is the race,
And most approved perfect path,
of goodness and of grace.
O mild and honorable Age,
that do abate the fire
Of vicious youth, and do restrain,
each lewd and fond desire!
The Paraphrase.
THE blessed Apostle tells us, that as long as we live in this world, we
are Pilgrims and strangers to the Lord, meaning that our true and natural
country is that, of which David speaks saying, I trust to see the glory of
the almighty in the land of the living. The land of ye living is the glory of
Paradise, where who soever remains do live without any dread or danger of
death. And as the Apostle says, all the while that we are absent from that
place, we are aptly here called strangers and pilgrims, meaning, that as the
pilgrim wandreth here and there forth of his Country. So we are always absent
and out of our country, as long as we live in this transitory life. And
because that by the means of age we draw near to our own country, when we
draw near to death: by which death, as Plato says in his Phedro, the soul
atteineth unto liberty, and breaking out from the Jail of the body, being
delivered from sorrow and misery, comes to her own quietness, joy and
solace. And therefore we ought not to be displeased at our old age, since that
it is the race of goodness, that is to say, the plain path and way, by which
we pass from sorrow and trouble to quietness, and to rest. And this is only
to be understood of the modest and well governed age, for that is she that
abateth the lusts and outrages of youth. For there is an age, as Aristotle
says in the first of his Ethikes, that being destitute of all virtue and good
behavior, is altogether doting and childish: For there is no difference, as
Aristotle says, betwixt him that is young of years, and him that is young in
behavior, so that the age which shall not be displeasant, must be modest and
furnished with good behavior and virtuous exercises, and that is the age, that
does abate the fire of vicious youth, and does restrain each lewd and fond
desire. This age (as Tullie in his book de Senectute writes) does alay both
lust, pride, and presumption, and does so enfeeble the force of the flesh, as
it brings a man to be lowly, mild, and modest. Of this kind of age also
speaks the Psalm, where it says, When the time of meeknes and mildnes shall
come, then shall we be reformed, which time of mildnes is from the age of
threescore, to threescore and ten, which season suffers not a man to be proud
or disdainful, but lowly, mild, and disposed to virtue. And therefore the
Proverb says, It does abate the fire of vicious youth, etc.

94.
This to the virtuous man alone,
does give authority,
And makes him perfect in the points
of grace and honesty.
For who is he that in his youth
can keep the perfect way?
Or measure in his life observes?
or runs not astray?
The Paraphrase.
IT is commanded in the law of God, that whenever we see an old ancient man,
we should rise and reverence him. And we find in the Civil law, that in the
City of Rome in the old time, they used to worship and reverence their aged
persons, and the people of those days did yield the same honor to such as
were old, as they did to their Judges and Magistrates: and this only they did
in respect of the honor that their old years does give them, for no young
man, though his wit be never so pregnant or quick, is able to attain to that
understanding, that the old man by his experience has gotten. For as
Aristotle in the first and sixteenth of his Ethikes witnesses, the number of
years is it that gives knowledge and experience. And therefore he says,
that the young man can never give any perfect judgment of any thing, because
he never has had any great experience. And although that in natural
Philosophy, and in the liberal arts and learnings, there needs naught else
but a sharp and quick conceit and understanding: yet in moral Philosophy,
which is the knowledge, by which we learn to live uprightly and honestly, it
is not only enough to have a good wit and capacity to, but also to have the
experience and knowledge of time: and such things as are done by men of ripe
years, we always presume that they be done upon great advise and
deliberation, which is nothing so with young men. And therefore upon great
consideration, our Savior being perfect God and man, although in the very
instant that he was conceived, he was perfect in all knowledge and
understanding, and did not grow with space of time to more ripe knowledge and
skill, would neither preach nor publishe his doctrine in his young years, but
at such time as he was come to his perfect age, neither does the Church
receive for truth and certainty any other things, then those, which we read
to be done at his full age. Whereupon all such Books as are written of such
things as he did in his childehoode, and youngest years, the Church does
take for Apocripha, and counts them not in the Canon of holy Scriptures. And
it is good reason that the things that are done in unripe years should be of
no authority, since our Savior Christ himself would neither preach, nor
publish his doctrine, till such time as he was of ripe and perfect age.

95.
This made the Catoes so renoumed
for wisdom great and grave:
this made the valiant Scipioes,
so great a name to have.
This only gouernes in the field,
and gives the victory,
And this in peace does countries keep
from all hostility.
The Paraphrase.
THere is no man, as has been said before, that attaineth to any perfection
in his doings and devises, but only by long experience of many years. And
therefore says Aristotle in the sixth of his Ethikes, that young men ought
always to have about them old and ancient men, whose counsel they may use,
and whom they ought in all things to believe, and therefore age is of great
account and estimation, for it makes, as the Proverb here says, men to be
wise, meet to judge, and discrete in government. And therefore Trogus Po^peius
in his eleventh Book writes, that Alexander whenever he happened upon any
desperate adventure, or saw himself in great danger in the field, would
never have about him any young blooddes or hewsters, but old men that were of
experience, such as had served his Father, and his Grandfather in their wars,
to the end he might have in his company, not only Soldiers, but
directers: he says beside that, when his old Soldiers had required of him
leave to go home to rest, and refresh their old and weeried bodies, and that
they would send in their places their sons that were young and lusty, and
better able to do him service: He answered them, that he made a great deal
more account of the wise and skillful gravity and authority of such ancient
men, then he did of the inexpert actiuitie and strength of those courageous and
lusty gallants. For age is only it that makes a man wise, and worthy of
reverence. Neither ought any man to mislike it, since it is the thing that
every man desires. And as Tullie in his De Senectute says, As the fruit is
not in season, nor to be eaten, till it be perfectly ripe, no more is man to
be accounted in his wisdom and perfection, till such time as he be old,
for then is he only come to his ripeness, though as the fruit is, he be
nearest his corruption: For then, as the Proverb says, he governs. etc.

The fourtienth Chapter, of Death.
Suppose thou not at any time
that death is far from thee,
But always think that he is nie,
and straight at hand will be.
great madness were it for a man,
to think this foolish life
Should evermore continue with
such misery and strife.
The Paraphrase.
SEneca, as has been said before, says in his second Tragedy, that no man
could ever yet have the Gods so favorable, that they might be able to assure
themselves, to live till the next day. For although we be most assured, that
we shall die, yet is neither the hour nor the time of our death certain, but
rather, if we consider the great dangers and casualties that our wretched life
is subject unto, we ought every hour, yea every moment to look for it,
according to the warning of our Savior, who wills us to watch and pray, for
we know not the day, nor the hour of our visitation. And therefore as the
Proverb says, it is a great folly, to think that Death is not always at
hand, and that he shall not, as he came into the world, go out of it. For as
the Apostle says, there is a law over all flesh, that they shall once die.
Valerius tells us in his fifth book, that when there was word brought to
Anaxagoras, that his son was dead: He answered the messenger, that it was
neither news, nor a strange thing, that he told him, but that it was such as
he always looked for. For he knew that there was nothing could come from him,
that should live for ever, and that it was a general matter, that whatsoever
received the spirit of life, must again restore it, and that as no man died,
but that first he lived, so no man lived, but at last he died: And therefore
well says here the Proverb, Great madness were it for a man to think this
foolish life. etc.

98.
If it so were the blessed joys,
that we do hope to see,
Should all in vain and to no end,
of us desired be.
Ne should the glory great of that
almighty Lord on hye,
Our Savior Christ be looked for,
that lasts continually.
AFter that our first Father had transgressed the commandment of God, our
life became straight to be subject to death, and fulfilled with all kinds of
calamity, and misery. For as the Apostle says, Through the offense of our
first father Adam, we are all borne the children of wrath. And never shall we
be without trouble, grief, and misery, during our mortal life, until such
time, that our soul be free and delivered from the dungeon of the body: And
this makes the Apostle to say: I desire to be loosed and to be with Jesus
Christ. For the Apostle, being vexed with many sorrows, griefs, and miseries,
desired to be dissolved, to the end he might rest from all his trauayles, and
Saint John in his revelation, says, Blessed are all those, that die in the
Lord, for they shall rest from their labors. So as by a good and happy
death, we are sure to be made partakers of the everlasting glory of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

99
Then tell me, wherefore should we fear
this death, why should it grieve?
Since that it is so good a lot,
if that we do believe,
That after our departure here
we go to perfect rest,
Attending for the glorious day,
wherein we shall be blessed.
The Paraphrase.
DEath as Aristotle in the third of his Ethics says, is the last of al
horrible and dreadful things: which being, as Tully in his Tusculans says, a
thing that naturally happens, we ought not to think that it can be evil,
since nature has appointed it. And Seneca in his Epistle to Lucilius says,
that life is given unto us, with condition, to look for death. The path is
plain and assured that leads unto it, and to dye well, is to die willingly.
And therefore death is never to be feared of those that be good and virtuous:
But of the wicked the Psalm says, The death of the ungodly is hurtful and
evil, but the death of the godly is life, because they pass from transitory
death, to everlasting life. According to the saying of our Savior unto the
thief, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise: which happened into him,
because he believed, according to the Proverb here, That after his departure
here, he went to perfect rest, attending for the glorious day Wherein he
should be blessed.

100
And hear to make an end, I say,
the only remedy
In all extremes, is for to keep,
the perfect mean with thee:
Which if thou take for thy friend,
a long and happy life
Thou shall be sure to lead, and live
without offense or strife.
ARistotle in the second of his Ethickes says, that in all sciences, the
work is brought to perfection, by having respect unto the mean, neither
adding nor taking from it more then is reason: meaning that the overplus and
the defect, do mar the whole matter, and that the mean does only save and
preserve it, which such as are skillful masters do chiefly consider. For
seeing that virtue is the most certain and best of all other arts, and that
her work and actions differ not from the actions of nature, it were greatly
against reason, that she should not (as well as al other arts) search and find
out the mean: and further he says, that the virtue moral consists as well
in passion as in action, and that in all things that be, there is an
extremity of too much, and an extremity of too little, and a mean betwixt
both: As for example, in fear, in boldness, in coveting, in cruelty, in
pity, and of all things that concern either pleasure or sorrow, the mean,
as Aristotle says, is to be commended, and the extremes do always bring
shame and dishonor. And like as it happens, that to the perfection of any
thing, there are a great number of things required, as likewise to make an
imperfection, suffiseth that any one of those things be wanting: even so for
a man to atteine unto the very mean of virtue, there are a great number of
things required, but to the not attaining thereunto, suffiseth the want of
any such thing as is needful. And hereof Aristotle puts a very familiar
example of such as be Archers, that to hitte the white, is a matter of great
cunning and hardness, and none is able to say that he can do it but he that
is a perfect Archer: but to miss it, is a very easy matter, and every man
that will, can do it. So likewise is it of the virtuous mean, for every man
that list, may avoid it. And therefore is the number a great deal more of
the wicked, then of those that be good, neither does it follow, as Aristotle
says, that of every thing the mean is always best. For some things there
are, that as soon as they be named, they are mingled and wrapped in mischief.
As for example, for a man to rejoice in an other man's harm, not to be ashamed
of any evil that he has committed, to bear a repining spite at an other
man's good hap, to commit adultery, to murder, to steal: of these things, and
such like, there is no mean that may be called virtuous. For howsoever a man
do them, they carry with them mischief and offense, but in all other things
that may be well done and evil done, there are both extremes, and a mean.
And of such means the Proverb, where it says, The only remedy, in all
extremes is, for to keep the perfect mean with thee, which if thou take
for thy friend, (that is: if so be a man in the order of his life join
himself with virtue, which is the mean:) A long and happy life, thou shall be
sure to lead, and live without offense and strife. In what sort we ought to
seek out this mean, and how we ought to order our selves for the obteining of
it, Aristotle at large declares in the second of his Ethickes, whyther for
avoiding of tediousness, I refer the Reader.

FINIS
Imprinted at London by Richard Watkins. 1579.




