November. 16. 1639.
Imprimatur.

THO. WYKES.

THE DISTILLER OF LONDON.

Compiled and set forth by the special License and Command of the Kings most
Excellent Majesty: For the sole use of the Company of DISTILLERS of London.

And by them to be duly observed and practiced.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD BISHOP. MDCXXXIX.

Ornate border

TO The Company of DISTILLERS OF LONDON.
WHereas our Sovereign Lord the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been
graciously pleased, by His Royal Letters Patents under the Great Seal of
England; To Incorporate (together with us) the Distillers etc. in and about
London, into one entire body politic, and Company of Distillers of London.
And amongst diverse powers and immunities unto us and our successors by the
said Letters Patents granted, His Majesty has therein given special command,
That a Book of Rules and Directions concerning Distillation of Strong Water,
etc. and making Vinegars, etc. should be compiled, and by us approved and
allowed: as by the said Letters Patents or Charter of Incorporation, more at
large does appear. In obedience to his Highness said Commands, this present
Book has been composed, entitled THE DISTILLER OF LONDON. Which Book and the
Rules and Directions therein contained, we have examined and corrected, and
do well approve and allow of the same, and every part thereof; signifying and
declaring, to the whole Company of Distillers and their successors, (and
whomsoever else the same may concern) That the Rules and Directions therein
contained, are good and warrantable; and may safely be followed and practiced,
by all the members of this Company, and their successors, in preparing,
composing, distilling, and making the several kinds and sorts of wares therein
nominated and expressed, (and others of like nature) and these several kinds
and sorts of wares and merchantdizes, being accordingly, duly ordered and made;
cannot be otherwise, than good, sound, and warrantably merchantable; and such
as may very well serve, to and for most uses and occasions, whereunto any of
those kinds and sorts of wares and commodities, are or may be required; as well
for spending within any of His Majesty's Realms, Dominions, and Plantations,
etc. as for victualling of Ships for any voyage or undertaking whatsoever, or
wheresoever: and for transportation by way of merchandise, into any the parts
beyond the Seas, in the usual way of commerce and trade. In confirmation of
the reallity hereof, we have hereunto subscribed our Names.

THEODORUS de MAYERNE, Regiarum Majestatum Medicus primarius. THOMAS CADEMAN
Medicus Regineus.


Company of Distillers' coat of arms DROP AS RAIN DISTILL AS DEW Deu: 32.2.
THE DESCRIPTION.
Azure. a Fesse wavie, Argent; between a Sun drawing up a Cloud distilling
Drops of Rain proper. And a Distillatory, double armed; Or. with two Worms
and bolt receavers Argent. (the Creast) on an helm mantled Gules dubled
argent; And a Torce, Argent, and Azure. A Barley garb, wreathed about with a
Vine branch, bearing Grapes, all proper. (Supporters) A Russe, and an Indian
savage, in their proper habits. with the Motto, in an Escroll, etc.

To the Society and Company of DISTILLERS OF LONDON. And to every particular
Member of the same: The Present MASTER, FOUNDER, Wardens, and Assistants of
that Company,
wish increase of Knowledge, and Endless Happiness.
IT has been observed in all ages, that the most excellent of Humane Arts,
that ever were invented by the ingenuity of Men of the most infallible
judgments, that even those Arts have not retained their first perfection
longer, than they have been confined within the limits of their Authors, or
like Artists practice. For no sooner have they been divulged abroad, amongst
the inconsiderate multitude, and so become the subject of their employments,
but those Arts have been thereby exposed to eminent danger, of being corrupted
through blind Ignorance, or wilful Error. Among the rest, (as a hereditary
evil incident to all Arts) it may as truly be said of this Art and Mystery,
the subject of our discourse; for no sooner was the practice thereof, taken up
as the last refuge of men inexpert, and of decayed fortunes: (who have (in all
times) been ushered in, and instructed by such as themselves.) But forthwith it
fell extremely short of its former excellent esteem, and true perfection; and
by degrees is grown so deformed, that Artists either do not, or rather are
ashamed to acknowledge it, to be the same thing, so strangely is it
transformed. But our intentions are not to obraid the ignorance or folly of
any, but rather endeavor the information and direction of such of our members
(as wanting the true knowledge of this Art) have run into errors and
absordities in their practices. And for our more orderly proceeding in that
behalf, have first made diligent search, to discover and find out the causes
of these confused disorders, both in the trade, and amongst the practitioners.
And find them principally to arise from want of power to regulate the true
professors, and means to suppress, or at least stop the current of the
disorderly and inordinate intrusion of Interlopers into the practice of this
Art: who by their prepostrous ways of working, and frequent use of base and
unsound materials, have brought scandal, not only upon the works of this
Art, (the wares) but also on the Art, and Artists themselves. For suppression
and future prevention of such delinquents, and their erroneous ways; and
releife, and reformation, of the present DISTILLERS, and their lawful
successors. His Majesty has been graciously pleased, to supply us with the
means to perform both: By Incorporating us, into one entire body politic,
and granting us and our successors, powers and immunities, tending to
reformation, and good government for time to come. And being thus enabled by
his Majesty's favor: and in obedience also to his Highness Royal Commands,
(in the said Letters Patents) We have prepared and made ready, these Rules and
Directions following, aptly fitted and composed, for the imitation and practice
of all the members of this Company, and their successors. And having therein
rejected and utterly forbidden, the use of base unsound materials and
ingredients, and taken away the abusive use, or misimployment, of those that
are sound and warrantable. It now remains that you, together with us, do
henceforth yield all ready conformity, to these instructions and directions,
and rightly and duly put the same in practice. And as we, (with constant
resolutions) have hitherto undergone the care and trouble, of procuring things
tending to reformation and settled government of the Company; so now we expect
(as justly we may) that you will second us, cheerfully with your best
abilities, to perfect and establish this good work. Jn this book we have
purposely incisted, principally on the most inferior and ordinary sorts of
wares, such as are most usually required for trade and commerce, foreign and
domistick. And therein have applied our selves, to accommodate all sorts of
people, that shall have occasion to use our wares. And here it is not amiss by
way of admonition, to give a touch of what you are (by our Charter and
Ordinances) strictly required and enjoined to observe and do: that is, That
neither the present Members of this Company, nor any of them, nor any of our
successors at any time hereafter, under any pretense whatsoever: Do presume
to distill or make any of the kinds or sorts of wares here expressed, or any
other sorts of like nature, any way meaner, weaker, or otherwise inferior to
those here prescribed. (For, by yielding to humor some sorts of people in that
particular, of making poor conditioned wares, it has been the very bane of
the Trade, and scandal to the Art, and Artists.) But you are not denied the
making of any of these, or like kinds and sorts of wares and merchandises
(according to Art) as much better, richer, or stronger, as you please. And to
that purpose we have here made provision, in some competent manner, to furnish
you with Rules and Directions to distill and make richer and higher prized
wares and merchandises of those kinds: as also for enriching and bettering of
diverse of those meanest sorts here set down; either by addition of greater
quantities of the same, or more sorts of ingredients; to the Rules whereunto
those additions are properly referred: unto which, if any shall yet desire to
add more, or other ingredients; they ought to be persons so qualified, and of
such abilities, as are able to give an Artlike account for their so doing:
others, by tampering, pretending to amend, will rather endanger spoiling all.
We are here to admonish both our present members and successors also, to
disclaim the abusive practices of some of the professors of our Art: who,
either by giving their undeserving wares, appellations of note, proper only to
the best approved Authors rules and compositions, of this kind, purposely to
delude the buyers, by such their false glosses; or else by adding to their
warrantable wares, impertinent (if not rediculous) titles: to the former (or
worse) ends. These abuses (being of scandalous nature) if henceforth any shall
presume to commit, they are to expect sharp reprehention, if not punishment,
for their folly and deceit. Also all the present members of the Company, and
our successors, are to take special notice, That they are by the Ordinances,
as also by their Oaths, strictly required, To place the true and proper names
and titles of every sore of wares (made ready and fitted for sale)
respectively, upon each particular vessel containing those wares, standing in
their Shops or elsewhere: As also, on all such vessels of wares as shall be
put up for sale, or sold; in some evident place, and legible manner, that it
may be visible to all whom it may concern: and that they also place their own
proper Mark (allowed them out of the Hall) on all the vessels containing the
wares they sell, in manner as by our Charter and Ordinances is required. And
now to return to such as desire to imitate the best approved Authors in their
titles; let not such do those Authors the injury, to deprive them of the least
jot of the true compositions proper to those titles; nor alter the nature of
their excellent things, by unartlike or prepostrous working. If you vary in any
particular from their Rules, be sure to add to the excellency and goodness
of the thing, else let their prescriptions be entire: otherwise you may
undergo a censure, and deservedly suffer for your errors. And here our duty
requires us all (that are Distillers by profession and Trade) to acknowledge
with thankfulness, the great care and industry (in adding of diverse excellent
Rules hereunto, and circumspect perusal and correction of this Book) performed
by the Right Worshipful Sir Theodore de Mayerne Knight, First Physician to
the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty, Founder and perpetual principal
Assistant of this Company of Distillers: And the Right Worshipful Doctor
Thomas Cademan, Physician to the Queens most Excellent Majesty, First, and
present Master of the same Company. And now least we frame our gate over large
for our little City, we shall conclude with this one admonition, That seeing
we have here forbidden the use of unsound materials and ingredients, and
prescribed for use, only such as are sound and warrantable. If any member of
this Company or their successors, having these Directions (which all must have
and observe, that intend to practice this Art) shall yet notwithstanding, make
unmarchantable wares, of any of these kinds, (or any other of like nature) or
wares any way inferior to these prescriptions: Such may deservedly, not only
undergo the censure of palpable ignorance, or malicious wilfulness; but also
justly suffer whatsoever by the Laws of the Kingdom, Ordinances of the
Company, or otherwise, may be imposed or inflicted on them, for their
delinquency. And so in assured confidence of the respective and willing
conformity of you all, in all things; do bid you all, heartily farewell.

THOMAS CADEMAN, Master. THEODORUS DE MAYERNE, Founder. EEVVARD HOOKER, Warden.
FOULKE WORMELEIGHTON, Warden. RALPH TRIPLETT, Warden. WILLIAM BROUNCKER,
Assistant. EDWARD FRANCKTON, Assistant. HENRY PINSON, Assistant. ROGER PALMER,
Assistant. JOHN BREVVER, Assistant. BARNARD FOUNTAIN, Assistant. GEORGE
SNELLING, Assistant. JOHN BAYLEY, Assistant. DANIEL CAGE, Assistant. THOMAS
DALLOCK, Assistant. HENRY GREEN, Assistant. THOMAS COE, Assistant. FRANCIS
HEATH, Assistant. WILLIAM BESSE, Assistant. JOHN WOODS, Assistant. WILLIAM
WILKS, Assistant. HENRY BOYCE, Assistant. HUGH BOWYER, Assistant. JOHN
CARWYTHAM. Assistant.


THE DISTILLER OF LONDON. OR, RVLES and DIRECTIONS For extracting and drawing
of LOW-WINES and SPIRITS, to be redistilled into RICH-SPIRITS, STRONG WATER,
or AQUAVITAE.
WHereas some of the Professors of Distillation in and about London, have
heretofore usually drawn Strongwaters and Aquavitae, etc. out of Wines,
Low-wines, and Small-spirits, etc. by one alone immediate extraction,
operation, or distillation, (contrary to the most approved form of working in
this our Art) and have been so opinionated of their own hereditary erroneous
ways, that they have esteemed the manner and order here taught, to be
altogether unnecessary and improvident, in that there is here required
Redistillation, which they have ever thought to be superfluous: Not
considering, that what they save by their seeming thrift, they lose double, in
the excellency of their wares, and otherwise. Wherefore that such may not only
acquit themselves of an aspersion of ignorance (not undeservedly cast upon
them) but also vindicate both their own, and the Companyes reputation, for
time to come. The Directions following, are henceforth by them and every member
of the Company, and their successors, duly and exactly to be observed and
practiced from time to time for ever hereafter.

THat all wines, Lees of wines, Low-wines, and Spirits under proof,
whatsoever, (intended for making of rich or high Spirits, Strong Water, or
Aquavitae etc.) Be first distilled, extracted, or drawn into strong proof
spirit, (whereby they may be corrected and cured of their natural, harsh,
distastefull, unsavory, or evil qualities,) before they be compounded with
ingredients, or extracted and drawn into rich or high Spirits, Strongwaters, or
Aquavitae; according to Art, and as is required in the ensuing Rules.

ANd because many gross absurdities have been frequently practiced in
adulterating some, and abusing others, of the materials used in Distillation,
and otherwise by DISTILLERS, by such as only, respect their own particular
gain; regarding neither the profit or credit of DISTILLERS, that have been
necessitated to make use of such their ill-conditioned wares: Wherefore, that
these grievances may be removed for time to come; The Directions following,
are strictly to be observed and practiced by all the members of this Company
and their successors, from time to time for ever.

THat no Afterworts or Wash (made by Brewers, etc.) called Blew-Iohn, nor musty
unsavory or unwholesome Tilts or Dregs of Beer or Ale; nor unwholesome or
adulterated wines, or Lees of wines, nor unwholesome Sugarwaters; musty unsavory
or unwholesome returned Beer or Ale; nor rotten corrupt or unsavory fruits,
druggs, spices, herbs, seeds; nor any other ill conditioned materials of what
kind soever, shall henceforth be distilled, extracted, or drawn into
Small-spirits, or Low-wines, or be any other ways used, directly or
indirectly, by any the members of this Company, or their successors, at any
time hereafter for ever.

ANd whereas of late times the small Spirits or Low-wines, made and sold as well
in and about London, as elsewhere in this Kingdom, have been generally
complained of, for their mean, weak, and poor condition: whereby many
inconveniences have fallen upon most of the DISTILLERS in general: And that not
through the alone practices of such as have no just title to, or interest in,
this Incorporation; but even by some of the DISTILLERS themselves, who
(notwithstanding their pretenses, of being necessitated thereunto) have justly
deserved reproof, for yielding to be Actors in a thing of such ill consequence
to DISTILLERS in general. Wherefore, that those abuses and disorders may now
be taken away, and the like prevented for time to come, the ensuing Rule, is
duly to be observed and practiced.

THat no Small-spirits or Low-wines, shall henceforth be distilled, extracted,
or made, and be allowed to be sold, put to sale, or used, by any of the members
of the Company, or their successors; But such only, as out of which, by one
alone redistillation, extraction, or operation, may be produced in quantity,
at least one third part thereof, of good strong Proof Spirit, such as is
required in the Rules ensuing, for making rich or high Spirits, Strongwaters,
or Aquavitae, etc. under such pains, penalties, and punishments, as by the
Laws of the Kingdom, Ordinances or Orders of the Company, or otherwise; may
be imposed or inflicted, on the contemners, neglecters, or opposers of these
Directions.

The names of the several Waters and Spirits, contained in this Book,
Alphabetically expressed, according to their Latin Appellations.
Page. Rule. v. Aqua Annisi, Anise seed water o. Aq. Angelicae Angelica water
c. Aq. Absynthij Wormwood water yo. Aq. Balsamitae, Balsamint water ya. Aq.
Caryophilorum, Clove water vo. Aq. Caryophilatae Avens water ns. Aq. Calendulae
Marigold water ny. Aq. Carui Caruway water yt. Aq. Cinnamomi communis, Cinnamon
water common ye. Aq. Cinnamomi optimi, Cinnamon water proper no. Aq.
Carminativa, Wind water na. Aq. ad Crapulam, Surfeit water nc. Aq.
Diaphoretica, Water to procure sweat un. Aq. Florum, Water of flowers vv. Aq.
Fructuum, Water of fruits yr. Aq. Faeniculi dulcis, Sweet Fennel water nr. Aq.
Lavendulae, Lavender water r. Aq. Limonum, and Aurantii, Lymon and Orange
waters a. Aq. Melissae, Balm water t. Aq. Menthae, Mint water in. Aq.
Majoranae, Marjerome water nv. Aq. Praetiosa Precious water nn. Aq. Nucis
Moschatae Nutmeg water ne. Aq. Pestifuga Plague water e. Aq. Rorismarini
Rosemary water yc. Aq. Rosasolis Vulgarly so called vy. Aq. Roris Solis Ros
solis proper is. Aq. Stomachica minor Stomach water small comp. yy. Aq.
Stomachica major Stomach water great comp. nt. Aq. Anti Scorbutica Scorbuticall
water us. Aq. Salviae Sage water y. Aqua vitae Aquavitae 1 sorts n. Aqua vitae
Aquavitae 2 sorts yv. Vsquebach. The Irish appellation.

The Characters expressing the quantities, qualities, and kinds of Materials
and Ingredients used in this Work.
Take Q. S. Sufficient quantity. ana of Each S. A. According to art B.M. Hott
Bath. M. Handful Barrel Qr. Quarter gr. grain Dram or ounce. Ounce Pound, or
16 ounces Reed roses Cloue gilliflouers. Reed Poppie. Reed Saunders. Rape Malt
Hopps. A Alum.

The ten small Italica Letters (of the Alphabet) below, are in all respects to
be esteemed and valued, in whole numbers and fractions; as the numerall figures
and cipher in Arithmetic, are:
As in Example.

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 0. y n v o c a t e r s

y / o y / v y / n v / o etc.

THE DISTILLER OF LONDON. OR, RVLES and DIRECTIONS FOR Preparing, Composing,
Distilling, Extracting and making OF RICH-SPIRITS, STRONG-VVATERS, and
AQUAVITAE, etc.
Rule I.
TAke Strong proof spirit, es. e. Aniseseeds bruised, y. y. c. Distill them
into strong proof spirit, S.A.

II.
Strong proof spirit, Q. S. e. Aniseseeds, n. v y / o. Caruway ana, y / o.
Coriander ana, y / o. v. Distill them into strong proof spirit, S.A.

III.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Aniseseeds the best, bruised, c. e. Distill
them into strong proof spirit. Dulcifie with white sugar, S.A. c. e.

IV
Strong proof spirit Q.S. e. Angelica roots, y y / n. or n y / o. or Angelica
herb, green, t y / n. in. Aniseseeds, ya. y. c. Slice the roots thin, or bruise
them and the seeds. Distill them into strong proof spirit: Dulcifie with white
sugar c. e.

V
Strong proof spirit,. es. Q. S. Aniseseeds best, bruised,. y. y. c. Wormwood
common, leaves and seeds stripped and dry, n. v y / n. Distill them into strong
proof spirit, S. A. Dulcifie with white sugar, c. y / n.

VI
Strong proof spirit, Q.S. e. Herb Balm dry, v. o y / n. Aniseseeds, y. y. c.
Distill them into strong proof spirit, and dulcifie with white sugar Q.S. S.A.
e.

VII.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Speire Mint dry, v. o v / o Aniseseeds best,
y. y. c. Distill them into strong proof spirit. Dulcifie with white sugar, c.
Q. S.

VIII.
Strong proof spirit, Q. S. e. Rosemary stripped, dry, us. v. Aniseseeds best,
ya. y. c. Distill them into strong proof spirit. Dulcifie with white sugar,
Q.S. e.

IX.
Strong proof spirit,. es. Q. S. Lymon pills dry, us. v. Aniseseeds best, ya.
y. c. Bruise the pills and seeds. Distill them into strong proof spirit, S. A.
Dulcifie with white sugar, c. e.

X.
Strong proof spirit, Q. S. e. Speire Mint, dry, Lovage roots, dry,
Aniseseeds, ana, y. y. c. Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger, Sweet Fennel seeds,
Imperatoria roots, Wormwood dry, stripped, ana, e. t. Caruway seeds, ana, a. c.
Coriander seeds, ana, a. Cumyne seeds, Cloves, ana, v. n y / n Bruise them that
are to be bruised. Distill them into strong proof spirit, S. A. Dulcifie with
white sugar, c. e.

XI.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Calamus aromaticus, a. c. Guiacum green
bark, Avens roots dry, Gallingall, ana, o. v y / o Citron, pills dry, Orange
pills dry, White Cynamon, ana, v. n y / n Wormwood Common dry Wormwood Romayn
dry Speire mint, Rosemary topps, Costmary, Sweet Marjerom, Wild Time, all dry,
ana, n. y y / n Nuttmeg, ana, n y / n n. Cynamon ana, n y / n Cubebs ana, y y /
n y y / o Cardamums ana, y y / n Sweet Fennel, seeds, ana, c. y / n Coriander
seeds, ana, c. Aniseseeds, y y / n n. v. Bruise them all that are to be
bruised. Distill them into strong proof spirit. Dulcifie with white sugar, y
s. S.A. ya.

XII.
Strong proof spirit Q. S. e. Sweet Marjerom dry, v. c. Aniseseeds, y a. y. c.
Caruway, o. v y / o Calamus aromaticus, a. c. Bruise them. Distill, and
Dulcifie, with white sugar, Q. S. S.A. e.

XIII.
Strong proof spirit, e s. Q. S. Aniseseeds, y. y. c. Cloves, n. y y / n
Nuttmeg, Ginger, Caruway seeds, ana, o. v. Distill them into strong proof
spirit, S. A. Then add to the Distilled water Licorice, spa. ana, n. v. y y / n
Raysins, sol. ana, n. Bruise the Licorice and Raysins, Dulcifie with brown
sugar, c. e. Stir them well together and so let it stand, y s. days, and
then (being Fine) draw it off, and keep it for use.

XIIII.
Strong proof spirit, Q. S. e. Balsamint dry, n. v. y y / n Aniseseeds best,
y. y. c. Caruway seeds, o. v. Lymon pills dry, e. a y / n Bruise them that are
to be bruised. Distill them into proof spirit. Dulcifie with white sugar, c.
S.A. e.

XV.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Cynamon of the best, e. a y / n Cloves, n. y y
/ n Nuttmegs, Ginger, Caruway seeds, ana, o. v. Marygold Flowers, Aniseseeds,
ana, ya. y. c. Bruise them. Distill them into strong proof spirit, S. A. Then
add to the Distilled water Licorice spanish, y. y. c. Raysins, sol, ana, c. e.
Brown sugar, ana, c. -- o. v. Bruise the Licorice and Raysins, Stir them
well together, And let them stand, y n. days, then being clear, it may be
drawn for use.

XVI
Strong proof spirit Q. S. e. Cloves of the best, is. y. Aniseseeds, ya. y. c.
Distill them into strong proof spirit. Dulcifie with white sugar, c. e.

XVII.
Strong proof spirit, e s. Q. S. Cynnamon of the best, c. e. Aniseseeds, is.
y. Distill them into proof spirit, S.A. Dulcifie with white sugar, t y / n in.

XVIII.
Strong proof spirit Q. S. e. Cynnamon best large, is. ya. Distill them into
proof spirit, S.A. Take white Sugar, in y / n ns. Rose water, o. a. v. Make
them into a syrrup, and dulcifie therewith S. A.

XIX.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Sweet Fennel seeds, c. e. Caruway seeds, o.
v. Aniseseeds, ya. y. c. Distill them into proof spirit. Dulcifie with white
sugar, c. e.

XX.
Strong proof spirit, Q. S. e. Marigold flowers new gathered, picked clean, n.
pecks heaped, Q.S. Bruise them. Sweet Fennel seeds, Aniseseeds, ana, is. y.
Distill them into strong proof spirit, Dulcifie with white sugar, c. e.

XXI.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Caruway seeds, us. v. Aniseseeds, is. y.
Rosemary dry, o. v. Lymon pills dry. Cloves, ana, v. n y / n Distill them into
proof spirit, S.A. Dulcifie with white sugar, c. e.

XXII.
Strong proof spirit Q. S. e. Nuttmegs best, ns. n. Aniseseeds, is. y. Bruise
them. Distill them into proof spirit, S.A. Dulcifie with white sugar, c. e.

XXIII.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Roots, Enulacampana, Avens, Angellica,
Cyperus, Calamus aromaticus, Sassafras, ana, c.
y / n Zedoarie, ana, o. v. Galligall ana, o. Cassia Lignea, Lygnum Rhodium,
Yellow Saunders, ana, v. n y / n Cytron, pills dry, ana, a. o v / ^ Orange
pills dry, ana, a. Cynnamon, white, Nuttmegs, Maces, Ginger, ana, c. y / n
Cynnamon best, ns. n. Cloves, Cardamums, Cubebs, ana, n y / n n. Seeds, White
Chervile, Basil, ana, v y / n Coriander, ana, is. Sweet Fennel ana, is.
Anise, ns.
v. y. n. Bruise them. Distill them into proof spirit, and Dulcifie with fine
sugar, yc. S.A. no. Let it stand till it be fine, then draw it off and add Musk
y. gr. a Ambergreice o. gr. no. Then let it clear and draw it for use.

XXIIII.
Strong proof spirit Q. S. e. Enulacampana roots dry, Aniseseeds, ana, y. y.
c. Cyperus roots, Bark, of the roots of Baytree, or as much leaves. Sassafras
with the bark. Cynnamon, white, ana, a. o v / o Calamus aromaticus Orange pills
dry, ana, o. v. Clarie, Mynts, redd, Callamint, Elder flowers, ana, c. y / n
Camomile flowers, ana, c. Seeds Sweet Fennel, ana, v y / n Caruway, ana, v y /
n Angelica, ana, v y / n
v. Coriander seeds, Cardamums, Cubebs, Grains of paradise, Cloves, Ginger,
ana, n y / n n. Pepper white ana, is. long ana, is.
y. Bruise them all grossly. Distill them into strong proof spirit. S. A.
Dulcifie with white sugar, is. ya. Draw it for use, when it is perfectly
clear.

XXV.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q.S. Butter-burr roots, dry, n. v. y y / n Valerian
(common) roots, Aniseseeds, ana, y. y. c. Vincetoxicum roots, Sassafras roots,
with the bark, ana, e. a y / n Angellica herb, dry, Cardus benedictus, Great
Valerian, herb and roots, all dry, Scordium, ana, in. y. y y / n Cowslippe
flowers, ana, is. y. Marigold flowers, ana, is. Juniper berries, ns. n. Bruise
them all. Distill them into proof spirit, Dulcifie with fine white sugar, S.A.
is. ya.

XXVI.
Strong proof spirit, Q.S. e. Juniper berries, n. v. y y / n Enulacampana
roots, dry, y. y. c. Calamus aromaticus, Gallingall, ana, o. y. y / o Wormwood,
ana, n y / n y v / n Speire Mint, ana, n y / n Red Mint, all dry, ana, n y / n
Caruway, seeds, ana, n. y y / n Angellica seeds, ana, n. Sassafras roots, with
the bark, White Cynnamon, ana, v. n y / n Nuttmegs, ana, y. v / o Maces, ana,
y. Ginger, ana, y. Cloves, ana, y. Red poppie flowers, o. a y / n Aniseseeds, n
y / n o. Bruise them all. Distill them into proof spirit. Dulcifie with white
sugar, is. ya.

XXVII.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q.S. Horse Reddish roots, dry, n. v. y y / n
Enulacampana roots, dry, Aniseseeds, ana, y. y. c. Water, Cresses, Winter,
Cresses, Garden, Cresses, Tarragon, Balsamint, Scurvey-grasse (garden)
Wormwood, Brook-lyme, Trefoyle (water) Sweet Chervile, ana, a. y / n v / o
Arsmart, e. v / o y / n Musterd, seeds, ana, v. n y / n Bank-cresse, seeds,
ana, v. Rockett, seeds, ana, v. Reddish seeds, ana, v. Citron pills, dry,
Orange pills, dry, Cynnamon (white) Maces, ana, o. v. Bruise them all. Distill
them into strong proof spirit, S.A. Dulcifie with white sugar, Q.S. y. For
use, take, t. parts of this spirit, and, y. part, of juice of Lymons, (or more)
mingle them together, and dulcifie it with white sugar, Q.S.S.A.

XXVIII.
Strong proof spirit, Q.S. e. Butter-Burr-roots, dry, y. y. c. Garden Valerian
roots, dry, Common Valerian roots, dry, Angelica roots, ana, a. y / n v / a
Imperatoria, ana, a. Gentian, ana, a. Enulacampana, ana, a. Snake-grasse roots,
ana, a. Contra yarva, ana, y / o v. Zedoarie, ana, y / o Gallingall, ana, y / o
Rue leaves dry, ana c. y / n White Horehound, ana c. Scordium, ana c. Carduus
benedictus, ana c. Elder flowers, ana, v. n y / n Lavender, ana, v. Maces, ana,
v. Cytron pills, dry, Juniper berries, ana, e. a y / n Green Walnuts, with the
husk, y. y. c. Venice Treakle ana, n. v. Mithridate ana, n. Aniseseeds (best) y
y / n n. v y / n Campheire, y. v / o Bruise or slice them as is most proper.
Distill them into strong proof spirit, S. A. Dulcifie with white sugar, is. Q.
S. For use, let the party infected of this water, y. mingled with warm
possett drink, (or any water proper in that case,) And be kept very warm and
sweat well thereupon.

XXIX.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Lavender leaves, dry, v. o v / o y / n
Lavender flowers, dry, n. v. y y / n Maces, y / n or a y / n Nuttmeg, y. y. c.
Lavender-Cotton, dry, n. v y y / n Stechados, y / n a y / n Bruise them that
are to be bruised. Distill them into proof spirit, S.A. Dulcifie with white
sugar, Q. S. ya.

XXX.
Strong proof spirit, Q. S. e. Great Sage, dry, v. o v / o y / n Redd Sage,
dry, n. v. y y / n Lavender, flowers, ana, y. y y / n y. Sage, flowers, ana, y.
Lavender Cotton, dry, ana, e. a y / n Southernwood dry, ana, e. Nuttmeg, is. Q.
S. Bruise or beat them as is most proper. Distill them into proof spirit, S.
A. Dulcifie with white sugar, Q. S. ya.

XXXI.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q. S. Ros solis, gathered in due season and clean
picked, o. a. v. Juniper berries, v. o v / o y / n Sassafras roots, with the
bark, Caruway seeds, ana, y / o v. Marigold flowers, y. y. c. Aniseseeds, y y /
n n. v y / n Bruise them that are to be bruised. Distill them into strong
proof spirit, S. A. Take hereof, t. add thereto, y. of Aqua Number, nv.
dulcified. Licorice bruised, y. y y / n.. y. Dulcifie it with white sugar, is
Q. S. If you add none of the aforesaid Water, then in stead thereof Musk, y.
Ambergreice, v. Color it with the tincture of,. or,. Q.S. S.A.

XXXII.
Strong proof spirit, Q. S.. e. And put it into a wide mouthed pott, (or other
vessel) stopped very close. Those several flowers following in their seasons,
and being clean picked, put them to your spirit in your pott. Viz. Cowslipps,
Woodbyne, Stock Gilliflowers, of all three sorts, Damask, Roses, Musk Roses,
Sweet Bryer flowers, Clove Gilliflowers, Lillium convallium, Iasmine, Citron,
flowers (or pills dry,) Orange flowers (or pills dry,) Tillia flowers, Garden
Time, flowers, Lymon Time, flowers, Wild Time, flowers, Lavender, flowers,
ana, y / n a y / n Marigold, flowers, ana, y / n Cammomile, flowers, ana, y / n
Mellilot, flowers, ana, y / n Elder, flowers, ana, y / n Being furnished with
all your flowers as above, when you would distill them, add to them,
Aniseseeds, n. Coriander, y. v. y y / n Bruise the seeds. It were best to
bruise all the flowers, as you put them up into the spirit, for their more
orderly working. y. c. Distill them into strong proof spirit, S.A. Then add
to the distilled water., and Elder flowers, ana, y. y. c. After in. days
infusion, it may be drawn off. Then dulcifie it with white sugar, is. y. And
being fine, may be drawn for use.

XXXIII.
Strong proof spirit, es. Q.S. Juniper berries, o. a. v. Quince parings dry,
ana, n. v. y v / n Pyppin parings dry, ana, n. Lymon pills dry, ana, ya. y. c.
Orange pills dry, ana, ya. Nuttmeg, o. v. Anise seeds, n. v. y y / n Cloves, n.
y y / n Distill them into proof spirit, S.A. To the spirit, add Straweberries
bruised, ana, c. e. Rasspisses bruised, ana, c. Stir them well together, and
after is. days, it being clear, may be drawn off. Then dulcifie it with
sirrup made as hereafter is taught. And so let it stand till it be clear, and
then draw it off, for use.

XXXIIII.
Strong proof spirit, Q.S. e. Avens roots, o. a. v. Orris roots, ana, n. y y /
n Nutmeg, ana, n. Yellow Saunders, ana, n. Maces, ana, n. Lignum rhodium, ana,
y. v / o Saffron, ana, y. Storax, ana, y. Benjamyne, ana, y. Angelica roots, v.
n y / o Lymon pills green, y / n a y / n Sweet Fennel, seeds, ana, y. y. c.
Anise seeds, ana, y. Cloves, y y / o y. Roman Wormwood, Mint dry, ana, Mv.
Stechas flowers, Red Roses, ana, Mo. Sweet Marjerome, ana, Ma. Q.S. Balm, ana,
Ma. Burnett, ana, Ma. Time, all dry, ana, Ma. Alkermes berries, n. y y / n
Bruise them that are to be bruised. Distill them into proof spirit, S.A.
Dulcifie with sirrup thus made. Rose water, o. a. v. White sugar, is. Q.S.
Boil it to a sirrup hight, then strain it, and put it on the fire again;
add thereto, Confiction of Alkermes, o. v. Sirrup of Gilliflowers, y. y. c.
Amber greice (dissoved in Rose water) y. gr. a. And so let these boil a little
till they be incorporated with the sirrup, and so keep it for use.

ADDITIONS TO Enrich those precedent Rules, to which (by numbers) these are
referred: viz.
To Rules. I. and II.
.. and. or any of them severally, Q. S. And infuse them in Aquavitae, or proof
spirit, till the Tincture be drawn out; then draw off your Spirit, and
reserve it (close stopped) for use.

When you have occasion to use it, take e. thereof to t y / n of this water,
and that will give it a sufficient color, or you may take more at pleasure,
without inconvenience.

III.
Aniseseeds, ana, c. (or Q.S.) e. White sugar ana, c. (or Q.S.) S. A.

IIII.
Caruway seeds, ana, v. n y / n Coriander seeds, ana, v. Calamus aromaticus,
Zedoarie, ana, o. v v / o Anise seeds, Cassia Lignea, ana, y / n a y / n
Angelica roots, e. a y / n (or Herb Angelica, n.) ( v. y y / n) White sugar, n
y / n (or Q.S.) o.

V.
Cynnamon, Cubebs, ana, o. v y / o Sweet Fennel seeds, ana, y / n a y / n Anise
seeds, ana, y / n Cloves, ana, v. n y / ^ Caruway seeds ana, v. Nuttmegs, seeds
ana, v. Wormwood dry, is. y. White sugar, n y / n o.

VI.
Time, garden, Penny royal, ana, Mv. Q. S. Cardamums, n. y y / n Anise seeds,
ana, y / n a y / n Sweet Fennel seeds, ana, y / n Balm dry, y. y. c. Nuttmeg,
ana, o. v y / o Ginger, ana, o. Callamus ar. ana, o. Gallingall, ana, o.
Cynnamon, ana, o.

VII.
Anise seeds ana, y. y. c. Speire Mint dry ana, y. Callamus aromaticus, o. v y
/ n White sugar, n y / n o.

VIII.
Sweet Fennel seeds ana, e. a y / n Cynnamon ana, e. Anise seeds ana, y. y. c.
Rosemary dry ana, y. Caruway, n. y y / n Speire Mint dry, M n. Q.S. White
sugar, n y / n o.

IX.
Caruway seeds, o. y v / o Anise seeds, ana, y. y. c. Lymon pills dry ana, y.
White sugar, n y / n o. In like manner, and quantities, make your Composition,
with Orange pills dry, S.A.

XII.
Cynnamon, c. y / n Cloves, n. y y / n Lymon pills dry, v. n y / n Sugar, n y /
n o.

XIIII.
Sweet Fennel ana, c. y / n Cynnamon ana, c. Nutmeg, v. n y / n Sugar, n y / n
o.

XV.
and add to the spirit, y / n as much as the Rule, of every particular
Ingredient therein expressed. And instead of. give it the tincture of.. or.
Q.S.S.A.

XVIII.
Musk, ana, y / n ana, gr. v. Amber greice ana, y / n White sugar Candy, in
stead of common white sugar, Q.S.S.A. In respect that Musk, in some cases, may
give offense to the Receiver, It is requisite to omit the use thereof, in some
of your water of this kind, to serve for such special uses.

XIX.
Sweet Fennel seeds, c. y / n Caruway seeds, o. v y / o Anise seeds, y. y. c.
Cynnamon, e. a y / n Cloves, n. y ^/n Sugar, n y / n o.

XX.
Cynnamon, ana, c. y / n Sweet Fennel, ana, c. Caruway, ana, n. y y / n
Cloves, ana, n. Marigolds, gallons, n. Q.S. Sugar, n y / n o.

XXIII.
The sirrup for dulcifying this water, is thus to be made. Apricocks ana, Q.S.
Quinces, ana, Cherries ana, English Currants ana, All full ripe, and of equal
weight, when they are thus prepared as follows.

Pare the Quinces and Apricocks, and take out the stones and kernels, and slice
them very thin, stone the Cherries and bruise them, and the Currants. Then lay
them into a flatt Basin or pann, thus. A layne of fruit of a fingers
thickness, and then a layne of white powder sugar of like thickness, and so
proceed in order layne upon layne, till all be laid into the Basin, then power
on gently good Aqua-vitae, till all be covered therewith, and so let it stand
hours, n. Then bruise or posh them all together, and press out the juice as
dry as possible you can through a thick linen bag. Then take the juice and let
it stand till it be settled clear, which juice by a gentle exallation in, B. M.
boil up to a sirrup hight, S. A. and keep it for use.

To every, e. of the spirit, put, y. of this sirrup, and when it is clear,
draw it off for use.

RVLES and DIRECTIONS for the Company of DISTILLERS of LONDON, in general: But
more especially for such of them, as now do, or hereafter shall, make
Vinegars, etc.
WHereas upon due examination it has plainly appeared; That many insufferable
inconveniences have of late fallen upon this Company and their Trade, in
general; by reason of the disorderly and abusive expense and employment of
Brewers After-worts (called Wash) Insomuch that thereby, not only those of this
Company that have had no hand herein, but even the Distillers themselves that
have been the Delinquents, have intollerably suffered both in their
Reputation, and great decay of their Trades, by these their alone inconsiderate
practices. For reformation of the present disorders and abuses, and future
prevention of the like. These ensuing admonitions and directions, are strictly
to be observed and practiced. Viz.

THat no Member or Members of this Company, or their Successors, nor any of
them, at any time hereafter for ever, by any way or means whatsoever,
(directly or indirectly) shall or may, use, dispose, convert or employ, any
After-worts (or Wash, made by Brewers or others) into Vinegar, Beere-egar, or
Ale-egar, or either of them: or to or for any other use or employment
whatsoever, except only to distill the same into Low-wines or Spirits, to be
redistilled into proof Spirit, for the uses aforesaid, according to the true
intent and meaning of these Directions. As they and every of them respect their
oaths, by them taken (when they were made free, and received into this
Incorporation) And will undergo the penalties provided, or to be provided, by
the Ordinances of this Company, or otherwise, to be imposed or inflicted on the
Contemners, Neglecters, or Opposers hereof.

Rule I.
PRovide three sweet tuns (or smaller caske,) place them orderly on scantlings;
provide good sound white. and such well conditioned liquid Materials as are
proper for this use, Q. S. (not musty in any case.) Then number your tuns, 1.
2. 3. Fill tun, 1. with. within, a. inches of the bungue, stop the bungue with
cork, or wood very close, and let it stand, and in few days it will gather
heat, then being conveniently hot, fill up the vessel within, v. inches of top
full, with your liquid Materials, without Dregs. Stop it close again. And at
that instant in like manner as before, fill tun, 2. with. after a few days,
that will be hot as the former was, then finding it conveniently hot, draw of
tun, 1. and put it into tun, 2. and stop both close. At that present fill tun,
3. with. and order it in every respect as you did the former. And when tuns, 1
and 3. have gathered heat sufficient, fill up tun, 1. with fresh liquor (as at
first) and draw of tun, 2. and put it into tun, 3. and so let tun, 2. gather
sufficient heat again. Then draw of tun, 1. and put it into tun, 2. And at that
present, you may draw off tun, 3. and put it into a store Caske. for having
passed, 3. times through the. is thereby become to be, good merchantable ware.

And so in like order, supply one Vessel from another, till you have finished
your work, S.A.

When all your liquid Materials are spent, so that you have no more to
continue your work, then be sure your tuns stand near full, till you are
provided of more liquor, to put upon your. for if your. (standing dry) should
wax hot, you having nothing proper to supply the same, your. will soon decay
and be utterly spoiled.

In summer or warm weather, the. will gather sufficient heat in, n. or, v.
days, but in winter it will require more time.

Rule II.
TAke ns. Qr: of good sound. convert it into yss.. of good serviceable ware (at
the most) you must allow to this quantity, good sweet,. at least, ca. And being
well wrought S. A. put it into sweet Caske (sweet oil butts are best) fill
them within, e. inches of the bungues (being laid upon scantlings in the sun)
let not the head work over at the bungues, and it will sink to the bottom.
Prepare little covers of wood fit to cover the bungues, and larger covers to
lay over them, to defend it from rain falling into the Caske. Let the bungues
stand open only when the sun shines hot upon the Caske, but in close or wet
weather and nights, let both covers be always kept on.

When the first head of the liquor is fallen, then draw it from the Lee, into
another clean sweet Caske. And so afterward from Caske to Caske, as there
shall be cause, till it come to perfection. Then draw it off into other sound
caske, and so house it for use.

The largest caske are the fittest to house and keep your wares in, for store.

If your wares grow long and ropie, then put a fit quantity of, A. into it,
work it well together, S. A. And it will grow short again.

A CATALOGVE of the MATERIALS and INGREDIENTS used in the precedent Rules.
Roots.
Angelica, Avens, Butter-Burr, Calamus aromaticus, Cyperus, long, Contra yerva,
Enula campana, Galingale, Gentian, Ginger, Horse Redish, Imperatoria, Licorice,
Lovage, Orris, Sassafras, Scordium, Snakegrasse Valerian common garden, great,
Vincetoxicum, Zedoaria.
VVoods.
Lignum Rhodium, Saunders red yellow

Barks and Pills.
Bay Tree roots, Cassia Lignea, Cynnamon common white
Cytron, Guiacum, Limon, Orange, Pippins, Quinces, Sassafras.
Herbs.
Angelica, Arsmart, Bay leaves, Balm or Bawme, Burnett, Brookelime, Balsamint
or Costmary, Carduus benedictus, Chervile, sweet, Clarie, Callamint, Cresses
water garden winter bank
Costmary or Balsamint, Horehound, white, Lavender leaves, Lavender Cotton,
Mint speire red
Marjerome, summer, Penny royal, Rosemarie, Rockett, Ros solis, Rue, Sage red
great
Scurvie-grasse, common, garden Staechados, Southernewood, Scordium, Time wild
garden Lymon
Tarragon, Trefoile, water Valerian, great Wormwood common roman
Flowers.
Cowslip, Cytron, Commomile, Elder, Gilliflower, clove Gilliflo: stock, 3 sorts
Iasmine, Lavender, Lillium Convallium, Marigold, Melilote, Orange, Poppie, red
Roses red damask musk bryer
Saffron, Sage, Staechas, Tillia, or Lyndentree, Time garden Lymon wild
Woodbyne (or honey suckle.)
Seeds.
Anise, Angelica, Basil, Caruway, Cardamums, Cresse, bank Chervile, sweet
Coriander, Cummyn, Fennel, Sweet Grayns of paradise, Musterd, Redish, Rockett,
Scurvie grass, garden Wormwood, common.
Fruits.
Apricocks, Alkermesberries Barley, maulted Bay berries Cardamums Cherries
Currants foreign English
Cubebs Cloves Grapes Hopps Juniper berries Maces Nutmegs Pepper white long
Quinces Raspis, red Raysins, sol Straw berries Saffron Walnuts green with
husks, Zedoaria.
Juices
Lymons, Walnutts green, with the husks.
Others of diverse kinds.
Amber greice, Alum Benjamyne, Camphire Confiction of Alkermes, Methredate,
Musk, Treakle, Venice Sirrup of Gilliflowers, Storax, Sugar, of diverse sorts.
Liquid Materials.
Wines of all kinds, Beer and Ale, After-worts, or Wash Sugar-waters, Tilts,
Dregs, Lees, or grounds of Beer or Ale, Lees of wines, Spirits of wine,
Rosewater.
FINIS.
Men's works have faults, since Adam first offended;
But those, in these, are thus to be amended.
Page 9. line 12. read undeserving. p. 10. l. 13. r. prescriptions. p. 34. l.
4. r. sweet Chervile. p. 37 margent, l. 5. r. y y / o marg. l. 11. r. ya. p.
39. marg. l. 1. and 6. r. v y / o p. 40. marg. l. 5. r. y y / n p. 42. marg. l.
5 and 7 r. v y / o p. 43. marg. l. 5. r. gr. a. l. 6. r. gr. yE. p. 44. marg.
l. 2 and 3. put them a line higher. p. 45. marg. l. 4 and 7. r. v y / o p. 46.
marg. l. 2. r. v y / o l. 5. r. n y / n p. 47. marg. l. 3. r. v y / o l. 5.
read v y / n

The Oath of every free Member.
YOu shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord the KINGS MAJESTY, His
Heirs and Successors, and in all matters and things lawful and reasonable;
you shall be obedient to the Master Wardens Assistants and governors of this
Company, and their Successors, and shall be ready and willingly come, to all
their summons, (except you have lawful cause to be absent) or else you shall
pay all such penalties and fines as you shall forfeit (according to the
Ordinances of this Company) for breaking the same. All the Ordinances, Acts.
and Orders, made or to be made, for the weal, rule, and good government of
this Company, you shall to your power observe and keep; or else pay such fines
and penalties as you shall forfeit by reason of your disobedience, or breaking
the same. All the lawful secrets of the Trade Art and mystery of DISTILLERS,
you shall conceal and keep; And all lawful counsels and consultations, words,
matters, and things which you shall at any time hear, or know, spoken or done,
at any Assembly of the Company, at the Hall or other place, that does concern
the government of the Company, reformation of abuses, or regulation of
refractorie persons; you shall nor divulge, declare, or make known to any
person whatsoever, whereby the good government, redress of abuses, or
regulation of disorderly persons be hindered, prejudiced, or prevented. All this
you shall faithfully and truly do and perform to the utmost of your power.
So help you God, etc.


