A. 18. Iacobi Regis. 1620. The brief Contents of the Bill exhibited against
Logwood, and abuses in dying.
1 THis Bill utterly prohibiteth, not only the importation into this Realm of
all Logwood alias Blockwood, Saint Martins wood, and Campecha wood, and all
mixtures to dye withal, thereof or therewith made; but also the buying,
selling, using, dying with, occupying and keeping the same: upon pain of
forfeiture of 40 pounds, whereof a third part to the King, another third to the
poor of the Parish, and another third to the Informer; besides such corporal
punishment as by the Statute of 39. Eliz. is to be inflicted on such as use
Logwood in dying, viz. To be set on the Pillory all the market time, one or
more days, at the discretion of the Magistrate.

Reasons. 1 The former Laws extend not to the prohibition of the importation,
and Logwood being licenced to be imported, Dyers will secretly get and use the
same, which cannot be prevented, unless the importation be utterly
prohibited. 2 These woods are all of one or like deceitful nature and
quality, yet of different names, devised to defeat the Laws, which extend
only to Logwood alias Blockwood. 3 Notwithstanding all the Art and cunning that
can be used in the mixture of these woods, yet the colors therewith all dyed,
are very false and deceitful. 4 By the prohibition of the importation of these
woods, his Majesty's Customs will exceedingly increase: for by the book of
Rates no Custom is paid for Logwood (the King not tollerating the importation)
and every Tun of these woods spent in dying, saves the spending of ten
Tons of woad, or the value of so much in Indico, for which Custom is paid,
so that it is manifest, that by the license granted for importation of fifty
Tun of Logwood yearly (if under color thereof no more be brought in, as it
is to be doubted the contrary) yet the King loses yearly the benefit of the
Custom of 500. Tons of woad, or of the value thereof in Indico. 5 By the use
of these woods the Subject is deceived, the art of dying both at home and
abroad much scandalized, and the ancient Trade of clothing in this Realm
greatly decayed.


2 This Bill authoriseth all persons by warrant of the Major or head Officer of
any City or Town corporate, or of two Justices of peace of the County, to
search in all suspected places for the said woods and stuff to die withal,
and finding the same, to seize and deliver to the said Majors, etc. who are to
cause the same to be speedily burned.

Reasons. 1 Unless they be so authorized, they cannot find where the same
woods shall be hidden. 2 Unless the woods may be speedily burned, the keeping
of them may prove very hurtful.


3 This Bill authoriseth any person by like warrant, to search for Clothes
deceitfully dyed.

Reasons. Which being found, the punishment for the same is provided by former
Statutes.

4 This Bill authoriseth the Wardens of the company of Diers in London, to make
the like search in all places in London and the Liberties, and within three
miles thereof.

Reasons. Otherwise many Dyers in those places, not free of the Company of
Dyers, will not permit such search to be made.

5 This Bill forbids all persons using dying in London and the Liberties, or
within three miles thereof, to woad any Clothes or Stuffes of a lighter or
lesser woad then the stalls or samples shall be of, which shall be delivered to
them by order of the Wardens and Assistants of the company of Dyers in London,

Reasons. The Freemen of the Company of Dyers in London, are by their
Ordinances strictly bound to observe this good order; but many persons in those
places using dying, some free of other companies, and some strangers, not being
bound to perform this order, do daily commit many notable deceits to the
abuse of the Subject, and scandal of the Art or mystery of Dying.

6 This Bill appoints the Wardens and Assistants of the company of Dyers in
London, within ten days after Midsommer, yearly to nominate, at the least
four persons expert in dying, which shall be Searchers for woaded colors,
which Searchers are to be sworn before the Lord Major and Aldermen in London,
for the due execution of their office: and the Wardens and comminalty of Dyers,

Reasons. This Company best knowing who are most expert in that Art, are
fittest to have the nomination of the said Searchers.

7 This Bill authoriseth the said Searchers so named, and sworn to search in all
places within the limits aforesaid, where dying is used, all clothes and
stuffes woaded before they shall be turned out of the woad into other colors,
and shall seal such clothes and stuffes which they shall find well and truly
woaded with seals of lead, stamped with such several stamps for several
colors, as are provided for that purpose by the Wardens of the company of
Dyers: and such clothes and stuffes which the Searchers shall find or suspect
to be insufficiently woaded, to bring the same to the Dyers Hall in London,
there by a court of Assistants to be adjudged whether the same shall be
sufficiently woaded or not, and then to be redeliuered to the Dyer from whom
the same was taken.

Reasons. 1 By sight of the clothes and stuffes in the woad, expert persons may
the better discern whether they are sufficiently woaded for the ^^lours
appointed for them, or not. 2 The like seal is appointed by diverse Statutes
for diverse things, to the end that the Subject might not be deceived. 3 The
Freemen of the Company of Dyers using dying, have many years past observed
this good order, which for prevention of deceit is also necessary to be done
by all others using dying, though not free of their Company. 4 Sometimes the
deceit may be so much shadowed by Art that the Searchers may be doubtful
thereof, in which cases the trial thereof cannot more easily be made then by a
court of Assistants of that Company.


8 This Bill imposes a forfeiture of 20 pounds to the King and Informer, upon
every person which shall not suffer search to be made, according to the tenor of
this Act.

Reasons.Diverse presentiments there are of the like, as 3. Ed. 6. c. 2. and 4.
and 5. Ph. and M. cap. 5.

9 This Bill allows (toward the provision of seals and lead, and recompense
of Searchers) ob. to be taken for the sealing of every piece of cloth and
stuff well woaded, and that for non payment thereof, the Wardens of the
Company of Dyers may distraine: The taking of which ob. cannot be termed a
Monopoly, for these reasons, viz.

Reasons. 1 The same is taken of the Dyer only, who therefore does not in any
wise enhance his prices of dying, and therefore not prejudicial to the
commonwealth in general. 2 It is doubtful whether ^ ob. upon the piece will
defray the charge for lead, seals, and searchers. 3 If the profit should
surmount the charge, yet the overplus being reserved to the Company of Dyers,
is there to lie in stock for the discharge of all extraordinary payments and
taxations, which otherwise are to be leuyed upon every particular person by the
Pole, which stock being so maintained, every member of that Company is
partaker of the benefit thereof, and therefore not to be thought unnecessary
to be paid. 4 Presidents there are diverse of receipts upon sealing, as by
Statute of 5. Ed. 6. c. 6. for sealing of cloth well dressed etc. 35. Eliz cap.
10. sor searching and marking of Carsies, 1. Ia. cap. 22. for sealing of
leather, etc.


10 This Bill also imposes a forfeiture of 20 pounds to the King and Informer,
upon every Major, Justice of peace, head Officer, Constable, etc. which shall
be negligent in the due execution of this Act, for so much as appertains to
them.

Reasons. This is not unnecessary, because the life of the Law is in the
execution thereof.

All former Laws not repealed, made for prevention of deceits in dying and
against using of Logwood, for so much as are not repugnant to this Act, to
stand in force, this Act notwithstanding.


