FRENCH KINGS EDICT UPON THE PEACE WHICH IT pleased his Majesty to grant unto
all those of the Reformed Religion within his several Dominions, Including
likewise those of ROCHELL.

Published, and Registered in the Parliament the 6. th of April. 1626.

Printed for Mercurius Britannicus. 1626.

The Kings Edict upon the Peace which it has pleased his Majesty to give unto
his Subjects of the pretended reformed Religion.
Published in the Parliament the Sixth of April, 1626.
LEWIS, By the grace of God, King of France and Navarre. To all both present
and to come greeting. As Sovereign authority has no less splendor in
actions of Grace and Clemency, then in Arms and Justice, and to know how to
vanquish and pardon are the highest marks of Magnanimity. So that a Prince
ought to be esteemed worthy of honor and glory who having given course to his
Arms against those which had justly brought them upon them, and after they had
submitted and ranged themselves in their duty is content to exercise his
clemency toward them, and to make the public fruits to be gathered by the
establishing of Peace, which causes God to be served and inuocated in all
places, the Kings authority reverenced, and acknowledged of all, and the Laws
religiously to be observed, the people eased, and the body of the State
uniting its forces together is more powerful for its conservation, and to give
succors and protection to the Allies. These considerations which we have ever
had before our eyes, have given us occasion to use as much moderation to
mittigate and extinguish the motives which diverse times have exposed this
Kingdom into combustion, using grace toward those who inconsiderately have
cast themselves thereinto, as we have showed vigor, firmness and diligence
to chastise and correct them, when we were thereunto constrained. Concerning
the present affairs, our courses have been such, that having employed both
threatenings and punishments in places which openly have declared themselves
disobedient, and gentleness, patience and persuasions unto those which have
contained themselves in their duty and obedience, having kept back the tempest
of trouble wherewith this state was menaced with an intestiue war and
preserved the better and greater part of our Subjects of the pretended reformed
Religion in the fidelity and obeisance wherein they are bound unto us: Our
intention having been so clearly seen and known to have always been as it
is still at this present to maintain them in peace, concord, and tranquillity,
and to cause them inuiolably to enjoy the graces unto them granted by our
Edicts and declarations. And that those which have taken Arms, and the Towns
which have followed their examples, having lately considered the quality of
their offense, the public indignation, the ruin and just punishment that they
draw upon themselves, continuing to trouble the repose of this State: they have
had recourse unto our benignity, as to the only refuge of their safety, and
have by their deputies besought us diverse limes by all ways of Submission that
subjects may show unto their King to pardon and forget what was past, and to
give them peace. Whereupon, we rather inclining to grace and clemency, than to
the ruin and desolation of our proper subjects: Having also regard to the most
humble Supplications to us made in the name and behalf of those of the
pretended reformed Religion which have continued in their duties, that we would
be pleased to receive the submissions of the others, to forgive their
inconsiderate courses, and to reunite all in peace and concord under their
obliged obedience. Protesting and assuring us never to depart from the same,
for any cause, pretext or occasion whatsoever. We declare, that for those and
other causes and considerations of great importance, us moving, by the advice
of the Queen our most honored Lady and Mother, the Princes of our blood, and
of other Princes, Dukes, Peers and Officers of our Crown, the principal
Lords and most eminent persons of our Counsel being near unto us: We have
signified and declared, do Signify and declare by these presents, Signed
under our hand, that our will and pleasure is,

I. That the Edict of Nantes, Declarations, and secret Articles, published and
enrolled in our Courts of Parliament shall be inuiolably kept and observed for
our Subjects of the pretended reformed Religion to enjoy as they have well and
duly done in the time of the King our most honored Lord and Father deceased,
whom God assail, and since our coming to the Crown before the last troubles.

II. That the Catholicall, Apostolical and Roman Religion shall be restored
and re-established in all places of our Kingdom and Countries under our
obeisance, where it has been intermitted during these last troubles to be
fully, peaceably and freely exercised: Expressly forbidding all persons of
what quality or condition soever, upon pain of being punished as infractors
of peace and perturbators of the public repose, not to trouble, molest nor
imquiet the Ecclesiastical persons in the celebration of divine Service and
other functions of the Catholic Religion, nor of their inioying and
perception of Tithes, fruits and revenues of their Benefices, and all other
rights and duties belonging unto them, and that all those who during the last
troubles that do detayne any goods and revenues of the Churches appertayning
unto Ecclesiastical persons, shall leave unto them the full and entire
possession free and peaceable, conformable to the 3. Article of the Edict of
Nantes, and restore such goods taken as shall be found in nature.

III. That the exercise of the pretended reformed Religion shall be
re-established in the places where it has been, according to our said Edicts
and Declaration in the year 1620. And our Subjects of the said pretended
reformed Religion shall be re-established in the said places, as also in their
Churchyards or places of Burials where they have been granted, or others, such
as by the Commissioners which shall be by us deputed or Officers of Towns
shall find it most fit and convenient, And where they shall best fall or for
some important cause, that the places of Burials cannot be re-established in
the same places which they possessed in the year 1620. there shall be others
given them, which shall be commodious at their charges which shall require the
alteration.

IV. And to give public testimony of the consideration in the which we hold
those of our Subjects of the pretended reformed Religion, which have continued
in their fidelity and obeisance, and the recommendable proofs which some of
them have demonstrated unto us in our Armies both within and without our
Kingdom, We have at their humble supplication, having also had regard unto the
Submissions of those which were strayed from their duties, and by our especial
Grace full power and Royal authority, we have acquitted, remitted and
pardoned, do acquit remit and pardon by these presents, all leuies of Arms,
enterprises and acts of hostility committed by our said Subjects of the
pretended reformed Religion, of what estate, quality or condition soever they
^ee, together with the Towns which have followed their examples, and the
Inhabitants thereof as well by Sea as by Land; since the first day of January in
the year 1625. and precedent commotions until the day of the Publication of
these presents, therein comprehended that which peradventure has happened within
the internal of the Signature of the Declaration the 20. th of October 1622.
and the publication thereof in our Courts of Parliament, whereof they shall
remain fully and perpetually discharged, together with all other general and
provincial assemblies, small conuentions, leuies, popular commotions,
excesses, violences, infractions of Safegards, and all other things generally
whatsoever contained in the 76. and 77. Articles of the said Edict of Nantes,
although they are not here particularly declared and expressed, without being
for any thing heretofore or to come any way questioned, pursued nor inquieted,
except only the case reserved as it is specified and declared by the 86. and
87. Articles of the said Edict of Nantes, whereof examination may be made
before the Judges to whom the knowledge of the cause belongs.

V. And for such sums of moneys as have been imposed, levied, and taken upon
our Subjects, or our receipts, or those who have the managing and
administration thereof and discharges of those which are comptable, together
with that which concerns the debts and excesses by the communalty of both
parts, and not paid. The 74.75.78. and 79. of the Edict of Nantes shall be kept
and observed.

VI. Which doing all Seats of Justice, Custome-hou^^s and receipts, and
Officers of Finances, which per^^uenture might, or have been transferred by
means (...) the present troubles since the month of January (...) last year,
and especially those of the Table of the ^^ction of Rochell, shall be
established in the same e^^^te wherein they were. The Towns which remai^^d
Reformed shall enjoy the same privileges, im^^^unities, Franchises, Faires and
Markets, which they ^^ue done heretofore. The elections of Consuls shall (...)
made after the accustomed form, and in case of ^^peale, it shall be relieved in
our Chamber of Edict.

VII. In like manner, we will that our said Subjects of (...) pretended
reformed Religion, shall be wholly ^^d entirely discharged of Judgments and
Decree. ^^de against them through the occasion of the pre^^^t troubles,
following the 58.59. and 60. Articles, (...) the said Edict, imposing
perpetual Silence upon (...) our procurators general, their Substitutes and
(...) others which therein may pretend interest.

VIII. We charge and command, that all hostile Priso^^rs which are detained on
either part, who have not ^^^ed ransom, shall be delivered and set at full
liberty without paying any: declaring all promises made (...) caused for
ransom, which have not been discharged by the day of the date hereof to be
void and of none effect, provided notwithstanding that for the ransomes
already paid, there may be no pretenses not repetitions: as also those of our
Subjects of the pretended reformed Religion, which are seized by authority of
Justice, detayned in our Prisons or Galleys, by means of the last and
precedent troubles, yea, even those that were taken in the enterprise of Port
St. Lewis, shall be enlarged and set at liberty immediately after the publication
of these presents without any remise or delay.

IX. Our meaning likewise is, that the 27. Article of the said Edict of Nantes,
concerning the admission and reception of our Subjects of the said pretended
reformed Religion to charges and Offices shall be kept and observed, and that all
those of the said Religion what quality or condition soever, which have been
by means of the present troubles destituted and deprived of their Charges,
Offices, Dignities, houses and habitations since the first of January 1625.
shall be remitted, and re-established. As also in all their goods, names, debts,
reasons, actions, which have been seized in the time of the first and last
commotions; Notwithstanding all provisions of Offices, gifts, confiscations,
represalls, payments, and quittances: Permitting to the Creditors to put in
execution their Contracts and Obligations for the principal, notwithstanding
all Judgments and Arests, except it were intervented with an arrest diffmitiue
and controdictorie for that regard in our Counsel, or in our chambers of the
Edict, or that the particulars have been paid elsewhere.

X We will that our present Letters of declaration shall be kept and observed by
all our Subjects, in and according to the prescribed form by the 82. Article
of the said Edict of Nantes, but Commissioners, shall be by us deputed where need
shall require, to cause the Contents thereof to be duly executed.

XI. With express charge to our said Subjects, professing the said pretended
reformed Religion, not from henceforth to hold any general or particular
^ssemblies, Counsels, conventions, nor any other of what quality or condition
soever, except they have ^xpresse commission by Letters or Breefes by us Signed
and counter-signed by one of our Secretaries of State: and that they shall
depart from all practices, in^elligences, unions and associatio^s. It being not
the less ^ermitted the collection of their consistories and Sy^ods for the
affairs concerning the ordering of the ^iscipline of the said pretended
reformed Religion, ^onformable to our Letters of declaration, dated the ^7. of
April 1623. inacted for the holding of collection and Synods, with express
inhibitions to treat of any pollitick affairs, and from henceforth they shall
make no fortifications in no manner whatsoever with^n our Towns, without our
express License by our Letters Patents; Neither shall they raise any sommes of
Money upon our Subjects for any cause whatsoever, without commission under our
great Seal: upon pain of Crimum leze maiestatis, and to fall from, and to be
deprived of this our present grace.

XII. Our intent is also that the Articles by us concluded, for that which
concerns the Town of Rochell, Isles and country of Aulins shall be kept,
observed, and incontinently, and without delay executed, and that the Towns
and Castles which shall be found to have been taken by those of the pretended
reformed Religion since the first troubles, shall be rendered into our
obeissance within fifteen days after the publication of these presents.
Declaring those of our Subjects of the said pretended reformed Religion which
shall make difficulties to submit themselves to this our will, to be fallen and
deprived of the benefit of this our present grace.

So We give command to our trusty and well-beloved the Officers of our Courts of
Parliaments, and Chambers of the Edict, our Chambers of Accounts, Courts of our
Aids, Baylies, Senescals, or their Lieutenants, and to all other our Justices
and Officers to whom it shall appertain to cause to be read, published, and
recorded by every one of them, and the contents hereof inuiolably to be kept
and observed according to the form and tenor thereof, without any
conteruention or suffering the same to be conteruented in any manner
whatsoever. Enioyning our Procurators general or their Substitutes, to cause
to this effect to be used all instances, pursuites, and requisitions
necessary: Notwithstanding all Decrees, Letters, and other things to the
contrary notwithstanding, To the which Derogatories of derogatories therein
contained, we have derogated and do derogate by these presents: For so is our
pleasure. And to the end that it shall remain firm and stable forever, We
have put our Seal thereto. Given at Paris in the month of March, in the year
of grace 1626. and of our Reign the 16. Signed LEWIS. And underneath, By the
King De Lomenie. And of one side Vis A. And Sealed with the great Seal in
green Wax, upon labelles of red and green Silk Laces.

Read, published and recorded, heard, and which the Kings Procurator general
requiring it to be executed kept and observed according to the form and tenor
thereof, with charge according to the Decree the 3. of this Month: and that a
collationed Copy of the original of the said Letters should be sent to the
Bailyships and Seneschalships of this Jurisdiction, to be likewise read,
published and recorded, by the diligence of the Substitute of the said
Procurator general who are enjoined to certify the Court to have done it
within the Month.

Given at Paris in the Parliament, Monday 6. of April, 1626. Signed DV TILLET.

The Extract of the Registers of the Parliament.
THe Court having seen all the Chambers assembled, the Letters Patents
conformall to the Edict given at Paris in the month of March 1626. Signed
LEWIS, and underneath, by the King, De Lomenye, and Sealed with the great Seal
in green wax upon silken Strings. By the which and for the causes therein
contained, the King wills and ordayneth, that the Edict of Nantes,
Declarations secret and public and recorded in his Courts of Parliament be
kept and observed: That the Catholicall, Apostolical, and Roman Religion, be
placed and re-established in all the places and parts of his Kingdom where it
has been intermitted during the last troubles, there to be freely exercised,
with prohibitions to trouble or molest the Ecclesiastical persons of divine
Service and other functions of the Catholic Religion; and that the pretended
reformed Religion shall likewise be re-established, according to the
Declarations of the year 1620. Acquiting, remitting and pardoning those which
make profession thereof, all what is already past during the time of the said
troubles, as more amply may appear by the said Letters petitions of the Mayor
and Eschevins of the City of Orleans, of Frances, Godfrey, Gabriel, Hirault,
and his consorts, Merchants of the said City, and of the Catholic
inhabitants of the Town of Montpeli^^^ and places adjoining, Prelates,
Ecclesiastical persons, Gentlemen and others, and John Casseirol their
Deputy, to the end to be received opposants to the verification of the said
Edict. The Conclusion of the Kings procurator general, and all which
considered, The said Court has ordained and ordayneth, that the said Letters
in form of Edict shall be read, published and recorded in the Office thereof,
to be executed, kept and observed according to their form and tenor: With this
charge notwithstanding, that in the execution of the 9. Article, the sums
paid by virtue of gifts, confiscations, represailes or otherwise may not be
repeated, but shall remain to those which have received them: Saving to the
said inhabitants of the said Country, to provide for them upon their
opposition in the Parliament of Thoulouse, and to the said inhabitants of
Orleans, to cause the Decree to be executed by them obtained in the Kings
privy Counsel the 22. of November, 1625. Ordayning that colationed copies of
the said Letters shall be sent to the Bailiwicks and Senescalships, to be
likewise read, published and Recorded, by the diligence of the Substitutes of
the Kings Procurator general, who shall certify to the Court their diligence
within the Month.

Given in the Parliament the third of April 1626. Signed. Du Tillet.

FINIS.

