I A

initials of the printer John Allde I A

initials of the printer John Allde blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of
arms THE COPY OF a letter sent by one of the camp, of the Prince of Conde
(touching the feats of war as of late have been done) to a friend of his, the
xxx. of December last past.

Anno Domini. 1568.

Laus Deo.

Omnia Vincit Veritas.

OF A LETTER.
AFter your departure (most honorable) out of France, we have own nothing but
running to and fro* taking and laying siege to Towns and Cities, and all what
we have taken in hand: has prospered well and gone forward, God have the
honor for it. And yet we will not cease, or leave of: but go forward as place
and time shall serve. And as we never douted of your good will, and earnest
desire to se the confusion of Gods and our enemies: so now we see effectually
showed your ready help and present comfort. And as we have had before in our
e^treprises, or atte^pts good succedings: so now we trust to do the better,
for your aid which you have sent us. Not because we put any trust, or
confidence either in our selves, or in any outward force: but that they are
means, whereby our God I trust shall deliver us, and that shortly. God forbid
that we should make flesh or blood our arm, or to put any conridence in the
multitude of horsemen. Nevertheless we are many, and our number is thirty
thousand footmen, of the which there are five and twenty thousand Harkebusiers,
or Gunners, and the rest weaponed with Lances, and seven or eight thousand
horsemen: beside the multitude which is coming from Montaban.

And as for our victories which God has given us: we have taken by force of
weapon these towns following. S. Iehan Dangeli. Fontenay. Angoulesme. Chaueni.
near Poytiers. Chammi. Lodun. Bisamni. Ambeteni. Toillebourg. Niort. Partenay.
Pont. Penni. Talmond. Montagni. Blay. Bo^niu^et. Saints.


And other more as Coingnac, New castle Breeflye all what lies upon the river
of Garro^ne until the river of Loyre on the side of Samne.

Concerning the battails or skirmisshings which we have had against our
enemies, we have been together twice or thrice, in such a place, and field, as
they might have chosen for their advantage to fight, whereas they were so laid
an: that never since they durst meet us any more, but always avoid and flee
our company, smelling us a far of as a Fore does the pitched line.

Touching the meeting and a skirmishe between us five weeks ago: they lost
seven or eight hundredth men, and the spoil was about two hundredth M. crowns
worth, but they saved them selves by the means of a river, some within
Poytiers, some other at Lusignam.

My Lord the Prince of Conde caught the hat of an Italian Captain named Peter
Strocij.

My Lord Admiral, the Coat of one Brisac. My Lord the Duke Montgomery the
stirrops and spurs of Monsieur of Guise.

One of my Lord Admirals lackeis has for his part six and thirty pieces of
silver vessels which did belong to the lord of Guise. To be short: there was
none of them al but that they were the better for it. After that my Lords the
Princes being of mind to provoke the^ to fight a battle: applied them selves
in their fight toward the Town and Castle of Chagny, a fortress where as
they trusted them selves for to be most sure, but these good souls had rather
to save them selves by flying then to defend their Towns and Castles, or to
present the^ selves to a Combat: for they say it is dangerous, to be there as
their common term was at that time through out all their camp, as since it
has been very often practiced by them, loving rather to flee and to forsake
their Towns and cities: then to hazard their lives, or to put in ieobardie
their bodies, through the which they hope to be revenged. So the said Prince of
Conde being near Samny, for to have besieged it: our enemies approached with
their Artisse^ry within a quarter of a leagne of Lodun, and required it to be
rendered, where of the Prince being advertised: made haste toward them in such
sort that they were constrained to break up their siege and to go again to
their old accustomed remedy, which is to get the^ away over the river. True
it is that before they came so far, there were slain two hundred of their men,
and the night following, seven Ensigns more were undone and destroyed.

Moreover two days past the company of Monsieur du Noye, ouertook, and found
at the subburbs of the before said town Chagny: about three or four score
Zwitsers.

Also the Provost and Archers of the Guard of my Lord the Kings brother, which
was him self within the Town. And beyond the water was an Alarm very hot.

This day there came news by two Gentlemen which arrived coming from the
Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Bipont, which left the said Prince of Orange
within seven and twenty leagues of Paris, having with him ten or eleven
thousand Kutters, or Horsemen, and four thousand french men, and sixteen or
seuenteen thousand footmen, which take their journey straight toward Paris, of
the which army Monsieur, de Iauliis leads the first ward. And the said
Duke of Bipont has been coming toward the prince of Orange, ever since the
tenth day of this Month, to join him self with him.

Also news came as well in our camp, as also to our enemies, that Monsieur
D'arnalle has lost four thousand men, being constrained through the army of
the Prince of Orange (which came to join him self to the Duke of Bipont) to
retire sudenlye with two thousand men which were left him to go to Riens. It
is said for a troth that the Lord Guise is gone in post to find out the
King. Also it is said that the most patt of there camp goes toward Paris, to
set the against the strange Princes. I believe we shall follow. Cito. Cito.

Imprinted at London at the long Shop adjoining unto S. Mildreds Church in the
Pultrie, by John Allde Anno Domini. 1569, Ianuarij. 24*


