An excellent and plain Discourse of the CHVRCH, whereby the Godly may know
and discern the true Church, from the Romish Church, and all other false and
counterfeit Churches, as well for matters of doctrine, as Discipline, etc.

Written in French by M. Bartrand de Loque, a godly Minister of Dolphenine.

And faithfully translated into English, by M.T.W.

SEEN AND ALLOWED.

Jmprinted at London, for Thomas Man. 1582.

The sum of the Chapters contained in this present Treatise.
Chapter. 1 TOuching the diverse significations, and takinges of this word
Church, and how the Church is commonly distinguished. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the
Catholic and universal Church, which is one, although there be diverse
particulers thereof. Page 7. Chap. 3. Of the visible Church, and of the true
marks thereof. Page 14 Chap. 4. Whether the true marks of the Church are to
be found amongst the Romish Catholics. Page 19. Chap. 5. Of the calling and
succession of pastors. Pa. 24. Chap. 6. That the Church has always been from
the beginning of the world, is, and shall be unto the end thereof: but yet the
Church must not be regarded or acknowledged, for the great numbers sake. Page
55. Chap. 7. That Jesus Christ alone is the head of the Church, and not Saint
Peter, neither any Pope. Page 68. Chap. 8. Whether the Church of Rome be the
true and Catholic Church, and whether we do well to withdraw or separate
our selves from it. Page 102. Chap. 9. Touching the degrees of Ministers in the
Church: where also speech is had of the orders of the Popes Clergy, and of
the office and duties of true Pastors. Page 128. Chap. 10. Whether the
ministry of the word be always necessary in the Church: and how much men
may attribute or give thereto. Page 160. Chap. 11. Of the sanctify or
holiness of the Church. Page 184. Chap. 12. Whether the Church may err.
Page 197. Chap. 13. Whether the Church be above the holy scripture, that is to
say, whether the holy scripture depend on the judgment and authority of the
Church. Page 213. Chap. 14. Of the Discipline of the Church. Page 234. Chap.
15. Whether it belong to the Church to make laws: and if she make some,
how far the faithful ought to obey her. Page 25^. Chap. 16. Concerning the
afflictions and persecutions of the Church. Page 274.
To the most noble Lord, my Lord Henry de la Tour, Vicount of Turenne,
County of Monfert, Baron of Mongacon, Oriergues, Bonsolz, Fey, Seruissac,
Croc, etc. Captain of five hundred men at arms of the kings armies.
MY Lord, Lactan. lib. 4 de vera. sapient. cap. 30.
Lactantius has very properly and fitly called the Church, the fountain of
truth, the house and dwelling place of faith, and the Temple of God, adjoining
withal, that if there be any which enters not into this Temple: or if there
be any that go out thereof, he is shut out from the hope of life, and from
eternal salvation. For even as in the time of the universal flood, none could
be saved, which were out of Noe his Arc: Gene. 7.20.23.
so without the Church, there is neither hope, nor faith, nor grace, nor
salvation. Which thing also, the Apostle Saint Paul did very well declare and
mean, when being purposed to excommunicate some, and to cast them out of the
Church, 2. Cor. 5, 3.5. 1. Tim. 1.20
he said, he must deliver them unto Satan. For as Jesus Christ reigns in
the Church: so Satan reigns without the same: and as they which are in the
Church, having Jesus Christ for their head are in very good state and blessed:
so they which are out of the Church, having the Devil for their head, cannot
but be wicked and accursed. And therefore it is said, both in Isaiah and in
Joel, That in Sion and in Jerusalem there shall be salvation. Isaia 46.13. Joel.
2.32.
There being meant by Syon and Jerusalem the Church of God: as also by the
word heaven there is meant the same thing in the Apocalips, when S. John
says, I heard a great and loud voice, Reave. 12.10.
saying, Now is salvation in heaven. On the other side we read, that when
God declares, that he will utterly root out some, from the heavenly life,
he denounces against them and threateneth: Ezech. 13.9.
That they shall not be in the counsel and assembly of his people, neither
written in the role of his servants. And David very well knew and felt this,
when sometimes being in exile, all griefs and adversities, were unto him
tolerable, and as a man would say easy to beat, excepting this, that he
was deprived of, and wanted the solemn assemblies, wherein men made public
declaration and protestation, of Gods religion and service. Wherefore be
wailing his condition, because he was excluded from the visible Church, he
being also shut out from access or coming to the Tabernacle, by the cruelty
and tyranny of his enemies, he cried out earnestly and said, O Lord of
hosts how amiable are thy Tabernacles? Psalm. 84.1.2.4.10.
My soul longs yea and faints, for the courts of the Lord, for my heart
and my flesh leap for joy in the living God. And a little after, Blessed are
they which dwell in thy house, they will ever praise thee. For a day in thy
courts is better then a thousand other wheis, I had rather be a door keeper
in the house of my God, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of the wicked: For
thereby he has declared that the condition of those men, which bestow their
life (yea although it were but a day long) in the service of God, in the
midst of the Church, and among faithful people, is far more blessed then
theirs, who live (though it were never so long) out of Gods house, and in the
midst of those, out of whose company, their religion is banished. To which
purpose also belongs that, which the same Prophet sings in an other
Psalm. Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. And again when he says, Psalm. 106.45
Remember, or have mercy on me O Lord, with the favor and good will of the
people, and visit me with thy salvation: That I may set the good things of
thy chosen ones, and rejoice in the joy of thy people, and glory with thine
inheritance. And for this very cause and occasion, the Apostle to the Hebrwes
commends and praises Moses, Heb. 11.24.25.
when he says: That by faith, he being come to age, refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh his daughter: chosing rather to suffer adversity with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, for a short season.

Wherefore if we would, that GOD should govern us by his holy spirit, (to
the end to make us enjoy and possess his spiritual and heavenly good
things, which he gives not but unto his children alone, the members of
Jesus Christ his son) and by consequent, if we would be saved and made
blessed, we ought to hold and keep our selves, firm, sure, and well stayed
in the Church, so that there be no force of tyrants, no violence of storms
and tempests, no persecution of enemies, no promises no threatenings, nor (to
be short) any thing else, which may turn us away, or cause us to separate our
selves from it.

But in the mean while we see, what controversy and disputation, there is at
this day amongst men, touching the point or matter of the Church, that being
true which Lactantius says: to wit, That every company of Heretics
supposes, that they are true Christians, Lact. de vera sapien. ca. 10
and their Church is the Catholic Church: as we know that Parmenianus the
Donatist said: That there was not a church, but amongst his sort and company:
insomuch that sundry of this age suffer them selves to drop away and be
deceived by the feigned name and visardlike title of the Church, abiding
hardened in their superstitions, and blinded in errors, making no account,
August. ad Catecum. cap. 20.
of Saint Augustine his advertisement and counsel, who speaks thus.

This Catholic Church is our true mother, yea she is our faithful and chaste
mother, decked within, with the dignity and worthiness of her husband, and
not colored or painted without, with lying and falshoode: and afterward he
adds: Let us look well to our selves, that the strange and false name of the
Church turn us not away from this mother of ours, and that the outward
show, or borrowed bare title of the Church do not deceive us.

There are some others, who remain astonished as it were, and doubtful, not
knowing to which part to turn, neither on which side to set themselves in
order. Seeing the Romish Church armed with great force and authority,
maintained and vpholden by great personages, clothed with diverse ornaments,
outward apparel, and followed of the greatest number: On the other side,
beholding the reformed Church feeble and weak in outward show, made and
standing for the most part, of the smalest and basest according to the world,
simple in deckings and ceremonies, and followed of very few people.

But the doctrine of the truth (which is our principal light, and chief
guide) gives us a good remedy and aid in this difficulty, showing us that
the true Church, ought to be discerned from the false, by her own right and
true marks, which are the pure preaching of the word, and the true and right
use of the sacraments, and not the great number of people, nor pompes, not
outward ceremonies, invented and devised by men themselves.

You (my Lord) have sometimes seen what trouble and combats the very
visarde, bare name, and shining show, of the Romish church has brought, to
some men's consciences and spirits, and that not only amongst the rudest and
ignorant sort but even in the rank and order of those, which made profession
and took upon them to teach others: yea so far it has carried them, that by
reason there was nor in them a full resolutenesse, they knew not of what
company they should be.

Notwithstanding as touching your self after that God had honored you with
his knowledge; and called you into his Church, that you might be
comprehended within the sheepefolde of Jesus Christ's his son, having almost
made open profession of his Gospel; and cast away the beasts mark,
whatsoever shaking and staggering you perceived in diverse others, you
notwithstanding have always continued, through Gods grace, grounding and
settling your self upon his assured and invincible word. And in deed, by what
force and strength could the back flydinges of some, and the Sophistical
disputations of other some, astonishe your faith, or beat down your
constancy, so well maintained and vpholden by the holy Ghost? How could these
assaults crack your courage, or change and make cold your zeal, so hot in
the service of God? Certainly, this is a great matter that all the world has
an eye upon you, wondering at, and loving, the great and singular affection
which you bear, to the advancement of Gods true religion and service.

But the question is now, to continue in well doing and to proceed daily from
good to better. For this is nothing to begin well, except a man persevere and
continue even to the end. And we know what Jesus Christ says, to wit, That
he which puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is not apt to
the kingdom of God. Luke. 9.62. 2. Tim. 2.5.
And Saint Paul. If any man (says he) strive for a mastrie, he is not
crowned, except he strive as he ought to do.

There are some which say, that this is enough, for a man to have some
testimony in his conscience, that he belongs to God, albeit he make not,
any declaration or profession of his religion. But by the testimonies here
above marked, and put down, it is easy for us to gather what need we have,
to range and bring our selves into the true Church, that we may therein live
Christianlie in the service of God, seeing that any where else there is neither
life nor light. And also what assurance can they have of their salvation, which
live in this world as dogs and swine, following the train and steps of
Sardanapalus, or of Epicurus, to eat and drink, to laugh and rejoice, to play
and to give themselves to pleasure without thinking any whit at all of God, or
remembering any religion? Wherefore my Lord, even as you have well and
blessedly begun, having had right knowledge to discern, between the true and
false Church: so it yet rests, that you persevere and continue yea that yet
you proceed and pass somewhat further, to range and bring into order all your
house in the fear of God, that it may be unto him a holy and chaste Church:
in the midst whereof he may take pleasure to dwell, that thereby he may
bless you, and make you to prosper.

You know with what ardencie and zeal, the Prophet Haggai reproved the Jews
of his time, Haggai. 1.4
lately returned out of Babylon, because they builded many houses, for
themselves, and did diligently feel and carue them, but they had no regard to
build up the Lords Temple.

Hag. 2.3.22
And we must note, that the Prophet directs not his speech only to the people
and Priests, to move them to do their duty, for the furtherance and setting
up of this building, but also unto Zerubbabel, the governor of Judah. Which
serves well to declare, that great lords and Magistrates, as well as
ministers, and the rest of the people, ought with all their might and power to
employ themselves, for the edification and advancement of the Church of God.

Romans 13.4. Psalm. 82.1.
And thereuppon comes it to pass, that Saint Paul calls Magistrates, the
Ministers and servants of God, and that in another place, They are called even
Gods: to wit, not only in respect of civil judgments, and because they are
the tutors, mainteiners and defenders, of public good things and common
wealth, but also because the principal part, of their charge and office is,
to serve God in nourishing and mainteining his service, as well outward as
inward, in causing pure doctrine and religion to florishe and in keeping the
state of the Church, safe and sound and whole in every part. For which effect
and cause, they are also named in Isaiah, Nurcing fathers, Isaia. 49.23. 1.
Tim. 2.24
and Nurces of the Church. The Apostle writing unto Timothy, shows us the
self same matter, when after he had exhorted them to pray for the kings, and
for all those which are placed in authority, he adds as a fit reason and
very strong for that purpose: That under them we may lead, a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: For thereby he evidently
declares that the Magistrates office is, to have care that the people which
are committed to them, should live not only in honesty and in peace one of
the^ with another, but also in all godliness, and fear of God.

But if the holy scripture did not teach us this, yet we might in some sort
learn it out of profane authors, that is to say, Philosophers and Heathen
lawemakers. For among the Philosophers, Aristotle in his Politikes has said:
Aristot. in Politicis.
That Godliness and religion are the matters which Magistrates ought to
esteem most necessary, for the establishment of commonweals.

Plato in Epinom.
And Plato in his Epinomis says also: That Princes should not at any time be
persuaded, that there is any thing more profitable and necessary for mankind,
then that virtue is, which men call piety and godliness, that is to say,
religion, and the service of God.

And as concerning lawemakers, we know, that they having to provide for
necessary things, and to make ordinances and decrees therefore, have always
given the first and most honorable place, to piety, or godliness, and the
service of GOD. And indeed because they would that their laws should be of
greater authority, and better received of their people, as well agreeing with
piety and godliness, Minos.
they have made them believe that their Gods were authors thereof. Minos the
Lawemaker of the Cretenses, gave them to understand, that he was Jupiters
familiar friend, and that he spoke often to him, to the end the people might
believe that he received from him the laws which he established amongst
them. Zoroastes.
Zoroastes, giving laws to the Bactrians and Persians, said that he received
them from Oromason, whom they accounted for God and author of al goodness.
Trismegistus said also, Trismegistus
that he had received from Mercurius, the laws which he gave to the
Egyptians. Carondas.
Carondas the lawemaker amongst the Carthaginenses, referred and ascribed his
laws to Saturnus. Licurgus.
Licurgus the lawemaker of the Lacedaemonians referred the laws which he gave
to Apollo. Solo^. and Draco.
Solon and Draco the lawemakers among the Athenians, referred their laws to
Minerua. Xamolxis. Numa.
Xamolxis the lawemaker among the Scithians, ascribed his laws to Vesta. Numa
to the end he might get authority to his laws amongst the Romans, feigned
that in the night season, he had great acquaintance, or lay with the goodness
Aegeria.

Wherefore this remains resolute, and stands sure: that Princes and
Magistrates, to the end, that they may in good policy and order govern their
Lordships, and frame the manners of their subjects, ought always to begin
with piety and the service of God, as with the most necessary matter, and as
without the which there is no regiment or government in the world, which can
long subsist or stand.

And therefore for this cause specially is it, that good kings, princes, and
lords are praised in the Scripture, as David, Josiah, Hezekiah, amongst
kings: Joseph and Daniell, among the rulers and governors of provinces for
kings: Moses, Iehoshua, and the Judges amongst those, who had the guiding and
leading of people which were free.

Wherefore the flatterers of the court do villanously abuse and mock the
very Lords and Princes, when they blow this into their ears, that the cause
of religion concerns them nothing at all, and that they ought to be content
with this, that they have some care of politic matters committed unto them,
and charge of their domestical and household affairs, and namely of their
Horses, Dogs, Hawks, Fowls, etc. For war, for hunting, hauking, and for
their other particular pleasures, without traveling and taking any more pain,
for all that, or any part thereof, which concerns the good estate and
affairs of Gods Church.

Thanks be to God (my Lord) that you be far otherwise instructed in that
which belongs to the duty of Christian lords and magistrates, than that
which the courtiers brabble and prate, not to suffer your self to be
distracted, neither to go astray from that, which the truth has once taught
you. And I hope, yea, I hope it very steadfastly, that that great god who has
put and placed in you so good seed, will give it so good an increase, that he
will be thereby for ever glorified, and that that true, and not counterfeit
profession of the religion which you have will bring to pass that you shall
be more and more loved and honored of good and honest people, and feared and
reverenced of the wicked and persecutors.

On mine own part, that I might bring some aid and succor to the faithful
people, to the end that they might learn by your example to put a difference
between the true and false Church, and by the same mean to resolve, to keep
and stay them selves upon the true Church: and that I might also give some
familiar and plain order to all, to know on which side the true Church is, I
have as diligently builded, framed and prepared this present discourse as it
was possible for me, wherein I entreat of the Church, and all the points and
parts thereof, that I thought meet and purposed to touch, or could think
upon. And therein I have followed the most apt and convenient order that I
could choose, without confounding the matters, therein declaring all that, which
we ought to behold and believe of the church, touching her estate, form,
guiding, and government. For I show therein, what is the true Church: which
are her true and infallible marks, which is the true succession and calling of
Pastors therein, what is her spreading abroad, increase of continuance, who is
the head thereof: how she is holy: whether she may err: what is her power
and authority: amongst whom it is: what be the degrees and orders of her
guiders: what is her discipline: whether the Ministry be necessary in her:
And lastly I speak, of her persecutions and afflictions, in which point I am
somewhat more large then in the rest, because I knew that the present need
and occasion required it, to the end I might confirm and strengthen the
faithful peoples consciences at this time, in which it seems that the
Devil, the enemy of Gods glory and our salvation, is unchained and untied,
and that all the world is kindeled with rage and set on fire with fury, and
conspired with him furiously to rushe upon the poor Church, setting out and
making a show against it, of all that, that cruelty can devise. Wherefore I
show what is the state and condition of the Church on earth, and that she
has always had such a virtue of patience and so great constancy and courage
in the midst of the cross that tyrants have rather left to persecute her,
then that she has failed and fallen away by their torments: insomuch that
she has abode invincible and unconquered against the vehemency and violence,
of so many horrible combats, as she was to sustain and endure, and out of
all them has brought a famous victory, and most glorious crown. In sum:
that the son of God has always found place and passage in the midst of
the world, notwithstanding the fires, swords, torments, furies, outcries, and
horrible scatteringes abroad which were made against him.

As touching the fruit and profit which may come of this little labor, I dare
not affirm any thing thereof, except it be in respect of you my Lord, For I
doubt not but you take as much pleasure to hear me discourse in writing upon
this matter of the church, as you commonly do, when you hear me speak,
either particularly to your self, or publicly in the execution of my charge
and office. And yet if you regard that which is mine, without doubt the fruit
will be none: but if you consider the argument, and the large laying out of the
matters contained in this present treaty, I assure my self, that it will not
be altogether unprofitable, and that they which shall read the same, will not
repent themselves thereof.

Furthermore, I staying my self (my Lord) upon your accustomed goodness,
through which you disdain not, or dislike any thing, which comes from your
servants, offer and dedicate unto you this little book, most humbly beseeching
you to accept it, and to take it well that it comes out into light, under the
inscription of your name, and to receive it with such gentleness and courtesy,
as you have been accustomed to love virtue, and favor Christian religion, and
those that make profession thereof. For I hope that (if you receive and take it
well, that your name shall procure it more grace and liking, and shall get it
more authority, and purchase it more favor, amongst all, because that things
dedicated to great personages, are better received of the lower sort, although
the things of themselves are oftentimes very base and of small account and
value. And also as touching my self, I was gladly minded, to declare and show
by this slender mean, a testimony of the obedience which I owe you, and for
ye singular and earnest desire which I have, to do you the most humble and
acceptable service that I can in the Lord: whom I beseech with all my heart,
to maintain you (my Lord) and my Lady the Countess your sister, in his most
holy and most worthy keeping, and to preserve you both in a blessed and long
life, augmenting and increasing in you daily more and more, the gifts and
graces of his holy spirit, wherewith he has so plentifully decked, and
liberally enriched you.

From Turenne this xxv, of March, 1577. Your most humble and most obedient
servant, Bertrand de loque.

A TREATY OF the Church, containing a true discourse, in which a man may
clearly behold and see, what is the nature, form, government, and guiding of
the true Church, together with the infallible marks and tokens, by which a man
may know it and discern the same, from the Romish Church, and all other false
and counterfeited congregations.
CAP. I.
Of the diverse significations, and acceptions of this word CHVRCH, and how the
Church is commonly distinguished.

MEN are accustomed to say, that every word, which may be taken in many
senses, and in diverse significatio^s, should rather be distinguished then
defined. For a man can not otherwise rightly declare, the nature, virtue, and
disposition of any thing, unless he be first resolved of the sense and
meaning, in which it ought to be taken. For as much therefore, as this word,
Church is of that sort (being a Greek word, which signifies an assembly or
congregation, and is taken or derived from a word which in that tongue
signifies to call, or to cause to come) it is meet and necessary, that before
we give the difinition thereof, we declare after how many sorts men use to
take it.

1 Now men sometimes take it, for a company or assembly of wicked persons,
Psalm. 22.16.
as Psalm. 22.16. The Church, or the Synagogue of the wicked have enclosed
me: and in Psalm. Psalm. 26.5.
26.5. I have hated the Church of the wicked, that is to say, the company.
For there is in the Hebrew text two words, which the Greeks have turned
Synagogue and Church, which do signify as much, as a company, troop, or
assembly.

2 Sometimes, it is put for the assembly of citizens, and burgesses of a
town, in which meeting they entreat of the common and ordinary affairs of
the common wealth: and so does Saint Luke use it, Acts. 19.32.39.

Act. 19.32.39.
3 It is also taken for the place, whether the assembly is called together, as
Iudeth. 6. Iudeth 6.16.
verse 16. And they called together all the ancients of the city, and all
their youth ran together, to the Church or assembly, that is to say, to the
place of the congregation or assembly.

4 Also for the Senate, or consistory of the Church, that is to say, for the
Pastors and Elders of the Church, who are indeed the conductours and guiders
thereof: as when Jesus Christ says: Tell the Church, Mat. 19.17. Chrysostom.
Hom. 62. upon Matthew.
that is to say (even as Chrysostom also expounds it) the Pastors, leaders
and governors of the Church, according where unto we see, that Saint John
making mention of the consistory of the Jews, in which it was sometimes
determined, to thrust out of the Synagogue every one that would confess Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 9.22.
he says generally, that the Jews made this decree, although it was indeed
the Consistory only.

5 But in the question or matter of Christian religion, it is taken for the
company and assembly of faithful people, which make profession of the true
and pure religion of God. Of this Church speaks S. Paul, when he says to
the Pastors thereof, Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, Act.
20.28.
whereof the holy Ghost has made you Bishops or overseers, to feed the
Church of GOD, which he has purchased with his own blood. But here we
must observe certain distinctions, for even in this signification, the Church
is commonly distinguished into three sorts.

First it is called triumphant, or else militant. The Church triumphant, is the
company of blessed spirits, who having gotten victory through Jesus Christ,
against their enemies the devil, the world, the flesh, sin, death, and hell,
triumph at this present, on high in heaven, praising God, and celebrating the
glory of his name, with all ioyfulnesse. We have a goodly description of this
Church in the Revelation. Reave. 7.9.10
Cap. 7.9.10.

The Church militant, is the assembly of all the faithful people, who as yet
on earth fight, under the banner or standard of Jesus Christ their head,
against the foresaid enemies, whose armours or weapons are set out by S. Paul
in the Ephesians. Ephesians. 6.13.14. etc.
chap. 6. For it is not the Lords will, that so long as we are to walk here
below, we should be without afflictions, but he will have us to be
continually in the battle, and always troubled and tormented through the
malice of men, yea so much the more, by how much we shall earnestly endeavor
to serve him in all godliness and holiness, Act. 14.22.
this matter also being already concluded, that by many tribulatio^s we must
enter into the kingdom of God. Whereunto do appertain also, Ioh. 15.20.16.2.
2. Tim. 3.12.
the sentences of Jesus Christ and S. Paul. Ioh. 15, 20. Ioh. 16.2. 2. Tim.
3.12. But hereafter we will speak more largely of the afflictions of the
Church.

The second distinction is, that the Church is called either Catholic, that is
to say, universal or general, being dispersed thoroughout the world, and
comprehending universally, all the faithful and elect people of God: or else
particular, which is a part of the universal: for we use to call them
particular Churches or congregations, which are limited within a certain
number, and enclosed in certain places, being, as it is said before, parts
and members of the universal: such in former time were the Churches of
Corinthus, Rome, Ephesus: and such are at this day, the Churches of France,
Germany, England, Switzerland, and other places, of all which together
consists the universal, which notwithstanding is but one, as anon we shall
see.

The third distinction is: that the Church is sometimes said to be invisible,
and sometimes visible. The invisible Church is streitly and narrowly
considered, and is the very same which before we called Catholic or
universal, comprehending only the faithful and elect, in which number they
also are to be accounted, that be already dead.

The visible Church is considered more largely, and comprehends al them which
are called by the preaching of the Gospel, to be of Christ's flock. Augustine.
in Psalm. 64.
S. Augustine uses this distinction in his writings. For writing upon the 64.
Psalm, he says: that the church which is signified by Jerusalem, took
beginning from Abell, and Babylon from Caine: and yet notwithstanding, in his
book of Baptism, against the Donatistes, chap. 16. August. Lib. 1 cont.
Donatist. cap. 1, 6.
taking the Church in a more general signification, he says: that the same
which begat, ingendered, and brought forth Abell, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and
the Prophets, did also begette, engender, and bring forth Caine, Ismaell,
Dathan, and others such like. But we must more narrowly and deeply search
this matter, and declare what it is, which does properly belong to the Church,
as well Catholic and invisible, as to the other, which I said was visible. But
first of the Catholic and invisible Church.

CHAP. II.
Of the Catholic and invisible Church, which indeed is but one, albeit it
have many particular parts and members.

BY that which has bin said before, it is an easy matter to gather and make a
good and certain definition of the Church. Wherefore first we say, that the
Catholic and invisible church, is the company of al faithful people,
scattered throughout the whole world, who^ God has chosen to everlasting life.
With this definition agrees that, which may be gathered out of that which
Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, to wit, that the Church is the company
of all those, 1. Cor. 1.2.
that being sanctified through Jesus Christ, and called to be Saints, do
call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, The Church then
is not an house of wood, or of stone, builded by man's hand, but the
congregation, commonaltie, and fellowship of all those, which follow the
truth of faith. Which matter also we may confirm by these reasons following.

Gal. 1.13. Act. 9.14.
First, S. Paul confesses, That he persecuted the Church of God: and Ananias
says, that he had authority from the high Priests, to bind all those that
called upon the name of the Lord, that is to say Christians. Here we see,
that Saint Paul calls those the Church, whom Ananias names Christians, or
such as did call upon the name of the Lord.

Ephesians. 1.23. 1. Cor. 12.27.
Secondarily, the Church is called the body of Christ: and the company of
faithful people, is also called the body of Christ, whereupon it follows,
that the Church is no other thing, but the company of the faithful.

Ioh. 10.16.
Thirdly, Jesus Christ him self calls the Church a sheepfolde, whereunto
sheep apperteine and belong, but by sheep are meant the elect, as appears by
that which is said. Math. 25. The Church then is nothing else, Mat. 25.32.3^
but the sheepefold or congregation of the elect.

Fourthly the ancient writers have so declared it, August. in Psalm. 122.
and set it out. For behold how Saint Augustine has spoken thereof: All
faithful Christians (says he) are the Church. And Chrysostom: Homil. 20. de
expuls. ipsius. Lib. 7. de stroma.
The Church (says he) consists not in walls, but in the multitude of
faithful people. Clemens Alexandrinus, says also, I call the Church not the
place or the temple, but the congregation of the elect.

This Church is called Catholic or universal for three reasons. First in
consideration of the place, for it is not tied, to one certain place, as
city, province, or kingdom, but is dispersed and scattered abrod throughout
all the world, Mat. 28.18.
even as Jesus Christ has said, that he has received all power, both in
heaven and in earth: and as the second Psalm shows: that all nations and all
the ends and coasts of the earth, Psalm. 2.8.
are by the Father appointed to his Son, for his inheritance: and therefore
also did Jesus Christ send forth his Disciples through out all the world to
preach the Gospel and to minister the sacraments. Mat. 28.29.
Wherefore Donatus erred, when he went about to tie the Church to a certain
corner of Africa only. The Romish Catholics also do at this day abuse
themselves, when they endeavor to tie it to Rome alone. For though it were so,
that the Church of Rome were a true Church (whereof we will speak in a whole
and plain chapter afterward) yet it could not be but a particular Church,
and at no hand the universal church, whereof we speak. They also are likewise
deceived, who think to chase and banish this Church out of the world. For
seeing that it is universal, it shall never want place, but it shall always
be gathered together, and received in some quarter or corner of the earth.

Secondly, it is called Catholic, in consideration of the persons, for it
receives and contains all the faithful, of what estate, sex, or condition
soever they be, as S. Paul shows, when he says, That there is neither
Jew nor Greek, Galat. 3.28. Collos. 3. 11.
bond nor free, man nor woman, but that all are one in Christ Jesus: And in
the Apocalipse, this Church is described and set out in this behalf, as a
certain City having twelve Gates, Reave. 21.13.
three on the East side, three one the North side, three on the South side, and
three one the West side, And therefore the Jews are deceived, when they
suppose that the church, ought to be restrained, to the only fleshlye race
and lineage of Abraham.

Thirdly in consideration of the time, for it shall endure and continue in the
world, not as some do imagine, a hundred or two hundred years, a thousand or
two thousand years only, but even as long as the world it self shall last,
as we will declare more at large, when we shall speak of the perpetuity or
continuance of the Church.

Furthermore we hold that this Church is one, even as it is said, Cantic.
6.8. Ioh. 10.16. 2. Cor. 11.2. Reave, 21.9. 1. Cor. 12.1^
that there is but one only Dove, perfect, and the only Daughter of her
Mother: one sheepefolde: one spouse of Christ: one body. And indeed this
unity or oneness of the Church, does not consist in a common and bodily
dwelling together, nor in certain outward ceremonies, but in a certain very
spiritual unity, and in an assured consent of doctrine and faith. For
amongst all those, which truly believe in Christ, there is one body and one
spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one GOD and father of all,
which is above all, and in all, and through all: and therevppon it is, that
Saint Paul says of the whole church, Ephesians. 4.4.5. Gal. 3.28.
That we are all one in Jesus Christ. All the particular churches then,
which consent in true doctrine, ought to be holden and esteemed, for one only
Church, seeing that the Church is but one? Whereupon Saint Cyprian said:
There is no more but one only Church, which is spread abroad or stretched
out far and wide, as there are many beams in the Sun, De simplicit.
Praelat.
and yet the light thereof but one: and in a tree there are many branches or
bows and yet but one body, which is stayed upon his own root: and from one
only fountain run many rivers, which no whitt at all hinder or let that
the unity or oneness should not abide in the fountain. Now herevpo^ it
follows, that al Schismatiks (which by factions, sects, partakinges, do
break the unity of the Church) do sin grievously, 1. Cor. 1.13.3.3.
as also S. Paul declares the same writing unto the Corinthians.

We say also that this Church is invisible, and that there is none but God
alone who knows the same: and therefore Jesus Christ says, Ioh. 10.14.
That he knows his sheep: and that he knows them whom he has chosen:
And Saint Paul: The Lord (says he) knows those which are his: Ioh. 13.18.
And as concerning our selves we believe it, as we protest and confess, 2.
Tim. 2.19.
in the christian articles of our belief, when that by outward signs, we can
not point it forth, or mark it out. For albeit we do not many times see and
behold the same, yet it cease not for all that to be, as it was declared
unto Elijah, when he co^playned that he was alone making profession of the
name of God. 1. Kings 19. 10.18. Romans 11.3.4
No no says the Lord unto him, I have reserved unto my self seven thousand
men which have not bowed the knee to Baal, But let us mark that we speak of
the body of the church generally, and not of the members thereof
particularly. For there is no doubt, but that we may by signs and outward
testimonies, profitably judge of election, even as men judge the tree by the
good fruit, and yet this must be understood singularly and specially when
the question concerns our selves. For according to the testimony of S. Peter,
2. Pet. 1.10.
We make our calling and election, firm and sure through good works.

Moreover this church contains also many persons, which are not yet called
unto the visible church, even as our Savior Jesus Christ shows in S. John,
when he says: Ioh. 10.60.
Other sheep I have also which are not of this fold, them also must I
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one sheepefolde, and
one sheepehearde. And hereof we have an example in Saint Paul, for when he
persecuted the Church it seemed verily, that he did not appertain to the
Church, being not yet called to be a sheep, of the visible sheepefolde of
Christ. Notwithstanding the Lord says unto Ananias: Go thy way to him, Act.
9.15.
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and the children of Israel: Which is a matter worthy to be noted, to
the end that we should carefully look unto our selves, that we take not
upon us, to judge of any man rashly, and before the time.

CHAP. III.
Of the visible Church, and of the true marks thereof.

THe visible Church is the company of al those, who by the preaching of the
Gospel, are called to be of Christ's flock, as indeed they are supposed to
be: amongst whom notwithstanding, many are not of the number of the Elect,
as appears by the parable of the seed, whereof Jesus Christ makes mention,
in the 13 chapter of the Gospel according to S. Matthew: and by that which he
says, that all they which say unto him, Lord, Lord, Mat. 13.24. Mat. 7.21,
Mat. 20.16. Romans 9, 6,
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: Also that many are called, but
few are chosen. Also by that Saint Paul says, that all they which are of
Israel, are not therefore Israel: And S. John: They went out from amongst
us, John 2.19.
but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us. We have an example hereof in Judas, as Jesus Christ him
self witnesses the same in Saint Ioh. Here then we have to mark this, Ioh.
6, 70.13 18.
that the outward profession of Christian religion, is not sufficient to
salvation.

Furthermore this Church is known by her own proper marks, which are two,
very principal and substantial. The first is the pure preaching of the
word, with a right and common consent thereto. There was never yet any
religion, which was not vpholden, maintained and pointed out by some doctrine.
So we se, that the gentiles, have had their services, hymns, songs, and
praises unto their Gods: The Jews have the bark or husk of the law, and
their own Thalmude: The Turks have the Alcoran of their Mahumet, and the
heretics also boast them selves of the doctrine of the Gospel, and yet all
these are false signs or marks. But the true church has for her first and
principal mark, the word of GOD purely preached, to the which the church
consents, and conformeth her self, as we prove it plainly by these places
of Scripture. Jesus Christ says: My sheep hear my voice, Ioh. 10.27.
and I know them and they follow me. And Saint Paul in his Epistle to the
Ephesians: you are (says he) builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. And indeed if this be
true (as of necessity it must needs be) that by the scriptures we are
brought to the knowledge of Christ, as Christ him self affirms: Search the
Scriptures diligently for they are they which bear witness of me: Ioh. 5.39.
ought we not then by the same Scriptures to be guided and lead, to the
knowledge of the true and right Church?

This matter the ancient fathers respected, when they taught that the true
church ought to show and declare it self, by the holy scriptures, Contra
Pitilia. Cap. 2.
as Saint Augustine, saying: There is great disputation between us and the
Donatistes, to know where the Church is. What is then that we have to do
herein? Shall we search it out in our own words, or rather in the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the head thereof? verily we ought rather to seek for
it in the words of him that is truth, and knows very well his own body.
2. Tim. 2.19.
For the Lord knows them that be his. And again: I will not show or declare
the Church by the doctrine of men, but by the word of God. Cont. Pitili. cap.
3. Aug. epist. 166.
Also by the scriptures (says he) we have learned Christ: by the scriptures
likewise we have learned to know the Church. We have these scriptures common
amongst us, wherefore then do we not retain and hold in them, both Christ
and his Church? And Chrysostom says: Supr. Matthew. exposit. 2. Hom. 49. cap.
24. Lib. 2. de Iaco. cap. 7.
He that will know which is the true Church of Christ, by what mean can he
know it, in such and so great a confusion of outward show, if it be not
only by the Scriptures? Saint Ambrose says also: The true and Catholic
Church is there, where GOD himself appears and speaks to his servants,
by his own word.

The other mark of the Church is the lawful administration of sacraments.
Cont. Faustu^. Manich. lib. 9. cap. 11.
Saint Augustine has sometime said, that men can not unite or knit themselves
together, in any religion whatsoever, be it true or false, but by the means
of some sacraments or visible signs. So the Gentiles had their sacraments and
sacrifices. The Jews had Circumcision, and some other outward signs of their
religion. But the true Church has, for the second of her marks, her own
sacraments instituted by Jesus Christ the head thereof, that is to say,
baptism, and the holy supper. And thereunto must be referred that which
Saint Augustine says: Ad inquisit. Ianuar. cap. 1
The Lord has united or knit together the new people (that is, the people
under the new Testament) by the sacraments, which are few in number, easy in
observation, and very great in signification: to wit, by baptism, consecrated
or administered in the name of the blessed Trinity, and by the communicating or
partaking of his body and of his blood.

Besides, Saint Paul does in like sort rightly teach us this, 1. Cor. 12.13
when he says, first of baptism, that we are all baptized by one spirit into
one body: and afterward of the Supper: we that are many, 1. Cor. 10.17
are one bread and one body, because we al are partakers of one and the self
same bread: meaning thereby that these two sacraments, are in such sort the
two common signs of the Church, that by the same we are visibly gathered
together, into the house of God, that we may there be accounted in the number
of his household servants, and contained in the unity of the body of the
Church, withal the faithful, and by consequent drawn, taken and separated
from all other people and profane nations.

CHAP. IIII.
Whether these true marks of the Church are to be found amongst the Romish
Catholics.

THese then are the two certain and infallible marks of the true church, by
which men must examine all assemblies, that pretend the Name and Title of the
Church, least otherwise they be seduced and deceived. Wherefore if a man will
know, whether the true Church be among the Romish Catholics or no, we need
not have recourse to any other proof or touchstone then this only. But it
shall behooue us to hold and to keep in memory one foundation or sure
ground, to wit, that these two marks must always be retained and kept in
their purity, without being any manner of way falsified or corrupted: that is
to say, that the preaching of the doctrine must be pure, and the administration
of the sacraments sound and lawful. For indeed in outward show they would
make men believe, that these two marks are to be found amongst the Romish
Catholics, but when all shall be rightly and duly examined, we shall find
that the true Church, is not for all that on their side.

For as concerning the word, it is not preached by them rightly or purely, but
(as S. Hilarie says,) they make a sense upon the scriptures, and take it not
out of the scripture, and make it as it were a leaden rule, which men commonly
call Regula Lesbia, applying it to their own intentes and purposes, and not
submitting their own purposes to it.

Touching this matter, it is needful for us to know, that all exposition of
holy scripture, must be referred to two principal heads or ends, that is to
say, that it tend to the glory of God, and that it be conformable or agreeable
to the analogy and proportion of faith. For touching the first, Jesus Christ
says: He that seeks the glory of God, John. 7.18.
is true. Now without doubt, when the Romish Catholics extol man's free will,
and ascribe unto man some merit for his works, they snatch, and as it were by
violence, pull away from God some part of the glory which is due unto him: and
so by consequent, when they serve them selves with certain pieces of the
scriptures, to prove that which they pretend, they can not therein excuse them
selves, but that they corrupt and falsify the scriptures, declaring them
selves hereby right heretics indeed. For (as S. Jerome says) Who so ever
expounds the scripture otherwise then the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost
requires, In epist. ad Galat.
although he have not withdrawn or separated himself from the Church, he
cease not for all that to be an heretic.

Secondly S. Paul declares, that he, Romans 12.6.
who has the gift of prophecy, ought to prophecy (yt is to say) expound the
scriptures according to the proportion of faith. Now if in this behalf, we
would take heed to, and mark the expositions, which the Romish Catholics
make and bring forth upon the scripture, we shall find at the least, for the
greatest part, that they alledg or bring nothing less than the right and true
sense thereof, not following the analogy and proportion which is required, and
namely, when the question is, to expound these words of Jesus Christ, Matt.
26.2^
This is my body. For seeing that they tie Jesus Christ here below on the
earth, meaning also that he should be bodily in the sacrament: (and that
nevertheless, the articles of our faith, which are taken and drawn out of the
holy scripture, do teach us, that Jesus Christ is above in heaven, Act. 3.21.
and that he must of necessity, in respect of his body, be therein contained,
and remain there until the last day: that he shall come to judge the quick
and the dead) it follows well that in such an exposition, they go far
astray, and wander very much from the analogy and proportion of faith.

As much also may we justly say in that behalf of many other articles which
they have corrupted, Matt. 15.9.
besides that very often they propound and teach for doctrine men's traditions,
which are not only not drawn or taken from the word of God, but which is
more, are altogether contrary thereto: as concerning abstinence from meats,
forbidding of marriage, invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, adoration or
worshipping of relics and images, and many other such like matters. And as
concerning the sacraments, it is certain, that they are not lawfully
administered by those men, neither yet according to the form and ordinance of
Jesus Christ, but they add and join to them in the ministration thereof
infinite abuses, and superstitions, and do corrupt them, through a certain
kind of idolatry, which is detestable and full of ungodliness, for (that I may
speak nothing of the five sacraments which they have added of their own) let
us consider in what purity, baptism and the holy supper is administered
amongst them.

First is this a small abuse, to apply or minister baptism to things without
sense (as to bells) which was not ordained but for reasonable creatures? Is
this a slight profaning thereof, to join to this sacrament, oil, spittle,
salt, and other such things, as though it did not behoue us to be content with
that simplicity, wherein and wherewith Jesus Christ has commanded his
Apostles to administer the same?

And touching the holy supper, when they cause men to woorshippe a morsel of
bread for Jesus Christ: when they deny to the people the sign of wine: when
the Priest eats all by himself, so that there is not any communion or
partaking at all, what is a corruption of the sacrament, and an overthrowing of
the ordinance of Jesus Christ, if this be not?

Now seeing that these matters fall out thus, we are to make this conclusion,
to wit that seeing it must needs be, that the word of God should be purely
preached and expounded, and the sacraments lawfully administered, to the end
that men may hold and take them, for right and certain marks of the true
Church, and that we are certain, and it manifestly appears, that the
contrary be found amongst the Romish Catholics, it follows very well,
that these are not to be attributed to them although they would make men
believe, that these marks do agree unto them, and their Church, as well as
unto us. But we will dispute more largely in an other chapter of this matter,
to wit, whether the Romish Church be the true church or no?

CHAP. V.
Of the succession and calling of Pastors.

BUT it may be that some will demand: Is not the succession and ordinary
calling of Pastors, a mark also of the true Church, yea, one of the
principal marks? I answer, that the Romish Catholics do affirm so indeed:
for this is that which they commonly object unto us, to weaken our calling by
being not able in the rest to find any thing to say or set against the doctrine
which we preach, unless they entangle themselves, in infinite contradictions
and manifest absurdities. But in the first place concerning succession, I
demand what this is which they mean there? I suppose that it is not such a
succession, as is from the father to the son, as it has been heretofore in
the line and race of Aaron, as to say, that he should be a priest, that is the
son of a priest, for so they might overmuch discover and unfold the vilanie
of their high priests: but that they mean a continual succession of Bishops
and Pastors succeeding one an other, even from the time of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. But where is this to be showed, that they have found, that such a
succession should simply be necessary and make a vocation or calling
lawful? Does S. Paul, Timoth. 4. 1. etc. Titus. 1.7. etc.
describing what qualities and conditions ought to be always in those, which
should be chosen for Pastors of the Church, make any mention at all of this
succession? No indeed. And yet notwithstanding it had been very fit, yea
necessary, if the succession whereof we speak, had been wholly required in
a Bishop or Pastor, to make his vocation sure, certain, and lawful.

But that we may not speak confusedly of this point, we must distinguish,
between the succession of persons, and that which is of the chair and place:
and between the succession of doctrine and office.

As concerning the succession of doctrine, we say, that it is altogether on our
side, and no whit at all, on the Romish Catholics side, for we make
profession to teach, the pure word of God alone, following therein the
Prophets and Apostles, whereas they of the Romish Church, staying them selves
upon their inventions, teach for doctrine, the traditions and commandments of
men, Matt 15.9.
which thing Jesus Christ expressly forbids.

And as touching that succession, which concerns the execution of the office,
or of all the chardge and duty of Pastors (which consists in preaching the
Gospel purely, in administering the sacraments lawfully, in caring for the
poor, in visiting the sick, in redressing offenses, in exhorting, comforting,
teaching, reproouing, and such like exercises,) truth it self and experience
do sufficiently show, who do indeed and verily succeed the Apostles,
therein, whether the priests of the Romish Church or we. Saint Augustine has
sometimes said, That the name of a Bishop, Lib. 19. cap. 19. de ciuitat. Dei.
is a name of charge or burden, and not of ^^nour, and that he indeed is a
Bishop, which desires to profit his flock, in teaching them, and not simply
to bear rule over the same. Also in an other place: We are not Bishops of our
selves, but for them, August. cont. Crescon Gra^mat. lib. 2. cap. 11.
to who^ we administer the word and Sacraments. Now here I speak unto al
Cardinals, Bishopes, Abbots, Priors, Curates, and other priests, together
with their Pope himself, and will them to examine and judge themselves in
their own consciences, and see, whether they can with good right boaste them
selves, to be the Apostles successors, in sound doctrine, and in faithful
execution of their charge and office: and to mark how they observe those
canons, which the attribute to the Apostles, whereof the fifty eight canon,
Can. Apost. can. 58.
excommunicateth the Bishops and Elders, who have not any care either of
their clergy, or of the people, the charge of whom is committed unto them,
and which do not teach them in the doctrine of true religion: which canon also
ordeineth, that if such continue in their negligence and carelessness, they
should be deposed.

There rests the succession of persons, or that which is of the Church or
place: touching which, first we say, that the ancient doctors did not
always aid themselves with this argument when the were to fight with
heretics: for having to deal with such, as did receive and allow the word
of God, as well as them selves, the dispute and matter in controversy between
them being only in the true interpretation thereof, they contented them selves
to allege scripture, expounding places one by an other, even as Saint
Augustine says: August.
That that which is dark in one, is clear and manifest in an other. But when
they were to reason against them, that would add to the holy scriptures, as
Manichaeus, who would, that men should receive his Epistle, which he called
fundamental even as it were the Gospel it self, there and in that respect,
they served their turn with the argument of succession. And yet when they used
it, it was not either their only or their principal defense. For in the first
place they showed by the word of God, that they were in error, and afterward
added as a good bulwark or mean of resistaunce, the consent of the Church
witnessed by a continual succession of all ages and times. Also, they helped
themselves therewith as with a very likely or probable argument, and good
enough in the defense of truth against error, but yet not so, as though it
had a like force and strength, for the maintenance of error against truth it
self. Lastly, when they demanded of heretics, from whence they came, from
whom they descended, who were their predecessoures etc. they meant not to
speak of their vocation or calling, which they never called into doubt or
question (for the greatest number of them were Bishops, as Nestorius was
Bishop of Constantinople, Samosatenus of Antioche, all lawfully called, and
having right and authority to teach in the Church) but they meant to speak of
their doctrine, which was new, and not heard of before. Wherefore when they
alleged, or laid succession for them selves, they did not so much mean the
occupying of the chair or enjoying of the place, as the continuance,
conformity and agreement of the doctrine: whereas on the other side, our
adversaries do not demand of us, who were the authors of our doctrine, but
inquire of us touching our vocation and calling, and are contented with this to
declare, that their Bishops, are descended from all antiquity, but not their
doctrine: and yet notwithstanding they deceive them selves. For neither in the
primitive Church, neither long time after, such Bishops, as be now in the
Popedom, had any place, so that a man may safely say, they are not descended
from the Apostles, nor from their true successors.

To conclude, we say that it is very certain, that such a succession of the
Pastors in the primitive Church, was of great weight and importance, because
the Pastors at that time, had not only the name and title of Pastors, but did
withal faithfully exercise the Charge and office thereof. But what is at this
day the duty of bishops and priests of the Church of Rome? Let the most sound
judge thereof. Is the controversy in the Church, touching succession to some
inheritance, to have the possession and enjoying thereof? No, but rather for
men to set their hands to work and labor, as the Apostles have done, to watch
diligently over Christ's flock, and to minister unto it, the food which is
necessary and meet for it. As S. Paul says: If any man desire the office of
a Bishop, he desires a good or excellent work: And again, 1. Tim. 3.1.
speaking unto bishops: Take heed to your selves (says he) and to the whole
flock, Act. 30.39.
whereof the holy Ghost has made you Bishops or overseers, to feed the
Church of God. And S. Peter: The Elders, which are among you I beseech, which
am also an Elder, with them, 1. Pet. 5.12.
feed the flock of Christ which is committed unto you, caring for it not by
constraint. etc.

The succession then of the Chair or place is nothing without the succession
of doctrine and duty. For if the bishop be dead (as says S. Cyprian) when
no sound goes forth of his mouth: Cyprian. lib. 1 epl. 4. Greg. epl. 24.
If he be dead (as says S. Gregory) when he preaches not, by what title
may a man say that the Romish bishops and Priests succeeded the Apostles,
and have the possession of their chair or place, if they be dead, or
altogether dumb, or else not the followers of the Apostles in doctrine and
truth? for let us a little behold how the ancient fathers have joined and
knitte the succession of person or place, with the succession of doctrine and
office.

Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 33.34.
Irenaeus says: We are commanded to yield obedience to the elders which are in
the Church: who have their succession from the Apostles, and together with the
succession of the office of a Bishop, have received according to the good
pleasure of the father, certain grace and knowledge of the truth.

Tertullian says also: If some heretics dare be so bold to intermingle
themselves with the times of the Apostles, thereby to make men believe that
they were delivered from the Apostles them selves, because they were under the
Apostles, or in their days, we may say, let them show then the beginninges of
their churches, let them unfold or discover the succession of their Bishops,
in such sort running and flowing by continual order from the beginning that
the first Bishop has had, some of the Apostles for his author and
predecessor, or some one of them, who were the followers of the Apostles, who
also did notwithstanding persevere and continue with the Apostles. And a little
after: The Churches (says he) which were planted after the Apostles time,
and those which are yet planted at this day, although that they bring not any
author for them, from amongst the Apostles themselves, or Apostolical
persons, yet notwithstanding, being found consenting in the same faith, they
are not to be held, taken, or acknowledged for any other then Apostolical,
pro consanguinitate dictrinae (says he) that is to say, for the nighnesse in
blood, or by reason of that doctrine, which they maintain, keep and hold,
with the Churches, which the Apostles them selves ordained and set up.

S. Augustine writing to one Generosus, Aug. op. 156.
does so extol the succession and continual order of Pastors, that he
names thirty Bishops of Rome, putting Anastasius for the nine and thirtieth:
but he adds even presently or immediately after: In all this rank or band,
there was not to be found one Donatist. And against the Manichees he writes
thus: Epist. fundament. cap. 4.
There are very many things, which hold and keep me in the lap of the
Catholic Church: the consent of people and nations, the authority which was
begun by miracles, nourished through hope, augmented by charity, and
confirmed by antiquity: moreover the succession of Pastors, even from the
seat of Saint Peter to him that is at this day present: And a little after:
But on your part (says he to the Manichees) ye allege or bring forth no
such thing, but only ye retain or stand to a promise of truth, which
indeed if it did declare it self so evidently, that a man could not any more
dout thereof, I confess and consent, that it ought to be preferred before
antiquity, succession, and all other things. S Hierome: Hierom. epi. 1. ad
Heliod. and habetur.
they are not (says he) the sons and children of holy men that hold and
possess the places of holy men, but they which follow their doctrine, and
practice their works. Distinct. 40. Can.
And Chrysostom in a certain place: There are (says he) many Elders and few
Elders: many in name, and few in deed. Behold, my brethren, how ye are
placed and set in the chair. For it is not the chair or place that makes an
Elder, but the Elder the chair or place. Behold after what manner and sort,
the ancient writers have spoken. But would we know in one word, by the word of
God, of what value is the most common and old succession, that a man can
suppose, if the purity of doctrine be wanting? S. Paul teaches it us, Gal.
1.8.
writing to the Galathians, when he says: If we our selves, or an Angel from
heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. Moreover, I would gladly demand of the Romish
Catholics, for what cause they hold not the Churches of the East for true
Churches. They will not say, that it is, because that succession is not on
their side, for they want not that, but it is on their side, even as old and
ancient at the least, as in the Romish Church. Wherefore they must needs say,
that it is by reason of the doctrine received amongst them, to wit, because
they hold not the Pope for their head, because they deny purgatory, because
their ministers be married, because they celebrate and minister the holy
supper, with leauened bread, because they give both kinds to the people, and
such like things. Now if as touching the East Churches, the Papists judge of
the Churches, not by succession, but by doctrine: wherefore do they, when they
dispute with us, stay them selves rather upon succession, then upon the
doctrine, seeing that the question in controversy between us, is to examine
the marks of the Church. Secondarily, touching the matter of succession, we
say that if we shall enter into the sifting of the succession of Popes and
Bishops in the Church of Rome, we shall easily find, that if men will theredy
judge of their vocation or calling, it shall not serve their turn very much,
or stand them in any great stead. For this we shall be sure to find, that they
have oftentimes succeeded tyra^ts, schismatikes, excommunicate persons, and
Bishops or Popes not lawfully called.

For what was Gregory the seventh, who was named before he came to the pope
dome Hildebrand? Vrspergensis
Vrspergensis witnesses, that he usurped the Papal seat through tyranny,
and not by a lawful vocation. And the council holden at Worms, Council.
Wormat.
in the year 1080. says also of the said Hildebrand, that he was not chosen by
God, but that he did without shame thrust in himself thither, by deceit and
money, and that he ouerthrewe the ecclesiastical order, that he was an
offensive person, a mouer of debate, and an obseruer of diuinations and
dreams, yea a manifest Necromancer or coniurer.

What was the woman Pope Joan, about the year 854? Platina.
Platina in her life says, that she was an English woman, who in her youth
followed and accompanied a young scholar in studies, and profited so well
therein, that at Rome she was esteemed amongst the most skillful and learned,
for which cause she was exalted to be Pope, they supposing she had been a
man. But she was found great with child, and at the last delivered in an open
streate, and as they were going in solemn procession upon the shoulders of
those that carried her, where also she died. What was Benedict the ninth? The
story writers declare, that after he was accused of many crimes by the
Romans, he was driven away, and in his place was ordained the Bishop of
Sabina, called Siluester the third, who likewise was deposed, and put down,
because he was an idiot, ignorant and unprofitable: and the said Benedicte
recovered the seat again, from whence through covetousness he put him self
down, and ordained in his place John the Archdeacon of Saint John port Latin,
who was named Gregory the sixth, to whom he sold the Popeship for very much
money paid downright, Johannes Mayor. Mare Historiarum Nauclerus Platina.
as witnesses Johannes Mayor, The sea of histories, Nauclerus, Platina: and
the same Gregory being Pope, was judged as well by the Clergy as by the
people, to be a murderer and a symoniakal person. What was Siluester the
second? Platina says, that being a Friar, he gave himself to the devil,
upon condition, that he would aid and help him to obtain that which he
desired, and so by that means he came to be Pope. What was Eugenius the
fourth? He by the definitive sentence of the Council of Basil, was condemned
for a schismaticke, rebel, and stubborn person, and so deposed, and one Aimus
Duke of Sauoie substituted in his place, in the year 1439. the 16. of Nouemb.
Notwithstanding he being supported and vpholden, by the favor of certain
princes, abode in the possession of his Popedom, and Aimus his election,
passed into smoke, and was of no force or value. But without passing to any
other examples (for this ca^ not be done but in long time) may we now affirm,
first that in all the time of these Popes, there has not been some
interruption, or breach of personal succession in the seat of Rome? verily we
must confess it, unless a man would say, that heretics and notorious
schismatikes were the heads of the church. Secondly, that the Bishops and
Priests, which have succeeded these reverend Popes, and others which were
created and established by them, have had a good and lawful succession? Let us
now come to the vocation or calling, whereupon the succession it self
depends, We affirm, that our calling is without comparison more certain
and more lawful, then is that of the Bishops and priests of the Romish Church.
For the better proof whereof, let us mark what things are requisite to a right
and lawful calling.

First right and authority to choose appertains to the Pastors, and that not
to one alone, but to diverse lawfully assembled, at which election
notwithstanding one ought to bear rule, to guide and govern the action, and
to avoid all confusion and disorder, and so must these places 1. 1. Tim 5.22.
Titus 1. 5.
Timot. 5.22. and Titus 1.5. of necessity be understood.

Secondely, the election ought not to be made, without the plain and express
consent of the people, Acts. 14. 23
as Saint Luke shows the same by example, Acts. 14.23. and as heretofore the
Church has ordained it even from Leo his time. Leo. epist. 87 and 90. Nicol.
Did. 23. Can. In nomine. Cypri. lib. 3. epist. 3.
Yea Nicolas the second has written, that it is a manner and fashion, which is
meet, necessary, and needful to keep, in the election and choice of the
Bishops of Rome. Yea Saint Cyprian writing to Anthony, rehearses, that
Cornelius was after such sort and manner ordained Bishop of Rome. Council.
Laodic. Can. 13. Did. 63. can. Non est permittendum.
For as concerning that which the decree of the Council of Loadicea
ordayneth, that the election and choice of the Pastors should not be made by
the people, that must be understood of the people alone, to the end that the
election should not be made confusedly, and without good order.

Thirdly, those that are to be chosen, should be well and duly examined
touching both manners and doctrine, according to the rule which S. Paul has
given therefore, 1. Tim. 3.1, 2 Tit. 1.5.6.7. etc.
writing to Timothy and Titus. For the bishop ought to be of very good life,
and holy conversation, so that the very strangers them selves, and such as are
without, may not justly have any thing to reproach or vpbraid himself wtal: also
he must not be a young scholar, but able and sufficient in doctrine and
knowledge, to teach such as are apt to learn, and to convince, yea stop the
mouths of such, as shall speak against the truth. Hereunto accords that
which Cyprian says: Cyp. li. 1. ep. 4
we must faithfully keep (says he) and diligently hold that, which has bin
left unto us, by divine and apostolical tradition, that we may keep it also
amongst our selves, yea and that in a manner throughout al provinces touching
the vocation and calling of Bishops, to wit, that all the Bishops of the
province nearest unto the place, where the election is to be made, do meet
together, and that they chose the Bishop in the presence of the people, which
does fully know the life and conversation of every one. And that also agrees
hereunto which is spoken by Saint Augustine, in a certain Dialogue between
him and Orosius. Wherein Orosius demands: Q. Qrosii. Dial. Quast. 65.
How may we know them which are sent from God? and Saint Augustine answers:
know that he is sent from God which has not been chosen by commendation or
flattery, of some small number of men, and desires not to bear rule, and
gives not any money, to atchieue or get the bishopplike dignity and honor,
but which is praised and commended, by his holy life and good manners, and also
by the works or deeds belonging to a Pastor, and by the approbation and
allowance of all the people.

We read also, that it was ordained in the Council of Laodicea, that none
should be chosen Bishops, Council. Laodic. Can. 12.
but they which had a long time been known, to be of a good life, and of
holy conversation, and who had also been well proved and tried in the word of
GOD, and in good works.

And in the first Council of Paris, Council. Parisi. Can. 8.
it was decreed that no bishop be ordained against the will of the Citizens
of the city, but only he which shall be chosen by the full will and
consent of the people, and of the clergy, and not by the commandment of
any prince, nor by any other condition, against the will of the bishops of the
province. He that shall be otherwise ordained, and that shall come to this
honor, by the authority of the king or prince, let him be driven out and
deposed by all the rest.

Conc. quin. tum Anicl. Can. 10.
In the fifth Council of Orleans: Let not any man pretend to be a Bishop,
neither by buying, purchasing or rewards, but let the election be made
according to the kings will, the cleargies, the peoples, and the bishops of
the province. There is almost an infinite number of like Canons in the
Councels, which if we would put down here, we should be ouertedious and
long.

Now after right examination, and lawful election or choice (which are two
very essential points and commanded by gods law, with which none in the
world may dispense) there comes in the third place, the imposition or
laying on of hands, which is a ceremony, by which the ministers that were
lawfully chosen, were offered and dedicated as it were to the service of God
and the Church.

But let us now examine, the Romish Priests vocations, first I ask, whether
the election which is made amongst them, be deferred, and put over to the
Pastors and the Church, yea or no? Every man sees what place and authority
they give, to their resignations, as they call them, to their permutations,
Collations, presentations, donations etc. and also how the Magistrates and
great men, give Bishopprickes, Abbotshippes, personages, vicarages, and other
benefices as it pleases them selves. If the Pastoures, or to speak more
rightly they that usurp the place of true Pastoures indeed, meddle in the
election, then it appertains to the Pope alone, to choose the Cardinals,
the Bishops and Archbishoppes, and to give the greatest and the fattest
benefices: And it belongs to the Bishops, to choose the simple or single
Priests, and to bestow or give the other inferior and less benefices. And
where is then the holy consent and agreement amongst the Pastors, which is of
necessity required in the election?

Secondarilie, is the people called to it? or is the people advertised or
forewarned, to bring thither and give their advise and consent thereto? Every
one knows that this is not performed.

Thirdly, as concerning them whom they choose, what serious or earnest
examination, make they, either of their manners or of their doctrine? Sometimes
they chose infantes and children, at no hand fit or meet to exercise, the
least charge of the Church whatsoever it be. Sometimes they choose men
altogether ignorant and very often also of wicked life, and this they do
through favor, money, robberies, spoils, factions and other lewd and naughty
practices, overthrowing all order, and subuerting all good policy and
discipline.

And yet notwithstanding, the Canons which they attribute to the Apostles,
ordeyne and determine, that every bishop, Elder or Deacon, Can. Apost. Can.
29. and 30.
that shall have obtained his office, by money or gifts, or by the favor of
the princes and potentates of this world, should not only be deposed, from
their estates and offices, but also excommunicated and cast out of the Church,
and that not only they them selves, but also they which shall admit and
receive the^ nto such charges, and which shall show them favor, and shall
communicate with them. Now let men mark, how these Canons are at this day
observed and practiced in the Romish Church, and by consequent, how right and
lawful the vocation is, of the Bishops and priests of that Church. It is
true that they use indeed the imposition or laying on of hands, but every one
knows with how many trifling toys and superstitions it is accompanied. And
indeed, this is the only point, whereof they can vaunt themselves, which is
not so necessary, but that we may very well ouerpasse or little regard it, as
having no express commandment touching the use thereof. For touching the two
substantial points, Titus 2.7.
they want them wholly, contrary to the ordinance of Saint Paul. Titus. 2, 7.

But touching our vocation, it is an easy matter for every one to judge,
whether it be true and lawefull, even by the proceeding which they that chose
us, keep and hold, in the right examination and diligent inquiry that they
make, as well of our doctrine, sufficiency, mean and manner, of teaching, as
of our life, manners and conversation: also by the allowance and manifest
consent of the people, who do receive us, after that they have a certain space
heard and tried us. For we hold and teach that none ought of himself to
teach and have charge in the Church, unless he be lawfully called thereunto.
Mat. 9.38.
It apperteineth to the Lord of the harvest to send forth workmen into his
harvest,

And S. Paul touching this matter asks, How shall they preach except they
be sent? Romans 10.15.
And therefore in the Prophet Jeremiah, they are taxed and reproved as false
Prophets, Iere. 14. 14.23.21.
which did run not being sent. And Jesus Christ says also: That they which
enter not in by the door into the sheepefolde, John. 10.1.
but climb up some other way, are thieves and robbers.

But perhaps the Romish Catholics, will not so much examine our calling, as
that of the first reformers and restorers of our Churches, and will demand
of us, from whom it is, that they received imposition of hands: and finding
in their own judgment, as they suppose, that they had not any certain
vocation, therevppon they would infer, that then they could not choose and
call us to our charges, and so by consequent our vocation should be none at
all, whereunto we answer two things.

The first is: that we ought to exercise our calling, according to the visible
state of the church, which is either altogether corrupted or else abiding safe
and sound. If the^ the state of the church abide in her purity which is then,
when pure doctrine is kept therein, and the lawful administration of
Sacraments, with the right use of the discipline, we say, that an ordinary
calling, that is to say, the way and manner of chosing Pastors, prescribed by
the word of God, according to which we have been called and placed in our
charge, ought to be observed and followed. But if the state of the Church, be
altogether corrupted, we say, that then an extraordinary vocation has place,
even according as it shall please God to raise up his servants, and to
employe them, to reform the Church, and to bring it to her old purity. For
God is not always bound to ordinary means, which he uses notwithstanding, when
it seems so good unto himself. And this was practiced in former time, even
then when the ten tribes of Israel, were altogether become bastardes and
corrupted, through their idolatries. For God did extraordinarily stir up, 1.
Kin. 10.1.9
unto them Eliiah, to reform them, and to endeavor to bring them into good
order touching his service: yea I say Eliiah, who was not a priest, and had not
in that respect any succession.

So likewise we hold and affirm, that God has dealt in our time, in the
choice and sending of some of our ministers, who were inspired and stirred up
by GOD, to streatch out the hand unto the Church, which in respect of the
outward and visible state, was wholly almost beaten down and overthrown. And
these men neither could not ought to look, to be sent from, or to be approved
by the Pope and his people, whose intolerable abuses, and false doctrines,
they had in charge to reprove no more, then they that would take upon them
to reform a company of Women, who had openly fallen to whoredom, fornication
etc. ought to wait to be stirred up or required thereunto, either by
altogether, or some of them, they pleasing them selves, and being desirous to
continue in their former dissolution and leudnes.

Here to allege, that for the making of an extraordinary vocation certain
and approved, some miracles are necessary, or else some certain, plain, and
manifest places of Scripture, is to no purpose at all, or they say as much, as
if they said nothing. For as concerning places of Scripture, we are not
destitute thereof. Jesus Christ speaking in the Gospel to the Priests, who
did not well and rightly execute their office in their charges, demands of
them, When the Lord of the vineyard shall come, Mat. 21.40.41.
what will he do to these wicked husbandmen? Unto whom they answer,
condemning them selves: He will cruelly destroy these wicked men, and will let
out his vineyarde unto other husbandmen, which shall deliver him the fruits in
their seasons. Now this was in deed justly and faithfully accomplished. For
the Lord took away his vineyarde, that is to say, the government of his
Church from the Priests, Scribes, and Elders of the people, who did not yield
him the fruits which did belong unto him, and committed the same unto other
husbandmen, that is, to his Apostles and their successors, which have yielded
him fruits in their seasons. And even in like manner has the Lord done in
the Popedom, beholding evil workmen in his vineyarde, that is to say, wicked
and naughty Pastors in his Church, which did not at any hand their duty and
office, he has not destroyed his Church, but has changed the state and
condition thereof, taking away her blind guides, and giving unto her others
which see clearly.

It is also written in the Apocalips: The holy city shall they tread under
foot two and forty months, Reu. 11.2.3.
but I will give power unto my two witnesses and they shall prophecy a
thousand, two hundred, and threescore days. In which place, S. John
foretells, the general corruption of the Church, which shall come to pass
in the last times, yet so that withal he gives us to understand, that God
will not suffer his service to continue so corrupted and bastardly, but that he
will reform it, and bring it to her former perfection and soundness, and that
for this purpose he will raise and stir up witnesses of his own, to
prophecy and speak against so grievous a corruption. And how shall this be
done? by using an extraordinary manner.

Luke 9.49.
We may also very well apply to this purpose, the example of him, who cast
out Devils in the name of Jesus Christ. For the Apostles would have hindered
him, because he did not follow Jesus Christ as they did. But Jesus Christ
says unto them: Take heed that ye forbid him not, or hinder him, for (faith
he) he that is not against us, is with us. It is very true in deed, that such
an extraordinary vocation, ought not to be lightly approved, but it is also as
true, that it ^ught not as lightly to be condemn.

But we have a certain and manifest testimony, Act. 6.5. and 8.5.
of this extraordinary vocation in Philip. For he being only ordained a
Deacon at Jerusalem, was afterward extraordinarily called by God to preach
Jesus Christ.

Beside, the first restorers of the Church of our age or time, who were
extraordinarily called, are not to be reproved or blamed for rashness. For as
in a city besieged by the enemy, or assaulted with fire, when they which
were ordinarily called for the safegarde and defense thereof, and to give order
in the danger of fire, should be themselves the first enemies and putters to
of fire, if it fall out that certain Citizens, having other charges or offices
in the city, or else if they were but private and particular persons, would
come and set up themselves, and employ them selves, in running to the breach
and fire, to the end that they might preserve the city, so far of is it,
that they deserve or ought to be reprehended, as traitors and unfaithful
persons, that on the other side for a fact so courteous and gentle, yea so
profitable to the country, they were greatly to be praised, as very good
citizens, and true friends and preseruers of the country: so when the
ordinary sauegardes or keepers of Gods own house, have declared them selves
to be enemies thereof, and putters too of fire, to overthrow and mar all,
they that are afterward advanced and set forewardes them selves to resist
them, and to maintain the right and estate of the said house, yea although
they have had no manner of ordinary vocation, but in their own consciences,
have only felt themselves extraordinarilye called, for to execute such an
office or charge, so far of is it, that either they may or ought to be
blamed, that contrariwise they deserve honor and great praise.

And yet this is here to be noted, that albeit all are not enjoined or
commanded to preach, as well as all are commanded to oppose or set them selves
against false prophets, yet by consequent it follows very well, that if any
do advance or set forward themselves, to oppose or set them selves against
false prophets, they have done nothing against their vocation or calling.

Add also, that even those which in the beginning were extraordinarily called,
having faithfully acquitted and behaved them selves in their charges, in
preaching the truth, and being received and allowed of the people, that
vocation of theirs, which before was extraordinary, has ceased, yea must
cease, and afterward is become ordinary.

And as concerning miracles, we will shortly answer thereto. Let the Romish
Catholics show, what miracles Isaiah, Amos, Obadiah, Nahum, Zechariah, and
many other prophets did, whom God did extraordinarily stir up, where they
which had the order and government in their own hands, abused the same.
Next, let them consider, Mat. 12.39.
that it appertains to an evil and adulterous generation, to demand and
seek signs, as Jesus Christ says. Thirdly, that miracles may seduce and
deceive. For we read, that false prophets, seducers, Deuteronomy. 13.1. etc. Mat.
24.24.
and deceivers, have sometimes done them, thereby to deceive men, and to make
approved their false doctrines, 2. These. 2.9.
and to increase and strengthen their superstitions and idolatries. And
therefore we ought not by miracles to judge of the vocation and doctrine, but
rather on the other side, by the vocation and doctrine we ought to judge of
miracles and signs.

The other thing which we answer, touching the vocation and calling of our
first ministers, is, that we may very well stop the mouths of the Romish
Catholics, if we would allege, that those ministers them selves for the most
part, had in respect of them selves an ordinary vocation, being in deed
called in their time, by the Pope, and by him established and set in their
charges, and therefore by consequent had authority and right, to go up into
the pulpit, and to teach in the Church, as Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius,
Bucer, and before them Wickliffe and John Hus. Also that in England, Sweden,
and Denmark, the right and lawful succession of the chair or place, is on
our side. For there the ordinary Bishops have received the Gospel, and
preach it, so that we shall not need to dispute of their vocation, no more
then for the calling of the Priests, which are at this present in the Romish
Chuch, called by the Pope, but even only of their doctrine.

CHAP. VI.
That the Church has been always from the beginning, is now, and shall be
even unto the worlds end, but that it ought not to be esteemed or acknowledged
by the great number.

WE must not think, that the Church had her beginning, when the Apostles
began to preach the Gospel throughout all the world, at which time the
disciples, were first named christians in Antiochia, but that she began to be
in the world, even from the very time of our first parents Adam and Heuah. For
in them and by them God began to be served on the earth, having blessed them,
and commended unto the^ his service, and after their fall having preached unto
them repentance and assurance of victory against the serpent, through Jesus
Christ his son. But the world increasing, the church also was augme^ted,
serving god. For as S. Paul says: God created the world, Act. 17 26.
and has made of one blood al men, that they might seek and serve him. And he
himself says in Isaiah: This people have I formed for my self, they shall
rehearse and show forth my praise. Isai. 48.2^.
GOD then created in the world, and that from the beginning a Church,
thorough free adoption, to this end, that his name might be duly praised, by
convenient, fit, and meet witnesses for so excellent a work. For this cause
also the Church is called the planting of the Lord, that he might be
glorified. Isaiah. 61.3.

Isai. 61.3.
Moreover this Church, notwithstanding the sharp and hard persecutions, which
it has suffered, has not yet ceased always to be, as it is at this
present, and shall be unto the worlds end. For as David says: The Lord has
chosen Sion (that is to say, Psalm. 132.13. etc.
the Church) and has desired it for his seat ^it has been (says he) my rest
for ever. Jesus Christ also has promised his disciples, Mat. 28.20.
to be with them always, even unto the end of the world. But chiefly Saint
Paul has declared and set out the perpetuity and continuance of the
Church, when he assures us, Ephesians. 3.21.
that GOD shall be glorified in the Church through Jesus Christ, throughout all
generations for ever and ever. They then are overmuch past shame, which
limitte the continuance of the Church to a certain time, Aug. de ciui. tat.
Dei. lib. 18. ca. 54
as those of whom Saint Augustine speaks, who durst boldly affirm, that
the christian religion should not last, but 365. years. They likewise do
abuse and deceive themselves, which think that by the assaults which they
give unto the Church, they are able to beat it down, consume it, and wholly
take it away out of the world. For is it possible that God should be without a
Church? Psalm. 10. 1 etc.
has not he himself promised that his son shall reign and bear rule for
ever over all his enemies? Verily the Church which is the spouse or wife of
Christ, is become or made so mighty and strong through her husband, that
being even one body with him, she is more forcible and mighty in her
weakness, then all the world in his pride and hautines. But as we have
already said once heretofore, we will hereafter speak more amply and
largely of the Churches force and power in persecutions. To be short:
amongst so many and so diverse chaunges, of the kingdoms of this world, God
always preserves his Church, and brings to pass, that nothing in all the
world is durable and perpetual, but she, not that she is always
flourishing, or has a continuance, which follows all by one threede, that is,
comes altogether, but because that God, not minding that his name should be
put out in the world, does always in his Church raise up some, of whom he
is sincerely and purely served.

Now when the question is, to discern the true Church from the false, some
there are that stay themselves upon the multitude and great number. But they
are very far from their right reckoning or account. For GOD measures not his
Church by the number. He loves his faithful people, and keeps himself in
the midst of them, Mat. 18.20.
although they be a very small number: on the other side, he hates those that
do despise it, and disdayneth them, though the number of them be never so
great. And indeed, on the side of the multitude and great number, the false
and bastardly Church is rather found, than the true and lawful one. And that
it is so, let us first mark the places of scripture, which withdraw us from
the multitude, and teach us to stay and cleave to the little flock.

Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. Mat. 7.13.14.
neither agree in a controversy, to decline after many, and to overthrow the
truth.

Enter in at the strait Gate: for it is the wide gate and broad way which
leads to destruction and many therebe which go in thereat, because the gate
is strait and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it.

Fear not, little flock, Luke. 12.32.
for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom.

We see by these places, that the greatest numbr is not always the best,
neither the soundest, and that the Church of God is found rather amongst the
small number, then among the multitude.

Secondly, let us note the reasons following, which are taken from examples
that we find in the scripture touching this very matter?

On which side was the Church, Gene. 7.1. Heb. 11.7.
when Noah alone, with his little family (which was not in all, but eight
persons) followed the true religion, God approving him, and by his faith
condemning all the rest of the world?

On which side was the Church, 1, Kin. 19, 10
when Elijah said, O Lord, the children of Israel, have forsaken they
covenant, they have destroyed thine Altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword, and I am left altogether alone, and yet they seek my soul to take it
away?

On which side was the Church when the four hundred prophets deceived Ahab,
1. Kin. 22.8.
and Michaiah, being alone and contemned, did yet notwithstanding resist the^
and speak the truth.

On which side was the Church, when Jeremiah was sent from God to say: In that
day the heart of the king shall perish, Iere. 4.9.
and the heart of Princes and of the Priests shall be astonished, and the
Prophets shall wonder: and that therefore the Prophets resisted him, Iere,
10.18.
laid crimes unto his charge, and imagined mischief against him?

Math. 26.3.
On which side was the Church, when the chief Priests and scribes, and Elders
of the people assembled themselves together into the Hall of the high Priest
named Caiaphas, and held a Council, how they might take Jesus Christ by
subtlety, and put him to death?

Certainly by these examples, it is plainly proved, that if it were
sufficient to allege the multitude and the greatest number, for to underprop
and uphold a Church, the false and bastardly Church, should ever prevail
in the matter, and get the better in that respect, because that the number
which cleaves to it, and follows, and maintayneth it, is always the
greatest. August. in Psalm. 128.
Let us add here a sentence of Saint Augustine. From the time (says he) that
the Saints have begun to be, the Church has been and is on the earth.
Sometimes it was in Abel alone, who was slain by his wicked brother Cain.
Sometime it was in Henoch alone, who was rejected of the ungodly. Sometimes it
was in the only house of Noah, and he bare with or suffered all them that
perished in the floude, and the Arc swimming upon the floudes, was saved, and
set upon the dry land. Sometime in one only. Abraham, of whom we know thus
much, that he suffered many things by the wicked. Sometimes in Lot alone,
and in his only house, in the midst of the Sodomites, whose iniquities and
ungodliness he endured and suffered so long, till God drew him as it were by
violence from among them. Sometimes in the only Israelites tormented by
Pharaoh, and the Egyptians. By these words that appears very well, to be
true and right which I have said, to wit, that the Church ought not to be
judged or acknowledged by the great number.

The faithful then should not at this day be offended, though they be but
a small number, despised and cast out as the fylth and ofscouring of the
world, for because they are not of the world, John. 5.19
but that God has chosen and drawn them out of the world, therefore
(behold) does the world hate them. They should not doubt that the Church is
not with them, though that it be assaulted and persecuted of the greatest
number of men, and those the mightiest, of greatest reputation and highest
exalted, and namely of the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, 1. Cor. 1.27.28.29.
parish Priests, Abbots and other of the Clergy of Rome, who indeed ought
to maintain and uphold it. For so it is, that GOD has chosen the foolish
things of this world, to confound the wise things: and the weak or feeble
things, to confound the strong: and the vile and despised things, and those
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, to the end that no
flesh should rejoice in his presence. And on the other side, the prophecies
must of necessity be wholly accomplished, Psalm. 118.22 Matt. 21.42 1. Pet. 2.7.
touching the stone, which the builders began long ago to reject, and which
even at this day, they do also refuse, although it be the master stone, or
chief stone of the corner in Sion, elect and precious in them which stay
them selves thereon, and be builded upon it.

But some will say, wherefore then is it, that God has heretofore suffered, so
many people in so many ages and times, to be seduced and deceived? Yea,
wherefore does he at this day suffer, the greater part of the world to walk
in the darkenesses of error and ignorance? Verily it is not our part, to take
upon us either to discover or curiously to search the secret causes of Gods
eternal judgment, neither yet to lay or cast upon him the fault of our
naughtiness and ungodliness, for certain it is that he does most justly
govern and guide all things, and therefore cannot do injury or wrong to
any man, what so ever he do, Psalm. 51 5. Ephesians. 2.3.
seeing that we are all conceived and borne in iniquity and are by nature the
children of wrath, guilty of death and eternal damnation. And therefore Saint
Paul in few words dissoluing this difficulty, contenteth himself to
allege, the only will and good pleasure of god without ascending or going up
higher, so much as one step. Act. 14.16. Act. 17.^0.
GOD (says he) in times passed has suffered all the Gentiles to walk in
their own ways: Nevertheless he left not him self without witness, in
that he did good etc. And again, The time of this ignorance God regarded not
but now he admonishes all men every where to repent,

Notwithstanding also we may tightly say, that God suffers Satan to have
so much power and might in the world, as that he should bear sway and reign
over the greater part, to the end that he might thereby through his just
judgment, punish men for their unthankfulness and unfaithfulness. For it
is not good reason that those which would not hearken unto God, neither receive
the truth which was offered them, and who also even willingly and of their
own accord, have despised and refused their own salvation, is it not meet I
say that such should be seduced and deceived through the subtilties and
sleightes of the devil, and at the last cast from God, and through his just
judgment punished, according as their ungodliness and unthankfulness
deserves? Saint Paul writing unto the Thessalonians, shows and puts
down this reason, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10
when he says: That because that they which perish received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved, God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed
not the truth of the word, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

This also fell sometimes, and was laid upon the Gentiles. For from the
beginning of the world, GOD made manifest unto them his Godhead and his power,
Romans 1.20. etc.
and although this was not done by the preaching of men, yet it was by the
ministry of the creatures, in which his glory was in such sort manifested
and showed, that a man may well say, they had in some sense, a tongue, as it
were to show, set forth, and rehearse the great power of the wonderful
works of God. But what thereof? These straglers and strayers having known
GOD, did not glorify him as God, neither yielded him thanks, but became vain
in their imaginations and discourses, and so forth, as Saint Paul shows of
them in the first Chapter to the Romans. Who will then at this day say, that
GOD has done them wrong, when he gives them over to the lusts of their own
hearts, to filthiness, and their own villainous affections through a spirit
destitute and unfurnished of all judgment, to commit things at no hand
convenient or seemly, he punishing them after his manner, according to their
deserts, and his own most just righteousness.

The same fell also in time heretofore upon the poor and miserable Jews. For
behold our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his own free will, presented and
offered him self unto them, being willing and ready to instruct and teach
them, in the doctrine of salvation, confirming his Gospel by excellent
miracles and authentical signs worthy of credit, by which he did
evidently show unto them, that he was the very Messiah promised in the law,
and the true and only redeemer of the world, but how did these miserable
people govern and behave them selves in that behalf? Their obstinacy and
rebellion was so great, that they were not only content, desperately to
reiecte, and throw from them, the doctrine of the holy Gospel, slaundering
it and accusing it of falsehoode, but which is worse, they killed and cruelly
murdered the only son of GOD, and outragiously persecuted the Apostles (as
before that they had put to death also even their own Prophets) and other
Christians. Who is he then which will affirm, that these wicked people did
not through their rebellion and pride justly deserve to be delivered and given
over for a pray unto Satan, and to be deceived through the subtilties and
crafts of his false doctrine?

The same is fallen out in our time, and continues yet, even every day. For
there are diverse which are in such sort blinded, and before hand possessed
with the darkenesses of the prince of this world, that they do not only
despise all true religion and doctrine, but also they enforce and strain them
selves, to bring into credit and estimation all the dreams, dotages,
raylings, and false opinions of Antichrist, and his instruments, in so much
that for to attain thereto, they cease not to make war upon the poor
faithful people, desiring with a burning affection, the sheading of their
blood. Who is he then which dare say, that such people are not very
worthy and meet to be delivered unto Satan, that they may be so made
drunken with the deadly poison of his false doctrine, as they may never after
be able to taste or smell, the sweetness and pleasa^tnes of the word of God? To
be short then, in that the devil has so great a sway in the world, it is a
very manifest sign (or as a man would say, a banner displayed) of the just
vengeance of GOD, and of his horrible and fearful fury upon all those, who
reject and persecute the Gospel of his son. For the ungodly perseuering in
their unbelief, deserve to be covered and clothed with so great abomination,
seeing that the truth of God, can find no place amongst them.

CHAP. VII.
That Jesus Christ alone, is the head of his Church, and not Saint Peter,
neither any Pope what so ever.

EXperience teaches us what evil it brings us, when we turn aside from
the word of God, be it never so little. In old time al ye pastors of the
church, were commonly called Elders, Ancients, Bishops, and they were all
brethren and fellows, equal also, and of like authority in their
ministeries. And this continued until such time as he, that was chosen in the
asse^blies of the Pastors, there for the time to be president, and to gather
the voices, came at the last, to be especially, and as it were only named a
Bishop: Hence the devil began to frame and spinne as it were the tyranny
of Antichrist in the Church, even such as we behold it at this day, so that
the man of sin, and son of destruction revealed is set down in the Temple
of God, as God, 2. These. 2.3, 4
showing him self as though he were GOD. For from Bishops they came to
Metropolitantes, who also are called Archbishops, and that under goodly show
and great pretense. For these Metropolitanes, were not, but as it were
Presidentes or rulers, to set the other in order, and to call them together
when it was needful, to have some Synod, for the affairs and businesses of
the Churches of the Province, and in good order, and without confusion to
redress and guide matters, in the assemblyes made.

From Metropolitanes they leaped to four Patriarchs, as though the whole
Christian common wealth, ought to be divided into four parts, and be ruled
and governed by four prelates. These Patriarchs were, one of Antioch, who
bare rule over Syria: one of Alexandria, who governed Egypt and Ethiopia: one
of Constantinoble bearing rule over Asia, Grecia, and Illyricum: and one of
Rome, ruling all the west, that is to say, Italy, France, Spain, and
Germany. Here upon afterward there arose contentions and stirs, between
these four Patriarchs, touching their jurisdiction and primacie, in so much
that they in such sort, set them selves one of them against an other, with the
hurt and loss indeed of the poor Church, that at the last two, to wit,
that of Antioche, and that of Alexandria, gave place and yielded their rooms
to the other two, that is, Constantinople and Rome, the controversy beetweene
which endures as yet, even unto this day. For it is not yet well determined
nor made plain, which of these two ought to be head and universal Bishop.
In some sort to quiet them, and to make them contented, and to keep them
selves within their own bounds, men have limited their charges thus, the
Patriarch of Constantinople, to bear rule over all the Churches of the East,
and the Patriarch of Rome, to bear rule over all the Churches of the West.

Wherefore the latter of these two, is he whom the Romish Catholics make
them selves to believe, that he is the head of the universal church, as being
the Vicar of Jesus Christ on earth, and the lawful or right successor of
Saint Peter. But we have here two points to examine and sift: the one
touching Saint Peter: The other touching the Pope, who says that he is his
successor.

Concerning the first, we shall not find in all the scriptures, that S. Peter
was ordained at any time to be head of the whole Church, and to bear rule
over it, neither that he him self did at any time, either pretend or usurp,
such a jurisdiction and primacie, because it did not at any hand beelong unto
him, but unto Jesus Christ alone, as we hope to prove, and manifestly to
show it by the reasons following.

The first reason is this Jesus Christ alone is called the head of the
Church. Ephesians 1. verse 22. Ephesians 5. verse 23. Ephesians. 1.22. Ephesians. 5.23.
Saint Peter then is not, otherwise the Church should be a body with two
heads.

If they will reply, and say, that Jesus Christ in deed is the only head of
the Chuche, because that he alone reigns over it, and that by his own only
authority, yet that this nothing hinders, but that there may be an other head
ministerial (as they call it) that is to say, one in respect of the execution
of the charge and office under him, who should be his great Vicar and
liuetenante general, for to govern the Church, I will demand of them to
show me, when and how this ministerial head, was ordained by Jesus Christ:
for if Jesus Christ be God living for ever, what need has he of a
successor? Romans 9.5.
If we have all his will in writing, and if he be always present in the
midst of his Church, Ioh. 15.15. Act. 20.27. Mat. 18.18.28. 20.
to rule and govern the same, what has he to do for a Vicar or Liuetenaunt?
And as concerning charges and offices, we know what executors he has
established and left. Saint Paul in the Epistle to the Ephesians: affirms,
Ephe. 4. 11. etc.
that Jesus Christ being ascended into heaven has given some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors, some teachers, to whom he has
given in charge, and committed his Church to order and guide the same. This is
not spoken only, for two or three, or for some other small number, neither yet
for one age, but for all the Pastors of the Church generally, and for all
times. Now you may see what lieutenantes Jesus Christ has substituted in
his place: but that he should give unto Peter a primacie, to be Pope and
head of the Church, is a mere leasing.

The second reason is this: 1. Cor. 13.11
Jesus Christ only is the foundation of the Church 1. Corinthians. 3.11.
Whereupon it follows, that the Church is founded upon Jesus Christ, and at
no hand upon Saint Peter, and by consequent that Jesus Christ alone is the
head of the Church, and not Saint Peter. Touching that which Jesus Christ
spoke unto Peter: Thou art Peter, Mat. 16.18.
and upon this rock I will build my Church, we will an one declare the true
and natural sense thereof.

The third reason: S. Peter's charge and office was limited and set within
certain bonds: For S. Paul witnesses of himself and Peter thus, Galat. 2.7.
That he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and Saint Peter of the Jews: And
says, that this division was made, by the revelation and ordinance of GOD. It
follows then that Saint Peter was not an universal Apostle, nor a sovereign
and high bishop over all the Church: Otherwise Saint Paul should have done
ill, in so limiting and hedging in as it were, the charge and office of his
Apostleshippe, yea, and that eighteen years after the death of Jesus Christ.
But I would wish the Romish Catholics, to take some better view of, and
heed to this reason. For if their Pope, snatche and take unto himself the
primacie, for this reason, because he is Saint Peter's successor, he must then
exercise his primacie or popedom over the Jews and preach unto them the
Gospel, that he may gain them and draw them to Jesus Christ, leaving unto
him whosoever he be, that will take upon him to be called the successor of S.
Paul, primacie over the Gentiles,

The fourth reason: One wife has but only one husband, which is her head. But
the Church is the spouse of Christ. 2. Cor. 11.2. Ephe. 5.22. Reave. 21.9.
2. Cor. 11.2. Ephesians, 5.22. Reuelat: 21.9. The Church then has none other
but Christ alone for her husband and head.

The fifth reason: It is certain, that Saint Peter used the power and
authority, which Jesus Christ gave him, for otherwise he should have
neglected his charge, and hidden his talent in the ground and so by consequent
have disobeyed his Master, not serving him purely and faithfully. But so it
is, he never usurped any primacie over the other Apostles or over the Church,
for he makes him self equal, to the other pastors, naming himself a Pastor
and an Elder with them, 1. Pet. 5.1.21. etc.
and he has said also, that it is not lawful at any hand for any man, to
have Lordshippe over the Lords inheritaunces. Then it follows that he
received not any primacie or Lordshippe from Jesus Christ, over the church of
God.

The sixth reason: Act. 8.14.
Saint Peter was sent together with John into Samaria by the other Apostles.
Now if he had been the head of the church, and had had rule and authority
over the Apostles, it had apperteined unto him to send others, and not others
to send him.

The seventh reason: If Saint Peter had had the right of primacie, to what end
would he have suffered himself, to have been reproved by S Paul, and that
before the people? In sext. decr. de con. cap. Licet. and distinct. 19. ca. si
Roman. in Glossa and de conces. prae. tit. 8. ca. pro. posuit and alibi.
for this was done even then when he both might and ought, to have showed his
authority and rule. As at this day, the Pope who says: that he is above
right, neither is held or bound by laws: that he may prefer through his
interpretation equity unwritten, before law written: that we ought to allow
or disallowe all that he allows or disalloweth: that he is not subject to any
censure, having all law and right in the coffer of his breast and stomach.
Now Saint Peter did not allege any whit or part of all these blasphemies,
but took in good worth Saint Paul's censure and reproof, acknowledging
himself his companion and fellow, and one that was joined with him and the
other Apostles in felloweshippe of office, yea inferior to the whole body and
subject to the admonitions and censures of his brethren.

Luke 22.24. etc.
The eight reason: So it was, that among the Apostles, in the time that our
Savior Christ was bodily conversant with them, there was a controversy which
of them should be esteemed or judged the greatest, but Christ labors to
bring them to humility, and to take from amongst them all ambition, saying
thus: The kings of the nations bear rule, and they which exercise authority
over the^, are called Gracious lords, but ye shall not be so: But let the
greatest among you be as the least, and the chiefest as he that serves: And
afterward he sets himself forth for an example. For who is greater, he
that sits at Table or he that serves, is not be that sits at the table?
And I am among you, as he that serves: and ye are they which have continued
with me, in my temptations. Lastly he concludes: Therefore I appoint unto you
a kingdom, as my father has appointed to me.

These are our principal reasons, to declare that Saint Peter was not
appointed Lord over the Church, and that he had no more authority or
pre-eminence in it, than the other Apostles, his companions and fellows had,
Now let us hear the contrary reasons, which the Romish Catholics make.

The first is this: Jesus Christ has said to Saint Peter, Thou art Peter,
Mat. 16, 18.
and upon this rock, I will build my Church. It follows then that Saint
Peter, is the foundation of the Church, and by consequent the head thereof.

I answer, that the holy spirit, is not contrary to it self: but he has
spoken plainly to the Corinthians: That Jesus Christ alone, is the only
foundation of the Church, 1. Cor. 3, 11.
and that none can lay any other, then that which is laid already: Therefore
he affirms not in that place of S. Matthewe, the contrary to this. And mark
this indeed, Jesus Christ has not said: and upon thee, O Peter, I will build
my Church: but, and upon this rock, I will build. And what means this,
upon this rock? Let us hear S. Augustine. August. in Johan. tract. 124, cap.
21.
The Church (says he) is founded upon the rock, of which rock Peter has
taken his name, for the rock is not so called of Peter, but Peter is so named
of the rock; as Christ has not taken his name of Christians, but Chhristians
of Christ. Therefore the Lord says, upon this rock I will build my Church,
because that Peter had confessed thou art Christ the son of the living God.
He says therefore, upon this rock which thou have confessed I will build my
Church. For the rock was Christ, upon which foundation Peter also himself was
builded. Mark what S. Augustine says, S. Ambrose and S. Chrysostom,
understand this to be spoken of the faith which is in Christ and not as the
Pope does of the person of Peter. Amb. in. epl. ad Ephe. cap. 2.20.
S. Ambrose says thus? Jesus Christ said to Peter: and upon this rock I will
build my church that is to say, upon this confession of catholic faith, I will
establisshe the faithful unto eternal life. Chrysostom says also: Chryso.
Ser. 21. de Pentecost.
Jesus Christ says: Thou art Peter: and upon this rock I will build my
Church. He says upon this rock, and not upon Peter: For he has founded or
set his Church not upon man, but upon the faith and confession of Peter. And
what was this faith and confession? Thou art Christ the son of the living God.

The second reason is: Mat. 16.19.
Jesus Christ has given the keys unto Peter, he has therefore appointed him
head of the Church.

I deny the consequent. For by the use of the keys is understood not the rule
or oversight of the whole Church, but the power, to bind and loose, or else
to pardon or not pardon sins, as it is declared, in the 18. Chapter of the
Gospel after Saint Matthewe, and Chap. 20. after S. John. Mat. 18.18. John.
20.23.
Now seeing that so it is, that power to remitte or to retain sins was
given, not unto Peter only, but equally unto all the Apostles, it follows
well, that the use of the keys was not given to Saint Peter alone, but also to
all his companions and fellows, and by consequent, if he were the head of the
Church, to who^ the power of the keys was given, it would follow that the
Church had so many heads, as it had then Apostles.

But some will say, Jesus Christ speaks only to Peter, It is true indeed.
How be it by the name of Peter is understood the whole Church. For even as
Jesus Christ was willing to hear, what judgment not only Peter, but also all
his fellows had of him, when he demanded of them, But whom say ye that I am?
Mat. 16.15.16.
And that Peter alone in the name of all answered and made this confession,
Thou art Christ the son of the living God: So on the other side Jesus Christ,
giving the power of the Keys unto the Church, addressed his speech unto
Peter alone, although he meant to speak as well unto all the rest. Augu. in
Johan. tract. 50
And so does Saint Augustine understand it: for behold how he speaks.
Peter (says he) signifies the whole Church. For if that in Peter there were
not the figure of the Church, Christ would not have said unto him, I will
give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And again, when Jesus
Christ said unto Peter, I will give unto thee the keys etc. He meant without
doubt the whole Church.

And the reason would be marked, why Jesus Christ, in the person of one spoke
unto all: that is, to the end he might comend and set out the unity of the
Church even as also the ancient writers have marked and observed the same.
Cypr. tract. 3 de simpli. praelat.
S. Cyprian says thus. Our Lord in the person of one man, has given the
keys unto all, thereby to denote and set out the unity of al. The other were
the same in deed that Peter was, fellows in equal honor, and in equal
power. But Jesus began with one man, to the end to show, that the Church is,
one. And Augustine: August. in Johan. tract. 11.
So it was (says he) that all were asked: Peter alone answered him, thou art
Christ etc. and to him was it said, I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, as though power to bind and loose had been given unto him
alone. But as he answered for all, so he received the keys together withal,
bearing as it were the person of unity. Wherefore he alone was named for all,
because there was unity among all.

3 The third reason is: John. 21.16.
Jesus Christ commanded Peter above all the rest, yea and that three times, to
feed his sheep. He then did constitute and make him an universal Bishop, and
head of all Churches.

I answer, that this consequent is false, for there is a very great not only
difference, but contrariety between these two, to have charge to feed the
sheep of Christ, and to have a most high Empire, and universal rule over the
whole Church. Besides, if to feed the sheep of Christ, be no other thing,
but to minister and give unto them the spiritual food of their souls, Mat.
28.19. Mark. 16.15
by the preaching of the Gospel, as it is in deed: and seeing that it is most
evident and plain, that Jesus Christ has given this commission, to al his
Apostles generally, it follows very well, that he has not given it to Peter
alone. And indeed Peter himself does well confess the same, 1. Pet. 1.5. etc.
when he exhorts his fellow ministers, to feed the flock of Christ, which
is committed unto the^. And Basil confirms the same, saying: Jesus Christ
himself teaches us this, (to wit, that he is the only head of the Church)
who did constitute and appoint Peter the pastor of his Church, after him. For
he says, Peter, love thou me? feed my sheep: and consequently, he has given
this very same power to all pastors and teachers, and hereof this is a
certain sign and sure token, that all bind and loose without any difference,
as well as he.

The fourth reason: S. Peter is diverse times in the scripture named the first
among the Apostles. Therefore he was chosen to have rule above the other his
fellows, yea above or over the whole Church.

I answer first, that this argument is frivolous and vain, yea worthy to be
mocked and hissed at. For be it that we confess that S. Peter was the first
and chief as it were amongst a few people, that is to say, amongst the twelve
Apostles, yet very far set is this, that it should therefore follow, that
he was the first or chiefest over all Christians, or that he did bear rule
over all the world.

Secondly, if because that S. Peter is the first named, he is therefore the
first and chiefest among the Apostles, we must then say by the contrary, that
the virgin Marie is the last and least of all women, because in the first
chapter of the Acts, where also S. Peter is set the first in the catologue or
number, Act. 1.13.14.
she is set the last after others. Which matter the Romish Catholics will
not at any hand say or affirm: which if they should, it would be found in
deed a very absurd thing.

Thirdly we read in many places, that S. Peter is not named first. And S. Paul
in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Galathians, Places James before
him. Gal. 2.9.
James then by this reason, should have authority over Peter, because he is
named before him. Besides in the Council of Jerusalem, the speech and advice
of James which was had, after that peter had given his, Acts. 15. 13 etc.
had such weight with it, that al consented and agreed to his judgment.

And this much concerning the first point. Let us come to the other which
concerns the Pope, who says, that he is Saint Peter's successor, and so by
consequent the head of the Church.

First, if it manifestly appear by that which has been said heretofore, that
Saint Peter was never established head of the Church, and that he never had
any such pre-eminence and authority attributed unto him, by what title or
right can or will the Pope (who says that he is his successor) pretend at
this day, any such Lordshippe, rule and authority?

Let us also on the other side well mark this. S. Peter dyed (as they say)
under Nero, and there succeeded him, Linus, Cletus, and Clemens, in the time of
S. John, who lived under Domitian, and even unto Traian his days. Now if they
of the Church of Rome will say, that the Popes which succeeded Saint Peter,
were the heads of the church, to whom all the rest of the Bishops ought to
be subject, they must of necessity be driven to confess, that S. John was
subject to Linus, to Cletus, and to Clemens.

Moreover, if S. Peter's successors be the heads of the Church, Clemens who
succeeded him in the third place (as they say) was so likewise. But let us
hear what he himself says in an Epistle, which (as some say) he writ to
James Bishop of Jerusalem. The title or inscription is this: Clemens, Tom. 1.
council. page 135. col. 2.
to James the Lords brother, Bishop of Bishops, governor of the Church of
Jerusalem, and of all other Churches which by the providence of God, are
throughout all the world. If Clemens were the universal Bishop, why did he
spoil him self of his own titles, to attribute, ascribe, and give the same
unto James, to whom they did not belong?

Furthermore, who is he that has lifted up the Pope into this goodly degree
of honor? Is it Jesus Christ or his Apostles? No in deed: for we read,
that Bonifacius the third of that name Bishop of Rome, was by the Emperor
Phocas ordained the first sovereign or chief of all Christendom, and the
Church of Rome, established head of all the Churches in the world: and this
was about the year of Christ six hundred and four.

This Phocas (as the history writers rehearse and record) was a traitor and an
unfaithful murderer of the Emperor Mauritius his master: for as the said
Mauritius at a certain time, showed him self over severe and rigorous against
his soldiers, they being given to debate and contention, chose Phocas for
Emperor, who in Calcedonia immediately caused to be cut off the forenamed
Mauritius his own head, his wives also, and his three sons named Theodorus,
Tiberius, and Constantine. But he received his payment and reward for it
afterward. For having reigned eight years, he was at the last slain by the
common people, in the year of Christ 612. Behold and mark by whom the
primacie of the Romish Church was established, and the Roman bishop made an
universal bishop, there being before, not so much as any news of it. For
as concerning a certain Edict or decree which they allege, by which
Constantine the great, a Christian Emperor, gave unto Siluester the bishop of
Rome (about the year of Christ 317,) spiritual domination and government,
over all the Churches of the whole world: also the jewels and kingly
ornaments, yea the Empire it self and politic government, over all the West
parts, it is a writing found and forged for and at their pleasure, full of
lyings also and falsehoods, which may be easily proved by these reasons.

There are none of all the approved historiographers, during certain ages,
which make mention thereof after any sort, as Eusebius, Eutropius, Ruffinus,
Socrates, Theodoretus, Beda, Euagrius, Paulus Diaconus, Zonaras, Nicephorus,
Orosius, either other the like, yea they which have written the lives of the
Emperors and Popes, have not any whitte at all spoken thereof. No more have
the ancient Doctors, Athanasius, Basilius, Saint Ambrose, Gregory Nissenus,
Gregorius Nazianzenus, Optatus Mileuitanus, Saint Augustine, Chrysostom;
which is more, the Bishops of Rome them selves have not said any thing
thereof, no not in Councelles, when they have taken upon them, the care and
charge to maintain their primacie, which would notwithstanding have been a
good buckler and shield of defense for them.

If Constantine gave to the Roman Bishop the primacie over Constantinople,
Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and all other Churches, what reason had he to
suffer in the council of Nice (whereat he him self was president) that the
contrary should there be determined and concluded? Council. Nic. Can. 6. and
habetur tom. 1. Council. page 342.
For in that Council, it was concluded that the Bishop of Rome should not be
preferred, before the Bishop of Alexandria, or of Antioch, or of Jerusalem.

If the foresaid Emperor ordained, that the Bishop of Rome should be held
and taken, for the head of all the Churches of the world, wherefore then did
Bonifacius demand and seek the same of Phocas, whereas he should rather
have required, to have kept the same to him self and his successors, which was
long before granted by Constantine to his predecessors?

With what conscience would Constantine give unto Siluester lordshippe and
government over the Churches, and the Empire, he him self being a Christian,
and therefore by consequent knowing very well, that there was a destinction and
difference, between the office of the Pastors of the Church, and the charge
and duty of Magistrates: Eusebius
even as Eusebius witnesses of him that he was accustomed to say: that the
Lord had given and committed the inward charge of the Church to the elders
and ministers, but the outward to him?

If we would consider Siluester, with what conscience, also could he
accept the said donation or gift, the use whereof as he well enough knew,
Jesus Christ had forbidden him? Luke 22.25. Mat. 22.21.
for he was not ignorant of this sentence: The kings of the nations bear
rule etc. but it shall not be so amongst you. Also, Give unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's. Wherefore seeing that Jesus Christ has
distinguished, the offices of the Magistrates, and the charges of the pastors
of the Church, Siluester did very ill, to confound and iumble them together in
his own person. Yea also, there is a certain Canon to this purpose, Distinct.
96. Can. Quu^ ad Nico, etc.
avouched and alleged under the name of a Pope, and that these offices are
distinguished by Jesus Christ.

If so be that Constantine gave the empire of the west parts to Siluester,
they must say that Siluester possessed the same, and left it to his successors:
and that if his successors do not any longer hold it, they must say, that they
have been thrust and driven out of the possession thereof. But let them show,
if they can, any matter touching this point in the histories. Verilye so far is
it, that Siluester and those which succeeded him even unto Hildebrande (who was
named Gregory the seventh, and was created Pope, about the year of Christ,
one thousand seventy four) did hold the Empire of the West, that indeed
they had not rule or authority over the City of Rome, but did peaceably and
quietlye acknowledge the Emperors for their Lords, and were subject to their
laws, neither was there at any time a Pope chosen or created without the
authority of the Emperor. The change came in, in the time of the foresaid
Gregory, It is about five hundred years ago since the Popes have by little
and little incroched upon the Empire, and have at the last brought into their
subjection the City of Rome, and since they did accomplish that, there is not
passed above a hundred, threescore and nine years, or there about.

I hold my self contented, to have set down and declared this, as it were by
the way. He that would more fullye see, the falshod and subtlety, which is
in the device of this donatio^ or gift, may read the^ which have confuted ye
same, Marsili. etc.
as Marsilius of Padua in his book which he entitled, the defender of peace,
who lived about the year of Christ 1324. Moreover Laurentius Valla, Laur.
Valla. Antonius Archiep. Cusan. Cardinal. Raphael. volater.
who lived about the year 1440. Also Antonius Archbishop of Florence in his
history: Cardinal Cusanus, in his third book and second chapter, who sent his
opinion to the Council of Basil, about the year 1460. Raphel Volateran, who
lived about the year 1500.

Moreover it is written in the ecclesiastical history, that Liberius and
Felix, Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 37.
both two together, at one and the same time governed the seat apostolical,
and did in common the duty of a Bishop at Rome, Sozo. lib. 4. cap. 15,
and that by the consent of the Church, yea by the ordinance and decree of the
Council of Syrmia: which of these two then was at that time, the only and
universal head of all the Churches? But let us see, whether the bishop of
Rome, were by the ancient fathers avouched or acknowledged for the high or
chief bishop. Cypri. lib. 1. epi. 1. and 2. Cypri. lib, 2. epi. 1. etc.


S. Cyprian writing to the Bishops of Rome, as Cornelius, Stephanus, and some
others, does not in any sort call them either Popes, or universal Bishops,
but brethren and fellows.

Cypria. tract. 3, de Simpli. praelat.
He himself says in an other place: that there is no more but one
Bishopprike, whereof every bishop in his own charge, holds a whole and
sound portion.

Cypria. in Synod. Carthis, August. recitat. haec verba. lib. 3. de Baptism.
contra. Donatist. cap. 3.
And again, none of us (says he) is appointed bishop of bishops to enforce
his fellows by tyrannous terror, upon necessity to obey him.

Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, came to Rome in the time of Anicetus Bishop
of Rome, not to frame some appellation before him, neither yet to kiss his
feet, or to receive his decrees, but to confer with him, touching the feast
of Easter, and he alleged for him self the authority and custom of S.
John, and of other Apostles of Christ. But Anicetus did not allege, either S.
Peter's authority or his own, but only said, that it stood him in hand, to
observe the custom of the Elders, which were his predecessors: neither did
he constrain Polycarpus to do the like, or excommunicate him therefore: and
Polycarpus on his side did not think, he had committed any offense, in not
consenting with the bishop of Rome, in this matter touching the feast of
Easter: which he would of a surety have done, if he had acknowledged him for
the head, or for the vicar of Jesus Christ constituted and placed in that
office by the authority of God,

Irenaeus, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26.
of whom we have spoken a little before, calls Soter, Anicetus, Higinus Pius,
Telesphorus, Xistus, Elders, as Eusebius in his fifth book and six and
twentye chapter recites.

Dionysius the Bishop of the Corinthians, writing to the Romans, calls
Soter not Pope of Rome, or high prelate, but Bishop. Mark what he says.
Soter your good Bishop has not only observed this custom, but also has
augmented it, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23.
Eusebius has extracted or taken this, out of the Epistle of the said
Dionysius. Lib. 4. cap. 3.

Saint Jerome in an Epistle to Euagrius says thus: Hierom. ad Euagr.
If a man dispute or reason of authority, the world is greater then a city.
In what place soever the Bishops be, whether at Rome, or at Eugubiu^, or at
Constantinople, or at Alexandria, or else where, they are all of equal
ministry and degree.

Chrysostom: Chry. hom. 43. in Saint. Mat. ca. 23.
whosoever (says he) shall among the Bishops desire primacie on earth,
shall find confusion in heaven: and he that shall affect or seek to be the
first, shall not be counted amongst the servants of Christ.

Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 16, 32.34, 36 38.39. Gregor. lib. 6. epist. 24.28.29.30.
S. Gregory in diverse of his Epistles says: That he is an Antichrist, that
will attribute or give unto him, the title of universal Bishop. But above all
he puts down a notable sentence, in the two hundred and seven and thirty
Epistle to Eugenius the bishop of Rome, saying: If Christ have sent thee, thou
should judge that thou art come, not to be served, Gregor. ad Eugeni. epi.
237.
but to serve. The true successor of Saint Paul, will say with S. Paul: Not
that we have Lordship over your faith, but that we are aided and comforted with
your joy. Saint Peter's heir, will hear S. Peter saying, 1. Pete. 5.3.
Not as though ye were Lords, over the Lords heritage, but being made
ensamples to the flock.

In the third Council of Carthage (which was held about the time of Pope
Syricius) in the 26. Conci. Cart. tertium. can. 26. and habet distinct. 99. ca.
primae. sedis. etc.
Canon, which is also alleged, distinct. 99. The fathers ordained, that the
bishop of Rome should not be called the prince or chief of priests, or the
high priests, or any such other like thing, but only the bishop of the first
seat, and that he him self should not be called universal Bishop, which
last clause Peter Crabbe the compiler or gatherer of the Tomes of the
Councelles, has left out either by deceit or negligence, I know not whether.

You see testimonies in owe, gathered out of the most approved old Doctors,
and such as be best worthy of credit: by which you may easily perceive, that
this rule or authority over all Churches, was not in their time attributed to
the Bishop of Rome, and that the Churches themselves, had not any superiority
or authority, one of them over another, but that they were all associated and
united together, that some obtained not, neither more or less power then
othersome, yea we read that when the Romish Bishop would sometimes have
usurped more authority, than did appertain unto him, other Bishops did
stronglye and steadfastly resist him, which appears by the history
following, that Socrates an ecclesiastical historiographer writes, in his
second book and fifteenth Chapter: and Sozomenus in his third book and
eight Chapter.

A certain man named Athanasius, and one Paulinus, being deposed from their
charges, by the Bishops of Asia, assembled and met together with the
Metropolitan, would needs complain to the Bishop of Rome, who easily gave
them letters, by which he did place them again in their first offices, and
did greeuouslye reprove and chide them, who had put them there from. But the
bishops of Asia took this in such sort, that they obtained of the Council of
Antioch, that letters should be written to Julius Bishop of Rome, by which
there should be declared unto him, that he did attribute and take unto
himself, an authority which did not at any hand belong unto him, and that
in so doing, he offered great wrong to other Churches, and other Bishops.
And there was added to the letters, that he should no more meddle with them,
whom they had deposed, then they meddled with those which were deposed by the
bishop of Rome, and others which were joined with him therein. To which
purpose they alleged the example of Nouatus, which was as yet very fresh
and new. For when this Nouatus was rejected by the bishop of Rome, none of
the rest of the Metropolitanes and Bishops of other provinces, did gainsay the
same, neither any manner of way intermedled therein.

Furthermore, if that which is maintained and practiced at this day amongst
the Romish Catholics, touching the large jurisdiction and sovereignty of
their Pope, were in force by Gods law, as they would persuade the simple
people thereof, should not then all the foresaid Bishops, and al others
together with their Councelles and Churches, which have not at any time
confessed the Bishop of Rome for their head, be very grievously censured or
punished, and worthy of a very severe and sharp reprehension? It is true
that men may find, that some amongst the ancient fathers, have sometimes called
the Bishops of Rome high Priest and Pope, but they did heretofore call after
the same sort all Bishops. For as touching the name, high Priest, Theodo. lib.
2. cap. 7
Theodoretus in his second book, and chap. 7. speaks on this manner: that two
hundredth and fifty high priests, were assembled together in Sardis. And
Athanasius in his first Oration against the Arrians, Athanasius oration. 1.
contra Arriano^
does not only call Julius and Liberius the bishops of Rome, high Priests,
but also he calls by the very same name the Bishops of Grecia, Dacia,
Cappadotia, Africa, Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Italy, Sicilia and Armenia. Ruffinus also, in the second book and 26.
chapter, called Athanasius, the great high Priest. As concerning the name Pope,
we will speak thereof (by gods grace and aid) hereafter in the ninth chapter.

Moreover, let us consider by what tokens and marks, the Pope of Rome says
that he is Saint Peter's successor. It is (say the Romish Catholics) because
that Saint Peter had his seat and chair in the church of Rome, being there
the Pastor, and having borne rule there a long time: and that after him there
came in order, his successors the Bishops of Rome, having the same authority
which he had before.

But touching the first, it is uncertain, whether S. Peter was Bishop of Rome
or no, at the least, whether he bate rule there and held the seat. They are
not able plainly to prove the same, neither to approve it as truth, at what
time it was, neither under what Emperor, neither how long, because that out of
the holy scriptures, they are not able to bring, Call. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 6.
sect. 14.
so much as one only probable conjecture, but rather the contrary, as Calvin
has well and sufficiently declared in his Institutions.

Secondly, if S. Peter's abode at Rome, has given this authority to the Romish
bishops, to be the heads of the Church, and universal Bishops, from whence
comes it, that the Councels have limited to all the Patriarchs (who were many
and diverse) yea even after that they were brought to four, Council. Nic. Can.
6. Council. Antioch. Can. 13.
their several charges; making them Metropolitanes, every one in his own
province, the Bishop of Rome, having no more authority over others, than
others over him? For at that time the Bishop of Rome might very well have
alleged Saint Peter's seat, and the other Bishops and Councels, would very
well have confessed and allowed the same, if it had been true, and if the same
could rightly have given the title of primacie to the Bishop of Rome. On the
other side what an argument is this? Saint Peter was Bishop of Rome, and there
suffered martyrdom: therefore it follows that this Church is the mother and
mistress of all the rest, and that the Bishop thereof is the universal and
general head of all Christendom. Verily if in this respect, the question be
to establishe and set up a primacie, it ought rather to be placed at Jerusalem
than at Rome. For Saint Peter preached there, Act. 2.14. Act. 2.12. Act. 4.3
yea the first after Christ's ascension, where he together with his fellows
and brethren builded up the Church, did great miracles, was imprisoned, Act.
5. 18
and sundry times persecuted. The Prophets likewise preached there, and all
the Apostles, yea which is more, Jesus Christ him self, Ioh. 2.13. and 7.14.
and 8.2. etc. 18.20
died there and rose again, and from thence ascended up into heaven. There
also was the first Synod, that ever was held in the Christian Church,
assembled of all the Apostles. There also Jesus Christ sent down his holy
spirit upon his Apostles and disciples. Act. 15. 6 etc. Act. 2.1. etc
And to be short, from thence it was that the doctrine of salvation, should
come forth, to be spread abroad throughout all the world, even as the Prophets
had before told: Isai. 2.3 Michah. 4.2
which things we cannot after any sort say or affirm of Rome,

Moreover, if we must respect and regard the Apostles, there is as much, or
rather more reason, to make Saint Paul the first Bishop or Pope of Rome, as
Saint Peter. For in the first place besides that he was not in any thing less
or inferior to the most excellent or chief Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.5
we find not that S. Peter did at any time reprove him in his ministry,
Gal. 2. 11
as he reproved or blamed S. Peter. And besides we have a certain and an
assured testimony in the holy scripture touching Saint Paul, Act 23.11 Act.
28.30 31
that he was sent by God to Rome, there to bear witness of him, and that he
there preached the kingdom of God, two whole years together: that from thence
he writ diverse Epistles to the Churches, that he was there prisoner, and at
the last beheaded by Nero. And as touching Peter, we have no assured
testimony that he went to Rome, or that he tarryed there exercising there the
ministry. If they will reply, that Jesus Christ gave him the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and that by that means, he was preferred before Saint Paul,
and made head of the Church, we have answered that heretofore, which we mind
not here to repeat.

Besides, though it were so that S. Peter was ordained to bear rule over all
Churches, as an Apostle, yet it can not thereupon follow, that his successors
ought to have any such right or authority as he: because they which succeeded
the Apostles, have not the same charge and the same office, that the Apostles
had. For when Jesus Christ ordained his twelve Apostles, he ordained them for a
time only, and after them he has not substituted or ordained others in their
place, to have so ample and large a charge as theirs was: Likewise we read not,
that the Apostles established other apostles in their steed, but only Elders
and ancients, that is to say, Pastors and Ministers, who had their callings,
charges, and offices limited. Wherefore albeit S. Peter might well be an
universal Bishop, yet so it is that those that came after him, cannot rightly
attribute unto themselves such an office. But to conclude, by what marks can
the pope brag that he is the successor of peter, whose office he does not any
manner of way execute, and whom he follows not in any thing whatsoever?

CHAP. VIII.
Whether the Church of Rome be the true and Catholic Church. And whether we
do well to separate and withdraw our selves from it.

WHen we call the assembly of papists the Romish Church, we mean not that
we hold or take the same for the true Church. For we take the word Church in
his general signification, for a company or fellowship, or congregation. And
in deed we hold and affirm, that among the papists, the true church is not,
but only some little tract or path of a Church, to the end that that, which
S. Paul says, may be accomplished, to wit, 2. These. 2.4.
that Antechrist does sit as god in the temple of God. This being true, much
less can we say: that the assembly which is amongst the papists, is the
Catholic Church: which point we prove by these resons following.

The first reason: The true Church is founded or builded, upon the doctrine of
the prophets and apostles, as S. Paul says: Ephesians. 2.20.
but the papacy or popedom, has not any such foundation, because that it
has ouerthrown the doctrine of the prophets and apostles, as may plainly
appear by the examination of their traditions. The popedom therefore is not
the true Church.

The second reason: In the true and Catholic Church, the truth should reign
and bear sway, for S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 3.7.15.
the church is the pillar and ground of truth: but in the papacy truth
reigns not, but on the contrary side falsehood and lying, as appears by the
doctrine of the mass, of Purgatory, of invocation or prayer to Saints, of
idols, of merits, and other such matters. Wherefore it follows, that the
papacy or popedom is not the true Church.

2. Cor. 11.2 Ephe. 5.22
The third reason: The true Church, is the spouse or wife of Christ: But the
Church of Rome is not the spouse of Christ. For the spouse of Christ
contenteth her self with Christ her only husband, even as an honest woman does
content herself with her only husband, without admitting or suffering any other
with or besides him, which the Romish church does not, because she receives
the Pope of Rome for her husband, and joins him together with Jesus Christ.
Wherefore it follows, that the Romish church is not the true church.

The fourth reason: The true Church is the sheepfold of Jesus Christ's sheep.
Ioh. 10.16
But the popedom is not the sheepfold of Christ's sheep, for it hears not
the voice of Christ the true pastor or shepherd, but the voice of a stranger,
that is, of the pope, whose laws it follows, and keeps more then the laws
of Christ. The papacy then, or Popedom is not the ttue Church.

The fifth reason: The true Church is the body of Christ: Ephe. 1.23
but the Romish Church is not the body of Christ. For the body of Christ
contenteth it self with Christ, the only head thereof, otherwise it should be a
mo^ster with two heads, as we have declared before in the seventh chapter:
which thing the romish church does not, because it receives and holds the
pope for her head. Wherefore it follows very well, that the Romish church is not
the true church.

The sixth reason: Though it were that the church of Rome were the true Church,
yet it could not be but a particular church, eue^ as the Church of Corinthus,
Ephesus, and others, whereupon it follows, that it is not, neither can be the
Catholic and universal church.

The 7. reason: In the true Church these 3. marks are found without failing:
that is to say: the lawful calling of pastors, the pure preaching of the word,
and the right administration of the sacraments. But in the Romish church, these
3. marks are not to be found, as it is easy to show, by the examination that
a man might take thereof. Whereof it follows, that the Romish church is not
the true and right church.

Now seeing that we have sufficiently showed, that the church of Rome, is
not the Catholic Church, neither yet the true Church, men must not deem it
strange, that we cannot agree with it, but that we depart and separate our
selves from it: and that in so doing, we ought not at any hand, or any manner of
way to be held and accounted for Schismatiks, because we do not forsake, the
ancient and Catholic Church, no not the ancient Roman Church, but do
altogether agree with the same. For would we know, what manner of Church, the
Church of Rome was in ancient time? Tertullian teaches it us, when he speaks
thereof after this manner: A blessed Church, for which the Apostles have spread
abroad all the doctrine with their blood: Tertul. de praescr. haeretic.
where Saint Peter suffered such a death, as the Lord him self did; where
Paul was crowned with martyrdom: where John the Apostle was put into burning
or flaming oil, and yet was taken out of the same, without any hurt or
blister, and afterward sent into exile. Let us look upon that which she
learned, and that which she taught, and what concord and agreemente she has
had with the Churches of Africa. She has acknowledged, confessed, and
allowed, one only God the Creator of all things, and Jesus Christ the son of
God, borne of the Virgin Mary: she has believed also the resurrection of the
flesh: she has received the law and the Prophets, with the writings as well
of the Evangelists as of the Apostles, and from thence she draws or fetches
faith: she marketh hers with the Sacrament of Baptism, and she clotheth them
with the holy Ghost: she nourishes them with the Sacrament of the Supper:
she exhorts by martyrdom, and she receives not any person against such
instruction. Behold Tertullian his words. Wherefore we have not forsaken this
ancient church of Rome, but the new and particular Romish church, which
since has lifted up her self, which aduoucheth the pope for her head, and
allows him for the Vicar of Jesus Christ on earth, which worshippeth him,
and obeys his laws against the laws of GOD. For she has degenerated and
gone out of kind, and has lost all her authority, even as the clergy of
the said Church has sometimes foretold, writting to Saint Cyprian saying:
That the praise that Saint Paul gave to that Church, Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist.
7 Romans 1. 8.
to wit, that their faith was spread abroad, and published throughout all the
woorlde, should be turned to their shame and dispraise, if they went out of
kind, and became bastards, and if they continued not to be the heirs of the
same faith. And by this departure from her, we have declared the obedience
which we owe unto God, who has commanded us to do so saying: Go out of
Babylon, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues: And have received the counsel of S. Ambrose, who says: If
there be any Church, which refuses the faith, and keeps not the foundation
or groundworks of the Apostles preaching, we must leave her, least she bring
with her the infection of error and unbelief. This he has written upon the
ninth chapter of the Gospel according to S. Luke.

But some will say: ye account the reformed Churches of Germany for the true
church, though ye find there many things to be amended, as concerning the
supper it self, and some other ceremonies. Why then make you not the like
account of the church of Rome? I answer, that it is very true that there is
some controversy between the Germans and us, touching some points of
religion, but it is not in respect of the essential or substantial points
thereof. I call them essential or substantial points, that are so of the
substance of religion that if men err in one point, the same cannot subsist or
stand. For even in that which concerns the holy Supper, we all believe that
we are partakers of the body and blood of Christ. The difference is not, but
in the Consubstantiation, which they maintain, which is not of such great
importance and weight as transubstantiation, which the Romish pretends:
which even in that one point overthrows and vtterlly brings to nothing
godliness, puttyng an Idol of bread in the place of the son of GOD: and
making of the creature, a Creator, and of Christ a subject to corruption,
rasing from the foundation, and turning topsie turnie, as we say, that which
concerns the propriety, the nature and the glory of Jesus Christ his body.
All which abominations and idolatries, the Germans that are reformed, do
detest and set them selves against, as well as we.

But if some that are willing to make divorce as it were and separation,
between the Germans and us will allege that the foresaid Germans, have not
the like opinion of us, that we have of them, and that they hold and account
us for Heretics, as may be seen and proved by certain writings which they
have set abroad and published: we answer, that the passions, affections, and
heates of some particular persons, who have written somewhat more freely, then
they should, ought not so to be regarded and esteemed, that thereuppon they
will make a general conclusion of all the rest, and so prove that there is a
division between all them and us. For albeit, there be some diversity
between them and us in this point touching the Supper, and in some certain
ceremonies, yet unity does not therefore cease, to continue and remain
always amongst us.

Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22.
Socrates, who writ the Ecclesiastical history, says thus: There is not any
religion, which observes the same Ceremonies though it do receive and admit
one and the self doctrine touching Ceremonies. And in deed they which have
the same faith, sometimes differ amongst them selves, touching some ceremonies
and observations.

Irenaeus writing to Victor the Bishop of Rome, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26.
rehearses that there was great diversity in the Churches, touching fasting,
and the celebration of the feast of Easter: afterward he adds:
Notwithstanding though there were diversity amongst all these touching
ceremonies, yet so it was that they did always agree with us: and the discord
or difference about fasting, did not break the concord or unity of faith.

So then following these places we affirm, that we leave not of to
acknowledge the company of the reformed Germans for the true Church,
although that we be not in every point and thoroughly agreed with them, touching
some matter considered in the supper and some ceremonies observed amongst them.

And the rule of charity teaches us this, as Saint Paul has given us a good
example thereof, when he calls the Corinthians and the Galathians, 1. Cor.
1.2. 2. Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.2:
Saints and faithful ones, and gives unto them in general the name of the
church, although there were amongst them great and grievous faults, as well
in ignorance, of the doctrine, as in their own life and manners. This is that
also which he has set forth in an other place saying: That all they which
hold and keep the foundation, do not always build gold and silver and
precious stones, but hay and stubble.

But some say, why follow you not the same rule on the behalf of the church of
Rome* we answer, that in the ceremonies and service of the Romish Church,
the purity of religion is not there observed and kept, but the whole service
of God, is amongst them corrupted and falsified, and therefore can not without
offending God apply or frame our selves unto them. And Saint Augustine has
given us this lesson, teaching us how far we may communicate in the
Ceremonies and service of other churches. August. ad Ianuarium.
There is no better rule in this behalf (says he) than a wise and sober
Christian himself, which will frame himself to that custom, which he shall
see used in that Church wherein he lives. For that which is not established
against faith, or against good manners, must be held for indifferent. But the
Church allows not that, which is against faith and good life, yea she
dissembleth it not, neither does it.

To be short then, for so much as we cannot be present, at the service and
Ceremonies of the Romish Church, without defilyng our selves in their
manifest idolatries, you may see wherefore we do wholly and altogether
renounce and forsake the same. And in this deed of ours, we follow the
example of the Prophets. For in the kingdom of Israel in the days of
Jeroboam, Circumcision was administered, and there they offered sacrifices: yea
the law was esteemed there amongst them as holy, and which is more, GOD him
self was called upon, and prayed to there: yet notwithstanding, by reason of
their superstitions and ceremonies, which men had devised and set up against
the ordinance of God, all that service was rejected and condemned: neither can
any man show, that Eliiah, or any other, whether he were a prophet or of any
other calling, did at any time worship, or offer up sacrifice in Bethell. But
see more largely touching this matter, in that which M. Calvin has written
thereof in the fourth book of his Institutions Chap. 2. sect. 1.2.3.4.5. etc.
Calvin. lib. 4 Instit. cap. 2. sect. 1.2.3. 4.5. etc.


Moreover, when we do thus separate our selves from the Romish Church, we
break not the unity of the Church, because that in the Romish Church, there
is no true unity. For first of all, it is not at unity in it self, as
appears by the several sects and rules which are amongst them, one saying,
I am of the order of S. Augustine: an other, I am of Saint Dominick his order:
an other, I am of S. Frauncis: an other, I am a Jesuit, contrary to that
which S. Paul writ to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.11.12.13.
in the first chapter.

Secondly, that Church is not united with God, which union or unity, is
necessarily joined with the former, 1. Ioh. 1.3
as Saint John declares it. And that this is true, that it has not any union
or fellowship with god, it is sufficiently plain by this only reason, that he
that has union or fellowship with God, ought by the testemonie of the holy
spirit and by faith to be assured hereof, that God dwells in him, and he in
God, even as the scripture teaches us. But the faith of papists is this, that
we must always doubt, whether we be in the grace and favor of God: wherefore
they can not have union or fellowship with him. Furthermore, this is to be
marked, that there is no union or agreement, between the doctrine of papists
and the word of God, whereupon it follows, that they are not all united with
him. Which being considered, to what end and purpose would they have us to
remain and abide in the unity of the Romish Church, seeing there is not in
it any unity, I mean holy unity, and such as agrees well to good Christians,
and the true members of Jesus Chirst?

They will object further: you hold indeed that baptism ministered in the
Romish Church is true Baptism, why then do you not hold this Church for the
true Church? I answer, that this reason is very weak. For we do not
acknowledge the assembly of heretics for the true Church, although we cease
not to allow the baptism ministered amongst them, for true and profitable,
even as the council of Carthage decreed the same, because that Baptism is
always the Baptism of Christ, and not of heretics, although it be ministered
by heretics, who have notwithstanding some vocation and allowaunce of the
people. Wherein let us hear Saint Augustine. Augu. lib. 3, cont. Donatist.
cap. 10.
The water (says he) over which the name of God is called upon, is not
bastardly: for neither the creature nor the name is profane or bastardly.
Wherefore the Baptism of Christ being sanctified and hallowed by the words of
the Gospel, is holy among the adulterous, and in the adulterous, although they
them selves be shameless and unclean.

And in an other place: Aug cont. Crescent. lib. 3. cap. 6
The baptism is such, as is he by whose virtue it is administered; and such as
be, by whose hands it is administered.

August. de fide ad Pet. cap. 36.
Also because it is manifest, that in what so ever place where baptism is
administered, it ought to be but once ministered: this is to be marked, that
though it be administered by heretics, in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy ghost, it ought to be reverently received, and at no
hand reiterated.

Wherefore we esteem and take the baptism of the Romish Church, for true
baptism, because it is ministered, not in the name of the Pope, but in the name
of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost: and confess that the
infants which receive it, are truly baptized, even as they which were
circumcised in the time of Jeroboam and of Caiaphas were held for true
circumcised persons, although at that time the state of the church was almost
altogether perverted and corrupted. But yet this remains, that albeit we have
received baptism in the popish assembly, and that we hold the same for true
baptism, yet we are far off from holding or accounting that assembly for
the true Church.

Calvin has sufficiently answered this difficulty or doubt, whose words I
will bring in place here, contenting my self therewith. Calvin. lib. 4
Instit. cap. 2. sect. 11.12.
As in the time of Jeroboam (says he) there were certain prerogatives
belonging to the Church, which remained amongst the Jews, although at that
time the service of God was very much corrupted: so we deny not, but that the
Papists have at this day, some steps and paths, of the dissipation or
scattering of the Church, which through the grace of God have remained with
them. For as Circumcision could not be so defiled, by the unclean hands of the
Jews, but that it was always a sign and a sacrament, of the covenant of God,
for which cause, god called the infants or children, which were borne of this
people his, which could not any manner of way belong unto him, but by a certain
special blessing and privilege. After the same manner also, because he has
once placed his covenant in France, in Italy, in Germany, and other
countries, (although that all that was afterward oppressed by the tyranny of
Antechriste) yet to the end that his covenant might remain amongst them
inviolable and unbroken, it has pleased him, that baptism should there
remain for a testimony and witness of that covenant, which because it is
ordained and hallowed by his own mouth, retains and keeps her own force,
notwithstanding the ungodliness of men. Likewise he has by his providence
brought to pass, that there should remain amongst them other remnants also,
as the Lords prayer, the Apostles Creed, the Commandments of GOD, etc.
least the Church should utterly perish. And as sometimes buildings are
pulled down in such sort, that the foundations remain, and some show of the
ruins and destructions: so the Lord has not suffered, that his Church
should be so rased or destroyed by Antichrist, that nothing of the building
should remain: And although (that he might take vengeance of the
unthankfulness of men who despised his word) he has suffered such a horrible
shaking and fall to be made, yet it was his pleasure, that some part or portion
thereof should remain, as a sign, token and mark, that the whole was not
abolished.

Wherefore when we refuse simply to grant unto the Papists the title of the
Church, we do not therefore utterly deem them, that they have not any
Churches amongst them: but we only reason, of the true and right estate of
the Church: which imports a fellowship, as well in the doctrine, as in all that
which belongs to the profession of our Christianity. Daniel. 9.27 2. These.
2.4.
Daniel and S. Paul have foretold, that Antichrist shall sit in the temple of
God. We say, that the Pope is the head, of that execrable, abominable, and
cursed kingdom, at the least he is so in the West Church. Now seeing it is
said, that the seat of Antichrist shall be in the temple of GOD, thereby is
meant, that his kingdom shall be such, as shall not altogether abolish the
name, either of Christ, or of his church. Hereby therefore it appears, that we
deny nor, but that the Churches, over which he bears rule by his tyranny,
remain Churches still: but we say, that he has profaned them by his
ungodliness, and so poisoned them by his false doctrines, that there appears
amongst them a picture or image of Babylon, rather than of the holy city of
God.

To conclude, we say that they be Churches, first, because that the Lord has
myraculously preserved amongst them the remnants of his people, though they be
poorly and thinly scattered abroad. Secondly, because there remain amongst
them some marks and rokens of the Church, specially these tokens, the power
and effectualnesse whereof cannot be abolished, neither by the craft of the
Devil, neither by the malice of me^. But on the other side, because the marks
which we have principally to regard in this dispute or question, be blotted
out there, we say, that there is not amongst them, a right show, and lawful
form of a Church, neither in any of their particular assemblies, neither in
the whole body. And these are the words of Calvin.

But though we might in deed accord and agree to this, that the Romish
Church were the true Church, in respect of the baptism which it has, yet
there should be no reason, to infer thereupon, that we ought also to take and
hold it for the true church, in respect of the other points of doctrine, for it
is most manifest, that for the most part, they are altogether contrary to
the expressed word of God. And as concerning baptism, albeit they add many
vain and superstitious Ceremonies, ministered in a tongue unknown to the
people, and not understood of them, yet so it is, that notwithstanding the
substance remains, and that which is the principal or chief point of the
form, as we have showed.

Now if one would demand: why then suffer we not our infants to be brought
to the Romish Church, there to be baptized, seeing that the baptism which is
there ministered, is good? I answer, that we suffer it not, because God has
given us grace to know the superstition and idolatry, which is there
committed, 1. Cor. 10.14 1. Ioh. 5.21.
to which we may not at any hand, stick, cleave or consent, whatsoever
appearance and show of good we suppose may come thereby either to us or to
our children. For Saint Paul says, Romans 3.8
That we ought carefully to look unto our selves, not to do evil that good
may come thereof. And also because that through Gods grace and goodness, we have
a mean and way opened, to have our foresaid children baptized in the reformed
Churches, without any abuse, error, superstition, or idolatry.

They will say yet further, that Jesus Christ ceased not to approve and allow
the Church of Jerusalem in his time, though it had in it store of errors:
which he well declared, when he was there present at the sacrifices and
feasts. Wherefore then do not we approve also the Romish church, although it
have errors in it? For if a church shall for some abuses, faults, or errors,
loose the name of the true Church, where shall we then find one alone in the
whole world?

I answer first, that we hold not that a true Church loses the name of
a true Church, for some abuses or errors therein. For S. Paul left not of to
name the faithful people of Corinthus, the Church, although he blamed and
reproved them, for many errors and corruptions, not only in respect of their
manners, but also concerning their doctrine. And we shall see hereafter that
particular Churches, are never so perfect in this world, but that they be
oftentimes subject to error and go astray. But we rightly hold and affirm,
that the Romish Church, ought to leese the name of a true Church, because she
has degenerated, and gone out of kind from the ancient and Catholic
Church. For the true, ancient and Catholic Church, cleaves to her only
head and husband Jesus Christ: she believes his word and follows him:
she is faithful to him, without committing adultery with idols, which the
Romish church does not, which thing we have a little while ago showed.

Secondly, as concerning that that Jesus Christ did approve the church of
Jerusalem in his time, we say in the first place, that there is very great
difference between the estate of that church then as it was, and the estate of
the Romish church, such a one as we behold it at this day. For the abuse and
corruption, as well of doctrine, as of Sacraments, and the manifest Idolatry,
which bears sway at this present in the Romish church, was not at that time
in the church of Jerusalem. Which is easy to prove, because that Jesus Christ,
would not have made much a do, to beat down the idols, and to reform other
abuses, if they had had place there, as he ouerthrewe the tables of the money
changers, Ioh. 2.14.
and cast out of the temple those, that there sold openly, sheep, and Doves.

Moreover Jesus Christ would not reject or disalowe the church of Jerusalem,
because that the time was not yet come, wherein he should put an end unto
the ceremonies of the law. Leuit. 17.3. Deuteronomy. 12..13
Wherefore for as much as the faithful had the commandment of God whereby it
was appointed them not to search or seek new places, to offer their
sacrifices and oblations in, but to come, and to stay them selves within the
Court of the tabernacle, or of the temple, Jesus Christ would not despise
this place. But we know, that whatsoever corruption was there, no faithful
man was enforced to cleave or stick, to any superstitious manner or custom:
which is not practiced at this day in the Church of Rome. For as all there is
full of superstition and manifest idolatry, so they will constrain and
enforce the faithful by fire and sword to consent thereto, and to pollute and
defile themselves therewith, against their own consciences and Gods express
forbidding.

Lastly, to what point did Jesus Christ bring the Church of Jerusalem, when
the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees showed them selves great mad men,
not doing their duties toward it? did he not take his vineyard from these
husbandme^, who did not give him the fruits, which belonged unto him, and
committed the same unto others, that is, to his Apostles, and their
successors, to yield him fruit in their seasons? Even so likewise has the
Lord done therewith in the Popedom. He has not destroyed his Church, but
has only changed the estate thereof, taking it out of the hand and guiding of
the Bishops and Popish Priests, and placing it again under the government
and charge of other guiders and leaders, who can see more clearly, and be of
better trust: as it is spoken in Saint Matthewe, Mat. 22.40
under the similitude or parable of the vineyard.

To conclude: if they ask what shall become then of our predecessors, who
dyed in the faith of the Romish Church: are they condemned? I answer, that
we leave the judgment thereof unto GOD: for it belongs not to us, to
determine and judge of that which is hidden from us, and which indeed passes
our knowledge and calling. It is very true, that the holy Scripture
pronounces, Ioh. 3.18.36
that they which die without the faith of Christ, are damned: and we cannot
but say amen, and give our consent to this. Neither serves it to any purpose
to allege ignorance, and to say that it excuses the sinner before GOD: For
the scripture is plain and manifest therein: The servant (says Jesus Christ)
that knew his masters will, Luke. 12.47 48.
and prepared not him self, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes. But he that knew it not, and yet did commit things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. Also: Math. 5.14
If the blind lead the blind, they shall fall both into the ditche. Saint
Paul says also: As many as have sinned without the law, Romans 2. 12. 2. These.
1.6
shall perish also without the law: and as many as have sinned within the law,
shall be judged by the law. And again, it is a righteous thing with God, to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you which are troubled,
rest and deliverance with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, re^dring vengeance unto them,
that do not know God, and which obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting destruction. etc.

These places do openly enough declare, what is the end of those that die
without faith, although they be ignorant, for their ignorance cannot excuse
them, nor serve them for a cloak or covering, to absolve and set them free
from the judgment of God. For confirmation and proof whereof we may allege
also and put down that which is written in Leuiticus, Leui. 4.2.
touching the offering commanded by God for the sins which were committed
through ignorance. Lo what we have to say for one point.

But to that which remains, touching our fathers and predecessors. God might
well show mercy upon them at the end of their days, making himself known
unto them, by the secret virtue and power of his holy spirit, and putting it
into their hearts, to believe in Jesus Christ his son, that so they might be
saved. For God is almighty to save his own people, yea without using any of
these means, which he is accustomed commonly and ordinarily to use, to plant
faith in us, and to ingraue it in our hearts to our own salvation. And this is
Saint Cyprian his answer, Cypri. lib. 2. epist. 3
touching those that die in some false opinions. If some one of our
predecessors (says he) either by ignorance, or through simplicity, has not
kept and held that which the Lord has taught us to do, by his example and
authority, the mercy of the Lord may pardon him. But we cannot help the
same, being admonished and instructed by him. Behold what Saint Cyprian
pronounces herein. It is true, that he speaks properly, touching the matter
of the holy supper, but nothing lets, but that we may apply his speech
generally, to the matter of all the other articles of the faith.

The IX. CHAP.
Of the degrees of Ministers in the Church: where mention is made, of the
order of the popish Clergy, and of the offices and duties of true pastors.

WE have seen and heard heretofore, Mat. 9.38.
that it apperteineth unto the Lord of the harvest, to send forth workmen in
to his harvest. For it belongs not to any, what gifts soever he has
received from the Lord, to thrust himself into the work of the ministry,
unless he be lawfully called thereto.

Now the Apostle Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians, Ephe. 4.11.
shows us what workmen the Lord has sent into his harvest, that is to say,
Apostles, prophets, Evangelists, pastors, and doctors.

Apostles.
Touching the Apostles, they were chosen immediately from Christ, and their
office was, to sow and spread the Gospel abroad throughout all the world:
neither had any one of the^ any limits or borders set them, or some certain
Churches appointed to them, Mat. 28.19 Mat. 10.2 Gal. 2.^.
but Christ would that in every part or place where so ever they came, they
should do their message, before all peoples and nations. Such were the twelve
named in the Gospel, to whom Saint paul was added, who was specially
appointed, to bear the name of Christ among the Gentiles. Now because this
degree of the Apostles, was instituted and ordained by God, for the
establishing of churches, those churches being planted and established, this
name of Apostle, ought not any more to be used among the ministers, as to be
given and communicated to them. And yet we read, that sometime it is taken
generally in the scripture, for a Pastor and preacher of the Gospel. As
Epaphroditus is called the Apostle of the Philippians, and Barnabas is named an
Apostle. Philip. 2.25. Act. 14.14.
Act. 14.

Prophets are distinguished into two sorts or o ders. Prophets.
Some were under the old Testament, and in that time, who being instructed and
taught by a special revelation from God, did foretell things to come. The
other were in the new Testament, who in the first place, had an excellent gift
and singular grace, to interpret the Scripture: 1. Cor. 11.4.
also they were such as were endued, 1. Cor. 14. 1. etc.
with great wisdom and readiness, well to provide for the necessity of the
Church, and to speak properly, they were as interpreters of the will of God.
In this rank or order were comprehended the Prophets, that had the gift to
understand, foresee, and reveal things to come: Act. 11.28.
such a one was Agabbs, who by the holy Ghost foretold, that a great famine
should fall throughout all the world, which also came to pass in the
Emperor Claudius Caesar's days: also that Saint Paul should be bound at
Jerusalem. Act. 21.10. etc. Act. 13.1.
There is mention made also in the thirteenth of the Acts, of certain
Prophets of the Church of Antioche, to wit, Barnabas and Simeon, who was
called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manahen, (which had been brought up
with Herod the Tetrarch) and Saul. And in the one and twenty, mention is made
of Phillips four daughters which did prophecy. Act. 21.9.
These degrees, or this office of Prophets, was ordained by God to endure but
for a time only, as the Apostles.

Evangelists.
Evangelists generally are those which perform the office of an Evangelist,
that is to say, which preach the Gospel. Sometimes also this name Evangelist,
is referred to those four; who have written the story of the Gospel, that is
to say, S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. John. But in this order of the
Church, the question is of an other charge or office. These men of whom we
speak, were as it were fellow helpers to the Apostles, whom they did follow,
and were almost continually in company with. And their office came somewhat
nigh to the office of an Apostle: the difference was only in the degree of
dignity. Of this sort were Silas, Timothy, and such like. In the one and
twenty of the Acts, Philip is called an Evangelist: Act. 21.8
And Saint Paul admonishes Timothy in one of the Epistles, which he wrote
unto him, to continue to do the work of an Evangelist. 2. Tim. 4.5^
These likewise had their time, and are no more in use at this present.

Pastors are they, Pastors.
that have the charge of some certain flocks, and of some certain Churches,
to rule and govern the same, preaching the Gospel, administering the
Sacraments, and exercising discipline in those Churches. This degree and
office, must have his course and continue in the Church, even until the end
of the world.

Doctors.
Doctors are they, which the Church in old time called Catechisers, that is to
say, instructors or teachers, whose charge and office was, plainly and simplye
to expound the scriptures, that men might have the right sense and
understanding thereof, and namely to teach the Catechumen^, that is to say,
those that were yet to be instructed, in the points and principles of Christian
religion. Of this sort are the Doctors and teachers of our age, which teach
youth in schools, expounding unto them the scripture. And their office
consists herein, carefully to provide that sound doctrine may be kept and
published, to the end that pure religion may continue and remain in the
church. Some suppose that the office of Pastor and Doctor is all one, as
Chrysostom and Saint Augustine: yet there is no dout, but that they are two
distinct offices, which men may not confound and mingle together. For albeit
that this be the charge and office of al Pastors, to teach, yet they go somewhat
further than the Doctors do. For first and foremost, they preach and exhort,
applying the doctrine to the necessities of the Church: next they administer
the Sacraments, and in the third place, they have the charge, government, and
execution of the discipline: to which matters, the Doctors charge reaches not,
they being only ordained to expound the scriptures, to the end that pure and
sound doctrine may always be preserved and maintained in the church. And
indeed such a one may be very apt to execute the office of the Doctor, as has
not the gift to preach: and such a one on the other side may very well have
the gift to preach, as shall not at any hand be meet or fit, to exercise
the charge and office of the Doctor, although that sometimes he that shall be
the Pastor, may also well be the Doctor: but yet this is to be marked, that
they are diverse and several charges or offices.

And these be the five degrees or orders of ministers, to who^ the Lord has
committed the government of his church to feed the same: of which five the
last two only remain to be always used in his Church. Saint Paul indeed
makes mention in other places of some other names, as of Bishops, that is to
say, watchmen, Bishops and Elders, or Ancients.
or ouer-watchers: and of Elders, that is to say, Senators or Ancients: but
these two names signify one and the self same thing, as the Apostle himself
declares, Titus. 1. 5
writing to Titus. For mark what he says: For this cause left I thee in
Creete, that thou should continue to redress the things that remain, and
that thou should ordeine Elders, (that is to say, Ancients) in every city
as I appointed thee. And afterward he adds an excellent description of
true Elders and Ancients, For a Bishop (says he) must be unblameable, as the
guider or steward of Gods own house: and so forth. We fee that those whom he
named Elders or ancients, in one verse, he names the same Bishops in an
other verse. Now these two names of Bishop and Elder, and the name also of
Pastor, are taken in the scripture to signify one and the self same estate.
For the charge and office of the Pastor, is to feed the sheep, as appears
by that which the Lord says in the four and thirty Chapter of Ezechiell.
Woe be to the shepherds of Israel, Ezech. 34.2
which feed them selves. Should not the sheepheards feed the flocks? But the
Bishops and Elders, are called to the same thing, Act. 20.28.
as both Saint Paul and Saint Peter do declare: Saint Paul speaking thus:
Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock, over which the holy Ghost
has made you Bishops or overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has redeemed with his own blood. And Saint Peter thus: 1. Pet. 5.1.2.
The Elders which are amongst you I beseech, which am also an Elder with you,
Feed the flock of Christ, which is committed unto you, caryng for it, not
by constraint, etc.

If one would know the reason why the Pastors are called Elders or
Ancients: it is for honors sake: not as though when in old time they chose
Pastors, they were all ancient in age and years, but because that they
specially chose them, from amongst the Ancients, and also because they ought
to be men both ripe, wise, and also very well experienced. Old age commonly
has more wisdom, more experience and gravity: But yet it does not always
fall out, that white or gray hair makes men wise: yea sometimes we shall
find young men, which are far more fit, to exercise and execute the charge
and office of a Pastor, (such a one was Timothy) than those that be of greater
years.

It is true, that there are two sorts of Elders, that is to say, Ancients. One
sort have charge and office, to minister the word of God and Sacraments, and
to watch over the discipline and over the whole Church. The other are joined
unto these, to aid them in the exercising and execution of discipline, without
meddling any whit at all in the preaching, etc. Saint Paul sets out this
order when he says to Timothy, The elders that rule well, 1. Tim. 5.17.
are worthy of double honor, specially they which labor in the word and
doctrine. For in that he makes mention of bearing rule, he gives us well to
understand, that those whom he names Elders or Ancients, that is to say, the
Pastors, and such as are joined unto them, are chosen to have charge and office
in the Church, over the people. And in that he more commends those, which
minister the word and doctrine, than the other, he evidently declares, that
all have not one and the self same charge. We may behold this order, even at
this day observed in the reformed Churches.

Deacons.
The Apostle makes mention likewise of Deacons, which word is taken in holy
scripture in two senses or sorts. Sometimes generally for every minister, or
seruitour: In which sense S. Paul calls the Magistrate, the Deacon of god,
that is to say, Romans 13.4. Ephe. 3. 7. Romans 15.8.
the servant or minister of God, and he names himself the Deacon, that is to
say, the minister of the Gospel: as also he calls Jesus Christ, the Deacon
of circumcision, that is to say, the minister thereof. Wherefore being so
taken, and referred to the estate and calling of the Pastor, it is commonly
translated and turned by this word, minister or servant, as in the first
Chapter of the Epistle to the Collossians, and the third chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. Colos. 1.7. 1. Cor. 3.5.
But sometimes it is taken more straightly, for the^ which have a charge and
office, to gather the alms, and to dispense or bestow them among the poor.

The first occasion that was given to chose these Deacons in the Church was
this, because the Apostles, could not very well provide for or furnish both the
charge of preaching the word, and of distributing the goods of the poor. And
for this cause were the seven Deacons chosen: of whom is spoken, Acts. 6. Acts.
6.2.
And the conditions and qualities, which ought to be in the Deacons that men
will chose, are there described and set out and also in the third Chapter of
the first Epistle to Timothy. 1. Tim. 3.8 etc.


These are the degrees of the Church, or ecclesiastical orders, which Jesus
Christ him self set up, and his Apostles after him established, for the
regiment and government of the Church: which order was afterward in the
Popedom by little and little, not only corrupted, but utterly overthrown. For
in that tyrannous kingdom, after that corruption had once craftily overtaken or
stolen upon the doctrine of the Church, they devised and forged a
stewardship, dispensation and bestowing of ecclesiastical offices and charges,
which was altogether far off and estraunged, from the former simplicity and
plainenes, whereof we have spoken. Wherein first they made a sacrament (without
the warrant of Gods word) of the orders and degrees of ministers. Afterward
they devised a certain kind of cream or oil, to anoint them, as they say,
but in deed it is to grease or smeare them, fetching that through a false
zeal, from Aaron, and that which was done in old time under the law. And
also shauing or shearing, specially of the crown of the head, against the
custom both of the Apostles, Act. 18.18.
and of the primitive Church. It is true in deed that Saint Paul did once
cause his head to be shorn in Cenchrea, after the manner of the Jews, but it
was by reason of a vow which he had made, and not that he was then ordained
into some ministry, but a great while after his calling. And in that he
caused himself to be shorn, he did it not for any other purpose, but to
apply himself thereby to the Jews, who were as yet very rude, and not well
instructed, as he himself protests in the Epistle to the Corinthians, 1.
Cor. 9.20.
That of his own accord and willingly he became under the law, (although he
were delivered there from) to the end he might win the Jews. Orders of the
Romish church.
Next they established or made seven orders of the church: the first, Porters
or door keepers: the second, Readers: the third, Exorcistes: or in plain
english, Coniurers, who as they feign, had power given them to lay their hands
upon mad men, and men possessed with devils and to heal them: the fourth,
Acoluthes, that is to say followers, who waited upon the Bishop in his
householde services, and did continually accompany him, first for honors
sake, and then that no suspicion should arise of them: the fifth, Subdeacons,
or vnderdeacons: the sixth, Deacons: and the seventh Priests: of which last
sort they have made many degrees: whereof they call some, simple or single
Chaplains: Others Curates and Vicars, others Bishops, others Archbishops or
Metropolitanes, other some Cardinals: And afterward they came to the four
Patriarchs, and lastly to the Pope himself. But from whence comes this
goodly hierarchy, or order of Pristes? who has established it and set it in
nature or being? Did Jesus Christ or his Apostles? the scripture makes no
mention thereof. But let us discourse a little upon the fountain and beginning
of these goodly degrees, I say and mean only of those, which they conteyne
under the name Priest. For the others keep not the place of true Bishops and
Pastors of the Church, as these would seem to do. And yet notwithstanding,
he that will hear speech thereof, Theo. Beza. lib. confess. Punct. 7. ca. 11.
let him read the confession of Theodorus Beza.

As concerning Chaplains, Durandus in his book called Rationale diuinorum
offic. alleges two reasons, to show why priests were so called. The one is,
because the kings of France in time heretofore, when they went to war, were
wont to carry with them, Saint Martins cappe or hoode, which they kept under a
tent, which of the cap kept in it was named Capella, that is, Chapel: and the
Clerks or Priests, that had the keeping of this Chapel, were called
Chaplains, and afterward in continuance of time, this name was in some
countries given generally to all priests. And these little Cabbines, or
corners, or rather high places, which were in the popish temples, wherein the
Chaplains said their masses, were called chapels. The other reason is, that
when in old time there were set out an army, or to do some exploite by
soldiers, they had in the camp certain special tents, to say mass in,
which tents were covered over with goats skines. Now a goat in latin is
called Capra or Capella, that is to say, according to the portuise of the
priests, which are at this day, Chapel. Wherefore because these tents were
covered with goats skins, they were named Chappelles, and the priests which
had the keeping of them, and who did therein sing their masses were called
Chaplains. Behold verily two reasons, to show from whence this name
Chaplain is taken, which reasons are very high, and full of great speculation
or insight, containing very great mysteries, and such as are meruelously
deep: but we leave the^ to be meditated or looked into diligently, to the
priests which are the Popes Chaplains, to the end that they should advise and
take counsel, to see whether they can be willing, that their reverend name
should be fet and drawn from these base beginnings.

Curates.
Curates have another fountain. In old time according to the order established
by Jesus Christ, the Pastors were ordained and placed distinctly and without
confusion in several Churches. For to the end that every Pastor might know
his own charge, and be able to yield a better account of his flock, and
that one should not any whit at al incroch upon, or intermedle with others,
also to the end, that the flock and sheep might know, where they might
seek for and find their own pastors, they divided the people into certain
circuites and countries or rather parishes in deed, whereof some were
committed to the charge of certain pastors, and othersome to the charge of
certain other Pastors. From thence came the name Curate, although some would
have it derived from Cura, that is to say, from the care that the pastors ought
to have over their flocks which were given and committed unto them in charge.
And the abuse coming on, and growing up more and more, they called the
benefice or reuenewe, that was assigned them to maintain themselves upon for
the doing of their office, by the name of Cure. And from thence it comes,
that when any one goes about to get such a benefice, they diligently enquire
of the value thereof, and that whereof they seem to have the greatest regard is
to know, how much the cure is worth.

As concerning Bishops and Elders, Bishops and elders or according to papists,
Priests. Hierom. ad Euagrium.
or as they call them priests, we have before showed and seen that these two
names signify one and the self same office or charge. And S. Jerome in his
Epistle to Euagrius witnesses, that in the time of the apostles, there was no
distinction or difference between these two degrees: but afterward whiles
schisms were in the church, one was chosen from among the elders, and placed
in the highest room, and called Bishop, because he differed from the Elders
only, for the executing of order. Now by these words we may easily know
and gather, that this difference began in the Church about that time, and in
that the office of a Bishop is held and accounted, for a more high, or more
excellent office than the office of Elder, or as they term the^ priests: it
was not done by the institution and ordinance of God, but rather by man's
authority, and that for the maintenance (as they suppose) of order and
discipline.

Archbishop. or Metropolitanes.
The names of Archbishoppes and Metropolitanes (which were taken for one and the
same estate) were unknown to the Apostles and to the old and ancient
Churches, but mark how they were brought in. Princes having put certain
degrees between their cities and towns, and making a difference between some
of them, in respect of dignities and privileges, they called those, which
they would establishe above the rest Metropolites, as if you would say,
Council. Calcedon. Canc. 12.
Mother Cities, as we may gather out of many histories, and namely and
expressly out of the Council of Calcedonia, where it is said, that they ought
not to account any Towns or Cities for Metropolites, but only those, to whom
Kings and Princes, have showed and given this honor by their Edictes and
statutes. Now as Princes lifted up their Metropolitan Cities, to bear rule
over others under their obedience: so the Bishops placed in those Cities,
usurped jurisdiction and authority over others, they being favored by their
Princes and Magistrates, who easily accorded and consented to this, that their
Bishops should be placed in authority above others. For this cause, the
Bishops of those places, were named in the council of Nice Metrepolitanes,
Conce. Nice. can. 6. Conc. Calce. can. 1.
and their seats were called in the council of Calcedon, the first seats.
You see then what was the fountain and beginning of Archbishops or
Metropolitanes: who at the beginning were lifted up to such a degree, for a
good end and purpose in outward show, for they were so placed and established,
as it were Ecclesiastical presidents and rulers in their provinces, to the end
they might guide and govern the affairs of the Churches, and direct and call
Synods, in good order and without confusion, when there was need thereof:
Conc. Nice. can. 6. Conc. Anti. can. 13.
and yet none among them had any authority one over an other. For that effect
and purpose the councels ordained, that al Metropolita^s should have like power
and equal authority, Conc. Sardi. can. 19. Conc. Consta^tinopolita. can. 2.
every one in his own province, that the Bishop of Rome (who was also
Metropolitan) had at Rome, and in the churches, which were under his charge.
Whereby it appears, that the Bishop of Rome was not then Pope, and universal
bishop, over all churches, but that he had his charge limited and bounded,
having no more authority and jurisdiction over other Metropolitanes, than the
other had over him.

Cardinals.
Touching Cardinals, I know not what we may speak of certainty, because there
is not so much a one only author, who lived or writ while the church was in
some purity, that makes any mention thereof at all. Yet we cannot be deceived,
in speaking of that which we find touching it. We read in Nauclerus, Nauclerus.
that in the time of Pontianus Bishop of Rome, who was about the year of
Christ 235. there was at Rome 36. Priests, Cardinals, that is to say,
principal and chief among the rest. Volateran. lib. 22. Antropolo.
For as Volateranus says in his Antropologie, the name Cardinal was in old
time take to signify as much as principal, and was (says he) given to the
Priests, as they call them, and Deacons of the Church of Rome: because that as
the Bishop of Rome was held and taken for the principal and chief of Bishops,
because he was in the principal city of the Empire: so the Priests (as they
call them) and Deacons of that city, were held and taken for Cardinals, that
is to say, for principal and chief among other Priests and Deacons.
Whereupon he adds some examples. There is a certain Epistle (says he) of
Gregory the first, to them of Peloponezus, who demanded a Priest to minister
the sacraments unto them, wherein he says, we send unto you our beloved son,
A Priest Cardinal. Also: there is amongst the ancient Charters, in the
Church of Aretinum, a donation or gift, of a certain Roman Senator named
Zenobius, which was made unto the said Church, in the time of Damasus the
high Bishop, wherein there is contained this subscription: And I, Io. S. R. E.
Deacon Cardinal, do on the behalf of the high Bishop Damasus, approve and
confirm, etc. And of these Priests or Deacons Cardinals, Marcellus Bishop of
Rome, ordained fifteen to baptize children, Petr. de Not. lib. 2. cap. 83.
Polydor. lib. 4. cap. 9.
and to bury the dead, about the year of Christ 301.

If the Cardinals of these days, would take their beginning from these, let
them mark then what is their charge and calling, without taking that upon them
which belongs not unto them. But we know, what great difference there is
between their estate and these, because at this day we may in every place
behold it to be an estate or calling of honor, and not of office and charge,
as it was then. Beside, when was it, that they were so lifted up? and by whom?
A thousand years and more were spent, before that the Church was burdened with
such cardinals, as we have at this day, having benefices, without exercising
and executing offices. It is affirmed, that Pope Innocentius the 4. of that
name, about the year of Christ 1244. did so exalt their estate and calling,
that he commanded by Edict, that from that time forward, they should go on
horseback, and should wear a red cap or hat, and a scarlet to be, for a sign
and witness that they ought to be always ready and prepared to suffer and
shed their blood, for the defense of Christian religion. And Paul the second,
about the year 1470. has ratified the same Edict, and in some point augmented
and enlarged it.

But some will set up him self and say, that these Priests and Deacons of
Rome, which were called Cardinals, obtained that name, because at ye time they
were such, as ye Cardinals at this present are, that is to say, having
authority and jurisdiction, over all other Bishops and Priests: I answer,
that the case goes not so. For we find this, that the Priests and Deacons of
Rome were in times past much less and inferior to the Bishops, in steed
whereof at this day, they go before them in honor and dignity. And that so
it is, we read that when the Bishop of Rome, sent two Ambassadors or Legates
to the council of Carthage, whereof one was a Priest of the Church of Rome, he
was set the last of all. Also yt in the counsel which Saint Gregory held, the
Priests of the Church of Rome, were set last, and made their subscription
apart by themselves, and the Deacons had not so much credit, as to subscribe.

Touching the four Patriarchs, Patriarchs.
we have spoken thereof in the beginning of the 7. Chapter. Now we must
understand, that the names of Patriarch and Metropolitan, were in time
heretofore taken for one charge or office, as appears by this, Socrates lib.
5 cap. 8.
that Socrates the historiographer, speaks of the council of Constantinople,
wherein mention is made of Metropolitanes. These Patriarchs then or
Metropolitanes, being lifted up in degree of honor, above all the rest of the
bishops, and in process of time thrust on foreward with ambition, have so
incroched one of them upon another, that at the last they have brought all the
Patriarchs, even to the number of four, as we have named and described them
in the aforesaid seventh chapter. And this has principally come to pass,
because, that either for the antiquity of the Churches, or for the renown of
the cities, and excellency also of the Bishops, men have reverenced and
honored Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, above all other Cities:
and by consequent the bishops of those places, as those that were the
principal or chief.

The Pope.
Now these four Patriarchs, have yet in such sort so robbed one an other,
that the Patriarch of Rome, and he of Constantinople, have quite and clean
taken away the room and place of the other two. And as touching the two of
Rome and Constantinople, we know what jar and contention there has been
betwixt them, which is not as yet well compounded or ended. In the time of
Gregory the first of that name, about the year six hundred and two, there was
great controversy and stir for the primacie of the Church. For John Bishop
of Constantinople, was declared and published in a full and solemn Synod of
the Grecians, universal Patriarch, and the Emperor Mauritius commanded
Gregory to obey the said Patriarch of Constantinople. But Gregory would not
endure or suffer this presumption, that any Bishop should be an universal
bishop over the rest: and in his Epistles he yields reasons thereof. First he
says: Greg. lib. 6. epist. 76. Greg. lib. 6. epist. 86.
If he fall that is called the universal Bishop, the whole church falls
from her estate. Secondly: None of my predecessors has ever desired to have or
use this profane word. For if there be one Patriarch that is called
universal, the name of Patriarch shall be taken from all the rest. To consent
to this execrable and accursed name, is no other thing, but to betray the
faith, and to destroy Christianity. Thirdly: Greg. lib. 7. epist. 196.
I speak freely and boldly, that whosoever calls him self universal
Bishop, or desires to be called by that name, the same is in his pride the
forerunner of Antichrist, because that by his pride he prefers himself
before all.

This controversy being between these two Patriarchs of Rome and of
Constantinople, it fell out and was agreed, that the Patriarch of
Constantinople, was appointed head of the Churches of the East, and the
Patriarch of Rome head of the Churches of the West: and this latter was
afterward so established, and lifted up by Phocas, about the year 604. (as we
have declared in the seventh Chapter) that he was created Pope and universal
Bishop of all Churches.

And as touching the name pope, it has bin heretofore generally attributed and
given to all Bishops, as may be proved by these testimonies. Aurelius Bishop
of Carthage, is called by this name Pope, in the beginning of the council
holden at the said Carthage: of which council he was President. In the
hundredth fifty and one Chapter of the same chuncell, Innocentius Bishop of
Alexandria, is called Pope. Saint Cyprian in certain Epistles which he writ
to the same Bishop, calls him Pope. The Elders and Deacons of Rome, Cyprian.
lib 2. Epist. 7.
called Cyprian Pope in their Epistles. Saint Jerome oftentimes calls
Augustine Pope, in his epistles. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria in the third
Epistle to Philemon, calls Heraclas his predecessor, Pope, as we may see in
Eusebius his seventh book, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 7.
and seventh chapter. There may be many such like testimonies found, which
declare that the name Pope was in ancient time common to all Bishops. If the
question be, touching the signification of the name, Suidas says, that it
signifies in the language of Syracuse, as much as father. But we have disputed
and discoursed heretofore, largely enough of this primacie.

Now let us return to our first purpose and speech, who is he that has
ordained these orders and ecclesiastical degrees? by what door have these
pastors entered, into the Lords sheepefolde? who has called and placed them in
their charges? was Jesus Christ (who is the chief sheepehearde, the Prince of
Prophets, the wisdom of the father) so ill advised, or so careless that he
has not placed so many degrees, and offices in his Church, as he saw and
knew to be needful, for the rule and government thereof, seeing he loved
it so much, and esteemed it so dear and precious unto himself, that he
delivered himself unto the most cruel and most shameful death of all others,
to save it? Let these reverend Prelates put down their authors: Let them show
from whence they are come, and from whom it is, that they be as it were
installed, established, and set in the Church. Let them bring forth and
allege the word of GOD if they can, or if they can not, let them leave off
and cease at the least, to strengthen them selves so much with their
succession, and so often to oppose, and set against us, their vocation and
sending.

The end where fore the lord sent his work men into his harvest. Mat. 28.19
Mark. 16.15. 1. Cor. 11 23.24. Ioh. 12.15. Act. 20.28.
But will we examine the end, or which the Lord of the harvest, has sent forth
his workmen into his harvest? He him self has declared it, when he commanded
the^ to preach the Gospel, and to minister the Sacraments after his example.
Which in an other place is signified by the word of feeding the sheep, even
as Jesus Christ said unto peter: Peter love thou me? feed my sheep. And
Saint Paul speaking to the Bishop of Ephesus: Take heed to your self (says
he) and to all the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you Bishop or
overseers, to feed the Church of God. Also S. Peter. The elders which are
amongst you, I beseech, 1. Pet. 5.1.2.
who am also a fellow elder, feed the flock of Christ, which is committed to
you. Wherefore cursing and woe is by the Lord pronounced, against the Pastors
which feed themselves, Ezech. 34.2.
and feed not their flocks or sheep. And Saint Paul having regards thereto,
says in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 1. 8.
That he was called and sent by Jesus Christ, to preach the Gospel of God.
And to the Corinthians: Necessity (says he) to preach the Gospel, 1. Cor.
6.17
is laid upon me, and woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, because the
dispensation thereof is committed unto me. In the Epistle to the Hebrews it is
said, Heb. 13.17.
that the pastors and guiders of the Church, ought to watch for the souls of
them, that are committed unto them, as they that must give account thereof. And
that is it that the word bishop imports, and means, that is to say, a
watch man, or an ouerwatcher, because the pastors ought to be as it were
watches, or watch men, according to the Prophecy of Ezechiel, Ezech. 3.15 33.3.
that they may watch over the flock.

Saint Paul in other words sets out this end, Ephesians. 4.11.12
when he says to the Ephesians, That Jesus Christ has given Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body
of Christ, 1. Cor. 4.1.2
that is to say, the Church. And writing unto the Corinthians he says in one
word, That it is required of the Ministers of Christ, who are the disposers
of the secrets of God, that every man be found faithful, behauing himself
faithfully, diligently, and rightly, in the execution of his charge and office.

Now according to this rule, can the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and other
priests of the Romish Church say, that they occupy themselves in their
charges, to feed the flock of Christ, to preach the Gospel, to administer
the sacraments, to assemble the saints, to give over themselves wholly to the
work of the ministry, to edify the Church? How do they satisfy and
answer the ordinance and commandment of Jesus Christ? How can they excuse
them selves, that they should not be almost all accursed, according to the
testimony of Ezechiel and Saint Paul, whereof we spoke, not long sithence?
what can they say or allege for themselves, that they should not be
excommunicated and deposed, if the canons, which they attribute to the Apostles
(of which we spoke in the fifth Chapter) were well and rightlye observed
amongst them, as they say they should be indeed?

But behold their ungodliness: they say that they exercise and execute their
foresaid offices and charges by their Vicars and deputies, whom they have
substituted and appointed under them in their places over their parishioners.
Yea but when Jesus Christ called and sent forth his Apostles, did he say unto
them, go and be the pastors of my Church, teaching it and feeding, by Vicars,
substituts and lieuetenants, which you shall put in your places? It is certain
that he did not so, but he gave unto them in their own persons, the special
charge of his Church, and commanded them in plain and express terms, to
preach the Gospel them selves, and to administer the Sacraments. Moreover
what sufficient Vicars or Deputies are they wont to have, and how faithful,
meet and able to do the duty of Pastors? Such Bishops and persons, such
Vicars and Lieuetenants, that is to say, one of them as ignorant, foolish and
unskillful as the other, But why do they take upon them the name and charge
of an office, which they will not exercise and execute? why take they the hyre
wages and revenue of that labor and work, which at no hand they do, neither in
deed will do? For they have no care to have Vicars and Liefetenants, but that
thereby they may enjoy prebendes, and the revenues of their benefices, and yet
they will seem to have them, as though it were to do their duties.

Yea which is more then this, they make accursed and more then profane division
of their offices, between them and their Friars, vilanously separating that
which Jesus Christ has joined together: For to whom was it, that Jesus
Christ committed the office to minister the Sacraments, but even to them
themselves, and to them alone also, whom he enjoined and commanded to
preach the Gospel? But these men, to wit, the Bishops, parsons, and other
Priests, do reserve unto themselves the administration of the sacraments, such
as they have, with the rents and revenues of their bishoprics, parsonages,
and other benefices, and post over the charge and office of preaching the word
unto the Friars, leaving them the bag, wallet, and staff, whatsoever by
begging they can get for their hyre and wages. But seeing that they leave unto
the friars the office of preaching, why do they not leave unto them also the
office and charge to administer the Sacraments? For these two offices are
joined together, and may not at any hand be separated or sundred one of them
from an other. Notwithstanding, there is in the popedom a plain prohibition
and forbidding, that friars, in as much as they are friars, should meddle with
or take upon them to administer any Sacrament, except they be such as have
charge, or unless they be dispensed withal for the doing of it. But why
then are they suffered to preach? For this is to do against the ordinance and
institution of Christ, and to divide and sunder things, which he has joined
together. Or seeing, that they are come so far, as to forbid friars to
administer the sacraments, why do they suffer them to say mass, seeing that
they all hold and affirm, that the mass, is the Sacrament of the holy supper,
which for this cause also they call, The Sacrament of the altar.

Indeed to speak according to the truth, making also an end at the length of
this matter, these men cannot after any manner whatseouer, vaunt or boast
themselves, to be true bishops and pastors, seeing they are not called by
Christ to such offices, and that they do not any manner of way exercise duties
and charges, according to the ordinance and co^mandememt of the Lord of the
harvest.

The X. CHAP.
Whether the ministry of the word, be always necessary in the Church: and
how much men ought to attribute or give unto it.

AFter that we have spoken of the diverse degrees of ministers in the church,
and of their charges and offices, it shall be very meet and requisite that we
declare, whether the ministry of the word be always necessary and
needful in the Church or no. For there are some which do despise it, and
utterly disallowe the same, as though it were superfluous, unprofitable, and
vain, whose arguments and reasons we must first examine, and afterward we
will allege and bring forth our reasons and warrantes against them.

Their first argument is this: The holy Ghost is our inward doctor, 1. John.
1.20 John. 16.13.
who teaches us all things, and leads or brings us to the knowledge of
all truth: It follows then, that we have not any need of the outward
ministry, neither that any do teach us with the lively or living voice.

I answer that the consequent is false, and that the argument is captious and
sophistical, by reason of the insufficient numbering or reckoning of causes. For
there are three very right causes, by which we are guided and led to the
knowledge of the truth. The first is the holy ghost: the second is, the outward
ministry of the word: The third is our will, (but yet regenerated) agreeing
with these two. Now of these three causes or means we are not to despise any
one, seeing that God by the^, will accomplish and bring to pass, his own work
in us. Wherefore, although it he the proper and peculiar office of ye holy
spirit, to lighten us within, and to lead us to the knowledge of the truth, yet
so it is notwitstanding, that the outward ministry of the word is not
unprofitable, because that god uses the same as an inferior or secondary
mean, for the above named effect and purpose. And indeed the preaching of the
word, and the administration of Sacraments, do then show and bring forth
their effect and power, when the holy ghost joins his withal, by the which
only the ears are pierced, the hearts opened, the affections touched, and the
wills disposed and prepared, thereby to give an entrance to the outward
ministry: insomuch that if this inward master or teacher do fail us, the
outward ministry can no more profit our souls, than the light of the Sun
helps blind eyes, or than a voice which sounds loud, profits deaf ears.
In the mean while, the outward ministry is not unprofitable or vain, when
the operation of the holy Ghost is joined therewith, working within, but is
full of virtue, efficacy and power, even as it pleases God to bless it.

The second argument is. Those which know all things, and have not need that
any should teach them, have nothing to do with the outward ministry: but the
faithful know all things (as S. John says, 1. Ioh. 2.20.27.
) and have no need that any should teach them. It follows the^, that the
faithful have nothing to do with the outward ministry.

I answer, that the place of S. John, is very ill and peruersly applied. For
when he says, that the faithful (to whom he writ) knew all things, first
this ought to be referred to that which he had before said, in the 14.
verse. to wit, 1. John. 2.14.
that they knew the father (for he that knows the father, certainly knows
all, because the father is known in his son) in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3.
as says Saint Paul. And therefore also the same Apostle declares to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 2.2.
that he esteemed not to know any thing among the^, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified.

Secondly when he says, that they knew all things, it is as if he had said,
that they were not young scholars, rude, and ignorant, but expert and well
skilled in the matters, which he propounded and set forth unto the^: and that
therefore he did not set out these points to them, as though they were
altogether unknown to the^, but that he did only bring these things to their
minds, that they might remember them. As S. Peter writes unto the faithful. 2.
Pet. 1.12.
I Will not be negligent (says he) to put you always in remembrance of these
things, though that ye have knowledge, and be established in the present truth.

Finally, when he says, that they had no need that any should teach them,
this ought not to be read alone by it self, but ought to be joined with that
which follows, to wit, 1. John. 2. 27
but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and it is true, and is
not lying: As if he would say: you have been taught of the holy ghost, who is
always true, and no manner of way a liar. You then have not need, that any
should teach you some other matter, as they are wont to do which teach for
doctrine man's inventions, but if any do teach you, that he follow that which
the holy ghost has taught you, in whose doctrine it behooves you always to
abide.

The third argument: the Lord says thus. And they shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, Iere. 31.34.
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of the^. This promise must be referred
to the state of the Church under the new Testament: and therefore it follows,
that the ministry of the word, ought not any more to have place now in the
church. I answer, that the application of the place of Jeremy, is altogether
contrary to the meaning, intent, and purpose of the holy ghost. For first and
foremost the Lord making comparison between the old people and the new,
means not any other thing, but that under the Gospel he would send unto
his people so great a light, by the means of Jesus christ his son, that his
knowledge should be common and familiar to all, whereas under the law, he
manifested and declared himself darkely, and that under certain shadows and
figures. As indeed the ancient people, yt is to say, they which were in the
time of the old Testament, were not so familiarly, plainly, and perfectly
taught, as we be at this day* by reason whereof also the Prophet Malachie
calls Jesus Christ, the son of righteousness, Malac. 4.^.
signifiyng thereby, that the fathers under the law, had indeed some light, but
yet not such a light as we, through his goodness have at this day. Furthermore
we must mark yt the lord does not say simply: They shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, but he adds, saying: Know the
Lord. By which restriction, or restraining it into a narrow room, he plainly
declares, that he promises to his children such a knowledge, that they
shall not be any more learners of the A.B.C. neither young scholars in the
doctrine of salvation. For these words. Know the Lord, denote and point out the
first rudiments or instructions of faith, and of the heavenly doctrine. And
indeed, if we well weigh and mark, how rude, gross and ignorant the old
fathers were, we shall find that they were as it were, little children, even as
S. Paul says, Gal. 4. 1. etc.
and as yet in their A.B.C But God has showed unto us, a far greater grace,
because that we have a more manifest, clear, and shining light, to lead us
to the knowledge of God, and of the mysteries of our salvation. For this cause
Jesus Christ said: Mat. 13.16.17. Luke. 10.23 24.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears for they hear. For verily
I say unto you, that many Kings, Prophets, and righteous men, have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those
things which you hear, and have not heard them. In sum the Lord promises
here, that his people shall not be found so gross and ignorant, under the
new conuenant or Testament, that they shall have need of the principles and
beginnings of christian doctrine. But if we would not take this place in this
sense, how shall we expound an other of Isaiah, which seems to be contrary
to this? He says: It shall be in the last days, Isai. 2.2. 3.
that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall
flow unto it, and many people shall go and say, Come, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways. It is certain that he prophesies eue^ as Jeremiah, of the grace of
God, which should be made manifest through Jesus Christ in the time of the
Gospel. Now one of them says: Every one shall not teach his neighbor, for
they shall all know the Lord: The other says: The people shall run
together and say: Come, Let us go up to the mountains of the Lord, and he
shall teach us his ways. How shall we make these two places agree, seeing
that both of them prophecy of one and the self same thing? Verily Jeremiah
means, that the people of God shall be in such sort lightened under the new
Testament, by the light of the Gospel, that they shall have no more need of
the rudimentes or first instructions of religion, neither to be so taught as
the old people were, by the shadows and ceremonies of the law. And as
touching Isaiah, he means that under the same New Testament, the people
shall (though they be well advanced and instructed in the points of Christian
doctrine) notwithstanding diligently endeavor, more and more to advance
themselves, and grow forward therein, and that for that purpose, they shall
continually exhort one another, to the end they may better profit in the
knowledge of the law.

Joel. 2.28. 49.
The fourth argument. It is written in Joel: At that time, (that is to say, in
the time of the new Testament) I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh,
says the Lord, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old
men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions: And also at
that time I will power our my spirit upon the servants, and upon the maids.
Now by this promise, the charge and office to teach, is without any difference
laid upon al, upon fathers and children, upon sons and upon daughters, upon
old folk, and upon young, upon servants and maids: wherefore it follows,
that the ministry of the word, is not necessary in the Church.

I answer, that there is nothing in this argument or reason, but a meet
cauil. It is true, that this prophecy ought to be referred to the kingdom and
coming of Jesus Christ, and that the gift of prophesying should then be common,
both to men and women, to old and young, and to be short to all estates. But in
the first place this is to be marked, yt the prophet speaks here by
comparison, using a figure commonly called Hyperbole, that is to say, a manner
of speehe very excessive, because of our wearisomnes, slacknesse and
negligence, for he does not presently promise, that al under the Gospel, from
the first to the last, shall be partakers of this gift, but in respect of the
old people under the law. For if we compare, the estate and condition of the
old Church, with the singular treasures, which God has powered out, and given
unto his people, after the manifestation and revealing of Jesus Christ, we
shall find, that in this latter time, the Lord has spread abroad, and
powered out the gifts of his spirit upon all flesh, that is to say, almost
upon all men, when as under the law, a very small number was partakers
thereof. Wherefore when he says, That the Lord will power out his spirit upon
all flesh, this particle or word all, is not here taken in his proper
signification, as though it were simply and altogether universal, but is
indefinite, and must be referred to all estates and conditions of people, and
not to every singular person: as in this sentence of S. Paul, where it is
said: 1. Tim. 2.4.
that God will have all men to be saved, that is to say, all persons, of what
quality, and condition soever they be. And in that place of Saint Matthewe,
where he says, Mat. 4.23.
that Jesus Christ being in Galilee healed all sickness, and all diseases
among the people: That is to say, all sorts of sickenesses and diseases. And
indeed Saint Peter, in the second Chapter of the Acts, Act. 2.16.17
makes this sense manifest and plain unto us, when he says, that this
prophecy was then accomplished when Jesus Christ sent his holy spirit, upon
the Apostles. Now we know that all flesh, that is to say all men, were not
at that time endued, with the gift of prophecy.

Secondly. The Prophet speaks not here, of the public office and charge to
teach, but of the particular duty of every one, calling them generally
Prophets, who in the time of the Gospel should be indewed, with so great
light of doctrine, that they might after a sort be compared with the ancient
prophets. Whereunto also must be referred the place of Jeremiah, Iere. 31. 34.
which we have expounded in the former argument, Mala. 4.2. Mat. 13.16.17.
and likewise the place of Malachie and of Jesus Christ in the 13. of Saint
Matthewe. It is not then without cause, that Joel attributes, this title or
name of Prophet, to them, who have no public charge or office to teach, but
are only enlightened by the holy spirit, and the preaching of the Gospel:
because that this light is far more excellent, then the gift of Prophecy it
self was in diverse who lived under the law. 1. These. 5.11
And also though we are bound, to exhort one another, and to teach one
another in the doctrine of godliness, and the fear of God, yet for all that
the public ministry of the word, is not superfluous or vain in the
Church. For the self same God, that has commanded fathers, to instruct their
children, and all us to admonish one an other, has also ordained the public
ministry of the word in the Church, that it may be there practiced and
exercised, not for some few years only, but even unto the end of the world.

And thus much touching the arguments of the adversaries and such as set the^
selves aga^inst the ministry of the Church. Now let us bring forth our
reasons to prove the contrary.

The first reason is: Jesus Christ has commanded that the Gospel should be
preached, and the Sacraments administered in the Church unto the end of the
world. Then it follows, that the ministry is always requisite and
necessary in the Church. I prove the Antecedent or former proposition by these
words of Christ, written in the last Chapter of Saint Matthewe: Go and teach
all nations, Mat. 28.19.20.
baptising them, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, teaching the^ to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, and behold I
am with you unto the worlds end. For after the commandment to preach the
word and to administer Baptism (under which Sacrament, the other also of the
holy Supper is contained) because the Disciples might doubt or fear their
charge, as being great in labor, and hard to execute, Jesus Christ adds a
promise of his assistaunce not for ten or twenty years only, but for
always, even unto the end of the world. Wherein he manifestly sets out
and declares two things. One, that he wills and ordeineth, that the
ministry be exercised in the Church, not for one age only, but continually
unto ye consummation and end of all things. The other is, that he promises,
that although Satan subtillie devise and invent and practice all that he can,
to hinder the ministry and the work of Gods servants, and the tyrants by
their practices and violences, enforce the^ selves, to the uttermost of their
power, to overthrow, and to bring to naught the church of God, yet he will by
his godly and heavenly power, always maintain his truth in the world, and
preserve his Church therein by the ministry and labor of his faithful
pastors.

The second reason: Romans 1^.17.
The Apostle Saint Paul says to the Romans, That faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. Whereby he declares, that God has accustomed
to plant faith in our hearts by the preaching of his word. It is true, that
the power of God is not tied to this outward mean, but that he is able to
beget faith in us after some other fashion, and by some other mean (although
it be to us incomprehensible) even as it shall please him self: but
notwithstanding all this, the ministry of his word, is the ordinary mean,
which he uses or serves himself with, to give us faith by, so that they
which will have faith, without the preaching and hearing of the word, do as
much as though they would live, without meats and drinks which God has
ordained for our bodily life. Now hereupon we take and frame our argument thus.

Faith is in all times, and always necessary for men.

But faith is given unto men from God, by the ministry of the word.

Therefore it follows, that the ministry of the word, is in all times, and
always necessary for men.

The third reason: It is certain, that for as much as the Sacraments are
ordained by God, to be as it were seals of the word, to seal in our hearts
that which is therein contained already, that is to say the union, fellowship,
and partaking, which we have in Jesus Christ, it follows, that where there
is not the word of God preached, there we cannot have any Sacrament. For as a
seal is altogether unprofitable, yea is not allowed a seal, unless be bound
or set to some instrument or writing, for the confirmation thereof: even so the
Sacrament is altogether unprofitable, yea indeed is not a Sacrament, if it be
not joined with the word of God preached, to confirm the same unto us.
Whereupon Saint Augustine has sometimes said: Augu. sup. Johan. Hom. 13.
Let the word be joined to the Sacrament, and there shall be made a Sacrament.
Of what word speaks he? verily not of a word mumbled up, murmured or
whispered without understanding over the Elements, but of the word of God
preached to the faithful, and received of them through faith, as he himself
makes it plain, wlien speaking of baptism, he adds, this is the word of
faith which we preach, by which baptism is consecrated and hallowed, 1. Cor.
11.^^
to have power to make clean. Now from that which is above said, we reason
after this manner.

The administration of the holy Supper, is always necessary in the Church,
even unto the end of the world, for Jesus Christ has commanded us to
celebrate it, and by that means to preach or show forth his death until his
coming again.

But the administration of the supper can not be performed without the
ministry of the word.

Therefore it follows, that the ministry of the word, is always
necessary in the Church.

The fourth reason: Jesus Christ has given and established the ministers of
the word, Ephe. 14.11.
for the work of the ministry, till we all meet together (in the unity of
faith and knowledge of the son of GOD) unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, that is to say, till that Christ
be perfect in us, and have in us his full grouth and increase. But we can not
obtain such perfection unto the end of the world, at what time GOD shall
be all in all. For as Saint Paul says, We know in part, and we prophecy
in part. But when that which is perfect is come, 2. Cor. 13. 9.10.
then that which is in part shall be abolished. Wherefore it follows, that
Jesus Christ has given and placed the ministers of the word, for the work
of the ministry, until the end of the world, and then God shall be all in
all.

These reasons are sufficient for this present, to teach and prove that the
holy ministry, is continually requisite and necessary in the Church: as
indeed, the Lord has for our good and salvation established the same, to
abide in all ages, therein applying and framing himself, to our weakness,
which is so great (we being corrupted thorough sin) that without this means
meet and agreeable to our nature, we could not be well instructed in the
points of our salvation. For if God should speak unto us in his majesty, we
could not at any hand away with or abide his presence, as we may see it, by
those, that when he was minded to publishe and to give his law, the people
themselves being astonished, with his greatness and majesty, said unto Moses,
Exodus 20.16 Deuteronomy. 5.29.29.
Talk thou with us, and we will hear. But let not the Lord talk with us, lest
we die: And God accepting this their request, said unto Moses, I have heard
the words of the voice of this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they
have well said, all that they have spoken. Oh that there were such a heart in
them to fear me, and to keep al my commandments always, that it might go
well with them, and with their children for ever. Go, say unto them, return
into your tents, but stand thou here with me, and I will tell thee all the
commandments, and the ordinances, Deuteronomy. 5.30.31.
and the laws, which thou shall teach them, that they may do them, etc.
Wherefore God yielded unto this people their request, to wit, that they might
be taught, by the ministry of Moses. And sithence that time, it was yet his
good pleasure, to have continued, and that unto the end, this manner of
instructing and teaching his Church, by the ministry of men, which order men
them selves did require and choose: in so much, that when God himself sent
Jesus Christ his son, Mark. 1.38 Heb. 2.16.
to preach the Gospel, he appointed him, to take upon him, not the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, that he might be like unto us in all things,
yet without sin. And Christ himself ascending to heaven, committed unto his
Apostles (who were men as we) the office and charge to teach us. Act. 14.15.
And since that time, this order has continued, and is common and ordinary in
the Church, and can not be separated from the Church, to wit, that God does
teach us, by the ministry of men, as by his instruments, which are most
profitable, Act. 8.27. etc.
familiar and easy to us. The Eunuch of Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, tead
in his chariot the holy scriptures: and no doubt, the Lord could very well
have instructed him, in the mysteries of faith, by the secret virtue and power
of his holy spirit, but yet he delighted rather to have it done by the
ministry of Phillip, and liked better thereof. Act. 10.1.2. etc.
Cornelius the Centurion, to the end he might be more fully instructed in the
knowledge of the Gospel, was sent back (as it were) from the Angel to Saint
Peter: He shall tell thee (says the Angel) what thou ought to do. Yea
Saint Paul himself, although that the Lord had spoken unto him with his own
mouth, was yet notwithstanding sent back (as it were) to Ananias, Act. 9.3.4.
etc.
that he might be instructed, and receive the holy Ghost, and be baptized.
Wherefore they that do cast from them, or disallow the ministry of the
Church, hanging upon, and loking for angelical and divine revelations, to
instruct them, do not only deceive themselves, but also violate and break
the order, which God has established in his Church, for our salvation.

Now there remains, to see and know how much we ought to defer and give
to the ministry, for if they be deceived which despise it, and do not their
duty in that behalf, which they ought, they are deceived also, which
attribute or give over much unto it. Wherefore we say, that we ought not to
give to it, either more or less, than that which belongs thereto, and that
as it is good reason that the authority and credit thereof, should be
reserved unto it self safe and sound, so we ought to take good heed of
this, that we pull not from God the honor which is due unto him. For this
purpose and point, we must diligently observe and mark this distinction.

Sometimes man is compared with God, when the minister is mentioned or spoken
of, and then it is said, that he is not able to do any thing at all, and that
his labor or work is altogether unprofitable. As when Saint Paul says: 1.
Cor. 3.7.
Neither is he that planteth, any thing, neither is he that waters, but God
that gives the increase. For what can man have in himself, if he would enter
into this, to part or divide a matter between God and himself? we must
therefore take heed of this, not so much as once to think, that the virtue
and power of the holy Ghost, should be tied and bound to the ministry of
men, as though without it god could not work in men's hearts, even as shall
please himself, as we see that they of the Romish Church suppose and think,
as appears in this, that they spare not to affirm, that in child die
without baptism administered by man, it cannot be saved: and on the other
side, that they which receive the outward signs from the ministers hands,
receive by and by the grace of God, which is tied to those signs. But god
says by his prophets, That it belongs to him, Iere. 31. 33. Ezech. 11. 19
Iere. 32.40. Isai. 43.25.
to write his law in men's hearts, to take away from them their stony hearts,
and to give them hearts of flesh, to renew within them a new spirit, to put
his fear in their hearts, that they should not depart from. Shortly: That it
is he alone, Luke 5.21.
to whom it belongs to pardon sins, and to save. And we hear that which
Saint Paul says, That it appertains to GOD, 1 Cor. 3.7.
to give the increase to that which the ministers plant and water: And Jesus
Christ: Ioh. 6.44 65
That none can come unto him, except his father draw him.

Sometimes also the scripture speaks of man, without comparing God and him
together, and then, in respect that God uses his ministry, to accomplish
his own work by, that is attributed to him, which is proper and peculiar to
God. As when it is said, 1. Cor. 3.
that the ministers plant and build Churches, 1. Cor. 3.6. Philemon 10 Luke
1.16. Ioh. 20. 23. Jude. 1.23.
that they beget men, and win them to God, that they turn men's hearts, that
they remit and retain sins, that they save. All this must be understood in
that they are the instruments, and as it were the hand of God, to bring all
these things to pass by: for then the question is not, of that which man
does by his own virtue and power, but of that which God works by the hand
and ministry of man. Wherefore GOD is always the efficient or working cause
of our salvation, and man, together with the word of God, which he propounds
and preaches unto us, is nothing else, but the instrument and minister,
wherewith God serves himself, or which he uses for the perfourmaunce of so
excellent a work. Whereupon it follows, that they which despise and reject
the ministry which God has ordained, do despise and reject God himself.
For this cause Jesus Christ says: Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me, and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me. And Saint Paul writing to the
Corinthians, declares right well, in what authority, reverence, and account,
we ought to have the ministry of the word, when he says, That GOD has
committed unto the Pastors and ministers of the Church, 2. Cor. 5.18.
the embassage or ministry of reconciliation. And writing to the
Thessalonians: 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13
We thank God without ceasing, that when ye received of us the word of the
preaching of God, ye received it, not as the word of man, but (as it is
indeed) the word of God, which also works in you that believe. It is for the
very self same reason, that speaking unto the Romans of the word preached by
the ministers, he says: Romans 8.18
That the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to all that believe. And to
the Corinthians, that Though the word or preaching of the cross be to them
that perish foolishness, 1. Cor. 1.1^
yet it cease not to be the power of God to us which obtain salvation. Now
the preaching of the word is so called by Saint Paul, because it is the
powerful and effectual instrument, which GOD uses to save us. And for this
cause, it is called also by Isaiah, Isa. 53. 1.
The arm of the Lord.

In sum, we ought diligently to take heed to, and to regard that which S.
Paul says unto the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 3.9^
We together are Gods laborers, ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods building: in
so much that we always set before us two things, when the question or dispute
shall be, touching the ministry: that is to say, on the one side, the minister
that shall speak and preach unto us, and minister the Sacrament unto us: and on
the other side God, who works inwardly in our hearts, and indeed
accomplisheth and fulfilleth in us, that which the minister speaks unto us,
and does outwardly represent and show unto us. As we have a notable example
thereof in the 16. of the Acts, where it is said: Act. 16. 14.
that as S. Paul preached the word of God to Lydia, a seller of purple, God was
he alone which opened her heart, that she attained unto and understood the
things which Paul spoke.

CHAP, XI.
Of the holiness of the Church.

WE have seen and heard heretofore, that the Church is the company of
faithful people, which is also called the communion or fellowship of the
Saints and holy ones. The Church therefore is holy, because it is compacted or
made of Saints or holy ones. But here we must mark four points.

The first is, how and in what sense, we are called Saints or holy ones it is
not as the idiots or ignorant people understand it, who by Saints, mean none
other, but those which are already dead, and so canonised by the Pope, or else
the Priests and Friars, clad in white, or black and girded with a rope. But
by saints we understand them, who being elected from before all
euerlastingnes of time, are in their time (that is to say, in the time which
God has appointed them, before the foundations of the world were laid)
sanctified by GOD, through Jesus Christ, and clothed with true faith. Now such
are all true Christians and faithful people.

The second: that it is not of our selves that we are Saints, or holy ones,
Psa. 51.5. etc Genesis 8.21.
neither of our own nature, for by our own nature all we are altogether
corrupted, and the children of wrath. But we are saints, Romans 8.6. etc Ephe.
2.3. Ioh. 17.19.
because Jesus Christ has sanctified us, as he him self says in Saint
John, For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified
through the truth. Now he has sanctified us by the virtue and power of his
holy spirit, which by reason of this effect is called the spirit of
sanctification. Romans 1.4.
And this is that which Saint Paul means, when he says, Ephe. 5.25.26.27.
that Jesus Christ has redeemed his Church, and has sanctified it, that he
might make it unto him self, a glorious Church.

Now this sanctification of holiness, is brought to pass, first by the
imputation or account of Christ's righteousness unto us, for he was given
unto us by the Father, 1. Cor. 1.
to be our sanctification. Secondly, by the purging or cleansing of our
filthinesses, that is to say, by the forgiveness of our sins in the blood of
Jesus Christ, as Saint Paul declares it in the Corinthians, when he says,
1. Cor. 6.5.10.11.
Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers,
nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God, and such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. And indeed Saint Paul
in an other place shows, that filthiness is opposed and set against
sanctification and holiness, when he says to the Romans: Romans 6.19.
As you have given your members servants to uncleanness and iniquity, to
commit iniquity: so now give your members servants unto righteousness in
holiness. Also to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4.^
God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

The third point is, That the holiness of the Church is not at any time
perfect, so long as she trauelleth and fights in this world: which mayor
I prove thus.

First, if the Church were without spot in this world, in vain has our
Savior Christ taught it always to pray, Mat. 6.12.
forgive us our trespasses, and sins. But the Lord Jesus has not without
good cause given us such doctrine and instruction, wherefore it follows that
the Church, is not in this world without spot, yea rather that she has
continual need always for to pray unto God, that she may be more and more
sanctified and obtain the forgiveness of all her sins.

Secondly, these which are without spot and wrinckle, have nothing to do with
any washing, because they have no need thereof. But the faithful although
they be washed, have notwithstanding need yet of washing still, as Jesus
Christ himself declares it unto us, Ioh. 13.10.
when he says, He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet. For by
the washing of the feet, he means a continual sanctification. It follows
then that the faithful are not in this world without spot.

1. Cor. 1.2
Thirdly, Saint Paul cease nor, to adorn and bewtifie the Corinthians, with
the title of the Church, who notwithstanding grievously abused the holy supper
of the Lord, and had amongst them divisions, and partakings, which are not
small faults, yea indeed they were in doubt also, touching the resurrection of
the dead. Gal. 1.2.
Also he names the assembly of the Galathians, the Church, although that
poor people were deceived by false Prophets, and carried away to another
gospel, contrary unto that, which he had preached unto them. These places do
manifestlye declare that the Church is never so pure and perfect in this
world, but that it has always need to be more and more purged and
sanctified. Which thing Saint Paul shows yet more plainly, and openly, when
he writes unto the Thessalonians. For he calls them the Church, 1. These.
1.1 1 These. 5.23
and yet he prays unto God for them, that he would sanctify the^ throughout.

True it is that the Nouatians, Donatists, and Anabaptists (who do not agree
with us, in this point) are not without their replies For first, they allege
unto us that which S. Paul writes unto the Ephesians: That Jesus Christ gave
himself for his church, EPhe. 5.25 26. 27.
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, that he might make it unto
himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinckle, but that it should
be holy and without blame.

But we want not an answer also. Saint Paul considers the Church not in
her self, but in Jesus Christ her head, which she takes hold of by
faith: So she is said to be without wrinckle and unblameable, by reason, not
of her own righteousness, but of Jesus Christ's righteousness, whereof she
is made partaker, because it pleases God to impute and reckon the same unto
her: for which cause also, it is in another place, 1. Cor. 1.30
that Jesus Christ is made of God the father unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Moreover we might say, that S. Paul speaks of sanctification or holiness
promised, and which is not yet full accomplished, as though he called and
said the Church to be without spot, not that it is so here below on the
earth, but because that one day it shall so be above in heaven. And after this
sort Saint Augustine understands it. August. lib. de nuptiis and concupisc.
cap. 34.
Jesus Christ (says he) cleanses his Church by the washing of Christians,
to make it unto himself, without spot or wrinckle, not in this world, but in
the world to come.

They allege moreover that which Saint John says: 1. Job. 3.6.9.
Whosoever is borne of God sins not.

Whereunto I answer by a distinction. Those that are borne of God, that is to
say, the faithful, sin not, that is to say, serve not sin, or rather sin
does not reign in them, because they do withdraw themselves, as much as they
can, or are enabled, from sin, and with all their heart give them selves to
holiness of life, that they may glorify GOD. And in this sense Saint John
takes it and speaks it. Again they that are borne of God, sin: that is to
say, can not do live so holyly, but that oftentimes they stumble and fall into
sins. For although they be sanctified, yet for all that, by reason of the
relics and remnauntes of nature corrupted, which yet rests and remains
in them, every day they turn aside from the right way, and sin. In this
sense Saint John meant not that which he says, that whosoever is born of God
sins not, for so he should speak against him self, having before said, 1.
Ioh. 1.8.10
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us,
yea we make God a liar, and his word is not in us. So it is then, that though
there seem to be some contrariety between those two, to say, that we are
sinners, and saints both together, yet all agrees together very well, for
every man if we consider him in his own nature, according to which he is
called the child of wrath, he is a sinner worthy of death, and eternal
damnation: but if we consider him in Jesus Christ as a Christian and faithful
man, he is holy, so that he sins not, that is to say, serves not sin,
and his imperfections are hidden and covered, because that they are not imputed
unto him, and moreover the Lord Jesus makes him partaker of his
righteousness. And so being a sinner in respect of his own nature, he is
notwithstanding reputed and accounted holy and just before God.

But that which we have hitherto spoken, touches or concerns the members of
the Church particularly. We may also well say, touching the Church considered
in her own body, that it shall never here be purged from al filthinesses,
because that so long as she shall be on earth, there shall be in her wicked
ones mingled with good ones. Which thing Jesus Christ has declared in the
Gospel, by two similitudes.

Mat. 13.24.25. etc.
In the first he says: that the kingdom of heaven, that is to say, the
Church, is like unto a man, which sowed good seed in his field, but while men
slept, there came his enemy and sowed tares amongst the wheat, and went his
way. And when the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth fruit, then
appeared the tares also. Then came the servant of the household, and said
unto him, Master sowedst thou not etc. And would presently have gone and
gathered them up, but the Lord would not suffer them, least while they went
about to gather the tares, they plucked up also with them the wheat.

Therefore he willed that they might both grow together, until the harvest,
and in the time of harvest, the reapers shall gather the tares, and bind them
in sheaues to burn them, but they shall gather the good corn into the Lords
barn. Afterward, he expounds the said similitude, saying: He that sows
the good seed is the son of man, and the field is the world, Mat. 13.3^.
etc.
the good seed are the children of the kingdom, the tares are the children of
the wicked, and the enemy that sows them is the Devil, the harvest is the
end of the world, and the reapers be the angels. As then (says he) the tares
are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of the world.
The son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth. Then
shall the just men shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their father.

In the second similitude he says, Mat. 13.47. 48.
That the kingdom of heaven is like unto a draw net cast into the Sea, that
gathers of al kind of things: which when it is full the fishers draw to land
on the shore, and put the good by them selves into their vessels, and cast the
bad away. And afterward he gives the exposition thereof: So shall it be
(says he) at the end of the world: Mat. 13.49 50.
The Angels shall go forth, and sever the wicked from amongst the just, and
shall cast them into a furnace of fire, where shall be wayling and gnashing of
teeth.

By these two similitudes Jesus Christ very plainly expresses, what shall
be the visible state and condition of the Church, so long as it shall be on
earth: that is to say, that the wicked shall continually be mingled therein
with the good, and that in such sort, as the tares are amongst the good
wheat in the fields, and as evil fishes are mingled with the good in the
Sea. Whereof follows that which we have said before in the third Chapter, to
wit, that all they which are in the Church, are not for all that of the Church.

And indeed experience has in all ages showed the same unto us, and makes us
to behold the same as yet eue^ every day. Genesis 4. 3. etc
Cain was the first that defiled the Church of God, although he offered
sacrifices in outward show as his just brother Abell did. Noah preached unto
those of his time. And continuing his exercise a long season, (some think six
score years) hardly would his own household believe his word, Genesis 7.1. etc
so that GOD destroying all the world by the flood, only eight persons of the
foresaid Noah's household, were reserved by the mean of the Arc. And even yet
of those eight persons, with whom God had made a new covenant, touching the
establishing again of his Church: Ham, Genesis 9.22.
in his time very manifestly declared his hypocrisy: Amongst the twelve
Apostles, Mat. 27. 3. etc. Act. 1.16. 17. etc. Reave. 2.6. Clemens strom. lib.
3. Eusebius. hist. eccles. lib. 3 cap. 29. 1. John. 2. 19
Judas is found a traitor, and unfaithful: Amongst the seven Deacons, one
Nicholas was an heretic, at the least if that be true that this Nicholas, was
one of the seven Deacons, as Clemens, Alexandrinus and Eusebius certainly
affirm it. Saint John speaking of Antichrists, wherewith the Church was in
his time troubled and tormented, says: They went out from us, but they were
not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. And
what at this day? How many hypocrites and great mungrell Mastiffes, are found
at this day in the outward Church, and are suffered therein? Certainly, there
are very many which are acknowledged and allowed for members of the Church,
of whom GOD (who beholds all men's hearts) does in the mean season judge
otherwise. Wherefore the Church even in this respect, is not at any time in the
world without wrinckle.

The fourth point, which we must note here, is, that our sanctification, is
not performed or wrought al at one time, but there are three degrees or steps
thereof, to the end that it may be perfect.

The first degree is during this life, when that our Lord Jesus Christ gives
us his holy spirit, thereby to resist and withstand the world, the devil,
sin, and our own flesh, to the end that we may love good things, Romans
7.22 23. etc
and hate evil. Hereunto may be applied that which Saint Paul speaks of
himself, writing unto the Romans, in the seventh Chapter, verse 22.23.

The second is after this life, when the soul enjoys the presence of Jesus
Christ, giving it self unto all holiness, but our other part (that is the
body) resting it self in the dust, without being able to apply it self, unto
any thing, to sanctify the name of God by.

The third shall be after the last judgment, when being perfectly joined with
Jesus Christ our head, we shall behold God, even as he is, who shall be all in
all, and that after such manner and sort as S. Paul says, that Christ is made
of GOD unto us wisdom, 1, Cor. 1. 30
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Therefore when that our Lord
Jesus Christ shall so work in us, that there shall be no spot, Philip. 3. 21. 1.
Ioh. 3.2.
but that our very bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and
we shall be like unto him, then truly shall our sanctification be accomplished,
and made perfect, which now is but as it were begun in us.

CHAP, XII.
Whether the Church may err or no.

THis question, to wit, whether the Church can err, has been diverse times
tossed and handled, for the opening and unfolding whereof, we must first
strive to know, after what manner, or in what sense, ye word church is here to
be taken: I mean, whether we must understand this of the Catholic and
universal church, or else of the particular Churches. But the controversy is
not in my judgment, of the Catholic church: for we all agree herein, that
she cannot err as touching faith. And indeed how should she err, seeing
that following Jesus Christ her head and her husband, she walks not in
darkness, but in the light of life? On the other side it is impossible, that
all faithful people universally, even from the first unto the last, should
fall into error, for there have been always some preserved, through the
goodness and grace of GOD, by whom truth it self through other men's
naughtines, brought as it were to nothing, or at the least destituted and
forsaken, has yet notwithstanding been restored to her former force, and is
yet still maintained and preserved.

Wherefore this question is touching a particular church. Touching which it
seems good unto us, in the first place to hear the judgment and reasons, of
the Romish Catholics, upon this that they affirm, that the church so taken
cannot err, following herein the Nouatians, Donatistes, and other heretics.
And afterward, we will show forth, and put down, our advise and reasons, to
prove the contrary.

The Romish Catholics think, that the church cannot err, although she do
and appoint any thing without the word of God, for being guided by the holy
Ghost, she may go and walk without the order and direction of the word, and
although she go and walk, yet she cannot err, or go astray. But they
separate that which ought always to remain and abide joined together, for if
the church follow not the word of God, it is impossible to keep her from
error, as on the other side, if she follow it, therein she does well, and
cannot err. The reasons whereby they would persuade men, that the church cannot
err, are these following.

The first is this: Jesus Christ does not at any time forsake his church,
which is his spouse or wife. Wherefore it follows, that it cannot err.

I answer by a distinction: So far forth, as the church follows Jesus
Christ, it cannot be forsaken of him, and cannot err: but in as much, as it
living in the world, does stray from Christ, and goes aside from gods
commandments, it is forsaken of him and does err.

The second reason: The Church is called The pillar and ground of truth. 1.
Tim. 3.15.
Wherefore it cannot err.

I answer, that there is in this argument a double error, the one touching the
word Church. For Saint Paul means the Catholic Church, and not any
particular one. The other is concerning the meaning of the Apostle. For he
calls the Church, the pillar and ground of truth, not that it is so simply
and indeed of it self, but in respect of us, because that the truth of God,
has not place in the world, save only in the Church. For as much therefore
as God maintains his truth amongst men, Chrysostom. in 3 cap. 1. ad Timoth.
and makes it always to go his right course, by the ministry of the
Church, therefore is the Church called the pillar and ground of the truth. To
be short, because that God himself comes not down from heaven, and does not
every day send his Angels, to maintain his truth among men, and to publish it
to the world, but uses the ministry of the Church, for this effect, that is
to say, the preaching of the word, for this cause it is called the column or
pillar of truth, because that by the preaching of the word, it is retained
amongst men, and countergarded, to the end that it decay not or perish from
the memory or remembrance of men,

The third reason: The Church is governed and guided by the holy Ghost: how
then can it err?

I answer: that so far forth, as the Church is governed by the holy
ghost, suffering it himself to be guided by him and obeys him, she cannot
err, but if she do the contrary, she may err and does err.

The fourth reason. In the kingdom of heaven no error can have any place. Mat.
13.24.16.19.
For truth reigns therein, but the Church is the kingdom of heaven: It
follows then, that in the Church no error can have place.

All this is true of the Catholic Church, yea and of particular Churches also,
so far forth as they show themselves to be the kingdom of heaven, and not
the kingdom of this world, and of the flesh: that is to say, so far forth
as they are assemblies subject in all things to Jesus Christ the king of heaven.
But where is that particular church so obedient to Jesus Christ the king of
heaven, that it erreth not, and fails not, in many points and particular
duties.

The fifth reason: councels cannot err, but the church consists of councels,
therefore the church cannot err.

This Syllogism pretends and labors to prove an uncertain thing, by
another thing, yet more uncertain. For many examples do plainly testify,
that the councels may err, as indeed they have oftentimes erred. And touching
the first: the council that Ahab assembled, of four hundred prophets, did
not it err? It is written that they being come to this wicked king to flatter
him, 1. King. 22.6. etc.
Satan was sent out, by and from God, to be a lying spirit in their mouths:
so all of them, with one consent, condemned the truth: Michaiah alone
withstanding them, who was reproved as an heretic, beaten and put into prison.

John. 11.47
The council which the high Priests and pharisees assembled in Jerusalem
against Jesus Christ, did not it err? we see how they condemned Jesus Christ,
and little regarded: yea much despised his doctrine.

And what shall we say of the councels and Synods, which were held and kept
after the death of the apostles, even unto our age, whereof some have reproved
and undone that, which was established and done by others: for of necessity
either the one or the other have erred, they being repugnant and contrary one
to another. Examples hereof.

The council of Carthage (in which Saint Cyprian was president) did decree,
Con. Cartha.
that those which were baptized by heretics, should be baptized again.
Which decree was broken and overthrown, by an other Council of Carthage
holden after. Con. Cartha.


The second Synod of Ephesus, Synod. Ephe.
consented to Eutiches his error, and embraced the same and received it, in
this, that he confessed in Jesus Christ, but one only nature, that is to say,
the divine nature: which error was afterward confuted and cast down to the
ground, Con. Chalce.
by the general council of Chalcedonia.

The council of Constantinople, Con. Constant.
called by the Emperor Leo, about nine hundred years ago, ordained, that men
should throw down and break in pieces, all the images that were in
Churches: which ordinance, the Council assembled at Nice, Con. Nicen.
by the commandment of Irene, the Emperors mother, was immediately after
broken and cracked, and commandment given, that Images should be set up
again.

Con. Neoces. Con. Maien. Con. Cartha. 2. Con. Nicen.
The Council of Neocesaria, and of Maience, and the second council of Carthage,
did forbid marriage to the ministers and Elders of the Church: The council of
Nice, decreed the contrary, permitting ministers to marry.

Con. Braca. Con. Tole. 3. Con. Roma.
The council of Bracara, did pronounce curse against those, that absteined from
eating flesh: and this decree was confirmed by the third council of Toletum,
but the council of Rome ordained the contrary, forbidding the use of flesh
upon certain days of the year.

August. lib. 2. de Baptis. contra Donatist. cap. 3.
To be short, Saint Augustine plainly declares, that which I speak, to wit,
that councils may err. For he expressly says, that the letters and Epistles of
particular Bishops are corrected by provincial councels, and the provincial
councels, by universal: and the former universal councels annihilated and
disanulled by the latter, when by some certain experience of things, that
which before was secret, is opened, and that which was hidden, is made evident
and plain: neither shall it stand them in any steed at all, to say, that this
place of Augustine ought to be understood of outward and indifferente things,
for Saint Augustine disputes there of a point of doctrine, that is to say, of
the opinion of Saint Cyprian, and of the council of Africa, touching
rebaptisation or baptising again.

Now then in so great diversity, and gainesaying one of another, what shall
we say? To which council shall we give greater faith and credit? For this
we perceive clearly and plainly, that they thus crossing and contrarying one
an other, did not all consent and speak, according to the truth: and that
therefore we must of necessity conclude, that some of them have erred, and
that by their false and erroneous determinations, they have degenerated and
gone astray, from the right way of the word of God.

Certainly it is very meet and requisite, An admonition touching Councels and
Synods
that we should be wise and very well advised, when the question is, either
to set out, or to receive that, which shall be determined by councels and
Synods. For it is altogether manifest and plain, that councels and Synodes may
be deceived. And therefore as touching their decrees and determinations, this
is that we have to say, that we must bring the weight of them, and make it
subject to the balance, that is to say, we must try and examine them by the
word of God, Gala. 1.8.
which is indeed the balance, whereunto not only men are subject, but also the
Angels, as S. Paul teaches in his Epistle to the Galathians.

Wherefore whatsoever we shall find in them conformable, and agreeable, to the
proportion of faith, and agreeing with the authority of the holy scriptures,
we ought to receive the same without any scruple or doubt. But if they
propound unto us, and set out, things contrary to that, we ought and we may
without any difficulty or danger, reject and refuse them, as suspected and
dangerous doctrines. For as Saint Jerome has sometimes said, Hiero^. in 9.
cap. Ierem.
We ought not to follow the errors of our fathers and predecessors, but the
authority of the scriptures, and the commandment of God Who teaches us.
Gerson. par. 1. de exam. doctrine. Abbas Panormita. Epist. de electia one and
elect. potest. cap. 5.
Whereupon also Gerson and Panormitan have concluded, that in matters which
concern faith, the Pope and his Bishops, may not determine and decree any
thing, against the word of God: and that if a general council should come
so far, as to decline, and go aside, either through malice, or through
ignorance of the Gospel, a simple man alleging in that council the word of
God, ought rather to be heard and yielded unto then all they.

Let us enter or come now to our advise, and let us bring forth and allege
our reasons to prove that the Church may err.

The first reason is this: That great company of the people of Israel, which
was in the wilderness, with whom GOD had made a covenant, and had made them
bound unto him, by an infinite number of benefits and good turns, and had
given unto them Sacraments, and Ceremonies, which were, as it were visible
signs of his grace, that great company I say, was a very goodly and a very
excellent Church. But they were vilely deceived and erred fowly, when
forsaking the commandment, they made unto themselves a golden calfe offering
and giving unto it, that honor which was due to God alone, yea and Aaron
himself the high priest, did not so constantly and boldly withstand them as
he ought, but rather consented thereto indeed, wherefore it follows, yt the
church may err and be deceived.

The second reason: The Church in old time did offer and give the holy Supper,
to little infants, staying and grounding themselves, upon the place of Saint
John, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of Man, John. 9.15.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And this custom was in use in
the time of pope Innocent, Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine, as it appears
by their writings.

But now this is not any more used, for children which can not prove and
examine them selves, are not at this day received to the partaking of the
Sacrament. Wherefore the Church in old time has erred, or else it erreth now.
But if we would answer, that the Church has power and authority to change
such customs and manners: I reply to the contrary: for now the question is
not here, of a thing indifferent in the use, but of the word of God, which is
always constant, and not subject to any change, as to say, that to day it has
one sense and understanding, and to morrow another, wherefore if the place of
S. John, command to give the supper to little infants of necessity, as the
forenamed ancient fathers, have understood and expounded the same, the Church
has ^one well in time heretofore to follow that commandment, and at this time
it erreth, in not following it any longer. Or else if the said place, be not to
be referred properly unto the holy Supper, neither commands to distribute
and give the sacrament to infants: but it is of necessity required, that he to
whom we must administer the said sacrament, have knowledge to try and
examine himself, according to Saint Paul's doctrine, 1. Cor. 1.2.
as indeed this is the pure and only truth: it follows then, that the
Church has in former time erred, to admit little infants to the holy supper,
and that at this day it does well to practice the contrary.

The third reason: If the Church could not err, Saint Paul had without
cause feared, 1. Cor. 11.28
least the Corinthians (whom he calls a Church) should through the
subtlety of the serpent be corrupted, 2. Cor. 11.3.
and turned away from the simplicity that is in Christ. And indeed, in vain
should he have called the assemblies of the Corinthians and Galathians, Gala.
1.2.
Churches, which yet notwithstanding erred in doctrine, in faith, in manners,
and in life. But Saint Paul did nothing of all this, without cause, or in
vain, otherwise Saint Paul himself should have been deceived. wherefore it
follows, that the Church may err.

The fourth reason: Those that cannot err, have no need of the forgiveness
of sins: but the Church has need of the forgiveness of sins, for Jesus
Christ giving it a form of prayer, has commanded it, to demand and ask of
God, Mat. 6.12.
forgiveness of their sins. Wherefore it follows that the Church may err.

The fifth reason: The Church which was in old time in Jerusalem, was
oftentimes reproved of error, by the Prophets, which thing declares, that the
Church is not in this world, without will and deed to err. But to the end I
may not be ouerlong, in recyting by peecemeale, and as it were one by one, all
the sentences, which make mention of the falls of the Church, let men read
that, which is written thereof in these places.

Touching the corruption of the church, see Isaiah 1. verse 21. to the 24.
verse. Isaiah.
Isaiah 3. ver. 8.9. Isaiah 5.13. Isaiah 30. verse 9. to the 13. ver. Isaiah
59. ver. 2. unto the 17. ver. Isai. 64. ver. 6.7. Iere. 2 ver. 5. Jeremiah.
to the end of the Chap. Iere. 3. ver. 2.3.20. Iere. 4. ver. 22. Jeremiah 5.
ver. 1. unto the 15. ver. and afterward from the 19. ver. to the end of the
Chapter. Iere. 6. ver. 7. unto the 11. ver. Jeremiah 8. ver. 4. unto the 11.
ver. Jeremiah 9. ver. 3. unto the 17. ver. Jeremiah 13. verse 10. unto the 15.
verse. Jeremiah 22. even unto the end. Jeremiah. 16. ver. 11.12. Jeremiah 18.
ver. 13. unto the 18. ver. Ezechiel 5. ver. 6. unto the 12. Ezechiel.
ver. Ezechiel 22. ver. 3. unto the end of the Chapter. Ezechiel. 33. ver. 24.
unto the 30. Deutro.
ver. Deuteronomie 32. ver. 5.6.32.33.

Touching the ingratitude and unthankfulness of the Church, see Isaiah 1. ver.
2.5. Isaiah.
Isaiah 5.47. Isaiah. 43. ver. 21. unto the end of the chapter. Isaiah 17. ver.
10.11. Jeremiah. Ezechiel. Zachariah. Deuteron. Hosea.
Isaiah 63. ver. 9.10. Ierem. 2. ver. 6.9.21.22. Jeremiah 12. ver. ^. Ezechiel
16. ver. 15. unto the 24. ver. Zachariah 11. ver. 8. unto the end of the
Chapter. Deuteronomie 32. ver. 15.18.23. Hosea 12. ver. 1.9. Hosea 13. ver. 6.
Malachie. 1. ver. 2.8.

Touching the obstinacy and rebellion of the Church, Isaiah.
see Isaiah 1. ver. 5. unto the 7. ver. Isaiah. ^. ver. 9.10. Isaiah 8. ver.
10.11.13.16. Isaiah 26. ver. 10.11. Isaiah 28. ver. 9.12.13. Isaiah 30. ver.
9.15. Isaiah 42. ver. 19.20. Isaiah 48. ver. 4. Isaiah. 65. ver. 11. Jeremiah
2. Ieremi.
ver. 24.29. unto the 33. ver. Jeremiah 5. ver. 3. unto the 8. ver. and ver.
20. of the same chap. unto ver. 25. Jeremiah. 6. ver. 10. in every verse
almost unto the end of the Chapter. Jeremiah 7. ver. 24. unto the 28. ver.
Jeremiah 8. ver. 4. unto. ver. 8. Jeremiah 17. ver. 1.23. Jeremiah 10. ver.
11.15. Jeremiah 25. ver. 4.8. Jeremiah 29. ver. 17.20. Jeremiah 35. ver. 13.16.
Jeremiah 43. ver. 2. Jeremiah 44. ver. 7.10.11.16.20. Ezechiel 2. Ezechi.
ver. 3. unto the end of the chapter. Ezechiel 3. ver. 5.10.26.27. Ezechiel. 4.
ver. 3. Hosea.
Ezechiel 12. ver. 2. Hosea 4. througout the whole Chapter. Hosea 5. ver. 4.
Amos 4. Amos. Zephaniah. Zachariah. Proverbs. Matthew.
ver. 6. unto the end of the Chapter. Zephaniah 3. ver. 5. Zechariah 7. ver.
11. unto the end. Proverbs 1. ve. 24. unto the end. Matthew 11. ver. 16.17.21.
and so unto the 25. ver. Matthew. 12. ver. 41.42. Mat. 23. ver. 37.

Touching the Pastors specially and particularly, see Isaiah 56. ver. 10.11.
Jeremiah 6. ver. 13. Jeremiah. 14. ver. 14. Jeremiah. 23. ver. 1.2. etc.
Ezechiel 22. ver. 25.26.28. Ezechiel 34. ver. 23.4. etc. Hosea 9. ver. 8. 1.
Kings. 22. ver. 6. John 7. ver. 47.

CHAP. XIII.
Whether the Church be above the holy scripture: that is to say, whether the
holy scripture depend of the judgment and authority of the Church.

THE Church indeed has a very great authority among men, in so much as, it
behooves us to hear the same, if we will not be accounted rebels against God.
Yet notwithstanding, seeing she is the wife and scholar of Jesus Christ, she
ought always to be subject unto him, as unto her husband, head and teacher.
And therefore this is an article, which we must hold inviolable and without
breach, to wit, that the church ought to depend and hang on Christ, and his
word, and to have her authority, from the same word, and not on the other
side, that the word of Christ, should depend and have the credit and
authority thereof from the Church. Notwithstanding many are found which
hold altogether the contrary, setting (as we say) the cart before the horses,
and plowe or waine before the oxen, and utterly overthrowing all order. For
they suppose, that the holy scripture has no more certainty and authority,
than it pleases the Church, that by her allowa^ce and consent it shall have.
And these be the Romish Catholics, who speak of the Church after this
manner, giving it authority over and above the word of God, to make men to
believe, that whatsoeur it decrees, determines and concludes, we must hold
her judgment, sentence and resolution, as a certain oracle, coming from
heaven, and to be short, as an article of our belief. And behold their reasons
for this.

The first reason: The Church by her judgment has brought to pass, that the
holy Scripture has been acknowledged for the true word of God, and has
distinguished, separated and sundered it, from all other writings what so
ever, which men have published and brought into the world. For who is it that
in the beginning has assured us, that the holy scripture is the word of God,
but the Church alone? And who is it, that even to this day can certify and
assure us, that the same word of God, is come safe, sound, and whole, even unto
our age, but only the same Church? Wherefore it follows, that the authority
and certainty of the holy scripture, depends upon the authority and
judgment of the Church.

I answer two things, or two manner of ways. First, that this is a most
wicked opinion to say, that without the Church, the word of God could not
have, a sufficient witness, to commend and set forth the authority and
credit thereof unto us. Let us hear what Saint Augustine says hereof. The
authority of the truth (says he) is fruitful and plentiful: Augu. de
assumpt. Virg. Mart. cap. 1.
and if she be diligently examined, men shall find, that of her self, she
makes her self to be sufficiently known. Wherefore Alfonsus de Castro, has
sometimes said: Alfonsus de Cast. li. 1. ca. 8. cont. haereses.
seeing that the holy scripture is come forth from GOD, it has of it self
already deserved, that we should give trust unto it, and believe it. And
when the Church publishes this, that it is given by God, she does wholly,
even as a witness, which bears witness to some thing. So that the truth of
the scriptures is certain, not because of the witness, but by reason of it
self, and the credit it has, and not because the Church receives it, and
publishes it, but because that God has given it, and made the same manifest
unto us.

Besides, is this a small matter, that we have the testimony of the holy
spirit dwelling in our hearts? It is said that it is his peculiar office, to
guide and lead us into all truth, John. 16.13. 1. Ioh. 2.27.
and to teach us all things. Whereupon it follows, that he teaches us this
truth: that the holy scripture is of God, and from him. It is said moreover,
that we have received the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.12.
that we might know the things that are given to us of God. Also, 1. Cor.
2.14.
that the things of the spirit of God, are spirituallie discerned, that is to
say, by ye efficacy, moving, and woorking of the holy spirit. Wherefore it
follows, that the holy spirit teaches us, and makes us to discern,
between these books which we ought to receive without gainesaying, and the
other, which we ought to reject and refuse.

Some perhaps will say, that this article or point is dangerous, because that
heretics oftentimes brag, that they have the spirit of God, which they have
not indeed: and we know how they have always endeavored, to make their
doctrines of authority and credit, through their inward revelations, which
they have imagined to proceed, from the holy Ghost. But we can easily answer
this: to wit, that in this matter, we can easily avoid all danger, if we use
and follow the remedies which S. John does furnish us withal, when he says:
that we ought not to believe every spirit, 1 Ioh. 4. 1.
but to try and prove the spirits, whether they are of God or no. And what
shall be the mean and way of this trial and examination? even the word of
God, as we see, that thereby the men of Berea, Act. 17.11.
did prove S. Paul his spirit and doctrine. And to this mean does Chrysostom
send us, when he says thus: Many boast of the spirit, Chrysostom. de sanct.
and adorand. spirit.
but they which bring any thing of their own, do falsely pretend the same. As
Christ witnessed, that he spoke not of him self, because that his doctrine was
taken out of the law and prophets: in like manner, if any under the title and
name of the spirit, shall bring unto us any thing, which is not contained in
the Gospel, let us not believe it. For as Christ is the accomplishmente, and
fulfilling of the law and Prophets: so is the holy Ghost of the gospel.

But how can we by this way or mean, discern and know the spirits, that is
to say, whether the doctrine which they shall propound and set forth unto us,
be from the holy Ghost or no? After two sorts or by two means, you shall
know this. First, if it tend to this end, to exalt, establish and set up the
glory of God. For as Jesus Christ says: Ioh. 7.18.
He that seeks the glory of God is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.
Secondly, if it be conformable and agreeable, Romans 12.6.
to the proportion of faith, that is to say, if it agree and accord well, with
the heads and foundations of Christian religion, whereof we have spoken more
largely heretofore, in the fourth Chapter.

The second thing, that I answer, touching the foresaid reason of the
Romish Catholics, is, that the consequence thereof, is not necessary,
neither well grounded, when they say, that the Church yields testimony to
the word of God, and does commend the same unto us, that therefore the
certainty and authority of the word of God, depends upon the authority and
judgment of the Church. For as we have but a little while ago alleged out
of Alfonsus de Castro: The word of God is certain, not by reason of the
Church, which bears witness thereof, but because of it self, and his own
credit. The Apostles yielded testimony, and bare witness of Jesus Christ,
John. 15.17. Acts. 1.8.
And who is he that will therefore say, that Jesus Christ his authority does
depend of the authority and judgment of the Apostles? The Goldsmith tries
the gold, and puts a difference between that which is good and pure, and
that which is naughty metal. But does he therefore by his trial and proof
make that the gold is either good or evil? A Parliament receives some edict
or law which comes from the King, that it may be published and proclaimed.
Inquiry is diligently made, whether it come from the King or no: Afterward
all know that it comes from the King: what does the Parliament then? It is
true that it allows the edict, that it acknowledges the same, that it
bears witness to it, and commends and sets out the same, yea, and if
need be, interprets it, according to the Kings intent and meaning: But does
the parliament for all this, cause it or make it to be the kings law? Does it
give authority to it? Has it any authority, to change any thing in it, or
to add any thing to it, or to clippe, or take any thing what so ever away from
it? It is certain, no. Even so stands the case with the Church. For although
it be an excellent testimony to the word of God, yet it cannot at any hand
give it authority, as to say, that the certainty of the word of God, hangs
upon the authority and judgment of the Church. For when the Church
acknowledges and allows the word of God, and does put a difference between
it, and the doctrines and inue^tions of men, she does no other thing, but hear
the voice of her pastor, and discerns and knows it from the voice of a
stranger. Ioh. 10.5.
Now there is great difference between discerning the Pastors voice from a
strangers, and adding authority and credit thereto, bringing to pass, and
that according to truth, that it should be such or such, that is, either true
or false.

The second reason is: The Church is more ancient, than the Scriptures. For in
the time of Adam, Abell, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, there was no
scripture: For Moses was the first penman or writer of matters concerning
religion, and yet notwithstanding there was a church. Wherefore it follows,
that the authority of the Church, is above the authority of the holy
scripture.

First and foremost I answer, that the consequence of this argument is none at
al. For grant it, that one thing be more ancient and old than another, yet it
follows not for all that, that it should be of greater authority and
credit: otherwise we must infer, that Moses has more authority, than Jesus
Christ, and the law more than the Gospel.

Secondly, as touching the antecedent or former proposition, I say that it is
sophistical, captious, and full of deceit. For albeit, that in these first
times of the world, there was no scripture, which the fathers used, yet for
all that, the word of God ceased not to be, because it was written and
engraven in the fathers hearts, and moreover founded very clearly in the
Church, which word, was in good time brought and committed to writing, first
by Moses, and afterward by others, and thereupon called, the holy scripture:
wherefore seeing that the holy scripture and Gods word, is nothing but one and
the self same thing, it follows very well, that if our first fathers have
had the word of God, they have had also in substance, the holy scriptures.

Aug. cont. epist. fundamen. cap. 5.
The third reason: S. Augustine has said I would not believe the Gospel, if
the authority of the Catholic Church, did not move me thereto. Wherefore it
is certain, that the Gospel takes his authority from the Church.

I answer that the consequence is stark naught, for that which S. Augustine
speaks to one purpose, or in one respect, is applied to another end. This
holy doctor speaks so, as having regard to that, he was then, when he took
the part of the Manichees, and as it were disputing against them. Now the
Manichees would, that the Epistles of Manicheus their author, which they
called Fundamental, containing in it all their false opinions, should be of
like and equal authority, with the Apostles epistles. Beside, they allowed
one part of the Gospel, and disallowed an other, and that not by the advice and
judgment of the Church, but of their own proper and particular authority. S.
Augustine having taken in hand, to confute the said Epistle in the beginning
speaks thus: The Epistle begins after this manner: Manicheus the Apostle
of Jesus Christ, by the providence and appointment of God the Father: I ask,
who is this Manicheus? you will answer, the Apostle of Jesus christ's I believe
it not. What will thou say thereto? Perhaps thou will bring forth the Gospel,
and thereby thou will lift up and establish the person of Manicheus. But what
if thou had to do and deal with a man, who does not yet believe the
Gospel? what would thou do, when he should say unto thee, I believe not the
Gospel? For as touching my self, I would not believe the Gospel, if the
authority of the Catholic Church did not move me thereto. Behold Saint
Augustines words, by which it is altogether manifest, that he minds not to
infer, that the Gospel hangs upon the allowance and authority of the
church, but only that the Church has great weight, to induce and move the
miscreants and unbelievers, to believe the Gospel. This holy Doctor then
speaks not, of the foundation of his faith, but of the beginning thereof,
that is to say, of the occasion and outward means, by which he was provoked
and stirred up, to believe the Gospel, when he was a Manichean heretic, and
not as yet a Christian, to wit, because he saw the good accord, consent, and
agreement of the Church in receiving the Gospel. In the fourth Chapter he
confessed, that in former time he maintained the Maniches part, and that he
was very eger and sharp therein, and blinded in the doctrine of their sect.
Now he speaks thus: How will thou prove, that Manicheus is an Apostle of
Christ? shall this be by the Gospel? But if some one that believes not the
Gospel, would say unto thee, I believe not the Gospel, what have thou to
reply? As if he should say, would thou not purpose, put down, and show
unto him the authority and testimony of the Church? For as touching my self,
in the time that I was a Manichean, I had not believed the Gospel, if the
authority and testimony of the Catholic Church, had not driven me thereto.
As if again he should say: For as concerning my self, when I was of your
faction and sect, I was so settled and stayed in your opinions, and had hard
them so attentively and diligently, yea I believed them so steadfastly, and did
maintain them with such courage and stomach, (this is that which he speaks
in the fourth Chapter) that very hardly I had ever forsaken and renounced them,
to believe the Gospel, if the authority and testimony of the Church, had not
induced, moved and provoked me thereto.

The fourth reason: He that has authority and power, to take away, or to
change some thing in the word of God, has also authority over it. But so it
is, that ye church has authority and power, to take away, or to change
something in the word of God: It follows therefore, that the Church has
authority over and above it.

They thus prove the assumption, which is the second proposition or sentence
of the reason. Saint Peter had authority and power, to take away and to
change some thing, in the word of God, for he changed the form of baptism
prescribed by Jesus Christ, as appears by this, that Jesus Christ having
commanded to baptize, in the name of the father, and of the son, Mat. 28.19.
and of the holy Ghost, Saint Peter changing this form, has enjoined and
commanded men to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ only. Act. 2.38.
As it is written in the second of the Acts verse 38. Now if Saint Peter have
had this authority and this power, why also should not the whole church have
it, as well as he?

I answer, first for the consequence, that it is not necessary and good. For
who is he that will yield to this, that all that, which was in former time
permitted to the Apostles, should now be permitted to the Pastors and
ministers of the Church, who are their successors?

Secondly I say, that that which is taken from Saint Peter as true and right,
is false. For Saint Peter did in no case change the form of Baptism: and in
the place of the Acts before alleged, it is not said, that they must be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ only, Act. 2.38 P^^^us Lomb^^^ lob. 4.
d^^. 3 sect. B. and (...). de Cosecrat. d^^t. 4. ^^^in Sinod. etc. Act. 8.12.
Act. 10.48. Ambr. lib. 1. de (...) sanct. cap. 3.
but simply said thus, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ. But let us see, how Peter Lombard, the master of the sentences
expounds this place If any (says he) be baptized without invocation of the
trinity he is not a perfect christian, unless he be baptized in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy ghost: yet we read in the Acts
of the Apostles, that the Apostles baptized in the name of Christ: but under
this name as S. Ambrose expounds it, is understood the whole Trinity, for
when a man names Christ, these are understood, to wit, the father, of whom the
son was anointed, and the son, which was anointed, and the holy Ghost, by
whom or with whom he was anointed. Behold the advice and judgment of the
master of the sentences, who does not altogether satisfy us, though he speak
much for us. For whether we regard the substance of the sacraments, or else the
form thereof, we hold that the Lords ordinance ought to be retained and
followed in the whole, and through the whole, and that it does not belong to
any particular person, no not to the church it self, to alter or change any
thing therein. And in deed, as I have already said, Saint Peter did not
change the form of Baptisme^ But mark this: His intent and purpose was to
teach, that the foundation, accomplishment and fulfilling of baptism, is in
Jesus Christ alone. For to be baptized in the name of Christ, is taken and
used by S. Peter, for to be received to grace and favor in baptism, by the
name of Jesus Christ. So that this manner of speech which Saint Peter uses,
is not in any sort to be referred to the form of Baptism: but only
declares, that all the virtue, power, and efficacy of baptism consists
only in Jesus Christ alone, because that all that, which baptism does
represent and figure unto us, 1. Ioh. 1.7. Romans 6.4.
is comprehended in him alone. For by the blood of Jesus Christ, we are
washed and purged from all our sins, and by baptism buried with him, to the
end that as he is raised up, from the dead by the glory of the father so we
also should walk in newness of life.

The fifth reason: The Church has changed the Sabbath to the Lords day, or
that which we call Sunday, although that God by express writing, commanded
the observation and keeping of the said Sabbath, Wherefore the^ it follows,
that the church has power and authority over the holy scripture.

I answer in the first place, That the Church has changed nothing at all, of
the commandment, touching the observation of the Sabbath, in or concerning
the substance thereof, but only in or concerning the circumstance. For the
thing or matter abides always, that is to say, the substance of the
commandment, seeing that one day of the week is reserved, to be employed and
bestowed upon the holy rest, which thing is enjoined by the commandment, as
being indeed the verity and truth thereof. So that the observation and keeping
thereof is only changed in respect of the time, which change does not derogate
any thing from the commandment, and neither alters nor changes any thing
therein, of that which God minded to commend and command to us.

Next: the commandment of the Sabbath, in respect of the figure was
temporal, and endured but a season, and therefore it ought to have an end, as
the other ceremonies of the law had. Wherefore the figure was taken away and
changed, not by the authority of the Church properly, or as you would say, of
it own authority, but by the truth it self, which declared and showed it
self in Jesus Christ: whereupon also the Apostle says, Col. 2. 16.17
Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect of an holy
day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath day, which are but a shadow of
things to come.

The sixth reason: The Apostles decreed in the first Council which they held in
Jerusalem, Act. 15. 29.
that the Christians should abstain from blood, and from that that is
strangled: which decree, yea brought and put into writing, the Church has
taken away and changed, after the time of the Apostles, giving leave to
christians to use both blood, and that that is strangled. It follows then,
that it is lawefull for the Church, to change some thing in the word of God, and
by consequent that the Church is above the same word.

I answer that the place of the Acts, touching that which the Apostles
determined in the Council, which they held in Jerusalem is ill understood,
and yet more ill applied, to fetch and draw from it such a consequence. For
the Church after the Apostles, has not established any thing against the
decree of the Apostles, in that they have suffered Christians, to use and eat
blood, and that that is strangled. For the decree of the Apostles was made, set
up and published, for a time only, and therefore it ought to end. The Church
in the time of the Apostles, was builded as well of the Gentiles as of the
Jews. Some weak ones amongst the Jews, thought, that they were yet bound
in their consciences, to the observation of the law of Moses, that is to say,
to the ceremonies thereof: The Gentiles on the other side, strengthening
themselves with that Christian liberty, which Jesus Christ has brought unto
us, would without any difference use, all manner of meats, and so amongst the
rest, blood, and that that was strangled. Whereupon the Apostles, least that so
free a use of blood, and of that that was strangled, might breed and bring
some offense to the weak Jews, determined and decreed in their Council, that
every one should abstain from such meat for a time, til that they might see
a good agreement and peace, between these two peoples. Now afterward, the
fear of such an offense being taken away, the Church judged, that the
observation and keeping of the said decree, was not any more necessary, or any
longer needful, and therefore respecting the intent and purpose of the
Apostles, gave liberty to the faithful to use all kind of meats, or else (to
speak better) did by the word of God declare unto them the liberty that they
had to use all manner of meats without, in any thing altering and changing, the
intent and purpose of the Apostles, when they made and established the
foresaid decree, not being appointed and set up by the^, but for a time only.

And thus much touching the reasons of the Romish Catholics, who affirm that
the certainty, and truth of the word of God, does depend of the judgment and
authority of the Church. Behold now our reasons to the contrary.

The first is this: The certainty of the church depends upon the authority
of Gods word. It follows then that the contrary cannot be true, to wit, that
the certainty of the word of God should depend upon the authority of the
Church. Now we prove the antecedent or former proposition, by that which the
holy Ghost says, Ephe. 2.20.
that the Church is builded upon the foundation and doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles. Whereupon it follows, that the Church depends upon the
authority of the same doctrine: And heereunto belong, the sentences of the
ancient doctors, which we have cited and quoted before in the third Chapter,
by which this is showed and proved, that the Church is marked, declared, and
known, by the holy scriptures.

The second reason: The holy scripture being given by inspiration of God, 2.
Tim. 3.16
as S. Paul says, has the authority from it self, as we have declared in
the beginning of this Chapter, in answering the first reason of the Romish
Catholics: wherein we have followed the judgment of Alfonsus de Castro. It
follows then, that it takes not credit or authority from the Church,
neither more not less, than the edict and law of the King, which has the
authority it has, from it self, that is to say, from the king, from whom it
proceeds and comes, and not from the Parliament, to which it is sent,
although that the same be allowed, praised, yea and expounded sometimes by the
said parliament.

The third reason: If the word of God ought to be heard above the Church, then
certainly it does not hang of the authority of the Church, but that the word
of God ought to be heard above the Church, it appears by this which S. Paul
says, that it ought to be heard above the Apostles, Gal. 1.8.
yea the Angels them selves. Wherefore it follows, that the word of God does
not hang of the authority of the Church.

The fourth reason: Aug. cont Max. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Saint Augustine openly declares, that the holy scripture is above the
Councels, and so by consequent above the church represented by Councels. For
writing to Maximinus the Arrian, touching the word Homousios, that is to say,
consubstantiall, or of the self same substance together with the father,
which word was confirmed by the counsel of Nice, and on the other side,
disallowed by the council of Ariminum, in the time of the Emperor Constantine,
he says thus: Now I have not to use or allege, the Council of Nice, neither
thou the Council of Ariminum, to prevail thereby one of us against another.
For as I am not bound to the Council of Ariminum, so art not thou bound to the
Council of Nice. We have the authority of the scriptures, which are not
partial or particular witnesses, for the one, or for the other, but are common
witnesses to both of us. Let us therefore by them dispute, and reason of the
matter in controversy between us.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the discipline of the Church.

NOW we must speak of the Ecclesiastical discipline, in which
notwithstanding, we will be brief and short, because there is of this matter a
very large and sufficient treaty extant alredie, which may satisfy and
content all good minds, and is entitled, The confirmation of the
ecclesiastical Discipline.
The confirmation of the Ecclesiastical discipline, observed in the reformed
Churches of the kingdom of France. And also he that will read the
Institution of M. Calvin, Calvin. li. 4. inst. Beza in co^fes fidei.
specially in his fourth book, and Theodorus Beza his confession, shall find
there all that which may be said, touching this point or matter, if so be it,
that he will content himself with reason. Wherefore then we have in this matter
of the Ecclesiastical discipline, for this present time to consider of four
principal heads or points.

The first is, Discipline is necessary in the church.
that discipline is most requisite and most necessary in the Church, if we
will not have all things mingled and disordered therein, yea full of
confusion. For even as there is no City, nor Town, nor house, which can be
without discipline, or policy, or some order, for the government thereof: so
the Church which is the city and house of God, cannot at any hand be without
his policy and spiritual government. And therefore Saint Cyprian has
sometimes called the discipline of the Church, Cyprian de tract. Virgin.
The keeper of faith and the mistress of virtue. For if it shall be lawefull
for every one, to do what they will, without being held back by some
bridle, what confusion and disorder, shall we see in the church? The same
Doctor compares also the Discipline to the rudder or helm of a ship, Cypri.
lib. 2, epist. 7.
thereby to declare, not only how profitable the same is for us, but also how
necessary and needeful. For seeing that the church is in this world, as a
ship upon the Sea, that is to say, subject to the billows, waves, and
tempests of tyrants and persecutors, yet to winds and whirlewindes of false
doctrine, how could it be able to subsist and stand, if together with the
word of God, it had not for the ordering and guiding thereof, her discipline,
to be as it were a rampart, ground work, foundation and stay? Wherefore those,
which either disallowe or despise this remedy (which serves to preserve the
church from dissipation or scattering abroad, to keep men in the obedience of
God, and to hold every one in his order and calling) labor and endeavor no
other thing, whatsoever they will pretend, than to overthrow the state of the
church, and to bring into the same al beastly excess, and barbarous disorder,
and that they are to be esteemed in the number of them, of whom is spoken in
the 50. Psalm, who giving themselves to all iniquity, Psalm. 50.16 17.
and hating correction and discipline, or to be reformed are reproved for
this, that they took upon them to speak of and rehearse the ordinances of
God, and to take his covenant and word in their mouths.

The second head or point is, The discipline does not so much as set a foot
into the Magistrates office.
that the Ecclesiastical or Church discipline, incrocheth not any thing at
all upon the magistrates charge and office. For first, the jurisdiction and
government of the church, and the civil jurisdiction or government differ
greatly one of them from an other: because that the one is spiritual, and
reaches to the inward man, and the other is bodily and outward. Therefore
Saint Paul said: 2. Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to cast
down holds. The church then has not prisons, or sergeants, or swords,
thereby bodily to punish evil doers, neither uses it force of hands,
confiscation or loss of goods, or amercements to punish the^ in their goods
and riches, but only draws out and occupies the spiritual sword of Gods
word to correct men, Ephe. 6.17.
and to bring them to amendment, as the Magistrate draws out, and uses his
material sword, to punish them either in their goods, or in their bodies.

And so both of them do their duty, the one of them not bringing any
prejudice or hurt to the other, but contrariwise, very well aiding them selves
between them selves, and helping one another, and being most necessary and
needful in their several charges and offices, the one not being able, to do
that which the other does. One example to make the matter plain. If some one
have committed whordome, and so by that means and fault, the civil laws
shall be transgressed and broken, and the church also offended: Now in
reformed Courts and places of law, such a one shall be punished either by
imprisonment, or by whipping, or by some other punishment: and so the offender,
shall have satisfied the Magistrates laws, but yet the offense shall not be
repaired or reformed in the Church. For it may be, that such an evil doer
will in steed of giving or showing some sign of repentance, murmur, be
angry, and despitefully deal with the Church. In such a case the Church,
before that it receives him to the holy Supper, shall require of him, a
public testimony and open token of his repentance, and by consequent, as the
Magistrate shall have his justice satisfied and answered, so shall the Church
have her discipline satisfied and answered. In sum, the Magistrate in the
exercising and executing of his office, respects men's goods and their bodies,
but the Church in the exercise and execution of her discipline, regards
simply and only, the souls and consciences of men.

Secondly, so far off is it, that the discipline of the Church, derogateth or
takes any thing at all away from the Magistrate, that contrariwise she
maintains the obedience that is due unto him. For if she tend to no other
end, or shoot at no other mark, but to cause us to practice that, which is
contained in the word of God, and so it is that Gods word teaches us to
submit our selves, and to yield our selves subject, Romans 13. 1. and Tit. 3.1.
to our Magistrates, and that not for fear of wrath only, but also for
conscience sake, who sees not this that she is established and set up by God,
to maintain the Magistrate in his authority, and to cause that obedience to
be rendered and yielded to him, which belongs unto him.

And also this is to be noted, that the church has not any particular member
or person in it, which she does not most willingly make subject to the
magistrate, following therein that which S. Paul says: Let every soul (that
is to say,? Romans 13.1.
every person or man) be subject unto the higher powers. Touching which the
Priests, Friars, and Monks of the Romish church, and in sum, all those of
the Popes Clergy, should here very well take them selves by the nose, that
if it may be, they may be ashamed, and so come to repentance. For whereas they
reprove and accuse us, to be rebels to our Superiors, I would wish them to
look to them selves, and to mark how far they show themselves obedient,
and by what title and right they can boast them selves to be exempted from all
such subjection. It may be, that they will not believe Saint Paul's words
without the interpretation of some of the fathers, let them then well look to,
and mark, that which Chrysostom has written upon this place, whose words are
very clear and plain. Chrysostom. in 13. cap. ad Roman.
When the Apostle speaks thus (says Chrysostom) Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers, he declares that this commandment is directed to all,
yea to Priests and Monks, and not only to them, which are busied and
occupied about the affairs of this present life, wherefore be it, that thou art
an Apostle, or an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or any other, thou ought to be
subject to the Magistrate. For this subjection does not hinder, disanul, or
take away godliness. These are this holy doctors own words, who if he had lived
at this day, I leave it to your selves to think of, how sharply and earnestly
would he set up himself, Causa. 15. quaest. 6. cap. Aelius Romanus. etc.
against the Romish priests, and namely against him, who does not only not
subject or submit himself to kings, but also makes kings subject to him, and
translateth to his own proper use, Kingdoms and Empires: and is not in the
mean while ashamed to say, that he is Jesus Christ's Vicar, and the successor
of the Apostles, whereas indeed Jesus Christ subjected himself to magistrates,
Mat. 17.27.
yea even to pay them tribute, and has said unto his Apostles: Luke. 22.25
that the kings of the earth bear rule etc. But it shall not be so amongst
you. The discipline ought to be exercised by the Consistory. Mat. 10.17. Act.
22.5.


The third head or point is, that for the exercising and executing of the
discipline, there must be in the Church a Consistory, that is to say, an
assembly or a Council, compacted and made of the ministers and elders to
watch over ye insolences, breakings out and offenses, which may fall amongst
the members of the Church. This consistory was heretofore in use among the
Jews, and was called Synedrion and Presbytery. Now if when corruption burst
into the Church, men abused both the title, and the right and lawful use of
the Consistory, it follows not for all that, that Jesus Christ, or his
Apostles, would have it abolished, but rather have brought it back again to
his former safety and soundness, and used the same, when the time was for it.
This is that which Saint Paul means, when writing unto the Romans, Romans 12.8.
he says: Let him that rules, do it with diligence. For it is certain,
that he speaks not to Magistrates, but he speaks to the Elders, Ancients,
and ouerwatchers, who were joined to and with the Pastors, for the ruling and
guiding of the Church. Also, when he says to Timothy: 1. Tim. 5.17
The Elders that rule well, are worthy double honor, specially they which
labor in the word and doctrine. For he makes there two sorts of Ancients
or Elders, some that travel in the word and doctrine, such are the Pastors
and Ministers, and other some, which exercise an other charge, as the Elders,
or as we say, ouerwatchers, who are appointed to have regard to, and to watch
over the manners of the people.

But to make this point more plain: we must speak yet somewhat more thereof.
S. Paul writing to the Romans, Romans 12.6.7.8.
divides the functions or offices of the Church into two sorts or kinds,
that is, into the office of Prophets, and into the office of Deacons, as in an
other place, 1. Tim. 3.1 ^ Tit. 1.6. etc. Philip. 1.1. Acts. 6.3. 4.
he makes mention, but of Bishops and Deacons, according to the example of the
Apostles. Acts. 6.2.3. 4. etc.

Again, he divides these two kinds or sorts, into certain other. Of
Prophets he makes two ranks or orders: some he calls Pastors, and the
other Doctors, whose charge and office is, to labor in the word and
doctrine, as we have heretofore sufficiently declared in the ninth Chapter.

Of Deacons, he makes three kinds. Some give themselves wholly to the
gatherings and distributions of the alms, which properly indeed are called
Deacons. Other some are they to whom specially and chiefly this charge
belongs, to watch over the manners of the flock, and over such offenses, as
may fall out amongst them, and these are properly called Ancients, Elders, and
ouerwatchers. The third sort, are they which have a special care of the sick
persons, to be dilligent about them, to take care over them, and to use them
courteously, gently, and well, and such were heretofore the widows, 1. Tim
5.9. etc.
whereof mention is made in the scripture.

Touching which matter this is to be marked, yt in succession and process of
time, certain Councels and Synods ordained, that women should be no more
admitted into such offices and charges of Diaconesses, and this was done to the
end, they might meet withal and prevent all inconveniences and offenses
rising thereon: in the place and steed of which women Diaconesses, the like
administration and office, was co^me^ded to and laid upon men, lawfully chosen
and called thereto.

Now mark how these offices and charges, be at this day exercised and used in
the reformed Churches. As concerning the pastors and Doctors, they handle,
entreat on, and expound the word, as we have said, and showed before in the
ninth Chapter, the elders and Deacons not any manner of way meddling therewith.

There are two other companies or sorts. The one is called the assembly or
company, which have care of the poor: the other the Consistory: Both in the
one and in the other, the pastors are usually to be found and had, as well to
make public prayer, as to give advise and counsel, touching yt which ought to
be done.

In the assembly or company which have care of the poor, they take advise and
order, for collections and distributions, for aid and assistance to be given
to the poor, and that the sick and diseased may be helped and succored. And
then are present with the Deacons, so many of the Ministers and Elders, yea and
of other citizens and town dwellers, or parishioners, as occasion and
necessity requires.

The Consistory is composed, made, and consists, of the Pastors and Elders,
whereunto also are admitted and received the Doctors and Deacons, so far
forth, and in as much as they shall judge it to be expedient and profitable,
to advise, give counsel, and consider of the Censures, and of that which is
requisite and necessary, for the guiding and government of the church.

Therefore of this company is it that we speak, to which we say
appertains the spiritual government of the Church. And indeed it appears
that the primitive Church was governed and guyded after this manner, by the
Apostles, accompanied with the Elders, who altogether assembled and met
together, so often, as there was need of such an assembly to be had. For it
is said in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Church of Antioch, being
desirous to have advise and judgment, in a difficult and hard question
concerning doctrine, Act. 15.2
did send to the Apostles and Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, and that they
assembled and met together. Also that the Elders of Jerusalem were assembled
and met together, when James was, to take counsel of that which Saint Paul
had to do, Act. 21.18.
touching the purging and clearing of himself, from the slanders that were
laid upon him, and given out against him. And we see also whither Jesus
Christ sends the offenders, who are stiff, and not yielding to a confession
of their fault, when he says: Tell it unto the Church. Mat. 18.17
For by the Church there he means no other thing, but the Consistory, that
is to say, the governors and guiders of the Church, even as Chrysostom has
expounded it, as we have before observed it, and put it down in the first
Chapter.

To be short, it is very manifest and plain, that there must be in the Church
Ancients or ouerwatchers, appointed to this end, to watch over the manners of
the people, and who also together with the Pastors, must look to the exercise
and execution of discipline that the church may be well guided and governed.

The fourth head or point is, Of the corrections and censures of the Church.
touching the corrections, and censures of the church. We have said, that in
every church there ought to be a Consistory, to exercise and execute the
discipline. Now we add, that this ought to be found true, and declared
specially in the corrections and censures. Whereupon we have certain
considerations to be observed and marked.

The first is, that we must make a difference between secret faults, and
those which are public and open, that we may apply thereto meet and
convenient censures. I call them secret faults which are known to one alone,
or to very few persons. And I call them public and open faults, which are
notorious and manifestly known of every one, or else of very many men. If then
the faults be secret, we must follow in the correction and amendment thereof,
the rule which is prescribed by Jesus Christ, Mat. 18.15.
in Matthew 18. where it is said, If thy brother offend or sin against thee,
go tell him thereof between thee and him alone, etc. But if the faults be
public and open, we must follow the commandment and example of Saint Paul. 1.
Tim. 5.20.
His commandment is this: Such as offend, reprove openly, that the rest also
may fear. His example is, in that when S. Peter had committed an offensive
fault, he did not warn him thereof apart, Gala. 2.14.
or by himself, but did reprove him openly, and that before the Church.

The second consideration is, that among open faults and offenses, there are
some which are less than othersome are, and therefore discretion and
judgment ought to be used in the censuring thereof. But all the circumstances
cannot be easily expressed, wherefore the Consistory ought to be wise, and of
good judgment, to practice the admonition and warning of Saint Jude Jude.
22.23.
when he says: Have compassion of some in putting difference: and other some
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. For amongst faults, some
deserve, but simple or bare admonition alone: othersom suspention from the holy
supper, others excommunication, and other, some other censure. But we cannot be
deceived in this what so ever it be, in following and doing that which the
word of God commands us, that is to say, to cut off from the church
rebellious and impenitent persons, also faulty persons, Mat. 18.17. 1. Cor.
5.3.4. Tit. 3. 10.
which stand stiff in their faults, and consequently heretics.

The third consideration is: that when the question is of Censures, and namely
of cutting off from the use of the Supper, or of excommunication, one alone
should not take upon him the knowledge thereof, but it is necessary and meet,
that the judgment of the Church should be interposed or come between. For
one man alone, whatsoever graces he has received from God, cannot, or ought
not to attribute unto himself such an authority. And therefore S. Paul being
willing to excommunicate the incestuous person, says thus: 1, Cor. 5.3.4.5.
I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have determined alredie, as
though I were present, that he that has thus done this thing, when ye are
gathered together and my spirit, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
such a one I say, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, be delivered unto
Satan, etc. Although he was an Apostle, yet he alone and of his own
authority, does not cut off from the Church this incestuous person, but
communicates his advice and order, to and with the Church, to the end that
the matter might be done by common authority and consent.

And indeed in old time this was the common and usual manner, to wit, that
the Ecclesiastical censures, should be executed, Tertul. Apologeti. ca. 39.
by the Consistory. For as it appears by the Apologetike, or defensive
writing of Tertullian, if question should be had, touching them that ought to
be excommunicated, or of them that had committed certain faults, whether they
ought to be received or no, this authority appertained to the Ministers and
Elders of the Church, who ordinarily and commonly assembled and met together,
for that purpose and matter. But the denouncing or publishing of the
excommunication, or the casting of one our, or the public receiving of him,
again before the Church, was done by the Pastor.

In this sort Origin ordains, Origin in Johan. Hom. 7.
that he which has been three times admonished, and yet afterward
amendeth not, should be cut off from the body of the Church, by the
governors of the Church

And Saint Cyprian, Cypri. lib. 3. epist. 10. 14. and 27.
making mention of the custom and manner used in his time, touching the public
and open censures of the Church, says, that nothing at all was done by the
Bishop, without the counsel of the Clergy, and the consent of the people.
Wherefore the Pope of Rome declares him self to be a false dealer, and
indeed a Tyrant, when snatching away, and that by violence, from the Church
the right and power that belongs thereto, he arrogateth to himself and to
his, power and authority, to cut off from the Church, and to excommunicate
whom so ever he, or any of them shall think good.

The fourth consideration is, touching the ends, which men ought to set before
them, in the corrections of the church, and namely in excommunication. Now
there are three special ends thereof.

The first is, that those which be of wicked life and conversation, may not
have any place amongst true Christians to the contempt of Gods name.

The second is, that good people may not be corrupted by the conversation of
the wicked, 1. Cor. 6.6.
for a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump.

The third is, that they which have fallen and offended, may be confounded
and ashamed in themselves, and aftewardes lifted up again, comforted, and
reconciled to the Church. That is it which S. Paul sets out and means, 2.
These. 3.14
when he says: If any man obey not our saying, note him by a letter, and have
no company with him, that he may be ashamed: Also speaking of the incestuous
person, 1. Cor. 5. 5.
I have determined (says he) that he should be delivered to Satan, for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus. These three ends are very largely laid out, and at length
discoursed upon, in the fourth book of M. Caluines Institution, cap. 12. Sect.
5. Calu. lib. 4. Inst. cap. 12. sect. 5.
Whereof the sum is, that in corrections and censures, men must regard and
look to three ends, that is to say, the glory of God, the edification of the
Church and the repentance and conversion of sinners.

The fifth consideration is, that men in the reprehensions and censures of the
Church, look well to this, that they have not such consideration, regard, or
respect, to the outward appearance and show of men's persons, yt they tread the
little ones, or poor people under their feet, and support, aid, and hearten
the great and rich: Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Gala. 3.28.
For as God accepts no man's person: and in the Church, there is neither Jew
nor grecian, bond nor free, male, nor female, but all are one in Jesus
Christ: so the governors of the Church, ought always to walk with an
upright and equal foot, without turning aside any manner of way, in receiving
and allowing some, and in refusing and disallowing others. It is very true,
that corrections ought always to be tempered, measured, and accompanied with
gentleness, softnes, and courtesy, to the end (as Saint Paul says) that
he that is reproved or blamed, 2, Cor. 2.^.
may not be swallowed up with over much heaviness. For otherwise we shall
turn the remedy into poison and hurt. And therefore the same Apostle does
exhort us, Gal. 6.1.
That we should restore with the spirit of meekness such as be fallen into,
or overtaken with some fault. 1. Tim. 5.12
And again: Rebuke not (says he) an Elder irreverently, but admonish or
exhort him, as a father, the young men as brethren, the elder women as mothers,
the younger as sisters with all pureness and chastity. We must therefore
moderate with gentleness and meekness, the rigor or hardness of the
discipline, least we hurt rather then profit. But so far off is it, that
they ought to spare any man, that the corrections must be equally and
indifferently applied and administered to all them which shall have need
thereof, whether they be men or women, whether they be great or small, whether
they be masters or servants, whether they be Gentlemen, or of the common sort.
We know with what earnestness and heat Chrysostom was angry, against the
Pastors in his time, who for fear of great and rich men, durst not reject or
put from the supper any of them, when they offered them selves thereto, not
before they were admitted thereto. Chryso. hom. 3. in Mat.
The blood (says he) of these men shall be required at your hands. If you
fear mortal men for their greatness and riches, verily men shall mock you:
but if so be that you fear the living God, he will bring to pass, that even
men themselves shall have you in honor and estimation.

And those which are lifted up to dignity, An admonition to great men not to
reject or despise the discipline.
ought not to refuse to submit themselves, and to make them selves, as it were,
subject to the discipline, and they ought not to refuse the corrections of
their Pastors and Elders, seeing that by this means, the Lord will set them
again upon their feet, after they are fallen. There is I know not what
manner of pride in many, which hinders them from submitting them selves
unto the discipline. There is besides I know not what manner of foolish and
filthy shame, which when it has once seized or taken hold of them, they
love rather to continue in their vices, than to be advertised or admonished
thereof, to the end that they may keep themselves there from.

But the Emperor Theodosius was better advised, and of a more godly mind. For
we read that when Saint Ambrose had excommunicated him, Ambr. lib. 1. epist.
8. in oration. Theodosu.
by reason of much innocent blood, which was spilt and shead at his
commandment, he took such a censure in good part, and so far off was it,
that he was stubborn and self willed against his Pastor and his Elders, to
recoyle back again, or to with draw himself from the Church, that on the
other side, approving the same correction and censure, he unclothed himself
of his kingly ornaments, and openly bewailing his sin in the Church, he did
with tears, gronings, and sighs, demand and ask forgiveness thereof.

Certainly this is not in vain, that Jesus christ has said to the pastors of
his church: Whatsoever ye shall bind or loose in earth shall be bound or loosed
in heaven. Mat. 18. 18.
For thereby he has authorized his church, in the use of the keys, by the
word of God, to condemn the perverse, stubborn and ungodly, and by the same
word to reconcile, and receive to mercy, all true penitent sinners. Which
authority of the Church, is not restrained or hedged in, to be exercised and
executed among the common people only, but also upon Lords and Magistrates.
Whereupon it follows, that none can distract or withdraw himself therefrom,
but he renounceth and forsakes the mean of his salvation.

The conclusion is this: that seeing God has ordained correction and
discipline, to the end that we should profit and grow up in his doctrine, and
that we should not be hardened in our sins, but rather that they might be
reproved, to the end they might not engender and work in us an incurable
rottenness or infection, It follows that they which fly and refuse the
admonitions and censures of the Church, which are made and given them in the
name of God, refuse God himself, and despise their own salvation.

Behold, this is that, which we have here to note and mark, as touching the
discipline of the Church. For concerning the laws which she may establishe
and set up, according to the authority, given her of GOD, we will speak
thereof in the Chapter following.

The fifteen Chapter.
Whether it belong to the Church to make laws? and if she make some, how far
the faithful ought to obey her.

WHen the question is of the laws of the Church, we know that some concern
the doctrine, under which we comprehend the Sacraments also, and other the
discipline or policy, and order, that is to say, the fashion and manner of
doing. The laws which concern doctrine, touch the conscience, and in the
knowledge and practice of them, stands the service and worship of God, and
our own salvation. Of this sort are all the points and articles of doctrine,
contained in the Scripture, which we must believe and observe, without adding
any thing thereto, or diminishing therfrom in changing it. Those which concern
the discipline, are to be referred to the order and honesty, which ought to
be kept in the church, and consist in a manner and fashion of doing, altogether
outward, and these may a man call indifferent, which a man may use either well
or evil, of this sort are ordinances touching the places, the times, the
seasons, and the hours, set for preachings and ministration of the Sacraments,
the celebration of marriages, fasts, publik prayers, and such like things: yet
notwithstanding this must be known, that no man may appoint in the practice
and perfourmance of these matters, the service of God, or our salvation,
neither must any man think, that of themselves they concern the conscience.

Now the difference and disputation that some move and make in the Church
touching this matter, is not as concerning this last kind of Laws,
apperteining only to the discipline or policy. So every one knows and
confesses, that the church cannot want her policy and order and that, to the
end she may abide united and tied together, she has need of certain outward
bonds: wherefore the church may without any difficulti or doubt, make laws
apperteining only to the outward discipline, and take them away, or change
them, according as she shall judge them to be expedient and profitable, having
always special respect to the times, places, and persons. As for example, the
church may ordeine and appoint some day of the week for public prayers,
whether the prayers be ordinary or extraordinary: the Church also may chose a
certain day, or a certain hour, to give thanks unto God when it shall have
pleased him, to have delivered out of some great danger either the whole
Church, or the Country, or the Magistrate, or some other members placed in
authority: the Church also may publish a fast, so often as necessity and
occasion shall require. It may take order also, that Baptism be ministered at a
certain time after the preachings: that the holy Supper be celebrated and
ministered so often in a year, and at those seasons, which they shall judge
expedient and meet: that the as kings or publishing of the banes of marriage,
should be as it were proclaimed or declared three several Sundaies! And
lastly that the said marriages should be celebrated at the Sermons or
preachings, either in the morning or evening: that the consistories for the
manners of the people, and the assembly or company which have care for the
poor, assemble and meet together so often in a month, as shall be found
expedient, and profitable.

Wherefore the Church may establish these laws, and other such like, which
the faithful ought to obey, to the end that there may not be any disorder, or
any confusion among the people of God.

But the question is of laws concerning doctrine, and the Sacraments, or else
other laws touching the discipline, by which they would bind consciences,
and enclose and comprehend therein simply the service of God, that is to say,
whether it belong to the Church to make Laws thereof or no? The Romish
Catholics, say they may, and we affirm the contrary, and these are their
reasons following.

The first reason is this: The Church has authority to teach: wherefore she
has also authority to make laws, belonging to the doctrine or teaching.

But this argument may be ouerthrown in two words, if we deny the consequence
For these be matters very much differing, to wit, to have authority to teach,
and to have authority to make Laws belonging to the doctrine. Jesus Christ
has in deed given the first of these to his church: but so he has not the
second. And as God has expressly forbidden, to add any thing unto his law,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. 12.32.
so Jesus Christ has comanded his disciples, to teach only the doctrine which
they had heard and received of him.

The second reason. The church has the use of the keys, and can bind and
loose, absolve and excommunicate. Wherefore it follows that she has also
authorie to establishe laws apperteining to the doctrine.

I answer in one word, that the consequence is false as it was in the
argument last before going: for a Lord or Ruler will in deed give power and
authority to his officers to absolve and to condemn according to the laws
and ordinances, but yet it will not follow for all that, that he gives them
power, of themselves to make new laws over his people, and to judge by them
according to their own fantasy. So Jesus Christ has in deed given unto his
apostles and disciples, this power, to bind, and to loose according to his
laws, but this is ill concluded, to say that therefore he has given the^ this
power and this authority of themselves to make laws, and to establishe them
in his Church, and thereby to bind men's consciences.

The third reason Jesus Christ has said, Mat. 23.2.3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do: Heb. 13.17.
And the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrwes, Obey the^ that have the
oversight of you, and submit your selves to the^. Wherefore it follows, that
we ought to obey the Pastors of the Church in keeping and observing their laws.

I answer, that when we are commanded to obey our Pastors, this ought to be
understood, so far forth as their commandments proceed and come out of
Moses chair, that is to say, out of the word of God. For otherwise the Lord
protests and openly witnesses, that he is worshipped in vain, when men set
out, and preach for doctrine, the commandments of men. Matthew. 15.9.
And he himself does straightly command us earnestly to take heed and beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees and Saduces. Touching which matter, Mat. 16.6
August. in John. Tracta. 46. Cap. 10.
let us hear Saint Augustine. The Scribes (says he) and the Pharisees sit
in Moses seat, do that therefore which they shall show unto you. For being
set in the chair or seat of Moses, they teach the law of God, and so God
teaches by them. But if they would teach any thing of their own, hear them
not, and do not that which they will say: for they seek their own profit and
gain, and not Christ's profit. In sum then, if the Church make and ordeine
for us commandments drawn and taken from the word of god, it is our duty
to receive them, and to yield our selves obedient thereto: otherwise not. For
it is not the Churches duty to go beyond the bounds of Gods word, in making
laws of her own head and authority, and inuenting new fashions and manners to
serve God by. And the rule of our obedience ought always to be the very self
same word of God: as Cornelius said unto Saint Peter. Acts. 10.33.
Now are we al here present before God, to hear all things which are
commanded thee of God.

The fourth reason, we must obey the voice of the Church, Mat. 18.17. Luke.
10.16.
as we have a commandment given us therefore in these places, Mat. 18. Luke
10. But the laws and commandments of the church, are the churches voice,
wherefore it follows that we must obey the laws and co^mandeme^ts of the
church.

I answer, as above is answered, that we must obey the voice of the
Church, when it comes out of Moses chair and seat: that is to say, when
her commandments shall be taken and set from the word of God: and when also
the question shall be of things indifferent, which she shall ordeine and
establish, to keep good order, and to serve for edification, and the
maintenance and upholding of the discipline: For in the things which are
contrary to Gods word, and in those also which of them selves are
indifferent, but yet become and made evil through superstition, to wit,
because that in them, they would place the service of God, and that they would
think by them, to deserve Gods grace, and the forgiveness of sins, in these
things I say, we ought not at any hand to obey, Acts. 4.19. 5.29.
but in such commandments of the Church, we ought to say, that it is better
to obey God then men.

The fifth reason: Ester. 9.26. 27
As in Ester it was ordained, that besides the feasts commanded in the law,
they should celebrate every year the feast of lottes, which was called,
Purim: 1. Macha. 4.59.
and in the history of the Machabees, the feast of the dedication, called in
Greek by Saint John, John. 10.22.
Encaenia: So the Christian church may well at this day ordeine feasts, as
shall seem unto her to be expedient and profitable for the glory of God, and
the edification of the people: as it has in time heretofore ordained the
feasts and holy days of saint Peter, of saint Anthony, of saint Marcellus,
of saint Margaret, and all the rest.

I answer, that there is no likeness at all, between the feasts of Purim,
or lots, and of the dedication, and these of saint Peter, saint Anthony, and
such others. I deny not, but that those two first, were in former time
established by the church, besides the feasts ordained in the law: but let us
mark I pray you, how, and to what end. Certainly this was for the glory of
God, and to bring to their remembrance his great benefits, toward his
church, that they also might give him thanks therefore. For in Ester it is
said, that the feast of Purim, or lottes, was ordained by the church, for
remembrance of this, that the people was delivered from the cursed conspiracy
of Haman. And Judas Machabeus, with the consent of the whole church ordained,
the feast of the dedication, otherwise called Encaenia, in remembrance of the
deliverance of the people, and of the repairing, and hallowing again, as it
were, of the Temple, which had been polluted by Antiochus. And we deny not
but that Synodes, may ordein certain days, and solemnly keep them, to the
end that the people may cease from their own works, to fast to pray unto God,
and to yield him thanks, according as things shall fall out, and occasion be
ministered, so that it be don without superstition, idolatry, or evil example.
But how can we, by the examples of the two feasts aforesaid, approve or
allow the feasts of the Papacy or Popedom? First they were but two only.
But in the Popedom, there is an infinite number. For what measure did they ever
keep in the number thereof? Secondly, the two above spoken of, were instituted
to the name of God, and at no hand to the name of any dead Saints. But these
are ordained to the name of creatures, and not to the name of God, as we hear,
they call them, the feasts of S. Anthony, of S. Frauncis, of Saint Vincent, of
Saint Sebastian, of Saint Agathon, of the virgin Mary, and so of others.

Thirdly, those had their foundation and beginning for the service of God, and
always served to edification, for they were established and appointed (as has
been said) to thank God, and to give him praise, for the benefits which he
had bestowed upon his Church. These had no foundation or beginning, but in
superstition and idolatry, and serve to no other purpose or matter, either
more or less, than the feasts and holy days of the Paganes and Ethnickes.
For wherefore is it, that the Papists give the names of Saints to their
feastiuall days, but because they mean, to sanctify the said feasts, in
the honor of those Saints (as they call them) whose name they bear? And in
so doing, do they not set up the Saints in Gods place, because they serve and
give that honor unto the^, which apperteineth to him alone, as in old time
the Paganes did in the celebration of their feasts and divine services?

These are the principal reasons upon which the Romish Catholics ground
them selves, thereby to prove, that it belongs to the Church, to make laws
to tie men's consciences withal. Now it remains, that we show and set
down our reasons, to prove the contrary.

The first is this: It is written in Isaiah: Isaiah. 33.22
The Lord is our Judge: the Lord is our law giver: the Lord is our King. Iam.
4. 12.
And in Saint James. There is one law giver which is able to save and destroy:
whereby it is very clearly seen, that it belongs to God alone, to make
Ecclesiastical laws, apperteining to his service.

The second reason: There is none but God alone, that can institute and ordeine
a lawful service, which may be agreeable to himself, and acceptable in his
sight, for this cause he him self says: Deuteronomy. 12.8.32.
Ye shall not do after all these things, that ye do here this day: that
is, every man whatsoever seems good in his own eyes: but whatsoever I
command you, take heed ye do it: thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take
ought therefrom. And in Jeremiah. Ier. 7.22. 23.
I spoke not (says he) unto your fathers, nor commanded them when I brought
them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices: but
this thing I commanded them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and
ye shall be my people, and walk ye in all the ways which I have commanded
you, that it may be well unto you. He says also by his Prophet Samuel: 1.
Sam. 15.22.
Think thou, that the Lord has as great pleasure in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as when his voice is obeyed? Behold to obey, is better than
sacrifice: and to hearken, is better then the fat of Rams. We may read,
many such or the like sentences, but specially this is notable and excellent,
that the sons of Aaron were horribly burned and consumed with the fire which
was sent out from the Lord, Leuit. 10.1. etc.
because they offered strange fire, and which in deed, was not commanded
them. But we add, that the laws which concern doctrine, and by which men's
consciences are tied apperteine to the service of God. And therefore it
follows, that there is none but God alone which can make and establish such
laws.

The third reason: Laws concerning doctrine, and such as bind men's
consciences, ought to be unto us a testimony and pledge, of the will of God:
But God alone by his word can give unto us this testimony, and at no hand or by
no means, men, as of them selves, Isaiah. 40.13 etc. Romans 11.34.
For who has instructed the spirit of the Lord? or was his Counselor, or
taught him? as the scripture says: It follows the^, that God alone, may make
and establish laws concerning doctrine, and which shall serve to bind men's
co^scie^ces.

The fourth reason: If it belong to the Church, to make laws concerning
doctrine, and the service of god, this must needs be, that she has received
the prerogative and authority, from God him self, for me^ have not here in
their life, any power so to do. But so it is, that the Church has not
received from God this prerogative and authority. For contrariwise, God has
expressly and plainly forbidden them, to join or add any thing to his law.
Deuteronomy. 4.2.12.32.
Wherefore it follows, that it does not apperteine to her, to make laws
touching doctrine and the service of God.

The fifth reason. It is necessary, that they which make laws should have
Lordship, rule and authority over the^, to whom they give those laws. But the
church has no Lordship, or rule, over the consciences of the faithful: 1. Pet.
5.3.
for S. Peter speaks with a loud voice and plainly, That the Pastors and
Bishops have not any Lordshippe over the Lords inheritance, that is to say,
over the faithful, of who^ the church is composed and made. 2. Cor. 1.4.
And S. Paul plainly protests: touching himself, that he has not any
dominion over the faith of the Corinthians.

Wherefore it follows, that the Church may not make or establish laws, to
bind the consciences of faithful people.

Mat. 15.9.
The sixth reason: The Lord says: In vain they worship me, teaching for
doctrine men's precepts and commandments: 1. Tim. 4.1. etc.
And S. Paul calls laws and traditions, touching forbidding of marriage, and
use of meats, the doctrine of Devils. Collos. 2.16.18.
Also he says: Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect of
an holy day, etc. Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you, by humblenes
of mind, and worshipping of Angels. By these sentences, it is most plain and
evident, that the Church ought not, nor may not establish any such laws, to
bind, tie, or restrain men's consciences.

The seventh reason. The laws which take away from us, that Christian liberty
which Christ has gotten and purchased for us, ought not in any case to be
established or tolerated. For S. Paul exhorts us, Galat. 5.1.
to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and that we
should not be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. But the laws given by
men and not from God him self, touching matters, which are commended unto us,
with an opinion of necessity, and which are required of us, as works
meritorious, or as the service of God, take away from us the christian liberty
and freedom which Christ has purchased for us: of this sort are the laws
made, touching the observation and keeping of Lent, celebration or keeping holy
of certain feasts, not to eat flesh, upon Friday, Saturday, and certain
other days: and such like things. Wherefore it follows, that such laws ought
not in any case to be established, set up, tolerated, or borne withal.

But we will make or put an end to this Chapter, with two sentences which make
altogether for us, and are altogether against the Romish Catholics. Tho.
Aqu^^ in summae part. 3. in addititio. 46. Artic, 6
The one is Thomas of Aquine his own, saying thus. Because that the Church is
founded already and grounded in the faith and in the sacraments, it does not
belong to the Ministers of the Church, to make new Articles of faith, or new
Sacraments, or to take away those which are already made and established. For
this is the excellency and power, which belongs only unto Jesus Christ,
who is the foundation of the church. The other sentence is of Alpho^sus de
Castro his own containing these words. Alphons. de Cast. aduers. omnes. haere.
lib. 1. cap. 8.
It may not at any hand be either done or suffered, that the Church should
establishe a new article of faith: but that which was in former time the true
faith, and which notwithstanding was hidden from us, the Church brings to
pass by her testimony and witness, that the same is made known unto us. And
the Abbot, is very much deceived in the decretals, expounding the chapter,
which begins Cum Christus, that is, when Christ, etc. in the title of
Heretics, when he says, that the Pope may make new articles of faith: He
knew not, nor understood not what it was which he spoke, and therefore erred
and was deceived, as a Shoemaker should be, if he would take upon him some
matter over and besides his occupation.

THE XVI. CHAP.
Of the afflictions and persecutions of the Church.

THere are diverse which would feign have a Church of Sugar, or of velvet, (as
you would say) that is to say, that in serving God they might be exempted,
from all afflictions: Such were Zebedeus his sons, James and John, who
being covetous and greedy of worldly honors, and desiring to live at their
ease and rest, demanded of Jesus Christ, Mark. 10. 35. etc.
That he would grant unto them to sit in his glory, the one at his right
hand, and the other at his left. But the scripture teaches us altogether the
contrary, that is to say, that so long as we have to walk here below, it
stands us in hand to battle or fight, yea to pass through the thorns, and
to be tormented by the malice of the Devil, and wicked men his instruments:
yea, so much the more, by how much we shall endeavor and labor, sincerely to
serve God. Which thing also Jesus Christ has well and sufficiently declared,
to the abouesaide sons of Zebedeus, when he answered them: Mark. 10. 38
Ye know not what ye ask. Can ye drink of the Cup, that I shall drink
of, and be baptized with the baptism, wherewith I shall be baptized? Meaning
thereby, that the common state and condition of Christians is this, that they
should be exercised in this world, by the cross and tribulations, before
that they can be crowned. And this is ye cause, wherefore ye church is called
militant or warfaring, so long as it is here below on the earth, even as we
have seen and heard in the first Chapter. And for this very self same cause
also, Mark. 4.36. etc.
it is compared to a little ship, altogether tossed up and down, in the midst
of the billows or surges, and of the tempests of the Sea: also, Ps. 129.3.
to ground continually ploughed over, and through which men make the plough,
continually to go, to rent or cleave it, and to turn it vpside down.
Therefore also Saint Paul says in the Acts: Act. 14.22.
That by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. 2. Tim. 3.12.
And in the 2. Epistle to Tim. All those that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
shall suffer persecution. Jesus Christ says also unto his Disciples: John. 15.
20.
Remember the word that I said unto you, that the servant is not greater
than his Master, If they have persecuted me,, John. 16.1. 2
they will persecute you also. Also, These things have I said unto you, that
ye should not be offended. They shall excommunicate you: yea, the time shall
come, that whosoever kills you, will think, that he does God service. And
this is the state and condition, wherein God will have his Church to glorify
him, here below on the earth. And in deed, the first lesson that Jesus
Christ gave to his Disciples, was touching this matter of the Cross and
persecutions: ^at. 1^.24.
If any man (says he) will come after me, let him forsake himself, and take
up his Cross and follow me.

The experience of all times and ages does sufficiently show unto us the truth
of this matter: whether we consider somewhat narrowly, as well the state of
the ancient Church under the old Testament, as the state of that which came
afterward under the new Testament, insomuch that it may rightly say: Psalm.
129 1.
They have often afflicted me from my youth, and have done me a thousand
evils, at is said in the Psalms. For even from the beginning the Devil has
always been like to himself, that is to say, a lier, a murderer, John. 8.
44.
envious, and a false and privy accuser, and war has always continued,
Genesis 3.15. 2. Cor. 6.14.15.
between the woman's seed, and the serpents seed. And how can any man join
and put together things which are of a contrary nature? How can any man make
agreement between God and the Devil, between Christ and Belial, between the
faithful and the unbelievers.

Jesus Christ in the 3. chapter of S. John. shows a reason, to declare why it
is impossible, that the good and the wicked should suffer one with another,
and agree together: Ioh. ^.19.20.
to wit, that all the works which the world does are wicked, and therefore,
least they should be discovered and laid open by the light, it hates the
light, and loves darkness. From hence is it, that even from the beginning of
the world enmities between the faithful, and the adversaries of the truth,
have taken and had their original and first foundation. This is the cause why
Cain slew his brother Abell: that Lot the faithful servant of the Lord, was
hated of the Sodomites, that Ishmael mocked Isaac, and persecuted him: that
Esau went about to oppress and kill Jacob, even from his youth: that Joseph
had his own brethren for his enemies: that the Prophets could not agree with
the wicked Kings: nor Saint John Baptist, with the incestuous Herod, nor
Jesus Christ with the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, nor the Apostles
and Martyrs, with the infidels and unbelievers of their times. And therefore it
is mere folly, to suppose and think, that the children of God, can ever be
beloved of the world. Whereupon by good right, and for good cause Saint James
says. James. 4.4.
That the amity of the world, is the enmity of God, and he that will be a
friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God. And for this cause
also, John. 15.19.
Jesus Christ has said to his Disciples: If ye were of this world, the world
would love his own, but because ye are not of this world, but I have chosen
and separated you out of this world, therefore the world hates you. To be
short, if we would, that the Church of God, should be without persecution,
the^ of necessity must it be, that the world should be without hatred, the
Devil without envy, and our nature without vice or sin.

But to the end that we may specify and declare cetaine things, A discourse
of the ten great persecutions of the Church.
touching the persecutions of the Church, let us examine, as it were one by
one, the ten persecutions which came upon it, after the death of Jesus
Christ, under the Emperors, whereof the Ecclesiastical history makes
mention.

True it is, that in the time of Augustus the second Emperor, the Church was
much persecuted under the great Herod, who thinking to put to death the King
of the Jews, in the very cradle, commanded men to slaie all the babes and
little children of Bethelehem, and of all the borders thereof, from two years
old and under.

Also under Tiberius, the third Emperor, by Herod Antipas, the Tetrarch of
Galilee (who was the son of the first Herod) who took away his brother
Phillips wife, and put to death John Baptist, because he reproved him for that
sin and offense. And by Pilate also, who condemned and caused to be put to
death on the Cross Jesus Christ, the high Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and
Elders of the people, being the principal blowers of the fire, and chief
persecutors.

Moreover, under Caius Caligula, that horrible monster, who was appointed the
fourth Emperor, in the nine and thirtieth year after Christ's birth, and
reigned three years, ten months and eight days: and under Claudius also,
his successor. And it appears by the history of the Acts, and the Epistles
of the Apostles, how the Churches were tossed and persecuted, in Asia,
Antiochia, Pisidia, Iconium, Lystra, Galatia, Ephesus, Macedonia, Phillippi,
Thessalonia, Corinthus, Berrhoe, Rome, and many other places, but al these
persecutions, were as yet particular, and but in some one place or other, God
moderating and mitigating the hearts and hands of men, and governing after a
wonderful sort his Church in those Emperors days, to the end it might more
blessedly and plentifully grow. But omitting these, let us speak of the ten
great and general persecutions, as they are called, by which the Church was
eagerly assaulted, and cruelly tormented on all sides.

The first persecution was under Nero, the sixth Emperor, who was called
Claudius Domitius Nero. He was ordained Emperor, in the year 57. after the
birth of Christ, and reigned xiiii. years, seven months, and certain days.
And some say that the five first years he was a good man, but that
afterward he so disordered himself, and fell into such excess by incests,
murders, and all manner of wickednesses, that hardly there is as yet any other
Emperor to be found, who was defiled with such filthinesses.

Tertullian rehearses in his Apologetico, Tertul. Apolog. cap. 5.
that this Emperor was the first persecutor of the Church, Look (says he)
into your history and registers, and you shall find, that Nero was the first,
which exercised cruelty, against the Christians, which were under the
Emperors authority, and principally against the Church which was established
at Rome. Corn. Tacitus. lib. 10.
And Cornelius Tacitus declares, that the occasion which Nero took to
persecute the Church for, was this, that he commanded secretly to set on fire
the city of Rome, that he might see some form or image as it were, which
might represent and set out unto him the fire of Troy. And so the fire
continued in the City six days space, which made such a destruction, that he
became hereby very odious among the people. And seeing that he could not put
out this hatred, and waiting of him to do him some mischief for all the good
turns which he could do to the people, he found out this devise to sow
abroad this brute, rumor and report, that it was the Christians, who had been
the blowers of that fire, and the authors of that destruction, and from that
time forward, he began to persecute them, and to put them to death, both
because they were (as he said) the blowers of that fire, and also because they
were enemies of all mankind, by reason of that confession which they made of
the name of Christ. And to make them to die, his vpholder put upon their backs
the skins of wild beasts, yt they might be torn and rent (if it were
possible) in pieces with dogs, where also they crucified them and burned them
all alive: and although the day failed them, yet they burned the^, that they
might thereby give light to the night. This first persecution began about the
year of Christ 66. the x. year of Nero his reign and lasted 4. years and
somewhat more, until the death of that tyrant. Some say, and Eusebius amongst
those recites it, that this Nero about the end of his days or reign caused
S. Peter and Saint Paul to be put to death.

The 2. persecution was under Domitian the 12. Emperor, who was appointed
Emperor in the year of Christ 83. and reigned 15. years and 6. months. He
was so lifed up in cruelty and pride that he would have his subjects call him
God and Lord, and caused images of his own person to be made of gold and
silver. He ordained (as his father Vespasian had done before him) that
inquiry should be made against the race of David, and that they which were
found to be thereof, should be put to death, for he feared the coming of
Christ, and about the fourteenth year of his reign, and the year of Christ
97. he caused by an edict to be published, and proclaimed a cruel persecution
against the Christians, insomuch that the Church was miserably and a long time
tormented under him.

The third persecution, was in the days of Traian, the fourteenth Emperor,
who was appointed Emperor about the year of Christ 100. who governed the
Empire nineteen years, six months, and fifteen days. He is greatly
praised of the Historiographers, as a courteous and gentle Prince: and some say
that he was so renowned and famous, by reason of his justice, and courtesy,
that ever after so often as any was created Emperor, the people yielded this
blessed exclamation, outcrie, and consent: Be he more happy then Augustus,
and better then Traian, yet notwithstanding he persecuted the Church, and
mark the occasion that he took so to do. He was brought up from his
infancy, in the Paganish and Heathenishe superstitions, by reason whereof he
disdained and despised christian religion, because that it was contrary to
these superstitions. Besides that, he had about him certain courtiers, which
were blowers of that fire in him and augmented that disdain, and disspite in
him: insomuch that diverse Historiographers record, that he was not so much of
his own nature inclined to shed blood, as deceived and stirred up thereto, by
his councellers, and principally by the Pagane Priests, Freculph. lib. 2. cap.
20.
who (as Freculphus witnesses) gave good store of silver to the governors,
and bribed freely, to the end that they would put the christians to death as
their deadly enemies. Some add, that the number of Christians, was very much
increased, whereupon many inconveniences might come to the Roman Empire, if
the danger were not prevented: which also was a cause that Traian was the more
inflamed and kindled against them, as also Sabellicus writes, Sabellicus.
that the great number of Christians were more suspected of this Emperor,
then the religion. After this sort then did they accuse the Christians of
sedition and blasphemy, and for these causes they were cruelly persecuted,
insomuch as it appears by that which Pliny the second has written, Plinius
secu^d
That public commandments were sent from the Emperor, to the governors of
all the Provinces, by which every governor was enforced too persecute: and so
the persecution was spread abroad throughout all the places of the Roman
Empire, which at that time contained, not only Europe, but also a great part
of Asia and Africa: And the said persecution endured about fourteen years,
but yet in such order that in the beginning of the reign of Traian, it was
somewhat less sharp, but afterward it flamed out, and burst forth more and
more.

Tertul. Apologi. cap. 2.
Now the said Pliny the second had at that time the government of a ceataine
Province, to wit, of Bethinia and as Tertullian says, he was appointed to
persecute the Christians, about the year of Christ, 112. and of Traian the
fourteenth year, Wherefore he being astonished with the great number of
martyrs, which were every day put to death, did write a letter to the aforesaid
Emperor, to advertise him, or to give him to understand of that which was
done in his Province, and to have his advise and counsel touching that which
he was to do in time to come, to whom the Emperor made answer by an other
letter, declaring unto him, and making him to understand his intent and
purpose. And because that in these letters, we may see on the one side, the
innocence of the faithful people, and on the otherside the injustice of
tyrants, and because they do lively set out unto us the estate of the
Christians at this day, and the manners and customs of those which persecute
them, and may by this mean stand the age wherein we live in very good
fleed, for instruction both of the one and the other, it shall be good and
expedient, that we in regester them, and put them down. Here now follows
Pliny his letter, which he sent to the Emperor Traian, even as it is written
in his own book.

Sir, Pliny the second his letter to Traian.
I am accustomed to declare unto your Majesty all the affairs and matters
whereof I am in doubt. For who can better correct my dullness, or instruct mine
ignorance? I was never yet present at the trials of Christians, and
proceedinges against them, and therefore I know not what informations, they
put in against the^, or for what cause they punish them. And I have been in
great doubt, to wit, whether there be any difference to be made of ages, or
whether those which be very young, do not in some thing differ from these,
which are more strong, or whether we should pardon them which repent, or
whether this might stand a man in any steed that has been a Christian, to
be so no more. And although the name import no wickedness, yet I doubt
whether the wickednesses tied to the name, ought to be punished or no. But
behold, what way and mean, I have hitherto held and taken, touching them
which were accused before me as Christians: I have asked the^ whether they
were christians, threatening them to bring them to trial and examination: and
if some perseuered, I have decreed and appointed them to be lead to
punishment, for I doubt not at all, that whatsoever it was, which they would
confess, but that a man ought to punish such stubbornness and indurate
obstinacy. There have been some lead with such a like kindled folly, and
because they were Citizens of Rome, I have decreed that they should be sent
back again to Rome. In process of time (as it commonly falls out) the
mischief is spread abroad and diverse kinds are come up. Some have published a
little book, without the authors name, containing the name of diverse which
deny themselves to be christians, or so to have been, I have made the^ call
upon the Gods, I spoke first, and they after me: and seeing that they offered
wine and ince^se, to your image which I caused too be brought thither, with
the images of the Gods, and besides this that they cursed christ, I have
decreed to let the^ go at liberty, and specially because some say, that those
which are Christians in deed, cannot be induced or drawn to this, for any
force or violence, which you can do to them. Some being disclosed by the
accusers, have first confessed that they were Christians, and immediately have
denied that they were such, yea indeed that they had bin christians, though
they would not be so any more: othersome said, that it was but little above
iii. years since they were such, but that they would be so no more: other
some said that it was a longer time, yea some that it was above xx. years. Al
worshipped your images, and the pictures and images of the Gods: these also
cursed Christ.

Moreover, they affirmed, that this was the sum or chiefest either of their
fault or of their error, that they had a certain day appointed, wherein they
assembled themselves before day, and did sing altogether a song or Psalm unto
Christ as unto God, and it of their own accord they bound themselves by an
oath, not to commit any offense: but it was done to this end, that they might
not commit any theftes, robberies, or adulteries, least they should break
their faith promised and given, and should deny that which was given them to
keep, and this being done they are accustomed to depart, every one about his
business, and afterward assemble themselves together again, to take their
refection in common, and one with another, and yet without doing any manner of
evil. Now then they ceased after my edict and proclamation, by which,
according to your decrees I have forbidden to keep any asse^blies or
co^uenticles. And so much the more have I supposed it to be necessary, to know
this, by the examination of 2. maidens, which some say, have served such people.
But I have not found any other thing, saving a certain perverse superstition,
and therefore putting of to be instructed therein, I have had my recourse to you.
(Sir) to have counsel thereof, for it seemed unto me that this was a matter meet
and worthy to be co^sulted of, principally, by reason of of the multitude and
great number of the^, which are in danger. For diverse of all conditions and
estates, old and young, men and women, are commonly in danger, and so will
be. For the contagion and infection of this superstition is spread abrod, not
only in Cities, but also in towns, villages, and fields, and it seems, that
it cannot or will be easily stayed and corrected: and verily, we perceive, that
they begin to frequent and repair to the Temples, whereunto they were not wont
to come, and that they give them selves to celebrating the divine services,
which were long time omitted, and that many beasts are sold, to be offered in
sacrifice, whereas heretofore, there were few buiers found. By this we may
easily conjecture, what a multitude of men may come to ame^dme^t, if we would
give the^ leisure to repent themselves. And this is the co^tents of Pliny his
letter to Traian: now follows the answer.

My friend Secundus, Traianns answer to Pliny.
thou have done that which thou ought to do, in the knowledge of the causes
of these me^ who have bin accused before these christians. For we can not
generally establishe and ordein any matter, which has as it were a certain
form.

Let there be no more informatio^s and inquires made of them, but if any accuse
the^ let them be punished yet so notwithstanding, that he which shall deny
that he is a Christian, and shall declare the same by effect, to wit in making
supplication and prayer to our Gods, although that in time heretofore he have
been suspected, do obtain pardon by this repentance. And as touching the
books which are published and set out without the autours name, they ought not
to have place, or to be accounted amongst crimes or faults, for that is a very
ill example, and also it has not bin begun in our time.

Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. Tertull. Apolo. Cap. 2.
Behold the two letters, whereof Eusebius makes mention in his Ecclesiastical
History, alleging Tertullian in his Apologetico. which Tertullia^ censuring
the Emperors answer, speaks after this manner. O sentence confused and
darkened by necessity, which decrees that inquiry shall not be made of them,
because they seem innocent people, and yet in the mean while commands that
they should be punished as culpable and guilty. It uses pardon and cruelty,
it disse^bleth and punishes. Wherefore O Emperor do thou abuse thy self, in
thy charge and Censure. If thou condemn Christians, why do thou not make
and put in also informations against them? Or if thou make and put in no
informations, Wherefore do thou condemn them.

The fourth persecution was under Marcus Antonius verus, the xvi. Emperor, who
was created in the year of Christ 162. He is otherwise called of the
Historiographers Marcus Aurelius Verus, and surnamed the Philosopher. He
governed the Empire the space of xviii. or xix. years. His virtues were great
and wonderful, yet the true virtue was wanting in him, to wit, the fear of
God. For look by how much more he was gentle toward his own, by so much he
was the more rude and severe against the Christians, as a Stoicall man, and
nourished and brought up from his infancy, with the Priests of Satia, his
laws and edicts declare how cruel he was toward the Christians. For in
the book of digestes we find such a writing or law that he made: that those
which would do any thing against the religion of their Ancestors, should
be banished and sent into the Isles.

Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 62.
Eusebius recites certain things taken out of the Apology of Melitus, the
bishop of Sardis, amongst which is this also to be showed that the faithful
people suffered persecution, by reason of some new Edictes, which were
published in Asia, wherewith the slaunderers making themselves strong were
provoked and stirred up, to pill and rob the faithful in every place
wheresoever they found them, and to steal away the goods of the poor
innocents.

Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1
The Epistle of the Martyrs of Vienna, and of Lions, Cities of France, sent to
the faithful people of Asia and Phrigia (of which Eusebius makes mention)
speaks of a writing or law of the Emperor sent too the governor of France,
by which he ordained, that they should put to death the christians,
perseuering and continuing in their confession, and that they should let the
other go, which would abjure, forswere and forsake the same.

As touching the crimes and faults, whereof the Christians were accused, the
foresaid Epistle recites that the Pagans provoked, yea, constrained them to
confess strange matters: and behold what it says. Some were found amongst
us, which were weak, who being vanquished by Satan, and very much fearing
torments, which they saw the Saints suffer and abide, being also pushed on
by the soldiers, have alleged against us that in our bankettes, we should
eat the flesh of little children, as was used in Thiests his banquet, and that
we commit whoredoms and horrible incests, like Oedipus, and other things
which are not lawefull for us to name, yea and that so execrable and
abominable, that it is not possible to think that men should ever have
committed such acts.

And as concerning the torments, the self same Epistle rehearses them. That
the Christians were spied and watched both within their houses and without:
that men cried out against them in all public, and open places: that they did
beat and whip them, draw them up and down, stoned them, pilled, and took
away their goods, and imprisoned them: that they applied and laid unto them
burning blades of iron that they shut them together in an instrument of torture
and torment even unto the fifth hole, that they put them into obscure and dark
dungeons, that they strangled them within the prison, that they cast them to
beasts that they put the^ with in cauldro^s of iron to burn them, that they
hanged them on Gibbets, that they cast them to bulls, which might pearse and
gore them with their horns, and such other like things.

The 5. persecution, was under Seuerus, xxi. Emperor, who was established in
the Empire in the year of Christ, 196. He reigned 18. years. The state of the
church was some what peaceable, from the time of the Emperor Commodus (who was
the xviii. Emperor and created about the year of Christ 182.) until Seuerus
came, who in the ix. year of his reign (which was after Eusebius account in
the year of Christ 205.) moved and stirred up a terrible persecution against
the christians, by the gouerners of the Provinces and countries. And some
think, that he was moved thereto, rather by the vices and faults, which the
furious common people, did very fasly and wrong fully lay to the Christians
charge, then to say that of himself he had his heart inflamed against them.

Tertullian who was in his time, says, Tertullian, ad scapul.
that he showed him self for a certain time, not only courteous, gentle, and
full of beneficence, liberality and good will, but also did openly resist the
rage of the people: yet Eusebius proves by diverse examples of the Martyrs,
that this Emperor was a terrible persecutor of the Church.

Touching the crimes falsely objected and alleged, against the Christians,
Tertul. ad Scapu. and in Apologet.
Tertullian recites diverse of them, saying: That they were accused of sedition
and treason: that they had blamed and spoken evil of the Emperor his honor:
that they were murderers, Church robbers, incestuous persons, killers of
infantes, which they did eat, the flesh being raw: that they committed
whordome without having respect with whom, after that they had put out the
candles, with which filthiness, the Gnostici, were in deed spotted. Also that
they worshipped the head of an Ass, in the steed of God: that they worshipped
the Sun: that they were in nothing profitable for others: that they were
enemies of mankind, and the greatest and chiefest crime that they laid against
them, or upon them, was this, that they despised the gods which other men
worshipped.

And touching the sorts and manners of torments, we may gather it out of that
which Eusebius has written of it: Eusebius.
that some were buffetted and beaten: other some beheaded, others burned:
others had boiling pitch powered, over all the members of their bodies, and so
they were by little and little burned and put to death: and besides all this,
that all their goods were pilled away, robbed, and confiscate.

The sixth persecution, was under Julius Maximianus, the xxvi. Emperor, who
succeeded Alexander, in the year of Christ, 237. and reigned only about three
years. He was a sheepeheard in his young age, but because he was a great and
mighty man, being a Soldier, he was created Emperor without any authority
of the Senate, but by the only good will and pleasure of the Soldiers and
warlike company. He being cruel, barbarous, and rude, moved great
persecution against the Christians, but namely and chieflly against the
Doctors, teachers, and governors of the Churches, supposing, that when these
men, who were (as it were) the pillars of Christian religion, should be
discomfited, the people would thereby be easily turned away. Eusebius says,
Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 28.
that this Emperor was not kindled and set on fire, to execute this cruelty:
but only for hatred which he bear, to Alexanders stock and house, wherein
there were many Christians: But he had not any great leisure or time to
exercise his cruelty: for before he had reigned three whole years, he was
slain of his soldiers, and with him his son, who was nineteen years old,
and their bodies were cast into the River.

The seventh persecution, was under the Emperor Decius, about the year of
Christ, 247. Eusebius recites, Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 39.
that this persecution was moved by Decius, because he meant evil, to
Philippus his Predecessor. And yet notwithstanding in an other place he
says, Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 41.
That Dionisius the Bishop of Alexandria, writ unto Fabianus, the Bishop of
Antioch, that his persecution was not moved or stirred up by the Emperor
Decius, but only confirmed by a certain ordinance and decree which he made,
after it had been a whole year before stirred up by the Pagans, who were
provoked thereunto by reason of a certain stir and uproar. But whatsoever
was the cause thereof, this is certain, it was a terrible and cruel
persecution, against the poor Christians, Nicephorus. li. 5. Cap. 29.
insomuch as Nicephorus says, That it as as easy a matter to count the sand
of the sea, as to number all them which suffered martyrdom, in this
persecution, and that not in one place, or two alone, but almost through all
the world.

And as touching the kinds of punishments, which they used against the
Christians, we may easily judge how diverse and many they were, by the extract
which Euse. Eusebius.
has made, out of Dionisius his writings, touching the Martyrs of
Alexandria: for he makes mention of boiling pitch, of stoning, of throwing or
casting sharp Reeds against their faces and eyes, of trayning them upon the
pauementes of the streets, of dashing or crushing them against the stones, of
beating, and whipping, of burning, of percing the inwardes or bowels, with
pointed or sharp percers, of cutting of heads, and of casting them down
headlong from high places. Saint Cyprian also recites, Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist.
25.
that certain were condemned to dig metal in the Mines. And Vincentius, in
his mirror or glass, adds the tearing of them a sunder with cords of iron,
Vincentius in specul.
burning Lamps put and set to the Martyrs sides, the rage of wild beasts,
hanging, and strangling, and an other sort of torture or torment, called
Cheualet, when they racked the^ in pieces with wild Horses. And besides all
this, the persecutors went so far astray, that they took away the christians
goods, bringing and leading the common people into the Christians houses, to
pill and sack them, as men are wont to do, in some mutiny, stir, or sedition,
as we may behold in the writing of Dionisius, sent to Fabianus, which says
thus: That so long as this persecution lasted, all the whole multitude of the
faithful, were enforced to flee into the Mountains, and into the
wildernesses, and to wander up and down, as vagabounds or straying people,
whereof some dyed with hunger, thirst, cold, and diverse sorts of sicknesses and
diseases, other some were devoured by wild beasts: other some, slain by
thieves and robbers, and other taken by the Barbarians, and led away as
slaves.

The eight persecution, was under Licincius Valerian, and Galien his son, who
were created Emperors, about the year of Christ, 255. and reigned fifteen
years: Galien reigned together with his father, five or six years, and the
rest above. Eusebius. lib. 7. Cap. 10.
Eusebius records this of the foresaid Valerian: That in the beginning, he
was peaceable and quiet, toward the men of God, and guided by a very good
amiable, friendly, and loving affection: that he showed him self familiar
toward the faithful, and entreat them courteously and gently: that his
Court was full of Christian people, and became a Church of God, but that the
Master and Principal, of the Synagogue, of the Magiacens or Sorcerers of
Egypt, did afterward persuade him, to persecute and put to death the Saints,
who, as they said, let and hindered the Inchaunters, and their Inchauntmentes,
of which Valerian was an earnest lover: so under his authority, the Governors
of the provinces, did in every place execute a cruel persecution.

And the foresaid Eusebius, adds: Eusebius. lib. 7. Cap. 11.
that Dionisius writ these words, of the cruelty exercised in Alexandria:
This should be a thing superfluous and more than needed, to recite the names
of our Martyrs, seeing that the number is almost infinite, and there were
diverse which were unknown to me. But yet know this, that amongst them there
were of all sorts of people, men, women, young, old, mothers, daughters,
soldiers, handicraftes men, To be short, of all conditions, and of all ages.

As touching the names of torments, the Historiographers do rehearse them to
be diverse sorts: they reckon the whippe, wild beasts, fire, the sword,
tearing and renting asunder of bodies, long keeping them in dark prisons, where
they made the Martyrs to wither and dry away with griefs and pininges:
forbidding any to go to visit them, laying to them flaming and burning rods of
iron to burn the^. Plummets or Balls of lead to kill the^, the drawinges with
Horses, blows with great staves, hurling them headlong into diverse tortures or
torments, named Cheualets, Bears and wild Bulls, rostinges upon Girdirons,
whot Ouens, banishments, violent taking away of goods, and besides certain
other torments.

The ninth persecution, was under Aurelian, who was created Emperor, in the
year of Christ. 273. and reigned six years. Vincentius in speculo.
Vincentius in his Mirror or Glass, lays out and rehearses at large, a
great many of the faithful, which he says, suffered Martyrdom under this
Emperor, and adds, that he caused them to be diligently sought out in
diverse places, and at the last put the^ to death in France and Italy: But by
the writings of other Authors worthy credit, it appears, that Aurelian
did nothing else, but think upon before hand, and devise this persecution, and
did not execute it. For Eutropius, Vopiscus, and Eusebius in his Chronicle,
have written, That after this Emperor had decreed the persecution, he was
suddenly very much astonished, with the destruction which would have come
thereof, and very quickly after he was slain. And Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical history, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30.
speaks of him after this manner. It is true that Aurelian was then such a
one toward us, that is to say, gentle, courteous, and a friend to
Christians, but in the advancement, growth and proceeding of his kingdom, he
did somewhat estraunge himself from us, insomuche that being already almost
won by some Counselors, he moved persecution against us, and great brute
or noise was thereof him amongst us. Notwithstanding, even then when he was
ready to persecute us, and had as it were subscribed to the decree, which
they were to publishe against us, a certain vengeance and wrath sent from
God, suddenly ouertooke him, which caused this pernicious and hurtefull cruelty
to cease.

The tenth persecution, was under Dioclesian, and Maximianus Hercules.
Dioclesian was established Emperor, about the year of our Lord, 288. and
associating unto him Maximianus, in the government of the Empire, he reigned
twenty years.

Pomponius Laetus, in the abridgement of the Roman stories, recites, That
Dioclesian forgetting that he was a man, and naming himself the brother of
the Sun and the Moon, as though there had been in him some divine or
heavenly Majesty, made an edict and law, by which he cammaunded that they
should worship him as God, and that all without difference of what raze and
condition soever they were, should kiss his feet, and for this end, he had
shoes fluffed and beset with gold, and precious stones.

The self same Pompeius says also, that Maximianus was openly cruel, raging,
terrible to behold, without faith or trustiness.

Now this persecution, which they moved against the Christians, lasted ten
years, and was the greatest and cruellest of all.

Vincentius in specul. lib. 12. cap. 2.
Vincentius in his glass, speaks of a whole legion of Christians, called the
legion of Thebes in Egypt, which was all cut in pieces, because they would
not sacrifice to Idols, as the Emperor had commanded.

He says also, Vincen. in spec. lib. 12. cap. 136.
that at Trieres (which is a City situated by the River Morsella) one
Rictionarius exercised so great cruelty, that the Rivers were red with the
blood of the Christians that were slain: and besides, that he sent Posts up
and down, hither and thither, with decrees and express Commissions, to this
end, that in whatsoever place any Christian was found, they should presently
put him to death.

Sabellicus recites, Sabellie.
that in the City of Alexandria, Peter the Bishop of the said place was
beheaded, besides more tha^ three hundred other.

Henry of Erforde, Henr. Erford
makes mention of Gereon Bishop of Colen, who as he says, was also beheaded,
with three hundred and eighteen companions.

Otto of Phrysingia, rehearses, Otto phrisi. lib. 3. cap. 41
that Mauricius, a conductor or Captain of a Christian legion was slain, and
with him, 1666. persons of his own people: and that Victor was put to death in
the city of Troy (which is now called Panthus) with 366. of his companions or
fellows.

Chroni. Martin. Fasicul. tem.
The Chronicle of Martin, and the book which is entitled Fasiculus temporum,
do witness, that so many Christians as were in England, were all put to death.

Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 3.
Eusebius says, That by the Edictes of these Emperors, commandment was
given, that the Temples should be rased and pulled down to the ground, he
holy Scriptures burned, and all Christians perseuering in their religion made
infamous, and deprived of all their liberties, and of all their offices and
dignities. Also that all Prelates, Bishops, and Pastors, should be in
every place straightly imprisoned, and afterward with all cruelty constrained
and enforced to sacrifice to Idols, ^ otherwise that they should be put to
death.

Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 11.
He says also, that the Emperor having sent certain commandments, to a
certain City of Phrigia, the commandments tendinge to this end, that the
inhabitaunts should offer Sacrifices to the Gods, and should worship their
Images, they not minding to obey being all Christians, yea even the
Magistrate, the Treasurer, and the captain, the City was besieged, and all
it, with all the people therein, were burned together.

Nicephorus writes, Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 6.
That in one City, at once, there were burned in one temple, on Christ's birth
day, twenty thousand persons, by the commandment of Maximianus.

To be short, the persecution was in every place so cruel and so sharp, that
the Christian faith was almost extinguished and put out, as well in the East
by Dioclesian, as in the West, by Maximianus.

And as concerning the fashions and manner of torments, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap.
3.6.7.8.9.
they were sundry and diverse, yea, and very strange. They did beat the
Christians with rods, they racked them, they murdered them, they burned them,
they threw them by thousands into the deapth of the Sea, they cast them to
wild beasts, as Leopardes, Bears, Lions, Bullockes and Bulls, provoked
against them by fires and sharp pricks or goades: they hanged them on
Gibbettes, they put them to death on Crosses, they tied them to posts with
their heads downewarde, they lifted them upon forkes, upon the which they
kept them alive, until famine and hunger caused them to die: they spoiled
them all naked, and they tied them by one of their feet, and lifted them up
into the air, which was a cruel and villainous spectacle, specially in the
women so cruelly handeled: they tied them to branches and to trees, and they
made men bow down the strongest boughs, to draw and tear in sunder the
members of the poor faithful people, who were tied thereto: they beheaded
them: they choked them with smoke, which proceeded from a little fire: they
cut of their hands, their cares, and other members: they roasted them upon the
coals, not to the end to make them die sodeinely or quickly, but to torment
them more long: they pricked them under their nails, at their fingers ends
and toes, with Reeds and other sharp instruments: they powered upon them
boiling lead: they fleied them all alive, and afterward cast upon them
Vinagre and Salt, Sabel. En. 7. cap. 8.
and so killed them most cruelly: In sum, there were so many Martyrs, so
many deaths, so many sorts or punishments in this general persecution, and
these so cruel, villainous and horrible, that there is no tongue, which can
suffice to rehearse the same.

But above all this is to be noted, that this persecution (as Eusebius
recites) came through the just judgment of God, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 1.
because that the Christians, abusing the liberty which GOD had given them to
serve him withal, became slow and sluggish full of hypocrisy and false shows
and dissembling, seditious, contentious persons, pursuing one another, for
small injuries, and that through deadly hatred. The bishops and Pastors,
inflamed, with envy, hatred, and ill will, puffed up with ambition and pride,
having also rejected the rule of godliness and charity, lifted up themselves
one against another, provoking and outragiously threatening one an other,
insomuch that they seemed rather to hold and possess, the seat of Tyraunts,
than of Prelates: an example certainly which ought very well to teach us, to
walk in humility, and in the fear of God, and to remain and abide united
and joined together one of us with an other, diligently keepyng through the
band of peace, that spiritual unity (which God commands us,) if we will
live in tranquillity, and enjoy some rest here below, on the earth, in the
midst of a perverse and crooked generation.

And thus much touching the ten great and general persecutions of the Church,
as we have been able to gather them out of the Historiographers.

But as we have before noted, that before this the Church was persecuted, in
the time or the Emperors Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius: so we
have to mark, that in the time of other Emperors, who reigned between the
time, of whom we have spoken in the general persecutions, the faithful
people and Christians, did not so live at their ease, but that every day some
new assaults, were made against them, and laid upon them.

And after these Emperors, yet was not the Church in rest, but was afterward
almost every day, assaulted and tormented, as for example, under Galerius, a
cruel tyrant, who increased the persecution begun by Dioclesian, and under
certain others.

Now this is to be noted, that from the first Bishop of Rome, unto Syluester
the first of that name (who was constituted and set up in the year of Christ,
314.) there were thirty and two Bishops of Rome, all them suffered matyrdome.
Since that time, the other Bishops of Rome, for the most part, yea almost
all, have duly governed and behaved themselves, in the execution of their
charge and offices, and in steed of the vow of martyrdom, which their
predecessors had, they have usurped another very trim haunt, they
themselves making themselves in steed of the Pagane Emperors, Tyraunts and
persecutors of the Church. But yet notwithstanding, there were also certain
cruel Emperors under whom, or in whose days the Church suffered very much.

Julian the Apostata, Julian the Apostata.
about the year of Christ 363. reigned Emperor about two years. He
ordained that the Christians should not be received to warfare, and that they
should not have any temporal office, touching criminal judgment, meaning
thereby any authority to judge, touching life and death, saying (he indeed
mocking them) that by their law it was forbidden to use the sword. He made a
law by which the goods of the Galileans (for so he called the Christians)
should be confiscate, saying, that Christ had commanded them poverty. He
ordained and set a certain punishmente by money upon them which would not
offer Sacrifice, and thereby found the mean to get and catch a great sum of
money, and when the christians complained thereof, it belongs to you (would
he say) to suffer evils, for your Galilean has so commanded you. Socrates lib.
3. cap. 13. and 1^. Valens.
Socrates recites all this, in his Ecclesiastical history lib 3. cap. 13. and
14.

Valens being created Emperor, about the year of Christ 366. reigned
fifteen year. He sent many Bishops, Elders, and Deacons into exile, and
caused them to be grievously tormented, and used great cruelty against the
Christian Church.

Touching which, we will note and put down a history meet to be
remembered, which fell out about the year of Christ 380 whereof Socrates the
Historiographer, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 18. Sozom. lib. 16. 8.
and Sozomen. both make mention. There was (say they) in the City of Edessa in
Mesopotamia, a temple of S. Thomas, whereto the Christians did commonly come,
and where in they had their ordinary asse^blies, which thing the Emperor
Valens seeing, and knowing that this multitude detested his heresy, he gave
the Provost of the City a blow with his hand, because he had not given order
to drive from thence the said Christians. Now this Provost having received
that blow, and being ready and at the point to execute the Emperors
commandment against his will and affection, not willing also to commit so
great a murder against so great a multitude, secretly advertised them and gave
them intelligence to withdraw themselves that they might not be found, but
none would yield to his counsel, not fearing any threatening insomuch that
on the morrow all assembled themselves and met together in the aforesaid
place, as they were accustomed. Then as the Provost of that City went with a
great company of soldiers to the said Temple, to put in execution the
Emperors commandment, a poor woman, holding a little child of hers by the
hand, made have to go to martyrdom with her brethren, and with the have which
she made, she brake the ranckes and rows of the soldiers. Wherewith the
Provost being angry and much moved, caused the said woman to come unto him,
to whom he said O cursed woman, whither runnest thou so unorderly, thither
(says she) whither all the other make have to go. Do not thou (says he)
understand that the Provost goes thither to murder and kill all those that
he shall find there? I understood it (says she) very well, and therefore I
make have that I may be found with them. And whither leadest thou this little
child, said he? The woman said, thither also, to the end that he likewise
may receive the crown of martyrdom. When the foresaid Provost understood
these things he marvelled at the courage and boldness of the Christians, and
returned toward the Emperor, declaring unto him, that all were prepared and
ready to endure and suffer death for their faith: and that it was not
reasonable or meet to put to death in so little time, so great a multitude of
people. By which word he persuaded Valens to moderate and stay his wrath and
so the aforesaid faithful people of Edessa escaped death. Notwithstanding it
is said in another place, that they were afterward thrown out of the City
and sent into banishment.

We might indeed easily bring forth in this place, many other examples of
persecutions under the Emperors, but then this Discourse or Treatise would
be ouerlong. And also it is certain that the greatest persecutions have
sithence the abouenamed, fallen upon the poor Church, by them that pretended
themselves to be the gouerners thereof, who had on their side worldly Kings
and Princes, who also gave them all, and showed them al favor, as the
histories of the Martyrs, both in former ages, and also in our time, do
yield sufficient credit and witness thereof: so that it is not needful to
insert or allege in this place any examples thereof. Points to be marked
touching the persecution of the church


But touching this matter of the persecutions of the Church, we have to
observe and mark certain points,

The first point is, that persecutions and afflictions come not without the
providence and appointment of God. To this end are to be referred these
places, I am the Lord that form the light, Isaiah. 45.7.
and create darkness. I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these
things, Amos. 3.6.
this is in Isaiah. And Amos says: Shall there be evil in a city, Psalm.
39.9.
and the Lord has not done it? And David, I should have been dumb, and not
have opened my mouth, 1. Pet. 4, 19.
because thou did it. So does Saint Peter conclude. Let them that suffer
according to the will of God, commit their souls unto him in well doing, as
unto a faithful Creator. Heereunto Job had regard also, when he said: Job. 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the
Lord. Psalm. 39.9.
And David saying (as I have ere while alleged) I should have been dumb, and
not have opened my mouth, because thou did it. Also when he was reviled,
railed upon, and as it were cursed by Shimei, Suffer him (says he) to curse
David, 2. Sam. 16.10.
for he curses, even because the Lord has bidden him curse David, who dare
then say, wherefore have thou done so? Heereunto likewise Jesus Christ had
regard, John. 9. 11.
when he said unto Pilate. Thou could have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above.

Now this point or matter contains three arguments and reasons to comfort
us in the midst of our crosses and troubles. The first is, that we are not in
or under the power of fortune, or of men, but of God. The second, that God does
justly and for good causes afflict us: for as he is faithful and righteous in
all his works: so he does not send or lay upon us any affliction, but that
which we have indeed deserved. Mat. 10.19.26.28. etc. Psalm. 33.4. 1. Cor.
10.13 To. 8.28. Hebr. 12.11. Psa. 1 26. throughout specially verse 5.6. John.
16.20. Luke 16.25.
The 3. that seeing the affliction we suffer comes from God our father, it
shall not ouerwhelm or overthrow us, but shall turn to our great good, joy, and
salvation. Now if the cross fall not from our shoulders, so long as this life
lasts God himself minding and willing to have it so, let us remember that
which is said of Lazarus and the wicked rich man in S. Luke: Thou wicked man
remember yt thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, and likewise Lazarus
pains. Now there fore he is comforted and thou art tormented. The second point
is, wherefore God does rather afflict his church the^ other people, as S. Peter
says, 1. Pet. 4.17.
The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God. And there are
5. principal reasons or causes hereof. The first, because that by affliction,
God declares unto us, that he loves us, as he speaks thereof in the
Proverbs, Pro. 3.11.12 Heb. 12.5.6.
and in the Epistle to the Hebrwes. Secondarily, because it pleases GOD by
this means to discern us that are his children from infidels and hypocrites,
as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrwes declares the same in the xii.
Heb. 12.8. 1. Cor. 11.19.
Chapter: and for this cause also Saint Paul said unto the Corinthians: There
must be heresies even among you, that they which are approved among you might
be known. Iam. 1.2.3. 1. Pet. 1.7.
And Saint James, and Saint Peter do for this very cause, call the afflictions
of the faithful trials of their faith. Thirdly, because they which know the
will of their master and do it not, Luke. 12.47.
are less excusable, yea shall be beaten with many stripes. Fourthly, because
it serves to set out the justice of god, to the end we should not think
that God winketh at the sins of his people. Fifthly, because it serves also,
to give example of instruction to the wicked: for as Jesus Christ says: Luke.
23.31.
If they do these things to a green tree, what shall be done to the dry?
And Saint Peter: If judgment (says he) first begin at us, 1. Pet. 4. 17.
etc.
what shall be the end of them which obey not the Gospel of God. And if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?

The third point, that the afflictions of the Church and faithful people,
are always moderated and kept in good measure by the hand of God himself: For
he has promised, that although he chasten his people, yet he will not destroy
them for all that. Hitherto must be referred these places: Deuteronomy. 4.30.31.
When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, at the
last if thou return to the Lord thy God, and be obedient unto his voice (for
the Lord thy God is a merciful God) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy
thee, 2. Sam. 7.14. 15.
nor forget the covenant of thy fathers, which he swear unto them: I will be
his father, and he shall be my son: and if he sin I will chasten him with
the rod of men, and with the plagues of the children of men. But my mercy
shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I have put away
before thee. For my names sake will I defer my wrath, Isaiah. 4.8.9. 10.
and for my promise I will refrain it from thee, that I cut thee not of.
Behold I have fined thee, but not as silver, I have chosen thee in the furnace
of affliction, Iere. 30.11.12. 13.17.
I am with thee (says the Lord to Jacob) to save thee though I utterly
destroy all the nations where I have scattered thee, yet will I not utterly
destroy thee, but I will correct thee by judgment and not utterly cut thee
off. For thus says the Lord, Ezec. 14.21 22.
Thy bruising is incurable, and thy wound is dolorous. There is none to judge
thy cause, or to lay a plaster, there are no medicines nor help for thee: but
I will restore health unto thee, and will heal thee of thy wounds, says the
Lord, Hosea. 5.15. Hosea. 6.1.2
etc. When I send upon Jerusalem my four sore judgments (says the Lord)
that is to say, the sword, and famine, and the noisome beast, and pestilence to
destroy man and beast out of it. Yet behold therein shall be left a remnant of
them that shall be carried away both sons and daughters, and ye shall be
comforted. In their afflictions they will seek me diligently, saying: Come
and let us return to the Lord, for he has spoiled, and he will heal us,
he has wounded us, and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us,
and in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.
There has no temptation taken you, 1. Cor. 10. 13
but such as apperteineth to man: and God is faithful, which will not suffer
you to be tempted above that you be able, but will even give the issue with the
temptation, that ye may be able to bear it.

The fourth point, wherefore God does not send succor and aid to his
Church, so soon as it is afflicted. Certainly the cross is sometimes so
weighty and heavy upon our shoulders, that it seems to us that God
sleeps, or else that he has forgotten us: as we hear the complaints of
Saints touching that matter in the scripture. How long will thou forget me O
Lord, says David, Psalm. 13.1.
how long will thou hide thy face from me? And again, Up, why sleep thou
O Lord? awake be not far off for ever. Psalm. 44.23.24.
Wherefore hydest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery, and our affliction?
And Habacu. O Lord, says he, How long shall I cry, Habae. 1.2. 13.
and thou will not hear? even cry out unto thee for violence, and thou will
not help? Thou art of pure eyes, and can not see evil, thou can not
behold wickedness: wherefore do thou look upon the transgressors, and
hold thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man, that is more righteous
then he? But God sleeps not at any hand, even as it is said in one of the
Psalms, Psalm. 121.4.
Beeholde he that keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep: neither
does he forget us, as he himself assures us by his Prophet Isaiah, when he
says.

Isaia. 49.15.
Can a woman forget her child? or will she not pity the fruit of her womb?
But though she should forget, yet will not I forget thee says the Lord. Haba.
3.2. 1. Cor. 10. 13.
And indeed God, does not at any time forget his mercy, no not in the midst
of his wrath and anger, neither does he suffer us to be be tempted above our
strength.

Wherefore then is it, that he does not send us succor and aid without
delay, thereby to deliver us from oppression? It is first and foremost, because
our sins are the cause thereof. Isaia. 59, 1. 2.
Behold (says the prophet) the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot
save: neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear. But your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hidden his face from
you, that he will not hear. Secondly, because that serves for the
advancement of God his glory, and for the augmenting and increase of our
faith: as appears by that which is written touching the sickness, and death
of Lazarus, the brother of Martha and Marie. John. 11.14. 15.
This sickness, says Jesus Christ, is not to death, but for the glory of
God, that the son of God might be glorified thereby: and afterward.
Lazarus is dead, (says he) and I am glad for your sake that I was not there,
that ye may believe. And to this last point is referred that which S. Paul
says, We received the sentence of death in our selves, 2. Cor. 1.9.
because we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead.

The fifth point: that afflictions and dangers increase, even then when the
deliverance is nigh, examples hereof, are set out unto us in the Scripture.
The Israelites were meruellously tormented in Egypt, all the while that they
were kept captives and prisoners there: Exodus 14. throughout.
but they never had so great an occasion to feate, neither were they at any
time so pressed, yea oppressed, as when God brought them out of their
captivity and bondage, to make them pass through the red Sea, and to guide
them in the wilderness, as we may see in the foureteeneth Chapter of Exodus.
David before he came to the enjoying of the kingdom which was promised him by
God, 1. Sam. 27. 1 etc.
was constrained to depart out of the Country, and to seek a place of refuge
and comfort amongst the Philistines his enemis, yea in the Court of king
Achish. Isaih. 37. throughout.
Where he found himself in extreme danger, yea more great then at any time
before he had escaped. Then was the angel of the Lord sent from him to remove
the siege of Zennacherib from before the City of Jerusalem, and so by that
means to deliver king Ezekias, and the people which were within, when for the
great oppression thereof, they were held and kept in so narrowly and short,
that they were at the point or very nighe, to see the City rendered and
delivered, to the Assyrians pity, Mark. 6.47. etc.
and mercy. Jesus Christ did very well behold that his Disciples were in great
danger in the ship, which was tossed to and fro, with the outrage or violence
of the winds and tempests, but yet notwithstanding, he came not unto them to
succor them, but about the fourth watch of the night. Wherefore let us not
loose our courage and stomach, in the midst of the greatest persecutions and
afflictions, which can come. For when all the means of help and aid on men's
side, or in respect of the^, do fail us, and that it seems that all were
done with us, and that the Church should be altogether worn out, consumed
and beaten down, even then will God perform his own work, he alone
succouring us, to the end, that unto him alone also, the glory of our
deliverance may be wholly and absolutely referred.

The sixth point, that God through his power, keeps and defends his Church
against the violences and assaults of tyrants and persecutors, and delivers
the same out of their hands when time is therefore. Thereto tend and belong
these promises. The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2.
Pet. 2.9.
and to reserve the unjust until the day of judgment to be punished. For the
oppression of the needy, Psalm. 12. 5.
and for the sighs of the poor: I will up says the Lord, and will set at
liberty him whom the wicked has snared. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round
about them, Psalm. 34.7.17 19.20.22.
that fear him, and delivers them. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears
them, and delivers them out of al their troubles. Great are the troubles of
the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all. He keeps al his
bones, not one of them is broken. The Lord redeemeth the souls of his
servants, and none that trust in him shall perish. Call upon me says the
Lord, in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50. 15. Psalm. 9, 14.15
so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And again, because he
has loved me, therefore will I deliver him, I will exalt him because he has
known my name: He shall call upon me and I will hear him, I will be with him
in trouble, I will deliver him, and glorify him.

Psalm. 125.2.
As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his people, from
hence forth and for ever. Mat. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall not overcome it. Luke. 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom.

Exodus 14. throughout. Dan. 3. Daniel. 6. throughout. Isaiah. 37. throughout.
Acts. 12.7. Acts. 5.19.
And we have many examples heerof in the Scripture: as when God brought the
Israelites out of Egypt, by the Ministry of Moses, when he delivered Daniel
out of the Lions den, and Shadtach, Meshach, and Abednego out of the burning
flame and oven, when he delivered from death Susanna, already condemned: when
he set Jerusalem at liberty, when he brought Saint Peter out of prison, and
the other Apostles by the ministry of an angel. And at this day, although we
see not angels visibly round about us, yet for all that we cease not by
experience to feel Gods aid and succor, and that after many sorts, yea
extraordinary. We know also that which is spoken in Zacharias, Zacha. 2.8.
to wit: He that touches you, shall touch the apple of mine eye says the
Lord. For indeed, Jesus Christ accounts the persecutions, which men bend
against his Church, as bente against his very own person, which appears
by the reproof that he gave Saint Paul, saying, Saul, Saul, Acts. 4.9.
wherefore do thou persecute me? who would ever have looked for such
assistance and help, as God has bestowed upon his Church in our time? were
there at any time more furious and raging persecutions? was the pride of the
enemies of gods Church ever greater? They spare not wisdom, nor counsel, nor
power, nor diligence, nor men, nor money, to the end that the poor Church
might be altogether cast down and made ruinous. But behold, the prudencie, the
counsel, the might and the wisdom of God, is far above all that, which
sets it self against his greatness, yea, he works myraculously, by
hidden, close, and secret means, insomuch that all the height of the world,
is confounded and overthrown. For as the wise man says: There is no
wisdom, neither understanding, Pro. 21.30.
nor counsel against the Lord. And in an other place it is said: Psalm. 33.10.
Job. 5.13. 13
The Lord breaks the counsel of the Heathen, and brings to naught the
devises of the people: the counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the
thoughts of his heart through out all ages To be short, we see that the
Church has in time heretofore, been very aptlye and fitly represented, Gene.
15. 17.
by a lamp or firebrande shinyng in the midst of dark, or smoking Furnace,
even as the vision thereof was given and showed to Abraham, whereof the reason
is assigned and showed, because God would not suffer, that his people should
be put out in the midst of darkness. Exodus 3.2.
Also by the burning bushe, which yet consumed not: as Moses also saw the
vision thereof. For as the bush, was kept safe and sound, in the midst of the
flame: so the Church has always been preserved, by and through the presence
of God, although the tyrants and wicked men have sought, to set it on fire,
and utterly to destroy it.

The seventh point: That the Church increases in the midst of persecutions.
This is seen from the time, wherein under the Emperors, the Church was
persecuted. For look by how much they enforced themselves, utterly to
extinguishe and put out the truth, by so much the faithful ones were ready
and prepared to defend and maintain the same. In the Acts it is said, Acts.
4.3.4.
That when the persecutors laid hands upon the Apostles, and had put them in
prison, many of them that had heard the word at their mouth, left not of for
all that to believe, but that the number of believers was increased, till it
came to be about five thousand persons. Also, that they which were scattered
abroad, because of the affliction that arose about Steeuen, Acts. 11.19.20.21.
walked throughout till they came unto Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antiochia, and
that some of them which were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, when they were come into
Antiochia, spoke unto the Grecians, and preached the Lord Jesus, and that the
hand of the Lord was with them, so that a great number believed, and turned
unto the Lord. Saint Paul speaks after this manner unto the Philippians. I
would ye understood (brethren) that the things which have come unto me,
Philip. 1.12.13.14.
are turned rather to the furtherance of the Gospel, so that my bands in
Christ are famous, throughout all the judgment hall, and in all other places:
Insomuch that many of the brethren in the Lord, are boldened through my
bands, and dare more frankly speak the word

And this is that which David has prophesied touching Christ, when he said:
Be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. The state of the Church of God,
Psalm. 110.20 The Church compared to a Palm tree, to Roses and to Lilies.
is like unto the state of the Palm tree, and like to the condition of Roses
and Lilies. For even as the Palm tree, the more it is laden and pressed down,
the more it grows and stretches out or spreads his boughs, in length and
breadth: so the Church the more she is persecuted and afflicted, the more
force, courage and liveliness she takes to her self. Also as Roses and
Lilies are accustomed to flourish among thorns: so this is a common thing to
the Church, to flourish and to increase in the midst of persecutions. Justinius
compares the church also to a vine or vineyard, The Church compared to a Vine,
or Vineyard. Justin. Martyr de verita te christianae religio. tom. 2. page 224.
lin. 14.
when he speaks thus, in the speech with Tryphon They every day perceive
(says he) yt we which believe in christ, cannot be astonished or amazed, by
any man, or any manner of way, let them cut of our heads, let them crucify us,
let them cast us to wild beasts, let them torment us, with fire, faggot, and
any other torments: the more they do tormente us, the more does the number of
Christians grow and increase no otherwise than when men prune and dress a
Vine or Vineyard, they do it to make it more fruitful and plentiful. For
the Vine or Vineyard which God has planted, and our Savior Jesus Christ, is
his own people. These are in that place almost Justinius his own words, And
verily we learn by our own experience, that so many cruel persecutions,
murders and slaughters of the Martyrs, have been as it were so many seals in
our hearts, to seal therein the holy Gospel of Christ: so that a good Doctor
has very rightly said: That the blood of the Martyrs, is the seed of the
Church.

The eight point: What is the cause, for which the Church is afflicted and
persecuted of the wicked. We may very well say, and rightly confess, that we
do justly deserve, by reason of the sins we have committed, to be afflicted
by God, and persecuted of the world. Leuit. 26.14.15. etc.
For we read in Leuiticus, how God threateneth his people, to send upon them
war, plague, pestilence, famine and other his rods, if they yield not them
selves obedient unto his commandments: And in Isaiah, Isaiah. 5.2.^. etc.
he speaks after this manner: Ye inhabitaunts of Jerusalem (says he) and
ye men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and my Vineyarde: What, could I
have done any more to my Vineyarde, that I have not done unto it? I have hedged
it, and gathered out the stones of it, and have planted it with the best
plants, and builte a Tower in the midst thereof, and made a Wine press
therein, looking that it should bring forth Grapes, but in steed of Grapes,
it brings forth wild Grapes. And now I will tell you, what I will do to
my Vineyarde: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: I
will break the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, and I will lay it
wast, Isaiah. 24.3. 4.5.
etc. And again: The earth shall be clean emptied and utterly spoiled: the
earth shall lament and vade away: for the inhabitaunts thereof have transgressed
the laws, they have changed the ordinances, and have broken the everlasting
covenant. Therefore the curse shall devour the earth, for the inhabitants
thereof have done wickedly: And therefore shall the inhabitants of the earth
burn, and few men shall be left therein: Iere. 25. 8.9. etc.
Also in Jeremiah: Because ye have not heard my words, behold I will send
and take to me all the families of the North, and Nabuchadnezzar the King of
Babell my servant, and I will bring them against this land, and against the
inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and I will
destroy them, and make them an astonishment, an hyssing, and a continual
desolation. In this place the Lord calls Nabuchadnezzar his servant, as in
an other place he calls Sanecherib, Isaiah. 10.5.
or Ashur, The rod of his wrath, because he serves him self with Princes,
tyrants, and wicked Magistrates, and uses them, that he may by them punish
the ungodliness and unthankfulness of his people. Wherefore Isaiah speaks
excellently well: That our iniquities have made a division, or separated
between God and us. Isaiah. 59.2,
And therefore when we are afflicted and persecuted, we ought to confess and
acknowledge, that God by that mean punish us, as we indeed have rightly
deserved it.

Yet all this notwithstanding, we have to consider and weigh an other cause,
for which the world persecuteth us, which ought to be a great comfort unto
us, in the midst of our Cross and Martyrdom.

For in the first place, the world in persecuting us, looks not to our
sins, but to that religion, which we make profession of which religion
indeed the world rejects and persecuteth, because it knows not the author
thereof, and because it is altogether contrary to his manners, and perverse and
wicked orders of life and conversation: even as Jesus Christ has foretold
the same, and made his Disciples to see it, Ioh. 3.19. 20.
when he said unto them: This is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then the light, because their deeds were
evil. For every man that evil does, hates the light, neither comes to
light, John. 15.20. 21.
least his deeds should be reproved. Also, if they have persecuted me, they
will persecute you also. But all these things will they do unto you, for my
names sake, because they have not known him that sent me. And again: John.
17.14.
Father, I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because
they are not of the world, as I am not of the world. Hereby we may see, that
the right and very cause of the persecutions of the church, is the plain
profession of the truth, righteousness, and word of God: as S. Paul says:
That That all they which will live in the fear of God, or godly in Christ
Jesus, 2. Tim. 3.12
shall suffer persecution. And also, what should be our consolation and
comfort, in the midst of the cross, if this point were not? Socrates.
The answer which Socrates made to his wife, was very apt and fit for the
purpose: she lamented because they put him to death wrongfully: but he being
somewhat moved, answered, That it was better for him to die an innocent and
without cause, than if he had offended. But how much greater matter, and just
cause have we, of comfort and joy, seeing we know that God of his
unspeakable gentleness, goodness, and mercy, burying all our sins, gives us
over, and leaves us but for a time to suffer unjust persecutions, to the end
that we bearing the Cross with Jesus Christ, should communicate also and be
made partakers of glory with him? The punishment (Saint Augustine has said)
makes not a Martyr, but the cause. August.
And the Devil has as well his witnesses and Martyrs, as Jesus Christ has
his. In former times, there were Heretics, which bragged much and boasted
wonderously, under the shadow and color that men persecuted them: And at this
day the Anabaptists do in that behalf the very self same thing, yea, and that
so far, that by this means they account them selves blessed and happy. But
we must mark what the scripture says: Mat. 5.10.
Blessed are they (thus says Jesus Christ) which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Luke. 6.22.
Blessed are you when men hate you, and when they separate you and revile you,
and put out your names as evil, for the son of ma^s sake. If ye be railed
upon for the name of Christ, (says Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 14.15. ^6.
) Blessed are ye: For the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, which
on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is glorified. But let none
of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil dooer, or as a
covetous person of other men's goods, or as a busy body in other men's matters.
But if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God in this behalf. And this is the mark or badge, by which the
scripture discerns the Lords true Martyrs, from others that suffer. For the
wicked men and ungodly persons do in deed suffer persecution, but in the
mean season it so falls out, that they cannot boast the^ selves for all that
to be true Martyrs, neither by consequent, that they are blessed: for they
suffer not for righteousness sake, neither to maintain Gods truth, as do the
Martyrs and witnesses of Jesus Christ.

Moreover, we ought to mark, that our good God shows us great grace, and
aduaunceth us to singular honor, when he vouchsafes us meet and worthy to
suffer any thing for his names sake, when as, he might very justly (if he would
have pursued us with rigor, nay if he would have proceeded against us by
justice) have punished us, with all kinds and sorts of afflictions, sending
them to us, and laying the same upon us, wherein he deals with us, as if a
king should take from the Gibbet or Gallows some man, who had rightly deserved
to be bound thereto and hanged thereon, and yet would set and appoint him,
among the chief Captains of his orders, that he might go to war, and
employ him, for the maintenance and defense of his crown, and of his kingdom.
For who or what are we? Poor worms of the earth, dwelling here in
filthiness and corruption, and infected with so many spots, as nothing more
than we: yea, we are abominable sinners, who have rightly deserved not only
by tyrants in this life, to be persecuted in our goods and bodies, but also
to be for ever lost, drowned, and swallowed up in the Devils possession in
hell: and yet notwithstanding, that God has vouchsaued us worthy of this
honor, to use our life and our death, to withstand his enemies, and to
mainetaine and advance his glory, by our Martyrdom. If we had but so much
as one drop of good judgment, and were pushed on forward, with as little
right zeal as may be, to serve our God, should not this kindle and inflame
us, in a singular and wonderful desire, to employ and bestow our selves in the
maintenance of his honor (whatsoever assaults should be set before us) and
to keep our selves strong and steadfast, in the midst of persecutions, that
we might suffer and abide the same courageously and cheerfully, for the name of
Christ.

The ninth point: What be the ends which God respects and regards, in the
persecutions and afflictions of his Church, and of his faithful people, whereof
we will mark and put down eight.

First, that the glory of God might be advanced. For it is said, Prou. 16.4.
The Lord has made all things for his own sake and glory: yea even the
wicked for the day of evil. When the Disciples asked Jesus Christ, touching him
that was borne blind, saying, Master, John. 9.2.3.
who did sin, this man or his Parents, that he was born blind? Jesus
answered: Neither has this man sinned nor his Parents, but it is to this
end, that the works of GOD should be manifested in him, and showed on him,
Jesus Christ meant to teach thereby, that God does not always afflicte men for
their sins, but to the end, that his glory may shine forth and be made
manifest, by the succor and comfort which he sends them. And this is the
same which he spoke also touching Lazarus: John. 11.4.
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son
of God may be glorified thereby. And thereunto had Saint Paul respect and
regard, 2. Cor. 4.8.9 15.
when he said to the Corinthians: We are afflicted on every side, Yet are
we not in distress: in poverty, but not overcome of poverty: we are
persecuted, but yet not forsaken: we are cast down, but yet we perish not,
for all things are for your sakes, that most plenteous grace by the thanks
giving of many, may redounde to the glory and praise of God.

Heb. 12. 8 Zach. 13.9. Iam. 1.2.3. 1. Pet. 1.7.
2 That the faithful may be discerned, from the unfaithful and hypocrites, as
the author of the Epistle to the Hebrwes, very well declares. And for this
cause, temptations and afflictions, are called in holy scripture, the trials of
faith.

3 That we might be humbled, and kept in our duties, the more earnestly to
serve GOD. Wherefore David said: Psalm. 119.67 71.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thy word. It is good
for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. And Saint
Paul: 2. Cor. 12.7.
Least I should be exalted out of measure, through the abundance of
revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me.

4 That our old man might be more and more beaten down, conquered and
mortified: for affliction serves to correct and amend the remnants of sin,
which are as yet in this our flesh. Wherefore Saint Paul said: 2. Cor. 4.16.
Therefore we faint not by reason of our afflictions, says he, but though
our outward man perish or be corrupted, yet the inward man is renewed daily.

5 That we might be provoked to pray unto God, and pricked on forward to
return unto him. For in prosperity we easily forget him: Psalm. 78. 34.
Hosea. 5. 15. Hosea. 6. 1.
When God slew them (says David) then they sought him, and they returned and
sought God early. And in Hosea: In their affliction they will seek me
diligently, saying: Come and let us return to the Lord: for he has spoiled,
but he will heal us: he has wounded us, but he will bind us up. We know
that men naturally, when they are at their ease and quiet, sleep therein, and
be as it were drunken therewith, insomuche that they seldom or never
acknowledge the Author of their prosperity: but being once afflicted with
sicknesses, or else tossed upon the Sea, with tempest and storm, or else on the
land assulted by thieves and robbers, or else straying and wandering through
wildernesses, and unknown countries, or else being persecuted, with some other
of Gods rods: then is it that every one runs and has his recourse to GOD:
whereunto nature it self thrusts them forward, they not going thither to a
right end, but this is also, to make them so much the more without excuse. And
touching the elect, the Lord not minding to destroy them, awaketh the^ by this
mean and way. Wherefore let us mark, that the Lord lays upon us many
necessities, miseries and afflictions (the deliverance from which, he has
reserved to himself) placing us therein, as it were in examination and upon
the rack, and torture to make us to confess that, which our unthankfulness
and malice would choke up, that is to say, that all our good, joy, and
prosperity, comes from him above, to whose fatherly goodness, it is meet
for us to resort by our supplications and prayers.

6 That the Gospel might be advanced: for it flourishes in the midst of
persecution, as we have before showed in the seventh point to be marked in
the persecutions of the Church, spoken of a little before in this very Chapter.

7 That our patience and hope may be exercised. Wherefore S. Paul says to the
Romans: We rejoice in tribulations, Romans 5.3. 4.5.
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

8 That we might so much the more willingly despise the world, and that we
(leaving without grief this life altogether full of miseries) might aspire
upward to heaven, where our City is, to the place of our perpetual abode, So
said Saint Paul: 2. Cor. 4.^^.18.
Our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory: while we look not on the things which
are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

The tenth point: what issue or end the afflictions have in respect of the
faithful ones: It is certain that they turn and work to their good joy, and
salvation: as appears by these places following. It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, Psalm. 119.71 James. 1.12.
that I may learn thy statutes. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation:
for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
has promised to them that love him. 1. Pet. 1. 6.7.
Wherein ye reioce, though now for a season (if need require) ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial of your faith, being
much more precious then gold (that perishes) though it be tried with fire)
might be found unto your praise and honor, and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 4.14.
If ye be railed upon for the name of Christ, blessed are ye: for the
spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, which on their part is ill
spoken of, but on your part glorified. Mat. 5. 10.11. 12.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men revile you, and persecute
you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely. Rejoice and be
glad, for great is your reward in heaven. All things work together for the
best, Romans 8.28.
unto them that love God, eue^ to the^ that are called according unto his
unchangeable purpose. In nothing fear your adversaries which is to them a
teken of destruction, Phil. 2.2.27.
but to you a token of salvation: and that of God. All the persecutions and
afflictions which ye suffer are a manifest token of the righteous judgment
of God, 2. These. 1.5.6.7.
that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the which ye also
suffer. For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you: and to you which are troubled, deliverance and rest with us,
When the Lord Jesus shall show him self from heaven, with his mighty Angels.

This is a true saying, 2. Tim. 11.10.
that if we die with Christ, we shall also live with him, and if we suffer
with him, we shall also reign with him.

Now out of these places we gather a very great and singular comfort. An
exhortation to the faithful, patiently and courageously to bear their Cross.
For in the first place, we know, that there is not any ignominy or shame,
in the persecutions and afflictions, which we suffer for Jesus Christ's sake,
but that they are a good and sweet smelling savor before God because he
approves and allows our obedience, when that by the Sacrifices of our
selves, we do most willinglye present and offer our selves unto him.

Moreover, our combat and fighting, shall not be without good hyre: for rest
and quietness is set out unto us in our pain and travel, and eternal life
in our death: of which it is written: Psalm. 116.15
Precious before the face of the Lord is the death of his Saints. And we are
well assured, yt this our good God beholds from above our good will, and the
confession of his holy name which we make and yield, and that as he aideth
our strength and power, so also that he will crown our victory, and reward in
us, all that which he has given to us, and will honor that, which he
himself has begun and made perfect in us. In sum by these persecutions we
advance and thrust forward our selves to go to the true and eternal
dwelling places of the Martyrs, that we may there clearly behold God, and
that there we may be partakers of so excellent a glory, as all the afflictions
and sufferings of this present life (even as Saint Paul says) are not worthy
of. Romans 8.18. Isaiah. 6.4. 1. Cor. 2.9.
For the things which the eye has not seen, neither the ear has heard,
neither came into man's heart, are they which God has prepared for them that
love him. Mat. 10.28.
Wherefore let us not fear them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul, but let us rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in Hell. Mat. 10. 32.33.
Whosoever shall confess me before men (says Jesus Christ) him will I
confess also before my father which is in heaven.

But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
father which is in heaven. He that will save his life, Mat. 10.39.
shall loose it, and he that loses his life for my sake shall save it. Let us
know and understand this, that from the beginning of ye world it has been
thus ordained and determined, that all which will live godly in Jesus Christ
shall suffer persecution: 2. Tim. 4. 12
And that by many tribulatio^s we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. For
at the beginning, the righteous Abell was slain and put to death, and after
him all the righteous persons, the Prophets and Apostles, sent by God: whereof
some were delivered and cast to wild beasts: others dyed in prison through
famine: others were hanged and strangled, others dug into earth, and buried
quick therein, others drowned, burned, beheaded, broken, and ground as it were
to pieces, dismembered, roasted, boiled, singed and sawed, flayed all alive,
stoned, whipped, etc. And is there any which is able to describe and set out
all the torments, which the tyrants, as well under the old as under the new
Testament, judged the Christians worthy of? Now the Lord Jesus has set out
unto us an example in himself, teaching us that none shall come to his
kingdom, but they which have followed him by his own way. Mat. 16.24
Wherefore let us not be fainte hearted for the persecutions and afflictions
which shall come unto us, but let us show ourselves strong and constant, and
let us through a certain spiritual power and force, pursue and that even to
the end, the way into which we are entered. If the waves, billows, and surges
of the Sea of this world, lift up themselves to rise against us, to swallowe
us up, and to ouerwhelme us: if our enemies in great companies and bands
compass us on every side, and assault us, Let us cry with the Apostles, Mat.
8. 25.
Master, or Lord save us, and he will deliver us out of all dangers. If death
fear us, let us remember that Jesus Christ in dying has brought this to
pass that death is not death unto us, but a very ready way to guide and lead
us, to life and eternal glory. If the world continue his assaults against us,
yea doubleth them, and trebbleth them as you would say, Mat. 10.22 ^. Tim. 2.5.
let us call to our remembrance, that he which indureth unto the end shall be
saved, and if any man strive for a masterie, Mat. 28.20. Mat. 10.28 2. Tim.
1.12 Psalm. 112. 6.
he is not crowned except he strive as he ought to do. The son of God, is
our protector and defender, who has promised us to be with us always even
until the worlds end. If we die for him and for his sake, he will keep our
souls: Pro. 10.7.
and that which we have committed unto him, shall be very sure in his hands,
even unto the last day. He will keep the remembrance of us for ever, Psalm.
34.20.
that it may not be any manner of way fading away or darkened. He will keep
our bodies to the very bones thereof, Job. 19.25.
against the day of the resurrection of all flesh, and will at the last
crown us with eternal life, which he him self has purchased for us by his
own blood. O death then, 1. Cor. 15.55
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory.

Certainly, we have very much wherewith to comfort our selves by the
consideration of these things: and when we hear that Jesus Christ says
unto us: If any man will come after me, Luke. 9.2^.
let him deny him self, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. We
ought to learn how and after what sort it behooves us to bear afflictions.

For first by these words, Let him take up his cross, Jesus Christ means,
that we should willingly bow down our shoulders under the burden of the
Cross, and should subject our selves, with a free heart and courage to bear
the same, yea that we should be glad and rejoice, if in this respect and
behalf we could yield and perform any service to God, Acts. 5.41. Romans 5.3.
according to the examples of the Apostles and the doctrine which they taught.
Secondly, when he adds daily, he declares that we are never at the end
of our striving, until we depart out of this world: and therefore this is our
continual exercise, that when we shall have endured and suffered sundry
persecutions, we should prepare and dispose our selves, to suffer them
again, and other new beside them, knowing (as we have erewhile alleged) That
he which shall continue to the end shall be saved. Mat. 10.22.
Wherefore they abuse and deceive them selves who think that they have rightly
and duly discharged their duty, if they have stood fast in the time of one
persecution or of two: for it is not with the first flight, that we fly to the
ioies of Paradise: and Jesus Christ commands us not any thing here which
he himself has not first of all showed us the way thereto, seeing that he
was not only under the cross, but that all his life was no other thing, then a
perpetual combat and striving against afflictions. 2. Cor. 11.14. etc.
And Saint Paul although he might have set out, his labors, his perils, his
prisonings, his beatings, his shipwracks, and an infinite number of other
afflictions, notwithstanding, he said yet, That he was altogether ready to
suffer not only to be bound and put in prison, but also willingly, Acts.
20.23.24.
and without any grief to die for Christ's cause. O how great is this honor
to give up our life for the name of God. They that are in the wages or
souldiership of some earthly prince, make no great difficulty, to forsake their
own parents, and their goods, that they may go to his service: yea it
troubles them not much to hazard and give up their own lives, to maintain
his quarrel and cause, which very often is unjust and wicked: And shall we
which have such a prince as Jesus Christ the son of God is, who died for us
poor and miserable sinners, shall we I say doubt to leave all things, yea to
adventure and yield up our own lives, to maintain his cause, and his
quarrel, which is so just and upright, specially seeing he has power to
render and give the same again unto us afterward.

Moreover, the meditation of the glory to come (as we have already touched
the same, ought to strengthen and encourage us in the midst of afflictions: as
we see Saint Paul fully resolved and settled himself thereupon, when he
said to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 4.17.18.
Our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far most
excellent and an eternal weight of glory: While we look not on the things
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen. For the things which
are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen, 2 Timothy 2.11.12.
are eternal. And to Timothy, It is a true saying: If we be dead with Christ,
we shall also live with him: if we suffer with him we shall also reign with
him. Do we think to have the crown of glory without having first fought as our
great Captain did? Do we think to reign with the Prince of life on high in
heaven, without having first suffered and borne troubles with him in this
world? If men take the earth from us, let us look up to heaven, Act. 7.55.56
which is open for us as it was to Saint Steeuen. If they put us to death, let
us look to Jesus Christ, who is our life, who also died and rose again, Romans
14.8, 9.
to the end that if we die, we should die unto him, that afterward we may
be raised up in glory, as he was. Phill. 3.21.
If our abject and base body be despised and dishonored let us look to the
glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, like unto which our bodies shall be
made in the last day.

To be short, if we weep and wail in this wonderful heap and sea of
miseries, 2. Cor. 5.1.
being in this world strangers, pilgrims, and passengers, let us remember,
that when we shall once come to our celestial and heavenly City, which we
now wait and hope for, then we shall rejoice with a joy which cannot be
comprehended, and that with God himself, and the holy Angels, Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs: For the Lord will wipe away all tears from our eyes,
Revel. 21. 4.
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall
there be any more pain. Then shall we feel the fruit of the Cross and
tribulation which we have endured and suffered in this world. Then shall we
know how much we be blessed, Reave. 21.4.
that have suffered for Jesus Christ, and have made our robes white in the
blood of the Lamb. 1. John. 3.2. 1. Cor. 13.12
Then shall we behold God even as he is, and shall know him perfectly, as
he knows us, and we shall live and reign with him for ever. The Apostle in
the Epistle to the Hebrwes, does by this meditation encourage the faithful,
Heb. 10.34.35.
when he said unto them: Ye have been partakers of the afflictions of my
bands, and suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods: knowing in your
selves how that ye have in heaven a better and enduring substance, Cast not
away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense and reward. But
shall we now think or suppose, that we loose our life, when we shall have
abandoned, forsaken, and as it were given up the same unto tyrants for Gods
cause and matters? Mat. 5.12.
Shall we judge that we die upon imagination, and as it were foolish and
insensible mad people (as indeed the world supposes) seeing Jesus Christ
has promised us so great a reward and hyre in heaven? Shall we say that our
death is wicked and accursed when he himself by his sacred and holy Reave.
14.13
mouth has pronounced the same blessed? or else that when we die for Christ
Jesus his name, we should be cursed when the holy Ghost pronounces us
blessed?

Wherefore let us not stay our selves in the judgment of the flesh, which is
so much blinded, that she sees not life in death, neither blessedness in the
curse: but let us behold with the eyes of our faith, the promises of God, and
be fully resolved of this, that the way and mean to make us conformeable and
like to our head Jesus Christ, is to carry and bear with patience our cross
after him. For as (S. Paul says) We must suffer with Jesus Christ, Romans
8.17.
that we may also be glorified with him.

The eleventh point, what is the end which persecutors have had: Examples of
the punishements and vengea^ces of God, against the persecutors of the Church.
Experience teaches us, yt there was yet never any tyrant with whom it went
well at the last, in banding and setting him self against God. And the holy
Scripture gives us also a faithful testimony and an assured witness
thereof, as also the Ecclesiastical history it self, God having willed and
appointed that the issues and ends of the persecutors of his Church, should be
put in order and declared by writing for a testimony of his wrath and fury
against them: to the end that the examples of his vengeance might be known to
them that came after, that thereby they might be bridled and kept in, and not
exercise cruelty against his faithful people, unless they would be most
senerely and sharply punished, as their predecessors were: to the end also,
that Christians living holily, should be comforted in this, that their keeper
and defender is in heaven, who sees and knows al their oppressions, to take
vengeance thereof in time and place, as to himself seems good. Wherefore it
is necessary, that we show here some examples touching the issue and end
of tyrants and persecutors of the children of God. And first of Pharaoh and of
his Egiptians, It is written that they pursuing the Israelites, were al
overwhelmed and drowned in the Sea: Pharao. Exo. 14.6.7.8.9.28. Sennache. 2.
King. 19.^.5.
so that there remained not of them, so much as one alone, although they were a
very great number.

Zennacherib, and his Assyrians making war upon Israel did not less feel
by experience Gods revenging hand. For they being before Jerusalem, and
besiegeing it, it came to pass that the Angel of the Lord went forth, and
slew an hundred, fourscore and five thousand men of those that besieged it.
And as concerning Zennacherib himself he at that time escaped and went to
dwell at Nineveh, but as he worshipped in the temple of his idol he was
slain by his two sons Adramilech, and Sharezer.

Antiochus, what end had he, Antiochus. 2. Match. 9.4
for all the oppressions and cruelties, which he exercised against the Jews?
After an infinite number of murders which he had committed, and that in his
pride, he had said, that he would make Jerusalem a common butchery and
burying place of the Jews, the Lord God of Israel stroke him, with an
innumerable and invincible plague, so that a horrible grief took him in the
bowels and grievous torments within in his body ^^e notwithstanding ceased not
for all this from his malice, but having his heart kindeled and set on fire
against the Jews, and hastening his journey to go on to Jerusalem, there to
execute his purpose, it came to pass, that going over hastily and violently,
he fell from the Chariot, and hurt him self sore in the members and parts
of his body, so that all his body was bruised, and in the same body was so
great corruption, that worms issued and came out of it, and his flesh whilst
he was alive, fell of from the bones by peece-meale through pain and torment:
insomuche that his army being grieved, at the smell and stinch of his
corruption, and rottenness, and he himself also not being able any longer
to endure the same, died like a murderer and blasphemer, of a miserable death.

Herod the great.
Herod the great, after that he had committed many execrable and detestable
offenses against the innocent people, ended not his days, but that the
vengeance of God, was horribly and fearfully kindled against him. For he was
tormented with many and very cruel sicknesses, neither more nor less then if
he had had hangmen or tormentors always beating his body both within and
without, til that at the last he dyed of a violent and cruel death. And
behold here what Josephus has said thereof: The disease and sickness of the
king increased, Josephus. lib. 17. cap. 8. de antiquitat. Iudeor.
waxed more sharp, and God manifestly and openly showed, that he punished him
for his ungodliness, for he was burned with a very slow heat, neither could
any man perceive that heat without, but he himself felt it within, because that
it gnawed his entralles and bowels. Moreover, he was so hungry, that he
took no leisure to chewe his meat, but devoured and swallowed up all that
entered into his mouth, and so they must cast meat continually into his
throat. Besides this, he had his inward parts full of sores, hurtes and
biles, and was tormented with the collicke of passion: he had his feet puffed
up and swelled with a most kind of fleme: he had also his nose swelled. His
privy parts and members, were rotted and full of worms, and his breath was
very stinking, insomuch that none durst come nigh him. Besides all this, he
had a certain shrinking or drawing together of the sinews, and he had much
ado to take breath. Wherefore all they, who made profession to devise and
foretell things to come, were of one and the self same opinion, and resolved
all upon this, that this was a very punishment and vengeance sent from God,
who punished him for this, because he had so many sorts and ways, violated the
honor, and profaned the reverence which be ought to God, and the love which
he ought to his wives and children: and so he died miserably.

Herod Agrippae.
Herod Agrippa the son of Aristobulus, (who was the son of the foresaid
Herod the great, by his second wife named Marianne, and put to death by him)
having cruelly tormented and persecuted the Church, and namely put Saint
James to death, Act. 12.1.2.3.4.18.19. etc.
being also at the last lifted up, to the highest of his honors, clothed in
his kingly apparel, and set upon the judicial seat, making an oration to the
people, and the people crying out, this is the voice of God, and not of a man,
he (I say) was stricken sodeinely by the Angel of the Lord, and was gnawen
and eaten with worms, and gave up the Ghost.

Herod Antipas.
Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee, and of Peroe (the son of the
foresaid Herod the great, by his fourth wife named Marthaca) who by violence,
took Herodias from his brother Philippe, and caused John Baptist to be
beheaded, Mta. 14.3. etc. Luke 13. 31.32. Luke. 23.11 Josephus. lib. 18. Cap 9.
de antiquita. Indaeorum Eusebius. lib. 2. Cap. 4.
prepared and laid his Ambushmentes in wait for the son of God himself:
and when Pilate sent Christ to him, he mocked him, and sent him back again
with great ignominy and reproach: after what manner died he? The
Historiographers recite and record, that he obeying the motions and
prouocations, of his shameless harlot Herodias, and having been condemned by
the Emperor Caius Caligula, to be perpetually banished, did miserably finishe
his life at Lions amongst the Frenchmen, being quite and clean spoiled of all
his goods and glory.

As concerning Pilate: This wicked and cursed man, Pilate.
suffering himself to be won by the Jews, yea even so far, that he
condemned Jesus Christ against his own conscience, and having exercised and
practiced diverse cruelties and outrages against the Jews themselves, showing
himself always prepared and ready, to execute the ordinances and
commandments of the Emperor, whatsoever wickedness was therein: at the
last (as it is contained in the histories) in the one and fortieth year of our
Savior Christ, Supplimen. Chro. Eutrop. lib. 7. cap. 7. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7.
he was sent into exile by Galigula, to Lions, where the vengeance of God
being fallen on him, he was locked up and closed in, with such terrible
griefs, that beating and striking him self with his own hands, and thinking
to finish and end his evils, in pricking forward and hasting his own death,
he killed himself. Behold, hitherto, the horrible example of Gods vengeance
upon these tyrants and persecutours of the Church. For it must indeed
needs be, that they which had provoked God and men against them, should so
cursedly and wickedly finish their days. God they provoked principally in
this, that they had warred and fought against his word: and men in this, that
they left not off any cruelty or barbarousnesse, which they exercised not
against them. But as we have heretofore more particularly described the
cruel persecutions, assayed and executed, by the Emperors against the Church
generally: so we must here speak, of their wicked and cursed ends.

Nero.
Wherefore now to begin with Nero: Eutropius in his eight book, Eutrop. lib. 8
speaks thus of his end: A decree was made by the Senate, that Nero should
be led naked openly before all the people, and that a forke should be put
on his neck, and that he should be beaten with rods, until that death
followed thereof, and that afterward he should be cast down, from the top
of a rock. After this manner being forsaken of all. he fled out of the
Palace, and about midnight went out of the City, accompanied only with
Pharon, and Epaphroditus, Neophitus, and Spore his Eunuch, and being about
four mile of from the City, he thrust himself clean through, with one
stroke of a sword, and because his hand trembled and shook, his Eunuch helped
him to thrust forward the sword, before which time he not finding any man
that would strike him, he began and took upon him to cry. Is it so, that I
have neither friend nor enemy? I have lived villanously, but yet I dye more
villanously. Behold then, what wages and hire this cruel Emperor received for
his grievous wickednesses, and accursed offenses.

Domitian received also the reward and Domitian.
recompense of his cruelties. For he was slain in his own Palace by the hands
of his own servants and household people, his own wife Domitia being
consenting thereto: and the Senate of Rome decreed and ordained that his body
should be carried and brought to the earth by the buryers after a vile manner,
and without honor, and that all the Images of his person, should be beaten
down and cast to the ground. Therefore the said Senate also, disanulled al
his ordinances and decrees, and called back all other men, which by his
authority and commandment were exiled and banished.

Traian. Dion.
Traian (as Dion says) did no more escape the vengeance of God than the rest.
For first having had all his members withdrawn, all his body without feeling,
and his senses dulled and stopped up as it were, so that he conceived an
opinion, that he had been poisoned: Moreover, being become full of the
dropsy, and very much puffed up and swollen, at the last he dyed very
poorly, in Selmion a City of Sicilia.

Marcus Antonius Verus, Marcus Aurelius
otherwise called Marcus Aurelius, having persecuted the Church, at the length
died, feeling the wrath of God upon him after this manner. Being in the war
of Pannonia, The dial of princes. Cap. 40.
which at this day is called Hungary, and keeping besieged a famous City in
that Country called Ve^debonna, and going upon a certain night round about
his camp, to visit his bands and hundreds, sodeinly there fell upon one of his
arms a palsy, insomuche that from that time forward, he could not, either
put on his garments, or draw his sword, neither yet bear a spear. After
this another sickness came upon him, called a Lethargy, wherewith he was
wonderfully tormented and troubled. Thus being sick in his Tent, he caused a
cruel battle and a hard assault to be given against that people, and there
was a cruel fight, between his people and the Hungaria^s, in somuche that
there was great bloodshed committed on the one side, and on the other. The
Emperor hearing of the evil order amongst his soldiers, and namely, that
five of his captains were dead, and that none of them all could there be
found: a certain heaviness seized and possessed his heart, insomuche, that
all thought that upon a sodeine, and as it were in the turning of a hand, he
had lost his life: and so he continued two days and three nights, without
having a will or mind to behold the light of the firmament, or to speak to
any man in the world: so that his heat was very great, his rest very
little: he had continual sighinges and groninges, a great thirst, small
appetite to eat, no sleep, and above all, he had his visage altogether
wrinckled, and his lips altogether black, his eyes hollow and suncke into
his head, and his tongue swollen, without being able to spitte. And so a
little while afterward, not knowing to whom he might commit and commend his
soul, but as it were one altogether lost and cast away: speaking these words
unto Commodus his son: Remembering me of this that I have come into life, I
have now no more delight or pleasure to live. But as I know not whither death
carries us: so I fear and refuse death it self. What should I do, seeing
that the Gods tell me not what I shall do? Immediately he roled and turned
his eyes, and lost his feeling, and having been in this pain and agony, by
the space of more than a quarter of an hour, he yielded up the Ghost.

Seuerus was blessed and happy in the beginning of his reign, Seuerus.
but so soon as he had moved persecution against the Christians, then
immediately his prosperity began also to fail, and he was distracted and
drawn hither and thither, by many dangers, and diverse civil wars, Platina.
as Platina says. And as touching his end, although he were not slain, or
that his blood was not shead, Victor.
notwithstanding (as Victor has left it in writing) feeling a vehement grief
in all his members, and specially in his feet, he asked and desired that some
would give him poison, to cause him to die, and so with a hasty and headlong
death he finished his days in England.

Maximinus, Maximinus.
after he had begun his persecution, was so ouercouered with shame, that
there was never any Emperor more miserable than he.

The Senate of Rome in despite of him, This is found written in Aurelius,
Victor, and Capitolinus.
chose other Emperors while he lived. His soldiers reuoulted from him in
Africa. And at the last, after that he had reigned whole three years he was
slain by his own soldiers, being threescore years old, and with his own
son being nienteene years old: and the manner of his death was terrible and
fearful, for he was cut in pieces and cast into the River, and this scoff
or taunt trotted, and was rife in the soldiers mouths, that it was not meet
to keep, no not a little dog, of a naughty raze or kind. Afterward all
those favorers which were joined with him, and all those which had been his
familiar friends and acquaintance were slain, drawn up and down, and cast
into the iakes and priuies.

Concerning the Emperor Decius, behold that which we find of his end. Decius.
Nauclerus
Nauclerus rehearses that he was drowned, and that his body was never found.
Pomponius has written, Pomponius
that in a wicked war against ye Goths, he was swallowed up of a whirle
poole, into which he threw himself headlong, to the end that he might not
fall into his enemies hands. Fascicul. tem.
Fasciculus Temporum says, that he was slain in war, and his son also, which
also is in like sort put down and set forth by Eusebius saying, that before
he had reigned two years, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 1.
he was miserably slain together with his children.

The vengeance of God, likewise horrible, was declared in and against Valerian,
Valerianus.
punishing him for the christians blood, which was spilt by his appointment and
commandment. For we read in the xxiii. book of volateranus, and in other
history writers, Volat. lib. 23.
that he a little before he began to persecute the Christians, went to make
war against the Persians, and that in battle he was taken by Sapores the
king of the said Persians, who handeled him so discourteously, and entreated
him so chourlishly, that so often as this king Sapores, would get upon
horseback, he used the back of this poor slave, to help him to mount up:
and so this Emperor spent his old age, in this so miserable servitude and
bondage. Eusebius in the Oration or Sermon which he made to the assembly of
the Saints, Eusebius.
says, that Sapores at the last caused Valerian to be fleyed: and these are
his words: And thou also Valerian, because thou did exercise so great
cruelty of murders, against the servants of GOD, the just judgment of GOD
has been declared on thee, when being captive, and bound, and led with
thy imperial ornament, had at the last thy skin pulled off, by the
commandment of Sapores King of the Persians, and salted, thou have set up
somewhat as a perpetual remembrance of thy wickedness.

Henric. Erdford. lib. 6. cap. 27.
Some say that Claudius, Valerius his Lieuetenant, was possessed with a Devil,
and that his tongue was cut out of his head, and chopped in pieces, and tha^ at
the last he was choked.

Aurelian.
Aurelian was not exempted from Gods punishment: for as he began his
persecution against the Christians, a thunderbolt fell nigh unto him, wherewith
he was sodeinely afraid, as we have said heretofore. But he became not
the better for that. Wherefore pursuing his enterprise and attempt, soon after
he was slain by his own people, going the second time to war against the
Illyrians, and this was done between constantinople and Heracleas, about the
year of Christ. 272.

Some affirm also of his Lieuetenaunt Antiochus, Henri. Erdford. lib. 6. cap.
20.
that while they were torme^ting Agapitus the Martyr, he sodeinly fell from his
seat where he sat in judgment, crying (as though he despayred,) that he
burned in his bowels, and that he died crying out, after that sort.

Dioclesian and Maximianus Herculien, Diocletia^ and Maximianus.
having reigned twenty years together, and very much tormented the Church
of God, by the tenth persecution, which they moved against it, at the last came
to so great a change and alteration of their state and condition, and to such
wilfulness and madness, both two of the^ that (as we read in the Histories)
for despite, which they had against Christ, Nicepho. lib. 7. cap. 20. Eusebius.
lib. 8. cap. 13. Volatera. lib. 23.
because they had not power to establishe and blot out his name, being let
by the constancy, courage, and might of the noble Martyrs: they deposed
themselves from the Empire, and leaving it to the government of Galerius and
Constantius, Diocletian withdrewe him self to Nicomedia, and Maximianus, to
Millaine, and both of them afterward lived as private men.

Diocletian lived certain years after. But at the last having received
threatening letters, from Constantine and Licinius, because he would not be
at a marriage banquet or feast, they having also invited and bidden him thereto,
and fearing a shameful death, he drunk poison, and dyed when he was
seventy three years old. This is recited and reported by the Roman
Historiographers them selves, Aurelius, Aurelius Victor. Pomp. Laetus
Volateranus.
Victor, and Pomponius Laetus, Volateran and certain others say, that after
his death he was Deified, that is to say, put, placed, and established in the
number of the Gods.

Naucler. Vespergensis in suo Croni.
And as concerning Maximianus Heculien, the history writers say, that Maxentius
his son, having been ordained, created, and called Emperor at Rome, the
father took courage to him again, and purposed in his mind, to recover the
Empire from which he had deposed himself together with Diocletian.

In this hope he came to Rome, and assaied all the power he had, to put down
and cast out his son, but he was driven back and withstoode by the City,
and went from thence toward Constantine his son in law, thinking to come
upon him at unawares, to catch him by treason, and so to kill him. But his
treason being discovered he fled away, and being pursued, he was slain by
Constantine nigh unto Marsilles, Vincentius in spec. li. 13. cap. 2. Mars.
hist. 2
as Vincentius recites it in his myrrour or glass the thirteen book, and
second Chapter. Notwithstanding that book which is called the Sea of
Histories, says, that being taken at the forenamed Marsilles, he there hanged
himself with a halter, being threscore year old.

Behold a Summarie and short description of the horrible punishementes which
the Lord sent upon the ten Emperors, under whom, and in whose days, the
ten great persecutions against the Church fell out and were committed.

Now as the Emperors which succeeded those, did not all withholde them selves,
from persecuting the poor Christians, so the hand of GOD was not shortened,
but that punishmente and vengeance was executed upon the persecutors, For that
which Saint Cyprian said in the Apology or defense he made against
Demetrianus the governor, Cypria^. co^tra Demetrianu^
is very true, to wit: that very hardly there was any man at any time, who
through wickedness, lifted up himself against the Christians, but that
incontinently thereupon, Gods vengeance and justice, followed him, and pursued
him therefore.

Galerius. ^later. lib. 23.
Galerius a cruel Emperor, or rather in deed a Tyrant, has very well tried
and proved the same: for having continued and increased, the persecution
begun by Diocletian, and having with all manner of punishments tormented the
Christians, both cruelly and furiously, at the last having reigned thirteen
years, not being able to abide, the torments and pains of a certain
sickness, wherewith he was taken and held, through impaciencie he slew
himself with his own hand. And some say, that in the time of his sickness,
he put his Physicians to death, because they could not heal him: of which
one declared and said, That his disease proceeded from the vengeance of God.

The death of Julian the Apostata, Julian the Apostata.
may very well also testify, what end the persecutors of Gods children may
look and wait for. For the histories declare, Theoderit. lib. 3. cap. 25
Volatera. lib. 23.
that he continuing the war against the Persians, which was begun by the
Emperors his predecessors, and upon the way having made a vow, again to
shead and spill the Christians blood, and namely in Jerusalem, and to make
them, or set them out openly as a show, in some solemn place, if he came
again victorious and a conqueror, as he was entered into a desert and
wilderness, he and his army wandering up and down together without guide or
leading, he was sodeinly taken and stricken with a stroke either of an arrowe,
or a sword, or of some other weapon (for none knows as the Historiographers
say, wherewith, or how he was stricken) and so dying in despair, having not
as then reigned twelve whole years, he cried out with a horrible blasphemy,
keeping and holding his blood, which gushed into his hand, and casting it into
the air said: O Galilean) for so in desspite he was wont to call Christ) at
the last thou have overcome, thou have overcome.

Valens. Theod. lib. 4. cep. 19.
Valens also did very well feel and know, the power of Gods vengeance in his
miserable death. It is said of him, that having received the doctrine of the
Arrians, a certain season after that he harkened unto the instruction of Basil
and received it: but straight ways he returned to his former natural
disposition, and assaulted and set upon Basil, and when it fell out, that he
could not persuade him, to join or take part with the Arrians, he commanded
that a Law and Decree should be made for his banishment. And when he was
minded to subcribe the said decree, the pen was found bruised after a
sudden and marvelous manner, so that he could not therewith make a stroke,
only or sign of a letter. They brought unto him the second pen, yea even the
third, and it fell out in them as with the first: and notwithstanding he yet
endeavored, to vndersigne, subscribe and ratify that decree, but he felt that
his right hand shoke and trembled, Socrat. lib. 4 Cap. 36. Theod. lib. 4. cap
36. Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 40.
and then being feared he care the Paper. But shortly after he died wickedly.
For in a certain battle which he had against the Goths (who rebelled
against him, being enforced thereto through famine and hunger) he was hurt with
an arrow. Wherefore he fled, and withdrewe himself into a small graunge or
farm house in the fields, with some of his people, and being close or hidden
there, the goths set fire on it, not knowing that Valens was therein, and
there he was burned all alive. And to the end, that they which should come
after might have a more evident testimony that this was in deed a punishment
sent from God, and that also in this wicked person, there might always be had
an example of the wrath of God, he remained without any burial at all.

But when will it be, that we shall make an end, if we would largely pursue and
recite, the Catalogue or beadrole, as you would say of tyrants and persecutors
of the church, who for a just recompense of their cruelties have been punished
by the hand of God, and died miserably? We should not want examples of former
ages, neither yet of our time. For God has always had care over his Church,
maintaining it, and punishing ye riots and murders committed against it: yea
he will always maintain it, and will exercise and execute his justice upon
them, which would oppress it, because he accounts it as dear, Zachari. 2.8.
as the apple of his eye, which should bring unto us, a singular comfort and
instruction. For it serves well to comfort us, when we understand, that we
have a keeper and a defender in heaven, who in the midst of our afflictions,
will not forsake us, no not then, when it seems unto us, that the whole
world conspireth and arises against us. On the otherside, we ought to
receive and take instruction thereby, because that we hear that God takes
vengeance in his good time, and as pleases himself, upon them which persecute
his Church, to the end that we should spoil our selves of, and cast far
from us all particular affections or motions of reuengement, and should leave
the judgment of our cause unto God, to whom alone (as he says) Vengeance to
repay the same, Deuteronomy, 32.35 Romans 12.19.
does belong when he shall see good and meet. And notwithstanding the
tyrauntes and persecutors, have to learn by the abouesaide examples, to have
in horror and wonderful fear, the great judgments of God, and to know, that
albeit God do for a time defer and put off, the punishmente of those which
ragingly and furiously fall upon his well-beloved Saints, yet such are not for
all that any whit the more blessed. The fury and wrath of God (as one has
said) walks and goes very softly: Valerius Maximus in his history.
but after it has been long time deferred or foreslowed, it does at the last
recompense that slownesse, as it were, and long forebearing by very terrible
torments: yea it comes and draws nigh by little and little, with feet of
wool, as it were, but being once arrived and come, it declares that it has
an arm of iron, to bruise in pieces and beat down, all unrepentant wicked
persons. O blessed is he (as a certain Poet has said) who is made wise by
another man's dangers and examples. I wish that this might open the eyes of
the men of our time, who do openly band and set them selves against God and
his Church. For some there be who are so arrogant and presumptuous, that they
take pleasure and delight in no other thing, then to murder and persecute
poor innocent people, and as though they had made a covenant or agreement with
death it self (as Isaiah says) They lift up them selves above the clouds,
Isaiah. 28.15
neither have they any taste or feeling of the judgment of God, and therefore
they harden them selves in a cursed kind of licentiousness. But so much there
is, that their end (if they amend not) shall make manifest an alteration and
change not looked for, by which the Lord (when so seems good unto himself)
knows rightly to execute his own judgments: yea that his hand although it
appear not, and that it seems as though he had it shut up in his bosom, is
notwithstanding nigh to ouerwhelme them, and where as they lift up themselves
against heaven, that he will in a moment, and twinkling of an eye make them
to fall backwarde to the earth, yea and cast them headlong to the depth or
bottom of hell. O that tyrants and persecutors would think well of these
matters. But what? What should a man do to hard hearts, and to blind eyes? The
wicked become more proud through the prosperity which they have in this
world, as though that no punishmente for their cruelties were perpared for
them. It fares with them as with Dionisius the tyrant, who after he had
spoiled and robbed a Temple, went to the Sea, and seeing he had a good wind
began to say that the Gods favored Church robbers or spoylers of Temples.
So likewise these men, when they behode that their offenses remain unpunished,
and that their villainies and wickednesses are not corrected immediately, they
give themselves over to work wickedness outragiously, and to conclude in
their carnal and fleshly understanding, that there is no judgment of GOD at
all, and that he has no punishments ready, and prepared for their
iniquities. But as the holy Scripture determines and pronounces the quite
and clean contrary: so ordinary and common experience, of the examples of
Gods wrath does sufficientlye show unto us, that when God spares the wicked
persecutors of his people for a time, and makes as though he seemed not to
look upon their extortions, outrages, and violences, it is not because he is
favorable unto them, neither because he reaches them his hand and helps
them: for it cannot otherwise be, but that one day (as he is a just judge)
he will give unto the enemies of his glory, and the good and salvation of his
Children, such recompense and hyre, as they shall have deserved, first in this
life (if it be expedient) that they may shamefully and wickedly end their
days: and afterward in the other world that they may utterly perish (if
they repent and amend not in this life) and may be tormented eternally in Hell
fire, where there is nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

FINIS.
A Table containing the principal matters handeled in this present book.
A
AFflictions and the causes thereof. Page 333. etc. Afflictions of the Church.
Page 274. Afflictions of the Church, and the ends which God respects therein.
Page 340. etc. Afflictions of the Church increase, when the deliverance thereof
is high. Page 325. Afflictions of the Church is always ordered and governed
by Gods hand. Page 321. Afflictions come not without the providence of God.
Page 318. Afflictions, and their issue in respect of the faithful. Page 345.
Afflictions and their issue in respect of the persecutors. Page 357. Ancients.
Page 133. Antiochus. Page 359. Apostles. Page 128. Archbishops. Page 69 144.
Aurelian. Page 304. 372. Augustine, and in what sense he said that he would
not believe the Gospel without the authority of the church. Page 222.
Ancient fathers did not acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for Pope. Page 92. etc.
B
Baptism of the Roman Church. Page 115. Bishop. Page 69. 133. 143. Bishop
universal, is a title of Antichrist, when it is given to men. Page 94.
C
CAlling, see vocation. Cardinals. Page 146. Censures. Page 247. Censures three
ends thereof. Page 252. Censures of the Church must be applied with out
respect of persons. Page 255. Chaplines. Page 140. Councels. Page 202.
Consistory. Page 241. Corrections and censures. Page 257. Curates. Page 142.
Church whence it comes. Page 2. Church how many ways taken. Page 2. Church
which is true has two susbstantiall marks. Page 15. Church and her
continuance. Page 55. Church and her head is Jesus Christ alone. Page 68.
Church and her holiness. Page 184. Church compared to a palm tree, roses,
lilies, and to a vine. Page 332. Old Church of Rome, what a one it was
according to Ter tullian his judgment. Page 106. Church Catholic is one
alone. Page 11. Church catholic and invisible what it is. Page 7 Church
distinguished into three sorts. Page 4. Church in what sense called the
pillar and ground of truth. Page 200. Church in what sense said to be
without spot or wrinckle. Page 189. Church whether above the Scripture. Page
213. Church whether more old then the scripture. Page 220. Church must not be
judged by the great number. Page 58. Church whether it may err. Page 197.
Church why called catholic. Page 9. Church why said to be invisible. Page
12. Church represented by a bright lamp or fire brand in the midst of a
burning or smoking furnace. Page 330. Church represented by the burning bush.
Page 330. Church of Rome has not the marks of the true church. Page 19.
Church of Rome, is not the true church. Page 102. Church of Rome has not true
unity. Page 113. Church increases in the midst of persecutions. Page 330.
Church visible what it is. Page 14.
D
DEcius. Page 299. 370. Deacons. Page 136. Diaconisses. Page 244. Dioclesian.
Page 305. 373. Discipline necessary in the Church. Page 235. Discipline
incrocheth nothing upon the magistrate. Page 237. Doctors. Page 132. Domitian.
Page 283. 365. Donation of Constantine to Siluester. Page 87.
E
EVangelistes. Page 130. Excommunication, and 3 ends thereof, Page 235.
Exposition of Scriptures, and two principles necessary therein. Page 20.
Elders. Page 135.
G
GAlerius. Page 376. Galien. Page 30^. God delivers his Church out of
afflictions, when it is time. Page 327. God why he afflicts rather his
church then other people. Page 319. God why he sends not succor to his
church so soon as it is afflicted. Page 323.
H
HEad of the Church is Jesus Christ alone, Page 68. Herod Agrippa. Page 362.
Herod Antipas Page 392. Herod the great. Page 360. High or chief Bishop.
Page 97. Holiness of the church imperfect. Page 187.
I
IGnorance excuses not. Page 125. Julian the apostata. Page 313. 377.
K
Keys in the Church, and the use thereof. Page 79.
L
Laws Ecclesiastical. Page 258.
M
MArcus Aurelius. Page 293. 35^. Maximianus Herculien. Page 305. 373.
Maximinus. Page 297, 369. Metropolitanes. Page 69. 144. 149. Ministry, and
how much should be given thereto Page 179. Ministry of the word ordained
by God for our weakness sake. Page 177. Ministry necessary in the Church.
Page 160. Ministers considered after two sorts. Page 180. Ministers of the
Church, and their degrees or orders. Page 128. Miracles are not sufficient to
prove a calling. Page 53. Multitude makes nothing at al for the church. Page
58.
N
Nero. Page 184. 364.
O
Orders of the Pope his Clergy. Page 139.
P
POpe. Page 79. 152. Pope and his blasphemies. Page 75. Popes two at Rome, at
one time. Page 91. Pastors. Page 131. Patriarchs. Page 69. 149. Paul should
rather be taken for Pope then Saint Peter. Page 100. Persecutions of the
Church. Page 274. Persecutions of the Church, ten great and general, and a
discourse thereof. Page 279. Persecutions come not without Gods providence.
Page 318. Persecution the first under Nero. Page 283. Persecution the second
under Domitian. Page 283. Persecution the third under Traian. Page 284.
Persecution the fourth under Marcus Aurelius. Page 293. Persecution the fifth
under Seuerus. Page 296. Persecution the sixth under Julian Maximinus. Page 298.
Persecution the seventh under Decius. Page 299. Persecution the eight under
Valerian and Galien. Page 302. Persecution the nienth under Aurelian. Page 304.
Persecution the tenth under Dioclesian and Maximianus. Page 305 Pharao. Page
358. Peter, whether he were Bishop of Rome is uncertain. Page 98. Peter was
not the head of the Church. Page 71. Pilate. Page 363. Pontifex or high Bishop.
Page 97. Predecessors of ours who died in the faith of the Roman church,
whether saved or condemned. Page 126. Pri^stes. Page 140. Prophets. Page 129.
Parsons. Page 158.
S
Sabbath changed to the Sunday. Page 228. Sanctity or holiness of the Church
is imperfect. Page 18^. Sanctification how wrought in us. Page 186.
Sanctification and three degrees of it. Page 169. Saints in what sense we are
called. Page 185. Sennacherib. Page 358. Seuerus. Page 296. 269. Succession and
three sorts thereof. Page 26. Succession to what end, and in what sense the
ancient Doctors used an argument taken therefrom. Page 28. Succession
personal has some times had a breach in the seat of Rome. Page 35.
Succession and calling of persons. Page 24.
T
TRaian. 284 356. Teachers. Page 132.
V
VAlens the Emperor. Page 314. 378 Valerian. Page 362. 371. Vicars. Page 140.
Unity in verity is not in the Romish church. Page 113 Vocation of Pastors,
three things necessary therein. Page 39. Vocation ordinary, and
extraordinary. Page 47.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson for
Thomas ^^an. 1582.


