The brief of the Ministers bill for London tithe.
THe Citizens and inhabitants of the City of London and the Liberties thereof,
are to pay their tithe by the Decree, The Statute ma^e the 37. Hen. 8.
of every xs rent xvj ob. per annum, and of eu^ry xxs rent ijs ix d. of all
houses, shops, warehouses, cellars, stable, etc. without fraud or c^nin for
^uer.

Contrary to the true meaning of the said Decree, some defeat the M^nisters of
their tithe, by reserving their yearly rent or paiments, The g^ieuances.
by secret bonds, double leases (one with small rent for the Parson to demand
his tithe; another for the Landlord, whereby he demands more rent:) others
call their quarterly paiments by the name of Fines, Pensions, Incomes,
New-yeares-gift, and many other secret contracts, reseruations, and agreements,
for avoiding of further charges to the Parson.

For reformation of these devices and other grieuances, they most humbly
entreat that commissions may be granted by the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper
for the time being, What the Mini^te^s de^^re.
to the Lo: Bishop of London and his Chancellor, to the Lo: Mayor of London and
the Recorder and some others, to assesse by valuation or otherwise, that some
reasonable tithe be paid of such houses aforenamed, as in their consciences
they shall think fit. Or that the honorable Court of Parliament will be
pleased to appoint any other order which in their wisdom they shall think
meet.

1. For many hundred years before the Decree, Motives.
houses paid iij (...) v d. out of every xxs rent, as they were or could be
let, or after a common value; and houses inhabited by the owners were to be
valewed by the Churchwardens, by a composition between the Citizens and
Ministers. 17. December. 1457.

2. The prices of all things are tripled since the Decree, and the Benefices
within the walls not half so good, in respect of the loss of personal or
privy tithes, offerings to Saints, Church Lands, Obits, Mortuaries, and many
other things, beside the abatement of viij d. of every xxs rent of houses,
shops, etc.

3. There be not so many poor Benefices of the like tax in the Kings books
in any shire of England, as are within the walls of London, some of them being
taxed at 20. l. 30. l. 40. l. 60. l. 100 marks and more; by which their
paiments are very great, for Subsidies, first fruits, continual tenths, and
other paiments.

4. Many Citizens, and some whole Parishes for the most part of the inhabitants
therein, have lately raised themselves to a competent tithe.

5. They desire no house to be raised to more tithe then some Knights, country
Gentlemen, and Citizens do already pay for houses of the like worth in the
City.

6. By this improuement, no one Benefice within the walls, shall come near to
that which has bin lately raised in some one impropriation within the city.

7. If there may be a reformation of some great houses inhabited by the richer
sort, that pay by the forenamed devices far less tithe then the meaner sort
of handicrafts men, the Ministers may forbear the poorer sort of citizens, as
hitherto they have done, and still desire to do.

8. To avoid the suspicion of excessive raising of the livings in London, a
prouiso may pass, that if any Benefice shall be raised in tithe by valuing to
50 lib per annum, more then now it is at the making of this Act, then no Parson
or Vicar shall have any more benefit by virtue of this Act.

Whereas the Parsons and Vicars of London in time of superstition before the
Decree, had relief from time to time by Constitutions, Compositions, Acts of
Common council, and Acts of Parliament.

They most humbly entreat, that this most honorable Court would take to heart
the distressed estate of many poor and painful Ministers, that these
variances being taken away, they may enjoy peace with their people; in which
happy success they shall ever acknowledge your honorable and religious care,
and not cease to pray that this Act, with many other such like, may tend to
your eternal comfort in Christ Jesus.


