PHYLASTER.

Or, Love lies a Bleeding.

Acted at the Globe by his Majesty's Servants.

Written by Francis Baymont and John Fletcher. Gent.



Printed at London for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Eagle and Child in Britains Bursse. 1620.

The Actors Names.
KING of Cecely ARATHVSA, the Princess. PHYLASTER. PHARAMONT, a Spanish
Prince, LEON, a Lord. GLEREMON Two Noble Gentlemen. TRASILIN Two Noble
Gentlemen. BELLARIO a Page, LEONS daughter. CALLATEA, a Lady of Honor. MEGRA,
another Lady. A Waiting Gentlewoman. Two Woodmen A Country G allant. Anold
Captain. And Soldiers. A Messenger.
PHYLASTER.
Actus 1. Scoen. 1.
Enter at several doors Lord LION, TRASILINE follows him, CLERIMON meets
them. TRASILINE. WEll ore taken my Lord.


LION. Noble friend welcome, and see who encounters us, honorable good
Clerimon.


CLE. My good Lord Lion, most happily met worthy Traefilme,
Come gallants, what is the newcs,
the season affoords us variety,
the nouilsts of our time runs on heaps,
to glut their itching ears with airie sounds,
trotting to the burse; and in the Temple walk
with greater zeal to hear a nouall lie,
then a pyous Anthum tho chanted by Cherubins.

TRANS. True Sir:
and holds set counsels, to vent their brain sick opinions
with presagements what all states shall design.

CLE. That's as their intelligence serves.


LION And that shall serve as long as invention lastes,
there dreams they relate, as spoke from Oracles,
or if the gods should hold a synod, and make them their secritaries,
they will divine and prophecy too: but come and speak your
thoughts of the intended marriage with the Spanish Prince,
He is come you see, and bravely entertainde.

TRAS. He is so, but not married yet.


CLE. But like to be, and shall have in dowry with the Princess this Kingdom
of Cycele.


LEON. Soft and fair, there is more will forbid the baines, then say amen to
the marriage: though the King usurped the Kingdom, during the nonage of the
Prince Phylaster, he must not think to bereave him of it quite; he is now
come to years to claim the Crown.


TRA. And lose his headi' the askin.g.


LEON. A diadem worn by a headless King would be wondrous, Phylaster is too
weak in power.


GLE. He has many friends.


LEON. And few helpers.


TRA. The people love him.


LEON. I grant it, that the King knows too well,
And makes this Contract to make his faction strong:
What Is a giddy-headed multitude,
That Is not Disciplinde nor trainde up in Arms,
To be trusted unto? No, he that will
Bandy for a Monarchy, must provide
Brave marshall troops with resolution armde,
To stand the shock of bloody doubtful war,
Not danted though disastrous Fate does frown,
And spit all spightfull fury in their face:
Defying horror in her vgliest form,
And grows more valiant, the more danger threats;
Or let lean famine her affliction send,
Whose pining plagues a second hell does bring,
Thei'le hold their courage in her height of spleen,
Till valor win plenty to supply them,
What think ye, would yer feast-hunting Citizens
Endure this?

TRA. No sir, a fair march a mile out of town that their wives may bring them
their dinners, is the hottest service that they are trained up to.


CLE. I could wish their experience answered their loves,
Then should the much too much wronged Phylaster,
Possess his right in spite of Don and the devil.

TRA. My heart is with your wishes.


LEON. And so is mine,
And so should all that loves their true borne Prince,
Then let us join our Forces with our minds,
In what is our power to right this wronged Lord,
And watch advantage as best may fit the time
To stir the murmuring people up,
Who is already possessed with his wrongs,
And easily would in rebellion rise,
Which full well the King does both know and fear,
But first our service we will proffer to the Prince,
And set our proiects as he accepts ofvs;
But hushed, the King is coming.

sound music within. Enter the King, PHARAMONT, the Princess, the Lady
GALLATEA, the Lady MEGRA, a Gentlewoman, with Lords attending, the King takes
his seat. KING. Fair Prince,
Since heavens great guider furthers our intents,
And brought you with safety here to arrive
Within our Kingdom and Court of Cycele,
We bid you most welcome, Princely Pharamont,
And that our Kingly bounty shall confirm,
Even whilst the Heavens hold so propitious aspect
We Will crown your wished desires (with our own)
Lend me your hand sweet Prince, hereby enjoy
A full fruition of your best contents,
The interest I hold I do possess you with,
Only a fathers care and prayers retain,
That heaven may heap on blessings, take her Prince,
A sweeter Mistrisse then the offered Language of any dame,
were she a Queen whose eye speaks common Loves;
and comfort to her servants: Last Noble son, for so I now must call you, what
I have done thus publik, is not to add a comfort in particular to you or me,
but all, and to confirm the Nobles and the Gentry of our Kingdom by oath to
your succession: which shall be within this month at most.


TRA. This will be hardly done.


CLE. It must be ill done, if it be done.


LEON When it is at best, twill be but half done,
whilst so brave a gentleman is wrongde and slung off.

TRA. I fear.


CLE. Who dos not?


LEON I fear not for my self, and yet I fear too:
well, we shall see, we shall see: no more.

PHARAMONT Kissing your white hand Mistrisse I take leave, to thank your
royal Father: and thus far to be my own free trompet: understand great King,
and these your subjects, mine that must be, for so deserving you have spoke me
Sir: and so deserving I dare speak my self, to what a person of what
Eminence, ripe expectation, of what faculties, manners and virtues you would
wed your Kingdoms, and in me have your wishes: oh this country, by more then
all the gods, I hold it happy, happy in their deor memories, that have bin
Kings great and good; happy in yours that is, and from you as a Chronicle to
keep your noble name from rotting Age: do I open my self most happy:
Gentlemen believe me in a word, a Princes word, there shall be nothing to make up
a Kingdom mighty and flourishing, defenced feared equal to be commanded and
obeyed but through the travels of my life, i will find it out, and tie it to this
country. By all the gods; my Reign shall be as easy to the subjects, that
every man shall be his Prince himself, and his own Law; Yet I his Prince and
Law. And dearest Lady, to your dearest self, dear in the choice of him, whose
name and luster, must make you more and mightier: Let me say you are the
blessedst living: for sweet Princess, you shall enjoy a man of men, to be
your servant, you shall make him yours, for whom great Queens must d e.


TRA. Miracles!


CLE. This speech calls him Spaniard, being nothing
but a large Inventory of his own commendations.

LEON. I wonder what is his price?
for certainly he will sell him, he has so be praisd his shape:

Enter PHYLASTER. But here comes one, more worthy those large praises, then the
large speaker of them; Let me be swallowed quick, if I can find all the
Anatomy of yon man's virtues unseen to sound enough, to promise for him, he
shall be Constable by this Sun: he will never make King, unless it be of
trifles in my poor judgment.

PHI. Right noble sir, as low as my obedience,
with a heart as loyal as my knee, I beg for favor.

K. Rise, you have it sir.


LEON. Mark but the King how pale he looks, he fears,
and this same whorsone conscience, ah how it iades us.

K. Speak your intents sir.


PHY. Shall I speak on freely, be still my royal Sovereign.


K. As a subject we give you freedom.


LEON. Now it heates.


PHY. Then thus I turn my language to you Prince, you foreign man nere
start, nor put on wonder; you must endure me, and you shall: This earth you
tread upon, a dowry as you hope with this sweet Princess, whose memory I bow
to, was not left by my dead father, O I had a father: to your inheritance, and
I up and living, having my self about me and my sword the souls of all my
name and memories: these arms and some few friends besides the gods to part so
calmely with it, and sit still and say I might have bin, I tell thee Pharamont,
when thou art King, look I be dead and rotten, and my name ashes, as I: for
hear me Pharamont, this very ground thou go on, this fat earth my fathers
friends made firtile with their faiths: before that day of shame shall gape and
swollow thee and thy nation, like a hungry grave into his hidden bowels: Prince
it shall, by the just gods it shall.


PHA. He Is mad, beyond cure mad.


LEON. Here Is a fellow has some fire in his veins,
the outlandish Prince looks like a tooth-drawer.

PHY. I Prince of popines, I will make it well appear
to you I am not mad.

K. You displease us, you are too bold.


PHI. No sir, I am too tame, too much a Turcle,
A thing borne without passion, a faint shadow:
That every drunken cloud sails over,
And make nothing.

KING. I do not fancy this choler,
Sure he is somewhat tainted.

TRA. I do not think twill prove so.


LEON. Has given him a general purge already, for all the right he
has, and now he means to let him blood: be constant
gentle heavens, I Will run his hazard although
I run my name out of the Kingdom.

CLE. Peace, we are all one soul.


PHA. What you have seen in me to stir offense,
I cannot find, unless it be this Lady offered into my arms,
with the succession which I must keep: though is has
pleased your fure to muteny within you, without disputing,
your Geneallegies or taking knowledge whose branch you are,
the King will leave it to me,
and I dare make it mine: you have your answer.

PHI. If thou were sole inheriter to him
That made the world his,
And could see no Sun shine upon any thing but thine,
Were Pharamont as truly valiant as I feel him cold,
And ringd amongst the choycest ofhis friends: such
As would blush to talk such cerious follies,
Or back such belied commendations: and from his presence
Spit all those bragges, you should hear further from me.

K. Sir, you wrong the Prince, I gave you not this freedom,
go to, be better temperde.

PHI. It must be sir, when I am nobliervsde.


LEON. Ladies, this would have bin a pattern of succession,
Had he never met this mischief: by my life this is
The worthiest: the true name of man this day within
My knowledge.

ME. I cannot tell what you may call knowledge,
but i'msure tothers the man set in my eye,
Oh it is a Prince of wax.

GAL. A dog it is.


K. Phylaster, tell me the injuries you aim at in your riddles.


PHI. If you had my eyes sir and sufferance,
My grief upon you, and my broken fortunes,
My wants great, and now nothing hopes and fears,
My wrongs would make ill riddles to be laughed at:
Dare you be still my King, and right me.

K. Give me your wrongs in private.


(Phy: whisperthe King. CLE. He dares not stand the shocke.


LEON. I cannot blame him, there is danger int.
Every man in this Age has a soul of Crystal, to read their actions, though
men's faces are so far asunder, that they hold no intelligence: but view the
stranger well, and you shall see a fever throw all his braueries, and feel
him shacke like a true truant, if he give not back his Crown again, upon
the report of an elder gun: I am no augery.


K. Go to, be more your self, as you respect our favor, you will stir us else:
sir I must have you know, that you are, and shall be at our pleasure, what
fashion we will put upon you, smooth your self, ore or by the gods


PHI. I am dead sir, you are my Fate, it was not I said I was wronged, I carry
all about me, my weak stars lead me too: all my weak fortunes, who dare in
all this presence speak, that is but man of flesh, and may be mortal, tell
me, I do not most entirely love this Prince, and honor his full virtues.


K. He Is possessed.


PHI. Yes, with my fathers spirit is hear O king,
a dangerous spirit, and now he tells me king,
I was a kings Heir, bids me be a king, and whispers
to me, these are all my subjects, it is strange he will
not let me sleep: but dives into my fancy, and there
gives me shapes that kneel and do me service,
cry me king, but i will suppress him, heas a factious
spirit and will undo me: Noble sir your hand,
I am your servant.

K. Away I do not like this,
I Will make you tamer, or i will dispossess you both of your life and spirit: for
this time I pardon your wild speech, without so much as imprisonment.


LION I thank you sir, you dare not for the people.


TRA. Ladies what think you now of this brave fellow.


ME. A pretty talking fellow hot at hand: but eye you stranger, is he not a
fine complete Gentleman? O these strangers, I do affect them strangely, they
do the rarest home things, and please the fullest, as I live I could love all
their Nation over and over for his sake.


LAD. Gods comfort, your poor head-peece it is a weak one, and has need of an
nightcap.


Exet Ladies. LION See how his fancy labors, has he not spoke home and
bravely, what a dangerous train did he give fire to, how he shoke the King,
made his soul melt within him, and his blood run into whay: it stood upon
his brow like a cold winter dew.


PHY. Gentlemen, you have no suit to me, I am no mynion, you stand me
thinks, like men that would be Courtiers, if you could well be flattered at a
price not to undo your Children, you are al honest, go get you home again,
and make your Country a virtuous Court, to which your great ones may, in their
diseased age, retire live recluses.


CEE. How do your worth sir.


PHY. Well, very well, and so well, that if the King please,
I may live many years.

LION Sir, the King must please:
Whilst we know who you are, and what you are, your wrongs and virtues shrink
not worthy sir: but call your father to you, in whose name we will waken all the
gods, and conjure up the rods of vengance, the abused people, who like raging
torants shall swell hie: and so begirt the dens of these Male-dragons, that
through the strongest safety they shall beg for mercy at your swords point.


PHY. Friend no more, our ears may be corrupted, it is an Age we dare not trust
our wills to, do you love me?


TRAS. Do we love heaven and honor?


PHY. My Lord Lion you had a virtuous Gentlewoman
called you father, is she yet alive.

Enter a Gentlewoman. LEON. Most honored sir she is, and for a penance but of
an idle dream, has undertook a tedious pilgrimage.


PHI. Is It to me, or to any of these Gentlemen you come.


GENT. WOO. To you, brave Lord, the Princess would entreat your present
company.


PHI. The Princess send for me, you are mistaken,


GENT. WOO. If you be called Phylaster, it is you.


PHI. Kiss her fair hand, and say I will attend her.


LEON. Do you know what you do?


Exit Gent. woo. PHI. Yes, go to see a woman.


CLE. But do you way the danger you are in?


PHI. Danger in a sweet face: By Iubiter I must not fear a woman.


TRA. But are you sure it was the Princess sent,
It may be some foul train to catch your life.

PHI. I dare not think it Gentlemen, she is noble, her eye may shoot me
dead, or those true red and white fiend friends in her cheeks, may steal my
soul out, there is all the danger int: but be what may, her single name has
armde me.


Exit PHILASTER. LEON. Go on, and be as truly happy as thou art fearelesse:

Come Gentlemen, lets make our friends acquainted, lest the king prove false.


Exit Gentlemen. Enter Princess and her Gentlewoman. PRIN. Comes he not.


WOO. Madame?


PRIN. Will Phylaster come?


WOO. Dear Madame, you were wont to credit me at the first.


PRIN. But did thou tell me so.

I am forgetful, and my woman's strength is so ore chargde, with dangers like
to grow about my marriage, that these under things dares not abide in such a
troubled sea, how looked he when he told thee he would come?


WOO. Why we ll.


PRIN. And not a little fearful.


WOO. Fear Madame, sure he knows not what it is,


PRIN. You all are of his faction, the whole Court is bold in praise of him,
whilst I may live neglected, and do noble things, as fools in strife throw
gold into the sea, drownde in the doing: but I know he fears.


WOE. Madame, me thoughts his looks hid more of love then fear.


PRIN. Of love, to whom: to you, did you deliver those plain words I sent,
with such a woing iesture and puicke looks that you have caught.


WOE. Madam I meaue to you.


PRIN. Of love to me: alas, thy ignorance lets thee not see the crosses of our
births, nature that loves not to be questioned: why she did this, or that, but
has his ends, and knows she dos well: never gave the world to things so
opposite, so bound to put as he and I am, if a boule of blood drawn from this
arm, would poison thee, a draught ofhis would cure thee: love to me.


WOE. Madame, I think I hear him.


PRIN. Bring him in: you gods that will not have your dens with. stood, whose
holy wisdoms at this time it is to make the passions of a feeble maid, the
way into your Justice, I obey.


Enter PHILASTER. WOE. Here is my Lord Phylaster.


PRIN. Oh it is well, withdraw your self.


PHI. Madame, your messenger.
made me believe you wished to speak with me.

PRIN. It Is true Phylaster, but the words are such I have to say,
and dos so ill become the mouth of woman,
that I wish them said, and yet am loath to speak them.
Have you known that I have ought detracted
from your worth: have I in person wronged you?
or have set my baser Instrumnts to throw disgrace
upon your virtues.

PHI. Never madame you.


PRIN. Why then should you in such a public place,
Injury a Princess, and a scandal lay upon my fortunes,
found to be so great: calling a great part of my dowry in question.

PHI. Madame, this truth which I shall speake^, will be foolish: but for your
fair virtuous self, I could afford my self to have no right to any thing
you wished.


PRIN. Phylaster, know I must enjoy these Kingdoms.


PHI. Madame both?


PRIN. Both, or I do, by heaven I die Phylaster,
if I not calmely die enjoy them both,

PHI. I would do much to save that noble life,
yet would be loath to have posterity find in our stories,
that Phylaster gave his right unto a Scepter and a Crown,
to save a Ladies longing.

PRIN. Nay then hear, I must and will have them, and more.


PHI. What more?


PRIN. Or lose that little life the gods prepared,
to trouble this poor piece of earth with all.

PHI. Madame, what more?


PRIH. Turn then away thy face.


PHI. No.


PRIN. Do.


PHI. I can endure it: turn away my face,
I never saw yet enemy that looked so dreadfully,
But that I thought my self as great a bassaliske as he,
Or speak so horrible, but that I thought my tongue
Bore thunder underneath as much as his:
Nor beast that I could turn from, shall I then begin,
To fear sweet sounds, a woman's tongue, whom I do love,
Say you would have my life, why I will give it you,
For it is of me a thing so loathed, and unto you that beg,
Of so poor use, that I shall make no price,
If youintreat, I will vnmouedly hear.

PRIN. Yet for my sake a little bend thy looks.


PHI. I do.


PRIN. Then know I must have them and thee.


PHI. And me!


PRIN. Thy love, without which, all the land discouerd yet, will serve me for
no use, but to be buried in.


PHI. Is It possible.


PRI. With it, it were too little to bestow on thee, now though thy breath
strike me dead, which know it may, I have vnript my breast.


PHI. Madam, you are too full of noble thoughts,
to lay a train for this contemned life,
which you might have for asking, to suspect were base, where I deserve no ill:
love you by all my hopes, I do above my life, but how this passion should
proceed from you so violently, would amaze a man that would be Jealous.


PRIN. Another soul into my body shot,
Could not have filled me with more strength and spirit,
Then this thy breath, but spend not hasty time
In seeking how I came thus: it is the gods that make me so,
And sure our love will be the worthier, and the better
Blessed, in that the secret justice of the gods
Is mingled with it: let us leave, and kiss, lest some
Vnwelcom'd guest should fall betwixt us,
And we should part without it.

PHY. It Will be ill I should abide here long.


PRIN. It Is true, and worse you should come often.
How shall we devise to hold intelligence?
That our true loves, on an new occasion may agree,
What path is best to tread.

PHY. I have a boy, sent by the gods, I hope to this intent, not yet seen in
the Court, hunting the buck I found him sitting by a fountain side, of which
he borrowed some, to quench his thirst, and paid the nymph as much again in
tears: a Garland lay him by, made by himself, of many several flowers, bred
in the veil, stuck in that mistick order that the rareness delighted me, but
ever when he turned his tender eye upon vm, he would weep as if he meant to
make them grow again, seeing such pretty helpless innocence dwell in his face:
I asked him all his story, he told me that his parents gentle dyed, leaving him
to the mercy ofthe fields: which gave him roots, and of the crystal springs,
which did not stop the course, and the Sun, which still he thankt, it yielded
him his life: then took he up his garland, and did show what every flower, as
country people hold, did signify, and how all ordered thus expressed his
grief, and to my thoughts did read the pretiest lecture of his country art,
that could be wished, so that me thoughts I could have studied it, I gladly
entertainde him, whom was glad to follow: and have got the trustiest,
louingest, and the gentlest boy that ever master kept, him will I send to wait
on you and bear our hidden love.


PRIN. It Is well, no more.


Enter woman. WOO. Madame, the Prince is come to do his service.


PRIN. What will you Phylaster do with your self?


PHY. Why? that which all the gods have appointed out for me.


PRIN. Dear, hide thy self, bring in the Prince.


PHI. Hide me from Pharamont:
When thunder speaks, which is the voice of God,
Though I do reverence, yet I do not hide my self,
And shall a stranger Prince have leave to brag
Unto a foreign Nation, that he made Phylaster
hide himself.

PRIN. He cannot know it.


PHY. Though it should sleep for ever to the world,
it is a simple sin to hide my self, which will for ever
on my conscience lie.

PRIN. Then good Phylaster give him scope and way
in what he says: for he is apt to speak
what you are loath to hear.

PHI. I will.


Enter PHARAMONT and a woman. PHAR. My Princely Mistrisse, as true lovers ought,
I come to kiss these fair hands, and to show in outward ceremonies,
the dear love within my heart.

PHI. IfI shall have an answer or no, derectly I am gone.


PHA. To what? what would he have answer?


PRIN. To his claim unto the Kingdom.


PHA. Sira, I forbear you before the King.


PHI. Good sir do so still, I would not talk with you.


PHA. But now the time is fitter, do but offer to make mention of right to any
kingdom, though it lie scarce habitable.


PHI. Good sir let me go.


PHA. And by the gods


PHI. Peace Pharamont, if then


PRIN. Leave us Phylaster.


PHI. I have done.


PHI. You shall not need.


PHA. What now?


PHI. Know Pharamont I loath to brawle with such a blast as thou, who are
nothing but a valiant voice, but if thou shall provoke me further, men shall
say thou were, and not lament it.


PHA. Do you slight my greatness so much,
and in the chamber ofthe Princess?

PHI. It is a place to which I must confess, I owe a reverence, but were the
Church at the high Altar, there is no place so safe, where thou darstiniurie me,
but I dare kill thee: and for your greatness, know I can grasp you and your
greatness, thus, thus, into nothing: give not a word, not a word back,
farewell.


Exit. PHA. It Is an odd fellow Madame, we must stop his mouth with some office
when we are married.


PRIN. You were best make him your Controuler.


PHA. I think he would discharge it well.

Madame, I hope our hearts are knit, but yet so slow, the ceremonies ofstate
are, that twill be long before our hearts be so, then if you please being
agreed in heart, let us not wait for dreaming form, but take a little stolen
delights, and so prevent our joys to come.


PRIN. If you dare speak your thoughts, I must withdraw in honor.


Exit Princess. PHA. The constetution ofmy body will never hold out
till the wedding, I must seek else where.

Exit PHA. Actus 2. Scoen. 2.
Enter PHYLASTER, and his boy, called BELLARIO. PHI. And thou shall find her
honorable, boy full of regard
Unto thy tender youth, for thy own modesty,
And for my sake, apter to give, then thou will be to ask,
I or deserve.

BOY. Sir, you did take me up when I was nothing,
And I am only yet some thing, by being yours,
You trusted me unknown: and that which you were apt to conster: a simple
innocence in me: perhaps might have been crafty: The cunning of a boy hardened
in lies: and theft: yet ventered you to part my miseries and me: For which I
never can expect to serve a Lady: that bears more honor in her breast then you.


PHY. But boy, it will prefer thee, thou art young,
And bear a childish ouer-flowing love, to them that claps thy cheeks, and
speak thee fair: but when judgment comes no rule those passions, thou will
remember best those careful friends, that pla'st thee in the noblest way of
life: she is a Princess I prefer thee to.


BOY. In that small time that I have seen the world,
I never knew a man hasty to part with a servant he thought trusty. I
remember my father would prefer the boys he kept to greater men then he, but
did it not till they were too saucy for himself.


PHY. Why gentle boy? I find no fault at all
In thy behavior.

BOY. Sir, if I have made a fault ofignorance,
Instruct my youth, I shall be willing: if not apt to learn,
Age and experience will adorn my mind with larger
Knowledge, and if I have done a wilful fault
Think me not past all hope: for once
What master holds so strickt a hand over his boy,
That he will part with him without one warning,
Let me be corrected, to break my stubbornenesse,
If it be so, rather then turn me off,
And I shall mend.

PHY. Thy love dos plead so prettily to stay,
That trust me I could weep to part with thee:
Alas, I do not turn thee off: thou know it is my business
That dos call thee hence, and when thou art with her,
Thou dwest with me, think so, and it is so, and when time is full
That thou have well dischargd this heavy trust,
Laid on so weak a one: I will again with joy,
Receive thee, as I live I will, nay, weep
Not, gentle boy, it is more then time thou did attend the Princess.

BOY. I am gone, but since I am to part with you my Lord, and none knows
whether I shall live to do more service for you, take this little prayer:
Heaven bless your loves, your sighs, all your designs, may sick men if they
have your wish, be well, and heavens hate those you curse, though I be one.


Exit boy. PHI. The love of boys unto their Lords is strange, I have read
wonders ofit: yet this boy for my sake, if a man may judge by looks and speech,
would out do story. I must see a day to pay him for his loyalty.


Exit. Enter PHARAMONT. PHA. Why should these Ladies stay so long, they must
Come this way, I know the Queen imployes vm not,
For the reverend mother sent me word,
They would all be for the garden: if they should all
Prove honest now, I were in a fair taking:
I was never so long without sport before in my life,
And in my conscience it is not my fault.
Enter GALLATEA. Oh for our country Ladies, here is one boulted,
I Will hound at her. Madame.

GAL. Your grace.


PHA. Shall I not be a trouble?


GAL. Not to me sir.


PHA. Nay, nay, you are too quick by this sweet hand.


GAL. You Will be forsworn sir, it is an old glove, if you will talk at
distance I am for you, but good Prince be not baudy, nor do not brag, those
two I only bar, and then I think I shall have sense enough to answer all
the weighty Apothegmes your royal blood shall manage.


PHA. Dear Lady, can you love?


GAL. Dear Prince, how dear? I never cost you a Couch yet, nor put you to the
dear repentance of a play and a banquet, here is no Scarlet sir, to make you
blush, this is my own hair, and this face has bin so far from being dear
to any, that it never cost a penny painting, and for the rest ofmy poor wardrop
such as you see, it leaves no hand behind it, to make the jealous silke-mans
wife curse our doing.


PHA. You much mistake me Lady.


GAL. Lord I do so, would you or I could help it.


PHA. You Are very dangerous bitter, like a potion.


GAL. No sir, I do not mean to purge you, though I mean to purge a little time
on you.


PHA. Do Ladies of this Country use to give no more respect to men of my full
being.


GAL. Full being, I understand you not, unless your grace
Means growing to fatness: and then your only remedy
Upon my knowledge Prince, is in a morning,
A cup of neat white wine, brewd with Cardus,
Then fast till supper, about five you may eat, use exercise,
And keep a sparrow hawke, you can shoot in a Tiller,
But of all, your grace must fly Flebotamie,
Fresh porke and Conger, and clarified whay:
They are dullers ofthe vital anymales.

PHA. Lady you talk of nothing all this time.


GAL. It Is very true sir, I talk ofyou.


PHA. This is a crafty wench, I like her wit well,
'Twill be rare to stir up a leaden appetite,
She Is dainty, and must be courted with a shewer of gold,
Madame look here, all these and more, then --

GA. What ha you there my Lord, gold? now as I live it is fair gold, you would have
silver fort, to play with the Pages, you could not have taken me in a worse
time sir, but ifyou have present use my Lord, I Will send my man with silver, and
keep your gold safe for you.


She slips behind the Orras. PHA. Lady, Lady.


GAL. Shes coming sir behind,
Will ye take white money yet for all this.

Exit PHA. If there be but two such in this Kingdom more, and near the Court,
we may ene hang up our harpes, ten such Campher Constitutions as this would
call the golden age again in question, and teach the old way for every ill
fast husband, to get his own children, and what a mischief that would breed,
let all consider.


Enter MEGRA. Heres's another, ifshe be of the same last, the devil shall
pluck her on: Many fair mornings Lady.

ME. As many mornings, bring as many days,
fair, sweet, and hopeful to your grace.

PHA. She gives good words yet, sure this wench is free.
Ifyour more cerious business do not call you Lady,
Let me hold quarter with you, we will talk an hour
Ont quickly.

ME. What would your grace talk of?


PHA. Ofsome such pretty subject as your self,
I Will go no further then your eye, your lip, there is time enough
For one man for an Age.

ME. Sir, they stand right, and my lips are yet even smooth,
Young enough, ripe enough, and red enough,
Or my glass wrongs me.

PHA. O they are two twend Cherries did in blush,
Which those fair suns above with their deep beams
Reflect upon, and ripen, sweetest beauty;
Bow down those branches, that the longing taste
Of the sweet looker on, may meet these blessings,
And taste and live.

They kiss. ME. O delicate sweet Prince, she that has snow enough about her
heart, to take the wanton spring of ten such lines, it may be a number without
Probatum. Sir, you have by such neat Poetry gathered a kiss, that if I had
but five lines of that number, such pretty begging blankes: I should commend
your forehead, or your cheeks, and kiss you too.


PHA. Do it in prose;
you cannot miss it Madame.

ME. I shall, I shall.


PHA. By my life but you shall not,
I Will prompt you first,
Can you do it now?

ME. Me thinks it is easy now you ha don't before me,
and yet I should stick at it.

PHA. Stick till to morrow, i will never part you sweetest,
but we lose time. Can you love me?

ME. Love you my Lord (...) ye?


PHA. I Will teach you in a short sentence,
Cause I will not load your memory,
This is all: Love me and lie with me.

ME. Was it lie with you, that you said, it is impossible.


PHA. Not to a willing mind, that will endeavor,
If I do not teach you to do it as easily in one night,
As you will go to bed: I Will lose my royal blood for it.

ME. Why Prince you have a Lady of your own,
that yet wants teaching.

PHA. I Will sooner teach a mare the old measures,
Then teach her any thing belonging to the function,
She Is afraid to lie with her self,
If she have but my mascaline imagination about her,
I know when we are married, I must ravish her.

ME. By my honor that's a foul fault indeed,
But time and your good help will wear it out sir.

PHA. And for my other I see excepting your dear self,
dearest Lady I had rather be Sir Timen a schoolemaister,
and keep a darie maid.

ME. Has your grace seen the Court star Gallatea.


PHA. Out upon her, she is as cold ofher favor,
as an appaplex: she saild by but now.

ME. How do you hold her wit?


PHA. I hold her wit, the strength of all the guard
Cannot hold it, if they were tied toot:
She would blow vm out ofthe kingdom: they talk of Iubiter,
He Is but a squib-cracker to her, but speak sweet Lady,
Shall I be freely welcome?

ME. Whether?


PHA. To your bed, ifyou mistrust my faith, you do me the most vnnoblest wrong.


ME. I dare not Prince.


PHA. Make your own conditions, my purse shall seal vm,
and what you dare imagine you can want,
i will furnish you withal, give worship to you thoughts
every morning about it, come I know you are bashful,
speak in my ear, will you be mine: keep this, and with
it me, soon I shall visit you.

ME. My Lord, my chamber's most uncertain, but when it is night i will find some
means to slip into your lodging, till when


PHA. Till when, this and my heart go with thee.


Exit ambo. Enter GALLATEA, from behind the Orras. GAL. Oh thou pernicious
petticote Prince, are these your virtues, well, if I do not iay a train to
blow your sport up, I am no woman, and Lady Dowsabell, i will fit you for it.


Exit. Enter Princess and her Gentlewoman. PRIN. Where Is the boy?


WOE. Within.


PRIN. Gave you him gold to buy him clothes?


WOE. I did.


PRIN. And has he don't?


WOE. Yes Madam.


Enter GALLATEA. PRIN. It Is a pretty sad talking boy, is it not, asked you his
name?


WOE. No Madame.


PRIN. O, you are welcome, what good news?


GAL. As good as any one can tell your grace,
that says, she has done that you would have wished.

PRIN. Have thou discovered?


GAL. I have straind a point of modesty for you.


PRIN. I prithee how?


GAL. In listening after bawdry: I see, let a Lady live never so modestly, they
shall be sure to find a lawful time, to harken after bawdry, your Prince
brave Pharamont was so hot ont.


PRIN. With whom?


GAL. Why with the Lady I suspected, I can tell the time and place.


PRIN. O when and where?


GAL. To night, his lodging.


PRIN. Run thy self into the presents: mingle there again with other Ladies,
leave the rest to me, if destiny to whom we dare not say, why thou did
this, have not decreed it so, in lasting leaves: whose smallest charecters was
never altered, yet this match shall break: where is the boy.


Enter Boy. WOE. Here Madame.


PRIN. Sir, your sad to change your service, is it not so?


BOY. Madame, I have not changed, I wait on you to do him service.


PRIN. Then trust in me, tell me thy name.


BOY. Bellario.


PRIN. Thou can sing and play.


BOY. If grief will give me leave Madame, I can.


PRIN. Alas, what kind of grief can thy years know,
Had thou a cross schoole-maister when thou went to school?
Thou art not capable of other grief,
Thy brows and cheeks are smooth as water be,
When no breath troubles them: believe me boy,
Care seeks wrinckled brows, and hollow eyes,
And builds it self caves to abide in them,
Come sir, tell me truly, does your Lord love me?

BOY. I know not Madame, what it is.


PRIN. Can thou know grief, and never yet knewst love,
Thou art deceiud boy, dos he speak of me,
As ifhe wished me well?

BOY. If it be love to forget all respect to his own friends, with thinking of
your face: if it be love to sit cross armde, and think away the day, with
mingling starts, and crying your name as loud as men in streets do fire: if
it be love to weep himself away, when he but hears of any woman dead or
killed, because it might have bin your chance: ifwhen he goes to rest, which
will not be, twixt every praierhe says, to name you once as others drop
beads, be to be in love, then Madame I dare swear he loves ye.


PRIN. O you are a cunning boy, and taught to your Lords credit,
But thou know a lie that bears this sound,
Is welcomer to me then any truth that says
He loves me not: lead the way boy, do you attend me too,
It Is thy Lords business hasts me thus away.

Exit. Enter the three Gentlewomen, MEGRA, GALLATEA, and another Lady. TRA.
Come Ladies, shall we talk a round, as men do walk a mile, women should talk
an hour after supper, it is their exercise.


GAL. Tislate.


ME. It Is all my eyes will do to lead me to my bed.


GAL. I fear their so heavy you will scarce find the way to your own lodging
with vm to night.


Enter PHARAMONT the Princess boy, and a woman. TRA. The Prince.


PHA. Not abed Ladies, yare good sitters up, what think you of a pleasing
dream to last till morning?


GAL. I shall chose my Lord a pleasing wake before it.


PRIN. It Is well yare courting ofthese Ladies,
is it not late Gentlemen?

GAL. Yes madame.


PRIN. Wait you there.


Exit Princess. ME. She Is jealous as I live, look my Lord,
the Princess a Hilus an Adonis,

PAR. His form is angel-like.


ME. Why this is that, must when you are wed sit by
Your pillow, like young Appollo, with his hand
and voice, binding your thoughts in sleep, the Princess
dos provide him for you, and for her self.

PHA. I find no music in these boys.


ME. Nor I, they can do little, and that small they do,
they have not wit to hide it.

LEON. Serves he the Princess?


TRA. Yes.


LEON. It Is a sweet boy, how brave she keeps him.


PHA. Ladies all good rest, I mean to kill a buck,
tomorrow morning, ere you have done your dreams.

ME. All happiness attend your grace,
Gentlemen good rest, shall we to bed?

GAL. Yes, all good night.


LEON. May your dreams be true to you,
What shall we do Gallants? it is late.

Enter the King, the Princess, and a guard. The king is up still, see he comes,
a guard along with him.
KING. Look your intelligence be true.


PRIN. Ypon my life it is, and I do hope your Highness will not tie me to a
man, that in the heat of woing, throws me off, and takes another.


LEON. What should this mean?


K. If it be true, that Lady had been better imbrast curelesse diseases: get
you to your rest, you shall be righted: Gentlemen draw near, we shall employ ye.

Is young Pharamont come to his lodging?


LEON. I saw him enter there.


KING. Haste some of you, and cunningly discover,
if Megra be in her lodging.

Exit LEON. LEON. Sir she parted hence but now with other Ladies.


KING. If she be there, we shall not need to make a vain discovery of our
suspicion, you gods I see, that who unrighteously holds wealth or state from
others, shall be cursed in that which meaner men are blessed withal: Ages to
come, shall know no male of him, left to inherit, and his name shall be blotted
from the earth, ifhee have any child, it shall be crosly matched, the gods
themselves shall sow wild strife betwixt her Lord and her: yet if it be your
wills forgive the sin I have committed, let it not fall upon this undeserving
child, if she has not broke your laws, but how could I look to be heard of
gods, that must be just, praying upon the ground, I hold in wrong.


Enter LEON. LEO. Sir I have asked, and her women swear she is within, but they
I think are baudes, I told vm I must speak with her, they laughed, and said
their Lady lay speechless: I said my business was important, they said their
Lady was about it: I grew hot, and cried, my business was a matter that
concerned life and death, they answered so was sleeping, at which their Lady
was: I urged again she had scarce time to be so, since last I saw her, they
smilde again, and seemde to instruct me, that sleeping was nothing but lying
down and winking, answers more direct, I could not get from them, in short
sir, she is not there.


KING. It Is then no time to dally, you a'the guard, wait at the backdoore of the
Princes lodging, and see that none pass thence upon your lives: Knock
Gentlemen, knock loud, what has your pleasure taken off your hearing: I Will
break your meditation, knock again, and louder, not yet, I do not think he
sleeps, having such larumes by him, once more, Pharamont.


They knock. Enter Pharamant above. PHA. What saucy groom knocks at this dead
of night, where be our waiters, by my vexed soul he meets his death, that
meets me for this boldness.


K. Prince, Prince, you wrong your thoughts, we are your friends, come down.


PHA. The king?


KING. The same sir.
Come down sir, we have cause of present counsel with you,

PHA. If your grace please to use me, i will attend you to your chamber.


K. No, it is too late Prince, i will make bold with yours.


PHA. I have certain private reasons to my self sir,
They prease to come in. Makes me unmannerly, and say you cannot:
Nay, prease not forward, he must come through my life,
That comes here.

K. Sir be resolved, I must come, and will come enter.


PHA. I will not be dishonored thus, he that enters, enters upon his death,
sir it is a sign you make no stranger of me, to bring these runagates to my
chamber, at these unseasoned hours.


K. Why, do you chafe your self: you are not wronged,
Nor shall be: only search your lodging,
For some cause to our self, Enter I say.

PHA. I so no.


ME. Let vm enter Prince, let vm enter, I am up,
I know their business, it is a poor breaking of a Ladies honor, they hunt so
hotly after, let vm enjoy it, you have your business Gentlemen, I lay here, O
my Lord the King, this is not noble in you, To make public the weakness of
a woman.


KING. Come down.


ME. I dare my Lord, your whoting and your clamours, your private whispers, and
your broad fleerings, can no more vex my soul, then this base carriage: but I
have vengeance still in store for some, shall in the most contempt you can have
ofmee, be joy and nourishment.


KING. Will you come down?


ME. Yes, to laugh at your worst, but I shall wring you, if my skill fail me
not.


KING. Sir, I must chide you dearly for this looseness,
You have wronged a Lady, but no more,
Conduct him to his lodging, and to bed.

CLE. Get him another wench, and you bring him to bed indeed.


LEON. It Is strange a man cannot ride a Stage or two,
To breath himself, without a warrant: if this gear hold,
That lodgings be searched thus, pray God we may lie
With our own wives in safety, that they be not
they come down to the King. by some trick of state mistaken.

KING. Now Lady ofhonour, where is your honor now?
No man can fit your palate but the Prince,
Thou most ill shrouded rottenness, thou piece
Made by a Painter and Apothecaries, thou troubled sea of lust,
Thou wilderness inhabited by wild thoughts,
Thou swollen clowd of infection, thou ripe mine of all diseases,
Thou all sin and hell, and last all devils, tell me,
Had you none to pull on with your courtesies,
But he that must be mine, and wrong my daughter:
By all the gods: all these, all the Pages, and all the Court
Shall whoote thee through the Court, fling rotten orrenges:
Make reball rymes, and sear thy name with candles
Upon walls, do you laugh Lady Venus?

ME. Faith sir you must pardon me, I cannot choose but laugh,
To see you merry, if you do this O King;
Nay, if you dare do it, by all those gods you swore by,
And as many more of my own, I will have fellows,
And such fellows in it, that shall make noble mirth:
The Princess your dear daughter shall stand by me,
Upon walls, and sung in ballads, or any thing, urge me no more,
I know her and her haunts, her fair leaps
And out-lying, and will discover all, and will dishonor her,
I know the boy she keeps, a hansome boy, about eighteen,
Knows what she dos with him, where, when;
Come sir, you put me to a woman's madness,
The glory of a fury, and if I do not do it to the height --

KING. What boy is that she raues at?


ME. Alas good minded Prince, you know not these things,
I am loath to reveal vm: keep this fault
As you would keep your health from the hot air
Of the corrupted people, or by heaven,
I will not sink alone, what I have known,
Shall be as public as in Print, all tongues shall speak it,
As they do the language they are borne in, as free and commonly,
I Will set it like a prodigious star, for all to gaze at,
And so high and glowing, that other kingdoms far and foreign,
Shall read it there, travail with it, till they find no tongue,
To make it more, nor no more people,
And then behold the fall of your fair Princess.

KING. Has she a boy?


LEON. So please your grace I have seen a boy wait on her, a fair boy.


KING. Go get you to your quarters,
for this time, i will study to forget you.

ME. Do so, and i will forget your --


Exit King, MEGRA, and the guard. CLE. Here Is a male spirit fit for Hercules.

if ever there be nine worthy of women, this wench shall ride aside and be
their Captain.


LEON. Sure she has a Garrison of devils in her tongue,
She uttered such bals of wild fire, she has so netled the King,
That all the Doctors in the Country will not cure him,
That boy was a strange found out antidote to cure her infections;
That boy, that Princess boy, that chaste, brave,
virtuous Ladies boy, and a fair boy, a wel-spoken boy,
All these considered can make nothing else,
But there I leave ye Gentlemen.

TRA. Nay, we will go wander with you.


Exit three Gentlemen. Actus 3. Scoen. 1.
Enter three Gentlemen. CLE. And doubtless it is true.


LEON. I and it is the gods
That raisd this punishment to scourge the King
With his own issue, is it not a shame for all us,
That write noble in the Land for us, that should be freemen,
To behold a man that is the bravery ofhis age,
Phylaster: pressed down from his royal right,
By this regardlesse King, and only look and see the Scepter
Ready to be cast into the hands of that laciuious Lady,
That lives in lust with a smooth boy,
Now to be married to you strange thing,
Who but that people please to let him be a Prince,
Is borne a slave, in that which should be his most noble part,
His mind.

TRA. That man that would not stir with you to aid Phylaster,
Let the gods forget that such a Creature
Walks upon the earth.

CLE. The gentry do awaite it, and the people
against their nature, are all for him, and like a field if standing corn,
moved with a stiff gale: their heads bow al one way,

LEON. The only cause that draws Phylaster back,
From this attempt, is the fair Princess love,
Which he admires, and we can now comfort.

TRA. Perhaps he will not bileeue.


CLE. Why Gentlemen, it is without question so.


LEON. I it is past speech she lives dishonestly,
But how shall we: if he be curious, work
on his belief.

TRAS. We all are satisfied within our selves.


LEON. Since it is true, and Lords to his own good,
I Will make this new report to be my knowledge,
I Will say I know it, i will swear I saw it,

CLE. It will be best.


Enter PHILASTER. TRAS. Twill move him.


CLE. Here he comes. Good morrow to your honor:
We have spent some time in seeking you.

PHI. My worthy friends, you that can keep your memories, to know your friend
in miseries, and cannot frame on men disgrace for virtue, a good day attend you
all, what service may I do worthy your acceptance.


LEON. My Lord, we come to urge that virtue which we know
lives in your breast: forth, rise, make a head,
the nobles and the people are all dull with this usurping king,
and not a man that ever heard the word,
knows such a thing as virtue, but will second your attempts,

PHI. How honorable is this love in you to me,
That have deserved more, know my friends,
You that were borne to shame your poor Phylaster,
With too much courtesy, I could afford to melt my self
To thanks, but my designs are not yet ripe sufficient,
That ere long I shall employ your loves,
But yet the time is short of what I would.

LEON. The time is fuller then you expect,
That which hereafter perhaps be reached by violence,
May now be caught, as for the King you know
The people long have hated bim, but now
The Princess whom they loved.

PHI. Why, what ofher?


TRA. Is loathed as much as he.


PHI. By what strange means?


LEON. She Is known a whore.


PHI. Thou lie!


LEON. My Lord --


PHY. Thou lie, and thou shall feel it, I had thought,
He offers to draw his sword, and is held. Thy mind had been of honor, then
to rob a Lady
Of her good name, is an infectious sin, not to be pardoned,
Be it false as hell, twill never be redeemd,
If it be sown amongst the people, faithful to increase,
All evil they shall he are. Let me alone, that I
May cut out falsehood where it grows, set hills on hills,
Betwixt me and that man that vtters this, and I will scale them all,
And from the utmost top fall on his neck,
like thunder from a cloud.

LEON. This is most strange, sure he dos love her.


PHY. I do love fair truth, she is my mistress, and who injuries her, draws
vengeance from me. Sirs, let go my arms.


TRA. Nay, good my Lord be patient.


CLE. Sir, remember this is your honored friend, that comes to do his service,
and will show you why he uttered this.


PHI. I ask your pardon sir,
My zeal to truth makes me unmannerly,
Should I have heard dishonor spoke ofyou, behind your backs, untruly, I had
been as much distempered and enraged, as now.


LEON. But this my Lord, is truth.


PHI. Oh say not so,
Good sir forbear to say so, it is then truth that women all are false, urge
itno more, it is impossible, why should you think the Princess light?


LEON. Why she was taken at it.


PHI. It Is false, by heaven it is false, it cannot be,
Can it, speak Gentlemen? Can women all be damned?

TRA. Why then it cannot be.


CLE. And she was taken with her boy.


PHI. What boy?


LEON. A Page, a boy that serves her.


PHY. Oh good gods, a little boy.


LEON. I, know you him my Lord?


PHY. Hell and sin know him: Sir you are deceived,
I Will reason it a little milder with you,
If she were lustful, would she take a boy that knows not yet desires, she
would have one should meet her thoughts, and know the sin sh e acts, which
is the great delight of wickedness, you are abused, and so is she and I.


CLE. How, you my Lord?


PHI. Why all the worlds abusd, in an unjust report.


LEON. O noble sir, your virtues cannot look
Into the subtle thoughts of women. In short my Lord,
I too ke them, I my self.

PHI. Now all the devils thou did, fly from my rage,
Would thou had taken devils ingendring plagues,
When thou did take them: hide thee from mine eyes,
Would thou had taken daggers in thy breast,
When thou did take them,
Or been stuacke dumb for ever, that this fault
might have slept in silence.

CLE. Have you known him so ill tempered?


TRA. Never before.


PHI. The winds that are let loose from the four corners
Of the earth, and spreads them self all over sea and land,
Meets not a fair on, what friend bears a sword,
To run me through?

TRA. Why my Lord, are you so moved at this?


PHI. When any fall from virtue I am distracted,
I have interest in it.

LEON. But good my Lord recall your self,
and think what is best to be done,

PHI. I thank you, I will do it,
Please you to leave me I Will consider of it,
To morrow i will find your lodgings, and give you answer.

OMNES. All the gods direct you the readiest way.


Exit three Gent. PHI. I had forgot to ask vm where he took her,
I Will follow him. Oh that I had a sea within my breast,
To quench the fire I feel, more circumstances
Would but flame this fire: it more afflicts me now,
To know by whom the deed is done, then simply,
That it is done, and he that tells me this, is honorable,
As far from lies, as she is far from truth,
O that like beasts we could not grieve our selves
With that we see not, bulls and rams will fight,
To keep their females standing in their sight,
But take them from them, and you take at once
Their spleenes away, and they will fall again
Unto their pastures, growing fresh and fat,
And taste the waters ofthe springs as sweet as 'twas before.
Finding no start in sleep, but miserable man,
Enter boy. See, see, you gods he walks still, and the face you let him wear
When he was innocent, is still the same, not blush.
Is this justice? do you mean to entrap mortality,
That you allow treason so smooth a brow:
I cannot now think he is guilty.

BOY. Health to you my Lord:
The Princess does commend her love, her life,
and this unto you.

He gives him a letter. PHI. O Bellario, now I perceive she loves me,
She dos show it in loving thee my boy,
She has made thee brave.

BOY. My Lord, she has attired me past wish,
Past my desert, more fit for her attendant,
But far unfit for me that do attend.

PHI. Thou art grown Courtly my boy.
O let all women that love black deeds, learn to dissemble here,
Here, with this paper, she dos write to me
As if her heart were twines of Adamant
To all the world besides, but unto me a maiden snow,
That melted with my looks: tell me my boy,
How dos the Princess use thee?

BOY. Scarce like her servant, but as if I were
Something alied to her, or had preserved her life
Three times by my fidelity: as mothers fond,
Do use their only sons, as I Would use one that is left unto my trust,
For whom my life should pay,
If he meet harm: so she dos use me.

PHI. Why it is wondrous well,
But what kind language dos she feed thee with?

BOY. Why she dos tell me she will trust my youth with all her maiden store, and
dos call me her pretty servant, bids me weep no more for leaving you, she will
see my service rewarded, and such words of that soft strain, that I am nearer
weeping when she ends, then ere she speaks.


PHI. This is much better still.


BOY. Are you not well my Lord?


PHI. Ill, no Bellario.


BOY. Me thinks your words fall out from your tongue, so unevenly, nor is
there in your looks that quickness that I was wont to see.


PHI. Thou art deceived boy. And she strokes thy head.


BOY. Yes.


PHI. And she dos clap thy cheeks.


BOY. She dos my Lord.


PHY. And she dos kiss thee boy, ha.


BOY. How my Lord?


PHY. She kisses thee.


BOY. Never my Lord, by heaven.


PHY. That Is strange, I know she dos.


BOY. No by my life.


PHY. Why then she dos not love me,

Come she dos, I bid her do it: I charged her by all charms of love between
us, by the hope of peace we should enjoy, to yield thee all delight, naked as
to her Lord. I took her oath thou should enjoy her. Tell me gentle boy, is
she not paradise: is not her breath sweet as Arabian winds when fruits are
ripe, are not her breasts two lickquid Iuory bals? is she not all a lasting
mine of joy?


BOY. Yes, now I see why my discurled thoughts were so perplexed. When first I
went to her my heart held augeries: you are abused, some villain has abused
you, I do see where you tend. Fall rocks upon his head, that put this to you,
it is some subtle train to bring that noble friend of yours to naught.


PHY. Thou think I will be angry with thee, come thou shall know all my
drift. I hate her more then I love happiness, and placed thee there to pry
with sparrowes eyes, into her deeds, have thou discovered, is she fallen to
lust, as I would wish her, speak some comfort to me.


BOY. My Lord you did mistake the boy you sent,
Had she the lust of sparrowes and of goats,
Had she a sin that weighed from the world, beyond the name oflust,
I would not aid her base desires,
But what I come to know as servant to her,
I would not reveal, to make my life last ages.

PHI. Oh my heart!
This is a salve worse then the maine deceit,
Tell me thy thoughts, for I will know the least
That dwells within thee, or will rip thy heart,
To know it, I will see thy thoughts as plain,
As I do now thy face.

BOY. Why so you do: she is for ought I know, by all the gods,
As chaste as ice: but were she foul as hell,
And I did know it thus, the breath of Kings,
The points ofswords, tortures, nor bulls of brass,
Should wrack it from me.

PHI. Then it is no time to dally with thee, I will take thy life,
For I do hate thee, I could curse thee now.

BOY. Ifyou do hate me, you could not curse me worse,
The gods have not a punishment in store,
To me, then is your hate.

PHI. Fie, fie, so young and so dissembling, tell me when and where,
Thou did enjoy her, or let plagues fall upon me,
If I destroy thee not.

He draws his sword. BOY. By heaven I never did, and when I lie to save my
life,
May I live long and loathed, hew me asunder,
And whilst I can think, i will love those pieces you have cut away
Better then those that grow, and kiss those limbs
Because you made vm so.

PHI. Fear thou not death, can boys contemn that.


BOY. Oh! what boy is he could be content to live
To be a man, that sees the best of men thus passionate,
Thus without reason.

PHI. O thou do not know what it is to die.


BOY. Yes, I do know my Lord it is less then to be borne,
A lasting sleep, a quiet resting from all jealousy,
A thing we all pursue: I know besides, it is but giving ore again,
That must be lost.

PHI. But there are pains false boy,
For perjured, souls: think but those, and then thy heart will melt,
And then thou will utter all.

BOY. May they fall all upon me, whilst I live,
If I be perjured, or have ever thought of that you charge me with,
If I be false, send me to suffer in those punishments you speak of Kill me.


PHI. Oh! What should I do, why who can but believe him?

He dos swear so earnestly, that if it were not true, the gods would not
endure him. Rise Bellario, thy protestaions are so deep, and thou do look
so truly when thou vtterest them, that though I knew vm false, as were my
hopes, I cannot urge thee further, but thou were too blame to iniuie me: for I
must love thy honest looks, and take no revenge upon thy honest looks: a love
from me to thee is firm, what ere thou do, it troubles me, that I have called
thy blood out of thy cheeks, that did so well become thee: But good boy let me
not see thee more, something is done, that will distract me, that will make me
mad, if I behold thee, if thou tenderest me, let me not see thee.


BOY. I will fly as far,
As there is morning, ere I give distaste to that most honored frame, but
through these tears shed at my hapless parting, I can see a world of treason
practiced upon you, and her, and me, farewell for evermore, if you shall hear
that sorrows struck me dead, and after find me loyal, let there be a tear
shed from you, in my memory, and I shall rest at peace.


PHI. Blessing be with thee what ere thou deseruest.
O where shall I go bathe this body, nature too unkind,
That made no medicine to a troubled mind.

Exit PHILASTER. Enter Princess. PRIN, I marvel my boy comes not back,
But that I know my love will question him over and over,
How I slept, make talk how I remember him,
When his dear name was last spoken,
And how spoke when I sight song, and ten thousand such,
I should be angry at his stay.

Enter King. KING. What, in your meditations, who attends you?


PRIN. None but my single self, I need no guard,
I do no wrong, nor fear none.

K. Tell me, have you not a boy?


PRIN. Yes Sir.


K. What kind of boy?


PRIN. A page, a waiting boy.


K. A hansome boy?


PRIN. I think he be not ugly Sir, well
qualified, and dutiful, I know him,
I took him not for beauty.

K. He speaks, and sings, and plays?


PRIN. Yes Sir.


K. About eighteen?


PRIN. I never asked his age.


K. Is he full of service?


PRIN. By your pardon, why do you ask?


K. Put him away.


PRIN. Sir.


KING. Put him away I say, has done you that good service,
Shames me to speak off.

PRIN. Good sir, let me understand you?


K. Ifyou fear me, show it in duty? put away that boy.


PRIN. Let me have reason for it, and then your will is a command.


K. Do not you blush to ask it, cast him off:
OrI shall do that shame to you, ye are one shame with me,
And so near my self, that by the gods,
I Would dare not tell my self, what you my self,
Have done.

PRIN. What I have done?


KING. It Is a new language, that allloue to learn:
The common people speak it well already,
They need no grammar: understand me well, there be foul
Whispers stirring, cast him off, and suddenly do it, farewell.


Exit King. PRIN. Where may a maid live securely free,
Keeping her honor fair, not with the living,
They feed upon opinions, errors, dreams, and make vm truth,
They draw a nourishment out of defamings,
Grow upon disgraces, and when they see a virtue fortified,
Strongly above the battry of their tongues.
Oh how they mind to sincke it, and defeated foul
Sick with poison, stricke the mountains,
Where noble names be sleeping, till they sweat,
And the cold Marble melt.

Enter PHILASTER. PHI. Peace to your fairest thoughts, dearest mistrisse.


PRIN. Oh my dearest servant,
I have a war within me.

PHI. He must be more then man that makes these christals run into rivers,
sweetest fair the cause, and as I am your slave, tied to your goodness, your
creature made again from what I was, and newly spirited, I Will right your
honor.


PRIN. O my best love, thatboy.


PHI. What boy?


PRIN. The pretic boy you gave me,


PHI. What of him?


PRIN. Must be no more mine.


PHI. Why?


PRIN. They are jealous of him.


PHI. Jealous, who?


PRIN. The King.


PHI, Oh my misfortune,
Then it is no idle jealousy, let him go.

PRIN. O cruel, are you hard hearted too?
Who shall now tell you how much I loved you?
Who shall swear it to you, and weep the tears I send?
Who shall now bring you letters, rings, braslets,
Loose his health in service, make tedious nights,
In stories ofyour praise? Who shall now sing
Your crying Elegies, and strike a sad soul
Into senseless pictures, and make them warm?
Who shall take up his lute, and touch it,
Till he crown a silent sleep upon my eyelids,
Make me dream and cry:
O my dear, dear Phylaster.

PHI. O my heart, would he had broken thee,
That made thee know this Lady was not loyal.
Mistress forget the boy, I Will get you a far better.

PRIN. Oh never, never, such a boy again, as my Bellario.


PHI. It Is but your fond affection.


PRIN. With thee, my boy, fare well for ever,
All service in servants, farewell faith and all
Desires to do well, for thy sake, let all that
Shall succeed thee, for thy wrongs,
Sell and betray chaste love.

PHI. And all this passion for a boy.


PRIN. He was your boy, and you put him unto me,
And the loss ofsuch must have a mourning for.

PHI. O thou forgetful woman.


PRIN. How, my Lord?


PHI. False Arethusa.
Have thou a medicine to restore my wits,
When I have lost vm, if not,
leave to talk, and do thus.

PRIN. Do what sir, would you sleep?
For ever Arethusa, O ye gods, ye gods:
Give me a wealthy patience, have I stood naked
Above the shocke of many fortunes? have I seen mischief,
Numberless, and mighty, grow like a sea upon me:
Have I taken danger as deep as death, into my bosom,
And laughed upon it, made it but a mirth,
And flowing it by, do I live now like him under this tyrant King,
That languishing hear his sad bell, and sees his Mourners,
Do I bear all this bravely? and sink at length
Under a woman's falsehood, O that boy, that cursed boy,
None but a villain boy, to ease your lust.

PRIN. Nay, then I am betrayed,

I feel the plot cast for my overthrow:
O I am wretched.

PHI. Now you may take that little right I have to this

Poor Kingdom, give it to your Joy, for I have no joy in it:
Some far place, where never woman kind durst set her foot,
For bursting with her poison must I seek,
And live to curse you, and there dig a Cave,
And preach to beasts and birds, what women are;
How Heaven is in your eyes, but in your hearts more hell,
Then hell has: How your tongues, like Scorpyons,
Both heal and poison: How your thoughts wouen,
With thousand changes in one subtle web, and worn by you:
How that foolish men that read the story of a woman's face,
And dies believing it is lost for ever: How all the good you have,
Is but a shadow, in the morning with you, and at night behind you,
Past and forgotten: How your vows are frost fast, for a night,
And with the next Sun gone; How you are,
Being taken altogether.
A mere confusion, and so dead a Chaios,
That love cannot distinguish these sad texts,
Till my last hour I am bound to utter of you,
So farewell all my woe, all my delight.

Exit PHYLASTER. PRIN. Be merciful you gods, and strike me dead.

What way have I deserved this? make my breast transparant,
That the world jealous of me,
May see the foulest thought my heart holds:
Where shall women turn their eyes to find out constancy?
Enter boy. Save me, how black and vile me thinks, that boy looks now!
Oh thou dissembler, that before thou spokst,
Were in thy cradle false, sent to make lies,
And to betray innocence, thy Lord and thou
May glory in the ashes of a maid, foold by her passion:
But the conquest is nothing so great as wicked,
Fly away, let my command force thee to that,
Which shame would do without it, if thou vnderstoodst.
The loathed office thou have undertook,
Why thou would hide thee under heaps of hills,
Lest we should dig and find thee.

BOY. O what god angry with me, has sent this strange desease
Into the noblest minds, Madame this grief you add unto me,
Is no more then drops to seas, for which they are not seen to swell,
My Lord has struck his anger through my heart,
And let out all the hope of future joys,
Ye need not bid me fly, I came to part,
To take my latest leave,
Farewell for ever.
I durst not run away in honesty from such a Lady,
Like a boy that stole, or made some greater fault,
The power of gods assist you in your suffering:
Hasty time reveal the truth to your abused Lord, and mine,
That he may know your worth, whilst I go seek
Out some forgotten place to die.

Exit BOY. PRIN. Peace guide thee, thou have overthrown me once,
But if I had another time to lose,
Thou, or another villain with thy looks,
Might take me out ofit, and send me naked,
My hair desheueld, through the fiery streets.

Enter. Woe. Madame, the king would hunt,
And calls for you with earnestness.

PRIN. I am in tune to hunt: Diana if thou can
Rage with a maid, as with a man, let me discover thee
bathing, and turn me to a fearful hind,
That I may die pursued by cruel hounds,
And have my story written in my wounds.

Exit Princess. Actus 4. Scoen. 1.
Enter the King, PHARAMONT, Princess, MEGRA, GALLATEA, LEON. CLE. TRA. and two
Wood-men. KING. What, are the hounds before, and all the Woodmen?
Our horses ready, and our bows bent?

LEON. All sir.

KING. You are clowdy sir. Come we have forgotten your venial trespasses, let
not that sit heavy upon your spirit,

Here Is none dares utter it.


LEON. He looks like an old surfeited stallion after his leaping, Dull as a
Dormouse: see how he sinckes, the wench has shot him between wind and water,
and I hope sprung a lake.


CLE. He needs no teaching, he strikes sure enough,
His greatest fault is, he hunts too much in the purlewes,
Would he would leave off poaching.

TRA. And for his horn, has left it at the lodge where he lay late: Oh he is a
pernicious limhound, turn him upon the pursue of any Lady, and if he lose
her, hang him up in the slip: when my fox bith bewty grows proud, I Will borrow
him.


KING. Is your boy turnde away?


PRIN. You did command sir, and I obeyed you.


KING. It Is well done, hark ye further.


LEON. Is It possible this fellow should repent,
Me thinks that were not noble in him,
And yet he looks like a mortified member,
As if he had a sick man's salve in's mouth,
If a worse man had done this fault now,
Some physical Justice or other, would presently
Without the help of an Almanacke,
Have opened the obstructions of his liver,
And let him blood with a dog-whip.

TRA. See, see, how modestly yon Lady looks,
As if she came from churching with her neighbors,
Why what a devil can you see in her face,
But that she is honest.

CLE. Faith no great matter to speak of: a foolish twinkling with the eye,
that spoils her coat, but he must be a cunning Herald that finds it.


TRA. See how they muster on another, O there is a rank regient, where the devil
carries the Culours, and his damned drum mayor. Now the flesh and the world
come behind with the Carriage.


LEON. Sure this Lady has a good turn done against her will, before she was
common talk, now none dares say Cantharides can stir her, her face looks
like a warrant, willing and commanding all tongues, as they will answer it, to
be tied up, and boulted, when this Lady means to let her self loose, as I
live, she has got a goodly protection, and a gracious: and may use her body
discretely, for her health sake, once a week, except lent and dog-dayes. O if
they were to be got for money, what a large sum would come out of the City,
for these Licenses.


KING. To horse, to horse, we loose the morning Gentlemen.


1 WOOD. What, have you log'd the Dear below?


Exit King and Lords, Manet Wood-men. 2 WOOD. Yes, they are ready for the bow.


1 WOOD. Who shoots?


2 The Princess.


1 WOOD. No, she will hunt.


2 WOOD. She Will take a stand I say.


1 WOOD. Who else?


2 WOOD. Why the young strange Prince.


1 WOOD. He shall shoot in a stone bow for me,
I never loved his beyond-sea-shippe, since he forsook the Say, for paying ten
shillings: he was there at the fall of a Dear, and would needs out ofhis
Mightiness, give ten groates for the docets; mary his steward would have the
villuet head into the bargain, to turfe his hat withal, I think he should
love venery: he and old Sir Tristrum: for ifye be remembered, he forsook a
Stagge once, to strike a rascal milking in a meddow, and her he killed in the
eye. Who shootes else?


2 WOOD. The Lady Gallatea.


1 WOOD. That Is a good wench, an she would not chide us for tumbling of her
women in the brakes, she is liberal, and by the gods, they say honest, and
whether that be a fault or no, I have nothing to do, there is all.


2 WOOD. No, one more, Megra.


1 WOOD. That Is a firker In Faith boy, there is a wench will ride her hanches as
hard after a kennell of hounds as a hunting sadle, and when she comes home, get
vm clapped, and all is well again, I have known her lose her self three times
in one afternoon, if the Woods had been answerable, and has bin work enough
for one man to find her, and has swet for it: she rides well, and she pays
well, hark else.


Enter PHILASTER solus. PHY. Oh that I had been nourisht in the woods,
With milk of goats, and Acrons, and not known
The right of Crowns, nor the dissembling trains
Ofcruell love: but dig'd my self a Cave,
Where I, my fire, my Cattle and my bed,
Might have been shut together in one shed,
And then had taken me some mountain girl,
Beaten with winds, chaste as the rock whereon she dwelt,
That might have strewed my bed with leaves and reeds,
And with the skins of beasts our neighbors, and have borne
Out her big breasts, my large course ifsue:
This had bin a life free from vexation.

Enter BOY. BOY. Oh! wicked men, aninnocent may walk safe amongst beasts,
Nothing assaults me here, I see my grieved Lord, sits as
His soul were searching out a way to leave his body.
Pardon me that brake thy last commandment, for I must speak:
You that are grieved can pity; hear my Lord.

PHY. Is there a creature yet so miserable that I can pity?


BOY. O my noble Lord, view my strange fortunes,
And bestow on me according to your bounty,
If my service can merit nothing, so much as may serve to keep
That little piece I hold of life, from cold and hunger.

PHI. Now by the gods this is unkindly done, to vex me
With thy sight, thou art fallen again to thy dissembling trade,
How should thou think to cosen me again,
Remains there yet a plague untried for me. Even so
Thou wepst, and lookst, and spokst, when I first took thee,
Curse on the time. Ifthy commanding tears can work
On any other, use thy art, I Will not betray it, which way
Will thou take, that I may shun thee, for thine eyes are
Poison to mine, and I am loath to grow in rage:
This way or that way?

Exit PHYLASTER. BOY. Any will serve, but I will choose to have
That path in chase, that leads unto my grave.

Exit BOY. Enter LEON, CLE. and Wood-men. LEON. This is the strangest sudden
chance, you Wood-man.


CLE. My Lord Leon --


LEON. Saw you a Lady come this way, on a sable horse, starredyed with stars of
white?


1 WOOD. Was she not young and tall?


LEON. Yes, rode she to the wood, or to the plain?


2 WOOD. Faith my Lord, we saw none.


LEON. Pox ofyour questions then: What, is she found?


CLE. Nor will be, I think.


LEON. Let him seek his daughter himself, she cannot stray
About a little necessary natural business:
But the whole Court must be in arms,
When she has done, we shall have peace.

CLE. There Is already a thousand fatherlesle tales amongst us,
Some say, her horse run away with her; some, a wolf pursued her;
Others, it was a plot to kill her, and that armed men were seen
In the wood: but questionless, she rode away willingly.

Enter the King, TRA. and there Lords. KING. Where is she?


LEON. Sir, I cannot tell.


K. Howe's that? answer me so again.


LEON. Sir, shall I lie?


K. Yes, lie, and dam, rather then tell me that:
I say again, where is she? mutter not,
Sir, speak you, where is she?

LEON. Sir, I do not know.


KING. Speak that again so boldly, and by heaven it is thy last. You
fellows, answer me, where is she? mark me all, I am your king, I wish to
see my daughter, show her me, I do command you all, as you are subjects, to
show her me: what, am I not your king, if I, why then, am I not to be obay'd?


LEON. Yes, if you command things possible, and honest.


KING. Things possible, and honest, hear me then, thou traitor, that dare
confine thy king, to possible and honest, thingsshew her me, or let me perish,
if I cover not all Cycele with blood.


LEON. Faith I cannot, unless you will tell me where she is.

KING. You have betrayed me, you have let me loose the Jewel of my life, go
bring her me, and set her here before me, it is the king will have it so, whose
breath can still the winds, vnclowd the Sun, charm down the swelling sea, and
stop the Floods of heaven: speak, can it not?


LEON. No.


K. No, cannot the breath of a king do this?


CLE. No more smell sweet it self, if once the lungs be but corrupted.


K. Take you heed?


LEON. Take you heed, how you dare the powers
That must be just.

K. Alas! What are we kings, why do you gods
Place us above the rest, to be ferued, flattred, and adord,
Still we believe we hold within our hands your Thunder,
And when we come to try the power we think we have,
There Is not a leaf shakes at our threatenings,
I have sinned, it is true, and here I stand to be punished,
Yet would not these be punished, let me choose my way,
And lay it on.

LEON. He articles with the gods, would some body would draw bonds, for the
performance of covenant betwixt them.


Enter PHARAMONT, GALLATEA, MEGRA. KING. What, is she found?


PHA. No, we have taken her horse, he gallopt empty by, there is some treason:
you Gallatea rode into the Wood with her, Why left you her?


GAL. She did command me.


PHA. Command, you should not.


GAL. 'Twould ill become my fortunes, and my birth,
To disobay the daughter ofmy king.

K. O you are all cunning to obey us, for our hurts,
But I will have her.

PHA. If I have her not, by this sword, there shall be no more Cycele.


LEON. What, will he carry it to Spain in's pockets?


PHA. I will not leave one man alive,
But the king, a Cook, and a Tailor.

LEON. Yes, you may do well to leave your Lady bedfellow here for a spincer.


K. I see the injuries I have done, must be revenged.


LEON. Sir, this is not the way to find her out.


K. Run all, disperse your selves, the man that finds her, or if she be killed,
the traitor, I Will make him great.


LEON. I, some would give five thousand pounds to find her.


K. Come, let us seek.


PHA. Each man a several way, here I my self.


LEON. Come Gentlemen, we here.


CLE. Lady, you must go search too.


GAL. I had rather be the search my self.


Exeunt omnes. Enter the Princess solus. PRIN. Where am I now, feet find out
the way, without the counsel of my troubled head, I Will follow you boldly about
these woods, or mountains, through brambles, pits and fluds; Heaven I hope
will ease me, I am sick.


She sits down, Enter BOY. BOY. Yonder my Lady is, gods knows, I want
nothing, because I do not wish to live, yet I will try her charity. O hear
you, that have plenty from that flowing store, drop some on dry grounds, see
the lively red is gone to guard her heart: I fear she faints, Madame, look
up: she breathes not; open once those rosy twines, and send unto my Lord your
latest farewell: O she stirs; How is it Madame? speak comfort.


PRIN. It Is not gently done to put me in a miserable life, and hold me there,
I prithee let me go, I shall do best without thee.


Enter PHYLASTER. PHI. I am too blame to be so much in rage,
I Will tell her coolely, when and where I heard
This killing truth, I will be temperate in speaking,
And as just in hearing; O monstrous, tempt me not
You gods, good gods, tempt not a frail man, who is he that has a heart, but
he must ease it with his tongue.


BOY. My Lord, help, help the Princess.


PRIN. I am well, forbear.


PHI. Let me love lightnings, let me be imbrast and kissed
By Scorpyons, or adore the eyes of Basaliskes,
Rather then trust the tongues ofhell-bread women:
Some good god look down, and shrink these veins up,
Stick me here a stone, lasting to memory of this damned act.
Hear me you wicked ones, you have put hills of fire
Into my breast, not to be quenched with tears,
For which may guilt sit on your bosoms, at your meals and beds,
Despair awaite you, what, before my face,
Poison of Aspes between your lips, diseases be your best issues,
Nature make a curse and throw it on you.

PRIN. Dear Phylaster, leave to inrage, and hear me.


PHI. I have done,
Forgive my passion, not the calmed sea, when Eolus
Locks up his windy brood, is less disturbed then I,
I Will make you know, dear Arethusa, take this sword,
And search how temperate a heart I have, then you,
And this your boy, may live and reign in Just, without control.
Will thou Bellario, I prithee kill me,
Thou art poor, and may nourish ambitious thoughts
When I am dead, thy way were freer, am I raging now?
If I were mad, I should desire to live: Sirs, feel my pulse,
Whether you have known a man in more
Equal tune to die.

PRIN. Alas my Lord, your pulse keeps madmens time,
So dos your tongue.

PHI. You will not kill me then?


BOY. Kill you,


PRIN. Not for the world.


PHI. I blame not thee Bellario, thou have done but th at
Which gods would have transformd themselves to do,
Be gone, leave me without reply, this is the last
Exit BOY. Of all our meetings, kill me with this sword, be wise,
Or worse will follow, we are two, earth cannot bear at once, resolve to do or
suffer.


PRIN. If my fortunes be so good to let me sall upon thy hand,
I shall have peace with earth,
Yet tell me this, there will be no slanders, no jealousy, in the other world
no il here?


PHI. No.


PRIN. Show me the way to joy.


PHI. Then guide my feeble hand, you that have power
To do it, for I must perform a piece of Justice:
If your youth have any way offended heaven,
Let prayers short and effectual, reconcile you to it.

PRIN. I am prepared,
Enter a Country Gallant.
COVN. I will see the king if he be in the Forest,
I have hunted him this two hours, if I should come home,
And not see him, my sisters would laugh at me,
I can see nothing but people, better horst then my self,
That out ride me, I can hear nothing but shouting,
These kings had need of strong brains,
The whooping would put a man out of his wits:
There Is a Courtier with his sword drawn, by this hand upon a woman, I think.


PHI. Are you at peace?


PHY. wounds her.


PRIN. With heaven and earth.


PHI. Nay, they divide thy soul and body.


COVN. Hold dastard, strike a woman, thou art a crauen, I warrant thee, thoud'st
be loath to play half a dozen veneis at wasters with a man for a broken head.


PHI. Leave us good friend.


PRIN. What ill bred man art thou, to intrude thy self upon our private
sports, our recreations.


COVN. God judge me, I understand you not,
But I know the rogue has hurt ye.

PHI. Pursue thy own affairs, it will be ill to multiply blood upon my head,
which thou will force me to.


COVN. I know not your Rethrack, but I can lay it on if you touch the woman.


PHI. Slave, take what thou deseruest,


They fight. PRIN. Gods guard my Lord.


COVN. O, do you breath?


PHY. I hear the tread of people, I am hurt, the gods take part against me,
would this bore have held me thus else: I must shift for life, though I do
lose it, I would find a course,

To lose it rather by my will, then force.


COVN. I cannot follow the rogue,
Exit PHY. I prithee wench come kiss me now.

Enter PHARAMONT, LEON, CLE. TRA. and Wood-men. PHA. What art thou.


COVN. Almost killed I am, for a foolish woman,
A knave has hurt her.

LEON. The Princess Gentlemen. Where Is the wound Madame,
Is it dangerous.

PRIN. He has not hurt me.


COVN. By god she lies, has hurt her in the breast, look else.


PHA. Oh secret spring ofinnocent blood.


LEON. It Is above wonder, who should dare this.


PRIN. I felt it not.


PHA. Speak villain, who has hurt the Princess?


COVN. Is it the Princess?


OMNES. I.


COVN. Then I have seen something yet.


PHA. But who has done it?


COVN. I told you a rogue, I never saw him before, I.


LEON. Madame, who did it?


PRIN. Some dishonest wrecth, alas I know him not,
And do forgive him.

COVN. He Is hurt too, he cannot go far, I let my fathers old fox fly about's
ears.


PHA. How, will you have me kill him?


PRIN. Not at all, it is some distracted fellow.


PHA. By this air, i will leave never a piece bigger then a nut, and bring him
all in my hat.


PRIN. Nay, good sir, if you do take him, bring him quick to me, and I will
study for a punishment great as his sin.


PHA. I will.


PRIN. But swear.


PHA. By all my Love, I will: Wood-man, conduct the Princess unto the king,
and bear that wounded fellow to dressing: Come Gentlemen, we will follow the
chase close.


Exit COVN. I pray you friend, let me see the king.


CLE. That you shall, and receive thanks.


COVN. If I get clear of this, I Will see no more gay fights,


Enter the BOY. Exeunt. BOY. Oh heavens! heavy death sits on my brow,
And I must sleep, bear me thou gentle banck,
For ever if thou will, you sweet on all,
Let me unworthy press you, I could wish,
I rather were a Corse strewn over with you,
Then quick above you, dullness shuts my eyes, and I am giddy,
That I could take so sound a sleep,
That I might never wake.

Enter PHILASTER. PHI. I have done ill, my conscience calls me false,
To strike at her that would not strike at me,
When I did fight, me thought I heard her pray,
The gods to guard me, she may be abused,
And I a loathed villain if she be, she will conceal
Who hurt her, he has wounds, and cannot follow,
Neither knows he me. Who Is this? Bellario sleeping,
If thou be'st guilty, there is no justice that thy sleep
Should be so sound, and mine whom thou have wronged,
So broken.
Cry within. Hark I am pursued, you gods I Will take
This offered means of my escape.
They have no mark to know me, but my blood,
If she be true, if false, let mischief
Light on all the world at once.
Sword print my wounds upon his sleeping body,
He has none I think are mortal,
He wounds him. Nor would I lay greater on thee.

BOY. O! death I hope is come, blessed be that hand, it wished me well again for
pity.


PHI. I have caught my self,
The loss of blood has stayed my flight here,
Phy. falls down. Here is he that struck thee, take thy full revenge,
Use me as I did mean thee, worse then death:
I Will teach thee to revenge. This lucklesse hand
Wounded the Princess, tell my followers, thou
Did receive these hurts in staying me,
And I will second thee: get a reward.

BOY. Hide, hide my Lord, and save your self.


PHI. How is this? would thou I should be safe?


BOY. Else it were vain for me to live.
These wounds I have, has not bled much,
Reach me that noble hand, I Will help to cover you.

PHI. Art thou then true to me?


BOY. Or let me perish loathed: Come my Lord,
Creep in amongst these bushes, who dos know
But that the gods may save your breeth in it, Shromd,

PHI. Then I shall die for grief, if not for this,
That I have wounded thee: What will thou do?

BOY. Shift for my self: Well, peace, I hear vm come.


WITHIN. Follow, follow, that way they went.


BOY. With my own wounds I Will bloody my own sword,
I need not counterfeit to fall, heaven knows,
I can stand no longer.

Boy falls down. Ent. PHARAMONT, LEON, CLERAMONT and TRASALINE. PHA. To this
place I tract him by his blood.


LEON. Yonder my Lord, creepes one away.


CLE. Stay sir, what are you?


BOY. A wretched creature, wounded in these woods by beasts,
Relieve me, if your names be men,
Or I shall perish.

TRA. This is he my Lord, upon my soul that hurt her,
It is the boy, that wicked boy, that served her.

PHA. O thou damned in thy creation, what cause could thou shape to strike
the Princess?


BOY. Then I am betrayed,


LEON. Betrayed, no, apprehended.


BOY. I confess, urge it no more, that big with evil thoughts,
I set upon her, and did make my aim her death:
For charity let fall at once, the punishment you mean.
And do not load this weary flesh with tortour,

PHA. I will know who hired thee to this deed.


BOY. My own revenge.


CLE. Revenge, for what?


BOY. It pleased her to receive me as her Page,
And when my fortunes eb'd, that men strid over them careless.
She did shower her welcome graces on me,
And did swell my fortunes: till they ouer-flowde
Their banks, threatening the men that crossed them,
When as swift as storms arise at sea, she turnde
Her eyes to burning Sines upon me, and did dry the streams
She had bestowed, leaving me worse, and more contem'd
Then other little brooks, Because I had been great,
In short, I knew I could not live:
And therefore did desire to die revenged.

PHA. If tortures can be found, long as thy natural life,
Resolve to feelethe utmost vigor.

CLE. Help to lead him hence.


PHILASTER creepes out of a bush. PHI. Turn back you rauishers of innocents,
Know you the price of what you bear away
So rudely.

PHA. Who Is that?


LEON. My Lord Phylaster.


PHI. It Is not the treasure of all the Kings in one,
The wealth of Tagus, nor the rocks of pearl,
That paue the Court of Neptune, can weigh down
That virtue. It was I that hurt the Princess,
Place me some god, on a Pyramades, higher then
Hills of earth: and lend a voice loud as you
Thunder to me, that from thence I may teach
The vnder-world, the worrh that dwells in him.

PHA. How Is this?


BOY. My Lord, some man weary oflife that would be glad to die.


PHI. Leave this untimely courtesy Bellario.


BOY. Alas, he is mad, come, will you bear me hence?


PHI. By all the oaths that men ought most to keep,
And gods to punish most, when men do break.
He touched her nor, take heed Bellario,
How thou do drown the virtues thou have shown,
With perjury, by all the gods it was I,
You know she stood betwixt me and my right.

PHA. Thy own tongue be thy Judge.


LEON. It was Phylaster.


TRA. Is It not a brave boy?
Well, I fear me sir, we were deceived.

BOY. Have I no friend here?


LEON. Yes.


BOY. Then show it some good body, lend a hand to draw us nearer: Would you
have tears shed for you, when you die? then lay me gently on his neck, that
there I may weep floods, and breath forth my spirit. Not all the wealth of
Pluto, nor the gold locked in the heart of earth, can buy away this (...) from
me; this had been a ransom to have redeemed the (...) (...), had he been
taken; you hard-hearted men, more stony then these Mountains, can you see such
a clear pure blood drop, and not cut your flesh to stop his life, to bind
whose bitter wounds, Queens ought to tear their hairs, and with their tears
bathe them: forgive me thou that art the wealth of poor Phylaster,


Enter the King, Princess, and a guard. KING. Is the villain taken?


LEON. Sir, here be two confess the deed, but suit it was Phylaster.


KING. Question it no more, it was.


PHA. The fellow that did fight with him, will tell us that.


PRIN. Ay me, I know him well.


KING. Did not you know him?


PRIN. Sir, if it were he, he was disguised.


PHI. I was so: Oh wy stars, that I should live still.


KING. Thou ambitious fool, thou that have laid a train for thy own life,
now I do mean to do, I Will leave to talk, bear them to prison.


PRIN. Sir, they did plot together, to take hence this harmless life, should
it pass vnreuengd, I should to earth, weeping. Grant me then, by all the
loves a father bears his child, their custodies, that I may appoint their
tortures, and their deaths.


LEON. Death, soft your law will not reach that for this fault.


KING. It Is granted, take vm to you with a guard.
Come Princely Pharamont, this business past,
We shall with more security go on
With our intended match.

Exit King and PHARAMONT. LEON. I pray that this actionloose not Phylastor the
hearts of the people.


CLE. Fear it not, their ouer-wise heads
Will think it but a trick.

Exeunt. Actus 5. Scoen. 1.
Enter LEON. CLE. and TRA. LEON. Has the king sent for him to death?


CLE. Yes, but the king must know, it is not in his powor to war with heaven.


TRA. We linger time, the king sent for Phylastor, and the headsman, an hour
ago.


LEON. Are all his wounds well?


TRA. All, they were but scrarches, but the loss of blood made him faint.


CLE. We dally Gentlemen.


LEON. Away.


Exit. TRA. We Will shufle hard before he perish.


Enter PHYLASTER, Princess, BOY, in prison. PRIN. Nay, faith Phylaster, grieve
not, we are well.


BOY. Nay, good my Lord forbear, we are wondrous well.


PHI. Oh Arethusa and Bellario,
Leave to be kind, I shall be shut from heaven,
If you continue so, I am a man false to a pair
Of the truest ones that ever earth bore.
Can it bear us all? forgive me, and leave me;
But the King has sent to call me to my death,
Oh show it me, and then forget me: and for thee my boy,
I shall deliver words, will mollify the hearts of beasts,
To spare thy innocence.

BOY. Alas, my Lord: My life is not a thing worthy
Your noble thoughts, it is not a life, it is but a piece
Of childhood thrown away: should I out live you,
I should out live virtue and honor:
And when that day come, if ever I shall close
These eyes but once; may I live spotted for my perjury,
And waste by time to nothing.

PRIN. And I the wofulst maid that ever lived,
Forced with my hands to bring my Lord to death,
Do by the honor of a Virgin swear.
To tell no hour behind it.

PHI. Make me not hated so.


PRIN. Come from this prison, all joyful to our deaths.


PHI. People will tear me, when they find you true,
To such a wretch as I, I shall die loathed.
Enjoy your Kingdom peaceably, whilst I for ever sleep,
Forgotten with my faults. Every just maiden, every maid in love,
Will have a piece of me, if you be true.

PRIN. My dearest, say not so.

BOY. A piece of you, he was not borne of woman, that can cut it, and look on.


PHI. Take me in tears betwixt you,
For my heart will break with shame and sorrow.

PRIN. Why? it is well.


BOY. Lament no more.


PHI. Why? what would you have done?
If you had wronged me basely, and had found
My life no whit compared to yours for love,
Sirs, deal with me truly.

BOY. 'Twas mistaken Sir.


PRIN. Why, if it were?


BOY. Then sir we would have asked you pardon.


PHI. And have hope to enjoy it.


PRIN. Enjoy it, I.


PHI. Would you indeed? be plain.


PRIN. We would my Lord.


PHI. Forgive me then.


PRIN. So, so.


BOY. It Is as it should be now.


PHI. Lead to my death.


Exeunt. Enter the King, LEON; CLE. TRA. and a guard. KING. Gentlemen, who saw
the Prince?


LEON. So please you Sir, he is gone to see the City,
And the new Plot-forme, with some Gentlemen
Attending on him.

KING. Is the Princess ready to bring her prisoner out?


CLE. She waits your grace.


KING. Tell her we stay.


Exit TRA. LEON. King, you may be deceived yet, the head you aim at,
Cost more setting on, then to lose it so lightly:
aside. If it must off like a wild ouer-flow, that soopes before him,
A golden stock, and with it shakes down bridges,
Cracks the strong hearts of Pynes, whose cable roots
Held out a thousand storms, a thousand thunders,
And so made weightier, takes whole villages upon his back,
And in the heat of pride charges strong Towns,
Towers, Castles, Palaces, and leaves them desolate.
So shall thy head, thy noble head, bury the lives
Of thousands, that must bleed with thee like a sacrifice,
In thy red ruins.

Enter PHI. Princess, BOY, with a garland of flowers on's head. KING. How now,
what mask is this?


BOY. Right royal Sir,
I shall sing you an Epethelamon, but having lost my best aires with my
fortunes, and wanting a celestial harp to strike this blessed union; thus in
glad story I give you all these two fair Caedor branches. The noblest of the
mountains where they grew, straightest and tallest, under whose still shades,
the worthier beasts have made their layers, and slept free from the firuer of
the Serian star, and the fell thunder-stroke, free from the Clouds, when they
were big with humor, and deliver in thousand spouts, that issues to the earth:
O there was none but silent quiet there, till neuer-pleased fortune shot up
shrubs base under branches, to devour these branches, and for a while they did
so, and did reign over the Mountain, and did choke up his beauty with
brakes, rud, thorns and thistles, till the Sun scorcht them to the root,
and dride vm there, and now a gentle gaile has blown again, that made these
branches meet and twine together, never to be vnarmde: The god that sings his
Number ore marriage beds, has knit their noble hearts, and here they stand,
your children, worthy king, and I have done.


KING. How, how?


PRIN. Sir, if you love it in plain truth, for now there is no masking in it,
this gentleman the prisoner that you gave me, is become my keeper.

And through all the bitter threats, your Iealousies, and his il fate, have
wrought him, thus nobly has he strugled, and at length arrived here:

My dear husband.


KING. Your dear husband. Call in the Captain of the Citadell, where you
shall keep your wedding, I Will provide a mask shall make your Hymen turn his
saffron into a sullen coat, and sing sad requiems to your departing souls,
blood shall put out your torches, and instead of gaudy flowers about your wanton
necks, an Axe shall hang, like a prodigious Metour, ready to crop your loves
sweetes. Hear you gods: From this time do I shake all title off of father to
this woman, this base woman, and what there is of vengein a Lion chaft amongst
dogs, or robbed of his dear young, the same enforced more terrible, more
mighty, look from me.


PRIN. Sir, by that little life that I have left to swear by,
There Is nothing can stir me from my self.
What I have done, I have done, without repntance,
For death to me can be no bugbare, as long as Pharamont,
Is not my heads-man.

LEON. Sweet peace upon thy soul thou worthy maid,
When ere thou die, for this time I Will excuse thee ore by thy prologue.


PHI. Sir, let me speak next,
And let my dying words be better with you
Then my dull living actions: Ifyou aim at the life
Of this sweet innocent, you are a tyrant and a savage monster,
That feeds upon the blood you gave a life to,
Your memory shall be as foul behind you as you are living:
All your better deeds shall be in water writ;
But this in marble. No Chronicle shall speak you,
Though your own, but for a shame of men:
No Monument, though high and big as Pelion,
Shall Be able to cover this base murder, make it rich with brass,
Gold and shining Jasper, like the Pyramides;
Lay on Epitaphes, such as make great men gods,
My little Marble, that only clothes my ashes, not my faults,
Shall far out shine it: and for after issues,
Think not so madly of the heavenly wisdoms,
That they will give you more, for your mad rage to cut off:
Unless it be some snake, or something like your self,
That in his birth shall strengle you: Remember my father king,
There was a fault, but I forgive it, let that sin
Persuade you to love this Lady, if you have a soul.
Think, save her and be saved, for my self, I have so long
Expected this glad hour, so languisht under you,
And daily withered, that by the gods, it is a joy to die,
I find a recreation in it.

Enter a Messenger. MES. Where Is the King?


KING. Here.


MES. Get to your strength,
And rescue the Prince Pharamont from danger,
He Is taken prisoner by the Citizens,
For the Lord Phylaster.

LEON. O brave fellows; Mureny my fine dear countrymen, Muteny. Now my brave
valiant formen, show your weapons In honor of your Mistresses.


2 MES. Arm, arm, arm.


KING. A thousand devils take these Citizens.


LEON. A thousand blessings on them.


MES. Arm, O king, the City is in Muteny.
Led by an old gray Ruffin, who comes on
In rescue of the Lord Phylaster.

KING. Away to the Citadell, I Will see them safe,
And then cope with these burgers, let the guard
And all the Gentlemen give strong attendance.

Exit King, Manet LEON, CLE. and TRA. CLE. The City up, this was above our
wishes.


LEON. I, and the marriage too, by all the gods, this noble Lady has deceived us
all, a plague upon my self, a thousand plagues, for having such unworthy
thoughts of her dear Honor: O, I could beat my self, or do you beat me, and
I Will beat you, for we had all one thought.


CLE. No, no, 'twill but lose time.


LEON. You say true, are your swords sharp: Well my dear
Countrymen what you lackes, ifyou continue, and fall not
Back, upon the first broken skin, I Will see you Chronicled,
And Chronicled, and cut and Chronicled, and all to be praised,
And sung in sonets, and bathed in brave new ballads,
That all tongues shall troule you in Secula seculorum,
My kind Countrymen.

TRA. What if a toy take vm i'ch he les now, and they run all away, and cry,
the devil take the hindmost.


LEON. Then the same devil take the foremost too, and sauce him for his
breakefast, if they all prove cowards, my curses flush amongst vm, and ill
speeding: may they have injurious rain to keep the Gentlemen at home in
rasine freeze, may the moth branch their veluets, and their silks only be
worn before sore eyes, may their false lights undo vm, and discover preases,
holes, stains, and oldnesse in their stuffes, and make them shop-rid, may they
keep whoores, and horses, and break, and live mued up with necks ofbeefe and
turnups; May they have many children, and none like the father, and know no
language but that gibberish they pratle to their parsels, unless it be the
gotish latin they write in their bonds, and may they write that false, and
lose their debts.


Enter the King. KING. Now the vengeance of all the gods confound them,
How they swarm together, what a hum they raise.
Devils choke your wide throats, if a man had need
To use your valors, we must pay a brokadge for it,
And then bring on, and you will fight like sheep:
It Is Phylaster, none but Phylaster must allay this heat,
They will not hear me speak, but fling dirt at me,
And call me tyrant. O run dear friend, and bring the Lord
Phylaster, speak him well, call him Prince,
Do him all the courtesies you can, commend me to him,
Oh! my wits, my wits.

LEON. O my brave Citizens, as I live I will not buy a pin
Out of your walls for this: nay, you shall cosen me,
And I Will thank you, and send you brawne and bakon,
Every long vocation; and foul shall come up fat
And in brave liking.

KING. What they will do with that poor Prince, the gods know, I fear.


LEON. Why, they will flea him, and make Church buckets on's skin, to qucnch
rebellion, then clap a reuit in's sconce, and hang him up for a sign.


Enter PHYLASTER. KING. O worthy Sir, forgive me: Do not make your miseries
And my faults meet together, to bring a greater danger,
Be your self still sound amongst diseases, I have wronged you,
And though I find it last, and beaten to it,
Let me your goodness know, calm the people, and be
What you were born to, take your love, and with her my repentance,
All my wishes, and all my prayers, by the gods,
My heart speaks all this, and if the least fall from me,
Not performed, may I be struck with thunder.

PHI. Mighty Sir, I will not do your greatuesse so much wrong,
As not to make your word truth, free the Princess and the boy,
And let me stand the shock of this mad sea-breach,
Which I Will either turn, or perish with it.

KING. Let your own word free her.


PHI. Then thus I take my leave, kissing your hand,
And hanging on your noble word, be Kingly,
And be not moved Sir, I shall bring you peace,
Or never bring my self back.

KING. Now all the gods go with thee.


Enter an old Captain, with a crew of Citizens, leading PHARAMONT prisoner.
CAP. Come my brave Mermedons, fall on, letyour caps swarm, and your nimble
tongues forget your gibrish, of what you lack, and set your mouths ope'
children, till your pallats fall frighted half a fathom past the cure of
bay salt and gross pepper; and then cry Phylaster, brave Phylaster. Let
Phylaster be deep in request, my ding-adings, mypaire of dear Indentures: King
of clubs, the^ your cut-water-chamlets, and your painting: let not your hasty
silks, deerly belouers of Custards and Cheescakes, or your branch cloth of
bodkins, or your tyffenies, your robbin-hood scarlet and John's, tie your
affections in durance to your shops, my dainty duckers, up with your three
pil'd spirits, that rightvalourous, and let your accute colors make the King
to feel the measure of your mightiness; Phylaster, cry, myrose nobles, cry.


OMNES. Phylaster, Phylaster.


CAP. How do you like this, my Lord prisoner?
These are mad boys I can tell you,
These be things that will not strike top-sayle to a Foyst,
And let a Man of war, an Argosea,
Stoop to carry coals.

PHAR. Why, you damned slaves, do you know who I am?


CAP. Yes, my pretty Prince of puppits, we do know, and give you gentle
warning, you talk no more such bugs words, lest that sodden Crown should be
scracht with a musket; dear Prince pippin, I Will have you codled, let him loose
my spirits, and make a ring with your bills my hearts: Now let me see what this
brave man dares do: note sir, have at you with this washing blow, here I lie,
do you huffe sweet Prince? I could hock your grace, and hang you cross
legged, like a Hare at a Poulters stall; and do thus.


PHAR. Gentlemen, honest Gentlemen --


1 SOUL. A speaks treason Captain, shal's knock him down?


CAP. Hold, I say.


2 SOUL. Good Captain let me have one mal at's mazard, I feel my stomach
strangely provoked to be at his Spanish pot-nowle, shal's kill him?


OMNES. I, kill him, kill him.


CAP. Again I say hold.


3 SOUL. O how rank he looks, sweet Captain let us geld him, and send his
dowsets for a dish to the Burdello.


4 SOUL. No, let us rather sell them to some woman Chemist, that extractions,
she might draw an excellent prouocatiue oil from uses them, that might be
very useful.


CAP. You see, my scuruy Don, how precious you are in esteem amongst us, had
you not been better kept at home, I think you had: must you needs come
amongst us, to have your saffron hide taw'd as we intend it: My Don, Phylaster
must suffer death to satisfy your melancholy spleen, he must my Don, he
must; but we your Physicians, hold it fit that you bleed for it: Come my
robusticks, my brave regiment of rattle makers, let us call a common cornuted
counsel, and like grave Senators, bear up our brancht crests, in sitting upon
the several tortures we shall put him to, and with as little sense as may be,
put your wills in execucion.


SOME CRIES. Burn him, burn him.


OTHERS. Hang him, hang him.


Enter PHYLASTER. CAP. No, rather let us carbinade his cods-head, and cut him to
collops: shall I begin?


PHI. Stay your furies my loving Countrymen.


OMNES. Phylaster is come, Phylaster, Phylaster.


CAP. My poroupines of spite, make room I say, that I may salute my brave
Prince: and is Prince Phylaster at liberty?


PHI. I am, most loving countrymen.


CAP. Then give me thy Princely goll, which thus I kiss, to whom I crouch and
bow; But see my royal spark, this headstrong swarm that follow me humming
like a master Be, have I led forth their Hiues, and being on wing, and in our
heady flight, have seized him shall suffer for thy wrongs.


OMNES. I, I, let us kill him, kill him.


PHI. But hear me, Countrymen.


CAP. Hear the Prince, I say, hear Phylaster.


OMNES. I, I, hear the Prince, hear the Prince.


PHI. My coming is to give you thanks, my dear Countrymen, whose powerful
sway has curbed the prossecuting fury of my foes.


OMNES. We will curb vm, we will curb vm.


PHI. I find you will,
But if my intrest in your loves be such,
As the world takes notice of, Let me crave
You would deliver Pharamont to my hand,
And from me accept this
Gives vm his purse. Testimony of my love.
Which is but a pittance of those ample thanks,
Which shall redowne with showred courtesies.

CAP. Take him to thee brave Prince, and we thy bounty thankefully accept, and
will drink thy health, thy perpetual health my Prince, whilst memory lasts
amongst us, we are thy Mermidons, my Achillis: we are those will follow thee,
and in thy service will scowre our rusty murins and our bill-bow-blades, most
noble Phylaster, we will: Come my rowtists let us retyer till occasion calls us
to attend the nohle Phylaster.


OMNES. Phylaster, Phylaster, Phylaster.


Exit CAPTAIN, and Citizens. PHAR. Worthy sir, I owe you a life,
For but your self there is naught could have prevailed.

PHI. It Is the least of service that I owe the King,
Who was careful to preserve ye.

Exit. Enter LEON, TRASILINE, and CLERIMON. TRA. I ever thought the boy was
honest.


LEON. Well, it is a brave boy Gentlemen.


CLE. Yet you would not believe this.


LEON. A plague on my forwardness, what a villain was I, to wrong vm so; a
mischief on my muddy brains, was I mad?


TRA. A little frantic in your rash attempt, but that was your love to
Phylaster, sir.


LEON. A pox on such love, have you any hope my countinance will ere serve me
to look on them?


CLE. O very well Sir.


LEON. Very ill Sir, vds death, I could beat out my brains, or hang my self
in revenge.


CLE. There would be little gotten by it, ene keep you as ye are.


LEON. An excellent boy, Gentlemen believe it, hark the King is coming,


Cornets sounds. Enter the King, Princess, GALLATEA, MEGRA, BELLARIO, a
Gentlewoman, and other attendants. K. No news of his return,
Will not this rabble multitude be appeased?
I fear their outrage, lest it should extend
With dangering of Pharamonts life.

Enter PHILASTER with PHARAMONT. LEON. See Sir, Phylaster is returned.


PHI. Royal Sir,
Receive into your bosom your desired peace,
Those discontented mutineares be appeasde,
And this fortaigne Prince in safety.

K. How happy am I in thee Phylaster?

Whose excellent virtues begets a world of love,
I am indebted to thee for a Kingdom.
I here surrender up all Soueraignetie,
Reign peacefully with thy espoused Bride,
Delivers his Crown to him. Ashume my Son to take what is thy due.

PHA. How Sir, yer son, what am I then, your Daughter you gave to me.


KIN. But heaven has made asignement unto him,
And brought your contract to anullity:
Sir, your entertainment has been most fair,
Had not your hell-bred lust dride up the spring,
From whence flowed forth those favors that you found:
I am glad to see you safe, let this suffice,
Your self has crossed your self.

LEON. They are married sir.


PHAR. How married? I hope your highness will not use me so, I came not to be
disgraced, and return alone.


KING. I cannot help it sir.


LEON. To return alone, you need not sir,
Here is one will bear you company,
You know this Ladies proof, if you
Failed not in the say taging.

ME. I hold your scoffs in vildest base contempt,
Or is there said or done, ought I repent,
But can retort even to your grinning teeths,
Your worst of spights, tho Princess lofty steps
May not be tract, yet may they tread a wry,
That boy there --

BELL. If to me ye speak Lady,
I must tell you, youhaue lost your self
In your too much forwardness, and has forgot
Both modesty and truth, with what impudence
You have thrown most damnable aspertions
On that noble Princess and my self: witness the world;
Behold me sir.

Kneeles to LEON, and discouers her hair. LEON. I should know this face; my
daughter.


BELL. The same sir.


PRIN. How, our sometime Page, Bellario, turned woman?


BELL. Madame, the cause induc't me to transform my self,
Proceeded from a respective modest
Affection I bare to my my Lord,
The Prince Phylaster, to do him service,
As far from any laciuious thought,
As that Lady is far from go odnesse,
And ifmy true intents may be believed,
And from your Highness Madame, pardon find,
You have the truth.

PRIN. I do believe thee, Bellario I shall call thee still.


PHI. The faithfullest servant that ever gave attendance.


LEON. Now Lady lust, what say you to the boy now;
Do you hang the head, do ye, shame would fleale
Into your face, if ye had grace to entertain it,
Do ye slinke away?

Exit MEGRA hiding her face. KING. Give present order she be banished the Court,
And straightly confinde till our further
Pleasure is known.

PHAR. Here Is such an age of transformation, that I do not know how to trust my
self, I Will get me gone to: Sir, the disparagement you have done, must be called
in question. I have power to right my self, and will.


Exit PHARAMONT. KING. We fear ye not sir.


PHI. Let a strong conuoy guard him through the Kingdom,
With him, let us part with all our cares and fear,
And Crown with joy our happy loves success.

KING. Which to make more full, Lady Gallatea,
Let honored Clerimont acceptance find
In your chaste thoughts.

PHI. It Is my suit too.


PRIN. Such royal spokes-men must not be denied.


GAL. Nor shall not, Madame.


KING. Then thus I join your hands.


GAL. Our hearts were knit before.


They kiss. PHI. But it is you Lady, must make all complete,
And gives a full perod to content,
Let your loves cordial again revive,
The drooping spirits of noble Trasiline.
What says Lord Leon to it?

LEON. Marry my Lord I say, I know she once loved him.
At least made show she did,
But since it is my Lord Phylasters desire,
I Will make a surrender of all the right
A father has in her; here take her sir,
With all my heart, and heaven give you joy.

KING. Then let us in these nuptuall feasts to hold,
Heaven has decreed, and Fate stands uncontrolled.

FINIS.

