A DISPLAY of two foreign sects in the East Indies viz: The sect of the
Banians the Ancient Natives of India And the sect of the Persees the Ancient
Inhabitants of Persia together with the Religion and Manners of each sect

Collected* Into two Books by Henry Lord Sometimes resident in East India and
Preacher to the Hoble Company of Merchants trading their

j Cor. ij.jo For there must be also Heirs amongst you that they that are
approved may be ^^nifest among (...)

(...):

Imprinted (...)London for Francis Constable and are to be Sold at his Shop
in (...) Church yard at the sign of the (...)

(...)



A DISCOVERY OF THE SECT OF THE BANIANS.

Containing their History, Law, Liturgy, Casts, Customs, and Ceremonies.

Gathered from their BRAMANES, Teachers of that Sect: As the particulars were
comprised in the Book of their Law, called the SHASTER: Together with a
display of their Manners, both in times past, and at this present.

ESAIAS 9.16. The Leaders of this people cause them to err: and they that are
led of them are destroyed.

LONDON, Printed by T. and R. Cotes, for FRA. CONSTABLE, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE by the Providence of God,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan.
Right Reverend:
WHen any person violateth the Laws of our dread soueraigns most excellent
Majesty, whereby he be comes guilty of high Treason, either in the attempts
of Rebellion, or counterfeiting the Kings coin, or the like; wheresoever such
a one is deprehended, it belongs to some body to attach the criminous and
bring him before the higher Powers, there to receive censure and sentence
according to his crime. As it is thus in causes secular, so me thinks it
seems but reason in causes divine. Having therefore in the foreign parts of
the East Indies (whither it pleased God to dispose me in a Ministerial charge
under the employment of the East Indian Company) espied two Sects rebelliously
and schismatically violating the divine law of the dread Majesty of Heaven, and
with notable forgery coining Religion according to the Minte of their own
Tradition, abusing that stamp which God would have to pass current in the
true Church: I thought it my bounden duty (through default of one more
sufficient) to apprehend them and bring them before your Grace, to receive both
censure and Judgment: Whose Primacy in our Church of England does best entitle
your Lordship to be a Judge of their causes and crimes. I have therefore in
this first Book made Indictment against the Banian, whose cause has formerly
had some reference to your Grace, by the labors of Mr. Purchase, whose
evidences being nihil praeter auditum, and those not vnbaring the root of
their guilt and criminaltie, I have brought them to a second examination
accused upon better Evidence. May it please your Grace then to give them a
second survey, pardoning my weakness, if in any place the poorness of their
superstitions go clothed in a style unworthy of your Graces more sublime
Judgment. Thus hoping the forward tender of this Nouelty, will over balance
the disabilities of the Presenter, my prayers to God are, that your Grace may
live long a Patron to the causes of our Church, and like a Reverend Moses
descending from Gods Mount, bray the Idols of superstition to dust and powder,
till the Almighty concluding your Honors here, bring you to eternal glory in
the world to come.

Your Graces in all duty, HENRY LORD.

THE INTRODVCTION OR PREAMBLE, PREPAring the Reader for the knowledge of the
following WORK.
Having by Gods Providence (who swayeth us as it pleases him to our several
places of being) gained a charge of souls in the Adventure of the honorable
Company of Merchants trading to the East Indies: It happened that I was
transferred from my Charge aboard the Ship, to reside in their prime Factorie
in Guzzarat, in a place called Surrat, with the President over their affairs
in that place Mr. Thomas Kerridge; where according to the busy observance of
Trauailers, inquiring what novelty the place might produce, a people presented
themselves to mine eyes, clothed in linen garments, somewhat low descending,
of a gesture and garb as I may say, maidenly and well nigh effeminate; of a
countenance shy and somewhat estranged: yet smiling out a glosed and bashful
familiarity, whose use in the Companies affairs occasioned their presence
there.

Truth to say, mine eyes unacquainted with such objects, took up their wonder
and gazed; and this admiration the badge of a fresh Trauailer, bred in me the
importunity of a Questioner: I asked what manner of people those were, so
strangely notable, and notably strange? Reply was made, they were Banians, a
people foreign to the knowledge of the Christian world; their Religion,
Rites, and Customs, sparingly treated of by any, and they no less reserved in
the publication of them: but some opinions they derived from the Philosopher
Pythagoras, touching Trans-animation of souls. It was thought the nouelty
would make the discovery thereof, grateful and acceptable to some of our
Country men, that some of my Predecessors had been scrutinous to bring this
Religion to light; but whether deterred with the Fictions and Chymeraes,
wherewith Banian writings abound, that might make it unworthy of acceptance,
or the shynesse of the Bramanes, who will scarce admit a stranger conversation,
the work was left to him that would make a path through these impediments.

The President, Mr. Thomas Kerridge, was urgent with me, to redeem their
omissions, and to see if I could work somewhat out of this forsaken Subject.
The truth was, I was willing to earnest his love to me by this iniunction, who
to give this undertaking the better promotion, interested himself in the
work, by mediating my acquaintance with the Bramanes, whose eminence of place,
was an attractiue to draw on this discovery and manifestation.

I that thought my observance would be well took, if I could present my
Countrymen with any thing new from these foreign parts, begun my work, and
essayed to fetch materials for the same out of their Manuscripts, and by
renewed access, with the help of Interpreters, made my collections out of a
book of theirs called the SHASTER, which is to them as their Bible, containing
the grounds of their Religion in a written word.

If any therefore be affected to peruse or reuise the Religion, Rites, and
Customs, of the said Banians, leaving out for the most part such prodigious
Fictions as seem independent on sense and reason; here they shall meet with
the best Essence and ground of this Sect, digested into such a form, as shall
best clear the knowledge thereof, and such as I presume never had a like
discovery by any yet in the Press. So handfesting the Reader with as good
hopes, as may be expected from a Subject of this nature, I refer them to the
proof of the following Chapters.

A DISCOVERY OF THE BANIAN RELIGION.
CHAP. I.
Of God, the Creation of the world, the creation of the first Man and Woman,
and the Progeny from them descending, as it is by the Banians delivered.

THE great God (say the Banians) being alone, bethought himself how he might
make his excellency and power manifest to others; for his great virtue had
been obscured and hid, if it had not been communicated to his creatures. What
means might then be better to give evidence of both these, then the creation
of a world, and creatures therein?

For this cause the Almighty consulted with himself, about the making of this
great work, which men call the World or Universe, and as the Ancients (say
they) have delivered; the Lord made four Elements as the groundwork of this
mighty frame; to wit, Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, which four Elements were
at first all mingled together in a confusion, but the Almighty separated them
in manner following.

First, it is delivered, that by some great Cane or like instrument, he blew
upon the Waters, which arose into a bubble, of a round form like an egg,
which spreading it self further and further, made the Firmament so clear and
transparent, which now compasses the world about.

After this, there remaining the Earth, as the sediment of the Waters, and some
liquid substance with the same; the Lord made of both these together, a thing
round like a ball, which he called the lower world, the more solid part
whereof became the Earth, the more liquid the Seas; both which making one
Globe, he by a great noise or humming sound, placed them in the midst of the
Firmament, which became aequi-distant from it on every side.

Then he created a Sun and Moon in the Firmament, to distinguish the times
and seasons: and thus these four Elements that were at first mixed together,
became separate and assigned to their several places; the Air to his place,
the Earth to his, the Water to his place, and the Fire to his place.

These Elements thus disposed, each of them discharged his several parts; the
Air filled up whatsoever was empty; the Fire began to nourish with his heat;
the Earth brought forth his living creatures; and the Sea his. And the Lord
conveyed to these a seminall virtue, that they might be fruitful in their
several operations, and thus the great world was created.

This World, as it had his beginning from four Elements, so it was measured by
four maine points of the Compass; East, West, North, and South; and was to be
continued for four Ages; and to be peopled by four Casts or sorts of men,
which were married to four Women appointed for them, of which we shall speak
as order may give occasion.

God having thus made the world, and the creatures thereto belonging; then God
created Man, as a creature more worthy then the rest, and one that might be
most capable of the works of God. The earth then did at Gods voice and
command, render this creature from his bowels, his head first appearing, and
after that his body, with all the parts and members of the same, into whom God
conveyed life, which as soon as he had received, witnessed it self: for,
color began to show it self red in his lips, his eye liddes began to
disclose the two lights of Nature, the parts of his body bewrayed their motion,
and his understanding being informed, he acknowledged his Maker, and gave him
worship.

That this creature might not be alone, who was made by nature sociable; God
seconded him with a Companion, which was Woman; to whom not so much the outward
shape, as the likeness of the mind and disposition seemed agreeing: and the
first man's name was Pourous, and the woman's name was Parcoutee, and they lived
conjoined together as Man and Wife, feeding on the fruits of the earth,
without the destruction of any living creature.

These two living in this conjunction, had four sons; the first was called
Brammon, the second Cuttery, the third Shuddery, the fourth Wise. These four
brethren were of Natures distinct each from the other; the four Elements
claiming in each of them a different predominance: For Brammon was of an
earthly constitution, and therefore Melancholy; and Cuttery was of a fiery
constitution, and therefore of a Martial spirit. Shuddery was of a flegmaticke
constitution, and therefore of a peaceable or conuersable disposition; Wise was
of an ayery temper, and therefore full of contriuements and inventions.

And because Brammon was of a melancholy constitution, and ingenious; God
endued him with knowledge, and appointed him to impart his Precepts and Laws
unto the people; his grave and serious look, best fitting him for such a
purpose: for which cause he gave him a Book, containing the form of divine
Worship and Religion.

And because Cuttery was of a Martial temper, God gave him power to sway
kingdoms with the Scepter, and to bring men into order, that the
Weale-publicke might thrive by united endeavors for the common good: as an
Emblem of which the Almighty put a sword into his hand, the instrument of
victory and domination.

And because Shuddery was of a nature mild and conuerseable, it was thought
meet, that he should be a Merchant, to enrich the Commonwealth by Traffic,
that so every place might abound with all things, by the use of shipping and
Navigations: as a monitour to put him in mind of which course of life, he had a
pair of Balances put into his hand, and a bag of waights hung at his
girdle, instruments most accommadate to his profession.

Lastly, because Wise was of an Ayery temper, whose conceits use to be more
subtle and apprehensiue, he was endued with admirable inventions, and was able
by his first thoughts, to form any thing that belonged to the Mechanicke or
handy-crafts man: For which purpose he had a bag of tools or instruments,
consisting of such variety, as were necessary to effectuate the works of his
fancy or conceit.

Thus you have the first Man and Woman, and the Progeny from them descending,
according to Banians tradition; and a world to be raised of so few, the persons
(as they think) could not be better fitted to the same, the whole world being
well considered, consisting of, and subsisting by, such four kinds of men.

The World being in this Maiden purity, that the generations of men might not
be derived from a polluted beginning of mankind; the Almighty gave not Pourous
and Parcoutee any daughters, least some of these four (...) preferring the
needs of propagation, before piety and Religion, should have defloured their
Sisters, and have blemished the world with impurity: but providing better for
the holiness and sanctity of our Ancestors, that the work of generation might
be agreeable to the work of Creation, God made four Women, for these four
Men, and placed them at the four Winds, one at the East, another at the West,
a third at the North, and a fourth at the South; that thus being divided, there
might be a better means for the spreading of their generations over the face
of the earth, with which four Women, how the four Sons of the first Man
met, shall be understood in the sequeale of their several stories in the
Chapters following.

CHAP. II.
Of Brammon the eldest Son of Pourous, his Travail toward the East; he
meets with the Woman appointed for him, the passages that happened in their
Accoast, their Marriage, and peopling of the East.

THis eldest son of the first Man, called Brammon, grew in stature, and had
the pre-eminence of his birth, both in place, and in respect above the rest of
his brethren; as also in regard of his near relations to God in religious
services, was highly honored of his Brethren, and was an Instructor unto them;
and the Almighty communicated himself to him, in presence, and vision; he gave
himself therefore much to reading, and conuersed with the book that God gave
him, containing the platform of divine worship.

Being therefore grown to man's age, and (as it should appear by
circumstances) man being created in the midst of the earth, in some pleasant
place, where the Sun at high Noone deprived substances of their shadows,
(for it was fit that man should be produced out of such a place, as might be
the Navel of the World) God who would now disperse the Brethren from the
Center as it were, to the Circumference, for propagation; commanded Brammon to
take his book in his hand, wherein was written the divine law, and to direct
his Journey toward the rising of the Sun in the East.

As soon as that glorious light of heaven had discovered his splendour from the
tops of the Mountains, he took his journey that way (for the East being the
most noble part of the world, it was likely that had the pre-eminence in
plantation) until he arrived at a goodly Mountain, before the proud face
whereof lay prostrate a valley, through which there passed a Brook, in the
descent of which there appeared a Woman satisfying her thirst, from the
streams of the River; and they were both naked, Innocence not being then
ashamed to publish her retyrements, and priuacies; nor having faulted so much
with those immodest parts, as to need a shroud to veil them from the sight.
This Woman was of hair black, of complexion yealowish, or Saffrony, as on
whose face the Sun had too freely cast his beams, the remembrance of whose
heat, was too surely conserved in her countenance; she was indifferently
sized, whose pitch could neither challenge the name of lowness or high
stature; modest were her Aspect, and her eyes Indices of so melancholy
soberness, and composed looks, as if she seemed to be sampled for him that
met her.

But her eyes unaccustomed to view such an Object, as was before her, having
never seen a creature of proportion like her self, betwixt wonder and shame
she was uncertain whether she should fly, or please her sight with such a
vision. But Brammon no less abashed at such intrusion, which by retyring he
could not well shun, with a downe-cast countenance suppressed with shame,
they both abode one another presence, with tongue-tyed silence; whose
backwardness gave encouragement to the Woman, to question the cause of his
coming thither; who answered, That by the command of him who had made the
world, him, her, and all creatures visible, together with the light that gave
them the comfort of their meeting; he was sent thither. The Woman to whom God
had given that understanding, to be capable of the propernesse of his speech,
and inquiring further into this Accident, said that there was an agreement in
their likeness, and composition, that declared they had one maker; that it may
be, he that had made them, and had his ends in their disposal, had thus
brought them together, that some nearer bond might make them inseparable, from
each others society: and casting her eye upon the book that Brammon bare in
his hand, asked what it was; who acquainting her with the contents thereof, was
desired to sit down, and communicate the religious Counsels of the same unto
her, whereunto he condescended; and being both persuaded that God had a hand
in this their meeting, they took counsel from this book, to bind themselves
together in the inviolable bond of Marriage, and with the courtesies
interceding betwixt Man and Wife, were lodged in one another bosom: For joy
whereof, the Sun put on his nuptial luster, and looked brighter then
ordinary, causing the season to shine upon them with golden joy; and the silver
Moon welcomed the evening of their repose, whilst Music from heaven (as if
Gods purpose in them had been determinate) sent forth a pleasing sound; such
as uses to fleet from the loud Trumpet, together with the noise of the
triumphant Drum. Thus proouing the effects of generation together, they had
fruitful issue, and so peopled the East, and the woman's name was Sauatree.

CHAP. III.
Of Cuttery the second Son of Pourous, his Travail, and the meeting he had
with the Woman appointed for him; their conflict, appeasement, conjunction, and
the peopling of the West by them.

SVccessiuely the second Brother Cuttery, was by the Almighty consigned to the
West, about the charge of making men; so taking the sword in his hand, that God
had given him, the instrument, on whose edge lay the hopes of a kingdom,
rowsing up his courage, which hiherto wanted occasion of exercise, from the
heart and bosom of the earth, in which his youth had conuersed, he turned his
back on the rising Sun every morning, whose swister course ouertook him, and
every day in his decline presented himself in his setting glory before him. As
he thus travailed toward the West, he chafed with himself as he passed along,
that no adventure presented it self, that might provoke him to give a probate
of his Courage, wishing that an Army of men, or a troop of wild beasts, would
oppose him, that he might strowe the surface of the earth with dead carkeyses,
and give the sowles of heaven flesh to feed on. And not knowing to what
purpose God had directed him to ^end his course that way, as only sensible of
his own heroic stomach, he said: To what end has God infused such
Magnanimity into my breast, if it shall want a Subject whereon to work my glory
and renown? shall I lose the end of my Creation? God forbid.

Thus carried on with the hopes of some Adventure, he intended that whatsoever
should first cope with him, should have the sense of his fury; when being come
to a Mountain, whose height might make things far distant visible to the
eye, he might perceive a creature of goodly personage, like himself, stalking
forward with a Martial step, no less slow then maiesticke in pace; which
two approaching, as desirous to make experiment of each others fortitude upon
their meeting together, it appeared to be a Woman, whose tresses in a comely
fertility hung down by her shoulders, which by motion of the air, turned into
a careless disorder, every blast that made an alteration in the same, gave a
new grace to her excellent Person, and made her presence more full of Majesty.
In her right hand she bare a Chuckerey, which is an instrument of a round
form, and sharp edged in the superficies thereof, so accommodate for offense,
that by a hole in the midst thereof, being whirled about the finger, and
slung off, in the quickness of his motion, it is able to deliver or convey
death to a far remote enemy. Courage displayed his Banner in her countenance,
and maiesticke fury sparkled in her eyes, bearing witness how much she
thirsted after conquest, and the woman's name was Toddicastree.

In the first encounter she made her Chuckerey bear the message of her
displeasure, giving entertainment with the instrument of Battle, which was
such as Cuttery expected: and no kinder behavior did he entend to proffer, as
preferring the harsh effects of violence, before the mollifying power of
beauty; with this hard greeting did they pass the first day, giving wounds on
each side, she with her Chuckerey, he with his Sword; both being much spent in
the conflict, and often breathing when extremity of exercise had languished
their powers, they renewed their battle by fresh Aggression and Onset, till
darkness did prohibit the use of Arms, leaving the first day as an
indifferent Arbiter of the battle, neither of them able to boast of Advantage.

The light of the next day inuiting them to a new experiment of Valor, they
accoast one another, renewing the remembrance of their injuries with second
attempts of violence: the day well near spent in fight, Cuttery gaining some
advantage, with his Sword hewed her Chuckerey, in two pieces, but favorable
darkness looking with a partial eye on the battle, and patronizing the
disaduantaged, shaded the woman with her broken instrument from the pursuer; by
the benefit of which intermission, she converted her broken Chuckerey into a
Bow, having provided Arrows, to requite the force of the Adversary, by this
new stratageme, who was now big with the hopes of her Overthrow.

The light being the best Herald they had, to call them to battle; a third
time they met, hopeful to conclude this strange duello or single Combat, which
urged on her side by her new invented instrument; and on his by the thought of
former advantage gained: made the Assault more vehement; making therefore her
enemy the Butte into whom she meant to transfixe her pointed shafts, she
freshly encountered him. But he perceiving her advantage, whose power was to
wound far off, and his injuries were most forceable in little distance,
exposing himself to greater peril, that he might be owner of a better
advantage, drew nearer, and in a cloze, exchanging the loss of weapons for
hand violence, they thus proved their forces together, weariness having abated
their vigours so equally, that neither of them was so strong to overcome, nor
so weak to yield, the balance of victory so justly poysed between them, as
inclined with partiality to neither, it was fit the tongue should conclude that
war, that the power of the hand was no longer able to prosecute.

Hereupon in this doubtful strife, Cuttery having seized her by the Tresses of
her hair to bring her to bondage; and exercise having put a fresh and lively
color in her cheeks, such as in Cutteryes eyes made her rather seem lovely,
then one to be injured; he said: Oh thou wonder of living Creatures for
strength and beauty, why should fury manage so strange a contention between
us two? If I should in this combat have slain thee, I should have cursed this
right hand, for bearing an instrument to ruin so goodly a proportion; and if
thou had slain me, thou should but have labored with anguish of soul for
thine own discontent, and discomfort, who know not what pleasure thou may
reap by my society. Why should one excellent creature seek the ruin of
another? will there not be one the less? and thy being will be nothing
augmented by my disanulment. Did God to this end confer boldness on us to
make it the cause of one another perdition, who are both worthy of
preservation? Surely courage in thee shall be nothing impaired by my
friendship and aid, but united virtues make most powerful assaults, and are
best Muniments against injury. Besides, the world now an Infant, and of short
standing, ought rather by all means to have her issue multiplied, then
impaired or diminished. Especially self love binds us to study our own
preseruations, to which since unity did best confer, he would not follow the
humor of his high spirit to seek glory so wickedly and unworthily, if he
might purchase that peace he sought by any reasonable concession.

The woman attentive to the motion, prosecuted with so fair a carriage, after
some pause of silence, and deiection of countenance, that gave consent to
bashfulnesse: replied, that though the marks of his violence were before her
eyes, whose anguish were sufficient to maintain the fuel of further passion,
yet in that he which had felt trial of like rage, had first broke off
violence, she gave so good an ear to the motion as the short time of
desisting might permit: affirming that she was so far content to suspend such
passages, as he continuing that peaceable treaty, should make his company
acceptable, otherwise to renew the same violence as she found just occasion of
provocation.

Thus with plighted hands, the form of their new made Amity, they became of
intestine enemies, reconciled and amourous friends, till prompt and
intelligible nature, apprehensiue of her own ends, through some longer
conversation together, made them prove the difference of their sex, from whom
plentiful generations were descended, endued with the fortitude of such as are
truly warlike* And thus the West came to be peopled from these two, from whose
enmities love wrought so perfect and unexpected agreement.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Shuddery the third Son of Pourous, his Travail, he finds a Mine of
Diamonds, meets the Woman appointed for him, they become conjoined together,
and by their Issue, the North is peopled.

THE third Son Shuddery, which was the Merchant man, according to his time
and age, was sent to the North, who taking his Balance and waights with him,
the instruments by whose Justice he was to buy and sell, tended thither whither
the Almighty had directed him. Having passed on some part of his way, (as busy
Nature loves to be in employment) he desired he might meet with some affair
or business, suiting with his traffiking disposition.

And being come to a goodly Mountain, called Stachalla, there fell immoderate
and excessive raines, he sheltring himself in some hollow place of the
Mountain, till the foul weather was past, upon which there followed a
clearenesse of the skies, but such a deluge succeeded upon the fall of those
waters, that his journey was prohibited; for the rivers not able to contain
the streams that had in rolling currents from the tops of the steep
Mountains, deuolued into their channels below; began to make breaches in
their banks, and returning their burden into the lower grounds, had turned
the valley of Stachalla, into a broad river impassable. Shuddery therefore
rested in the hollow of this Mountain, till the weather might be more
propitious to his travail intended: when in some days the fair weather had
made the thirsty earth to drink up part of the waters, the Sun to dry up the
other part, and some were left to inherit the lower grounds, so that the way
being free for him over the Valley, he passed on; but in the bottom of the
Valley, he found certain pearl shells, that had their precious treasure
within, which dividing to be made capable of their contents, he found in them,
that which contented his eyes with their shining, and promised in their
beauties something worth the prizing and preservation (though he was as yet
altogether ignorant of their worth and value:) so folding them up he renewed
his travail, till he came to a Mountain on the other side of the Valley,
where the Mountain, he, and dark night, met all together.

But as if the Pearls had but borne the message to him of a greater fortune, a
Rock or Mine of Diamonds discovered it self to his sight, which the late
washing of the Waves, had been as a Midwife to bring to light, as if it had
been unfit so great riches should be treasured up in darkness, in the arms
of so course an Element; which Mine taking advantage by the darkness of the
heavens, the better to set of his sparkling luster, seemed to inuit Shuddery
to come and take knowledge of its admirable shining, who supposing it to be
fire, began to move the loose sparkles of the same, but perceiving their glory
nothing to decrease by their motion, grew enkindled with a great desire to
prove the strangeness of the Accident, by the touching of his finger: but the
darkness and his vnacquaintance with the thing, rather begetting admiration,
then right information of his knowledge; (since it had the light of fire, but
wanted the heat) he was content with a patient aboade to awaite the days
light, to give him better instruction concerning these mysteries, which no
sooner appeared, but these Diamonds concealed their glory, affoording only a
waterish colored beauty to the eye; the disannulment of this luster amazed him
as much, as the presentation thereof made him admire. But desirous to have this
excellency made known to mankind, that seemed so wonderful to himself, he
carried so great a quantity of the Diamonds with him, as might be no impediment
to him in the bearing, taking a remarkable observation of the place, that he
might thereunto repair upon better proof of the Diamonds excellence and worth.

Thus Shuddery continuing his Progress forward, at last arrived where the
Woman to which he was sent, was wandering by the side of a wood, close
adjoining whereunto was an even plain, through which he made his path; of
whom when his eyes had gained sight, and that she presented a person formed
like himself; he diuerted from his way toward her, to gain more perfect
knowledge of her: she no less filled with wonder and desire in the view of
him, yet sometimes possessed with fear, sometimes with joy, sometimes with
shame, in the variety of passions, purposing many things, but really
prosecuting nothing. Shuddery at length accoasted her, whose approach she
received doubtfully, as if she sought a means of evasion into the wood; at
which he said, Oh thou worthy Creature, most like unto my self, fly me not,
who have cause to love me, because I resemble thee; shun not the conversation
of him, that follows thee not to give thee displeasure, but that he might
enjoy thy society, things that have resemblance in shape should embrace
consortship.

The woman then whose name was Visagundah, perceiving by the slownesse of his
pace, that he rather seemed to be a suer to her, then a pursuer of her, by the
retardation of her flight, witnessing her contentment to stay, if she might
presume of her safety, thus replied to his words, That if she could as much
presume of his good usage, as she was contented to behold him, she would grant
his request; Who giving her assurance thereof, they entertained conference with
each other, she moving the question how it might be that they two could be
capable of one another language, having never before seen each other; he made
answer, That that God that had made them like in bodies, had also made them
like in languages, that they might receive the comfort of one another
speeches, and be acquainted with one another thoughts, without which
conversation should lose the greatest part of his comfort.

So receiving stronger gages of each others love, they continued together, he
not unmindful to impart the fortunes of his travails in finding of Pearls,
and Diamonds, wherewith he adorned her, till they in future times became a
customary ornament, as also acquainting her with the work of the Creation,
together with his Parents and Brethren, they proved the comforts of the
conjoined state: from whom a generation descended, that became Merchantmen, and
followed Shudderies profession, who with some of his Sons, did afterward
travail to the Mine of Diamonds by him discovered, and stored themselves with
them; which ever since have been Merchandise of dear estimation; and thus the
North became inhabited.

CHAP. V.
Of Wise the fourth Son of Pourous, his Travails over seven Seas, his
Architecture, he meets with the Woman appointed; his revelations touching
Religion, consummation of love with the Woman, and their peopling of the South.

THen Wise the youngest of the four Brethren, went to the North, having
instruments necessary with him to effectuate any thing that his well conceipted
invention could find out: therefore whatsoever was convenient for man's use,
he had a brain to think and contriue; that so the needs of the world might
be served by the devises of his ingenious fancy or conceit. Thus he became the
original of the handycrafts; for he knew how to rear the buildings of
Towns, Cities, or Castles; to set, plant, and till the ground; how to make all
things needful for the use of man; which various disposition of his to
meditate things for man's conuenience, gave him the name of Viskermah, which is
as much as the Handsman, because he could do any thing to be done by the hand.

Being endued with a genius sit for Plantations, he (directed by God) travailed
toward the South, where he met with seven Seas, all which he passed over,
framing a vessel for his conuoy, and leaving in every place testimonies of his
ingenuity; and passing over the last called Pashcurbatee, he came to the land
called Derpe, there by the Sea side he built him a fair house of such Timber
as grew by the place, having Engines of Art, to rear up Timber. Thus having
made a comely habitation, with rooms lightsome, and broad tarrasses or roofes
aloft, for pleasure and prospect delightful, where he might sometimes please
his eyes with the rolling Sea, which with renewed assaults smote against the
banks of the shore, and directing his sight the other way, might behold the
pleasant woods and fields, he thus for a time solaced himself after tedious
travail.

But not long had he took such comfort as his solitary condition could afford
him, but the Woman appointed for him wandering through the woods to the Sea
side, and passing along the shore thereof, set her eyes upon this new Edifice;
and having never beheld any before, the rarity of it drew her nearer to
satisfy her admiration with the view of the same; on whom Wise chancing to
cast his eye, as she thus came to look on his habitation, he descended to
take a fuller contemplation of her beauty, whose feature deserved his better
notice; for she was of body amiably white, and her tresses were scattered with
poudered Saunders, and other odors, the sent of which the blasts of the wind
dispersed in such manner, that he became partaker of them by his approach,
which enkindled his senses with new desires, to be nearer her, who at such
distance gave him a smell of so great sweetness: whose approach struck her
into a blush, but her shame giving place, she moved the question to him, How he
came to that place where she only had lived, to interupt her in her free
walks and wanderings? He made answer, That God the maker of light, that makes
all objects visible, had sent him thither to admire her excellency, which was
so rare, That it was not fit it should be shaded in a place so solitary, but
had reserved it as a blessing for his eyes to view and admire: and because it
was pity desolation and lonelynesse should be a waster and obscurer of such
louelynesse, he had with hazard of his life adventured over seven Seas, to be
blessed with the enioyment thereof; a labor and travail worthy of so rich a
recompense, and a worthy recompense and satisfaction for such a labor:
entreated her therefore, to accept of such a blessing as God had provided for
her by his society.

But she that could not be brought to think of a course of life different from
her former, told him that in his absence she found no need of his presence,
neither did she at that present stand inclined to accept of his motion; that
therefore he would leave her to the liberty of her own free dispose. He loath
to lose the happiness of his eyes, importuned her to view the rooms of his
building, as if he meant to woo her with the fair works of his hands: but
she taking his importunity in evil part, told him, that if he desired her not
to shun the place, he would dismiss her freely. So turning from him with
some displeasure, because she was by him unwillingly detained, she fled from
him with coye distaste, he almost expiring with the sadness of her departure,
whose presence he could not purchase and his pleasure therein without her anger.

She having robbed his eyes of that sight, that they would never willingly have
lost, he committed himself to the rack of pensive meditations, broke the
quiet slumbers of repose, thinking darkness vnfauorable to him that suspended
and prorogued the cheerful day from his appearance, in which he might renew
his visitations of her. So traversing the woods to and fro, he at last came
into a Valley, where he found her cropping the flowers, and gratifying her
senses with their several odours; on whom intruding ere she well perceived,
he said: Oh sweeter then all Flowers or sents that the field can boast of,
whose loveliness has drawn me to make proffer of new kindness, fly me not
who have had a former trial of my behavior toward thee. So bearing with his
presence, he took occasion to make known to her the Creation of the world,
and the Parents from whence he was descended, the dispersing of his brethren
into the several parts of the world, the hardness and hazard of his voyages,
the qualities with which he was endued, and the several Monuments of his Art,
which he had left in the places where he had been. Further, he conceived
that the power above had not prompted him with the ieopardy of a thousand lives
to cut a path through seven ragged Seas in a floating habitation, but even to
that end that the bitterness of all those evils might be sweetened by his
enioyment of her.

She desirous to break off this speech, as ungrateful to her ears, turned
back this discourse, desiring him to take his contentments elsewhere, then in
quest after her; that if she could prevail with him in any request, it should
be in this, to leave her, and never after to disturb her with such motions. So
both departed, she indisdaine, he in sadness and sorrow, for such dismission:
giving him only this as a doubtful comfort at their parting, that if she
found her self inclined to his society, she knew where to find him, and to
manifest to him such alteration,

Upon this having left the place that contained his bliss, with oppressed
thoughts, he was no sooner got into a private place that might seem as
counsel keeper to his passions, but he humbled himself under the green
trees, and said; Oh thou to whom belongs the acknowledgement of my being, I
have by thy guidance forsaken the society of my parents, whom I know not
whether I shall ever behold again, as also the fellowship of my brethren; I
have coped with as many hazzards as can make travail bitter and
discomfortable, I have left company to come into solitude; nay, which is worse,
to behold one that might give me the wished comforts of society, by her
refusal to add degrees to my sorrow. Oh make not void the end of my being!
give not such an evil recompense to my adventures, bury not all these
qualities thou have put in this Essence, by this one disaster: witness oh you
heavens, under whose azured roof I now am, the sorrow I suffer, and witness
oh ye green trees, that if you were sensible of my complaint, would spend your
selves in gummy tears, what Agony perplexeth me. And if the Maker of
creatures ouerlooke his works, let him now appear and redress the miseries
of his Servant.

With that a still and quiet Air breathed through the leaves of the trees, and
a voice issued thereupon, and said, What requirest thou oh thou son of Pourous?
And Wise made answer, that he only desired that the woman with whom he had
met, might afford him the comforts of society in the copulations of Marriage;
which request was granted on these injunctions, that he should erect Pagods for
Gods worship, and adore Images under green trees, because God had under them
manifested himself hy vision to him.

So Ieiunogundah, (for so was the woman called) feeling the motions of
affection to renew in her, at the next meeting gave such expressions of love
to Wise, as fully accomplished his demand: So conuersing together, they made
good the nuptial ends, in a fruitful generation. So the South as the other
parts of the world became inhabited.

CHAP. VI.
Of the meeting together of the four Brethren at the place of their birth;
their divisions and dissentions, the great evils amongst their generations
bringing a Flood which destroys them, and so the first Age of the world
concludes.

EVery thing by natural motion passes to his own place; so the Brethren
having peopled the world in these four parts, turn their course to the place
where they first breathed their vital air; for Brammon having peopled the
East, with all such as was of his Cast or Tribe, was carried with a natural
desire to go and conclude his days, where he began, and to possess the
people of that place with the true form of divine worship, that so all the
world might retain one uniformity of Religion, not rending Gods worship into
parts with the Factions of unsettled opinions, as also not willing to lose so
great a joy as his eyes should convey unto him in the sight of his Parents and
his Brethren, to the former of which Religion had enjoined him, to the latter
all expressions of a Brothers love.

Cuttery also the next that had accomplished the end of his travail, began to
long after the sight of the place that brought him forth, that he might there
to his Father, Mother, and Brethren, show the blessings of God, in his wife and
Progeny, and acquaint them with the story of his Occurencies, and leave a race
of Soldiers there also in his posterity.

Shuddery turned also by the same inclination, had his desires bent to his
birthplace, being big with the eminency of his accidental fortunes, which
had lost their greatness, if his Parents and Brethren had lost the knowledge
of them, to feed which humor, as accompanied with other respects, formerly
mentioned, drew him to give his appearance amongst the rest.

Lastly, Wise to communicate his Arts, whose aduenturous travail was no less
memorable then the rest, transporting his sons and daughters over the
several Seas, left them in several places, and repaired to his birthplace,
to pay his duty to his Parents, and his love to his Brethren.

It so happened that God that would not cross any part of their intentions
with evil success, did reserve them to find the happiness of their meetings
in their several turns and successions, as their works were in order
accomplished, their several arriuals being congratulated with Feastings and
Triumphs, meet welcome for such Guests. It was not to be doubted but Pourous
and Parcoutee, grew young again, having such a season of happiness reserved
to smile upon them toward the Sunset of their Age, such as were able to make
their forewasted powers, spent with years to renew their vigor: Every one of
them when their joy grew stale, giving a fresh renewance of gladness, to their
Parents, by their successiue arrival. Neither could it be imagined but that
the Brethren accounted that the blessed time that lost all remembrance of
trouble, which we think too importunate a disturber of our joys.

But joy is never of long lasting, but after the passage of little time has
his abatement: this the Brethren being sensible of, laid aside the thoughts of
their Travails, and the remembrance of their late comforts, and as men newly
transplanted to bring forth the fruits of their being in that place, begetting
new generations there, that the world might be compleately populous, and
instructed in their several qualities; by Brammon in matters of Religion; by
Cuttery in matters of Rule and Domination; by Shuddery in matters of Traffic
and Merchandising; and by Wise in the invention of the handycrafts; of which
four Casts the world consisted, every one of them living in his several
quality, keeping his Tribe free from confusion or enterfeering, and thus the
world became peopled.

But multitude and concourse that uses to be the nurse of mischief; for where
there are many men there will be many evils, and prosperity, that makes us
forgetful of our selves; and length of time, that renders to us the worst at
our latter endings; began to confound all goodness, and turn every thing out
of order. For Brammon grew neglectiue of his piety; and Cuttery grew cruel and
full of usurpation; and Shuddery grew deceiptfull in the waights and balances,
and practiced cosenage amongst his brethren; and Wise lost his conscience in
his dealings, and became a spend-thrift, making the profits that came by his
inventions, but the furtherers of riot and excess; and as they were thus evil
in themselves, so they were evil one toward another. For Brammon stomacked
Cutteryes greatness; and Cuttery forgot to give Brammon the pre-eminence of
his birth, and as if his might had been sufficient to give him the right of
Priority, placing all excellency in Rule and Authority, condemned the still and
solitary spirit of his brother, as unworthy of respect and eminence; yea prized
his own laws and government before Gods Laws; because they came from Brammon
whom he disesteemed. On the other side, he pleased himself with the
slaughter of those that displeased him, laid Taxations upon Shuddery, and
drayned the profit of Wyses labors, and like a great Tide made all run along
with his own Current, whilst they requite his injuries in cosenage and griping
upon their brethren in fraud and circumuention; these evils of Example were
seeds of wickedness, that no doubt would grow in their Posterity. And this
dissension among themselves did boade a breach of that sweet harmony that
concurred to the worlds first constitution.

Wise likewise seeing Brammon to lose his respect, the more to make him
despised sought to bring in a new form of Religion, communicated to him in
vision, concerning the worship of Images, and bowing to Pagods under green
trees, with other new ceremonies; which since Brammons book contained not, the
dispute was great whether they should be received as Canonical, but upon Wyses
asseueration that they were received from God, they were received as part of
the Ceremonial Law.

Thus every day presenting new platformes of wickedness, and sins that made
a noise, God grew angry, and the heavens were clothed with blackness and
terror, the Seas began to swell as if they meant to join with the clouds in
Man's destruction, great noise was heard aloft, such as uses to dismay mortal
wretches, and thunder and lightning flashed from the Poles, such as seemed to
threaten a final wrack to the Earth; but as if the world needed cleansing of
his defilement, and pollution, there came a Flood, that covered all Nations in
the depths. Thus the Bodies had their judgment, but the Souls were lodged in
the bosom of the Almighty, and so concluded the first Age of the world,
according to the Tradition of the Banians.

CHAP. VII.
Of the second Age of the World, begun by Bremaw, Vystney, and Ruddery; of
their Creation, Assignation to their several works, their time of
Continuation upon Earth, and the means used for the Restoration of the World
again.

IT had now (says the Banian) been to little end for God to disanull his own
creatures, for now his wisdom and power must have again layne obscured; but
though his Justice were so great that he would not let wickedness go
unpunished, yet he would again have a world of new creatures, to whom his
wisdom, power, and mercy might be declared.

Seeing therefore the first Age miscarried by their sinfulness, (for whose
purity God had so well provided) the Almighty determined to begin the second
Age by three persons of greater perfection and excellency, then the other,
called, Bremaw, Vystney, and Ruddery.

The Almighty therefore descending from heaven upon a great Mountain, called
Meropurbatee, upon the top of the same the Lord pronounced his word, and said,
Rise up Bremaw, the first of living Creatures in the second Age, the earth then
did render from her womb Bremaw at the voice of God, who did acknowledge and
worship his Maker: and by a second and third Command from the same place,
raised Vystney, and Ruddery, who with no less reverence adored their Maker
likewise.

But God that makes nothing without his use or end, did not make these to live
idle, but to be serviceable in the worlds restoring; to the first therefore
which was Bremaw, he gave the power to make the Creatures, because (say the
Banians) as great persons do not their work but by deputies, so neither was
it fit God should be servile to the Creatures, but give them their being by his
Instruments. To the second which was Vystney, he gave the charge to preserve
the Creatures, for that as it was his mercy to cause them to be, so it was his
providence to keep them in their being. But to the third which was Ruddery,
he gave power to destroy his Creatures, because he knew they would be wicked
and deserve a Judgment amongst them.

Now as God had given to these persons power to do these great works, so it
was meet they should be fitted with means capable for the discharge of their
several charges. That Bremaw therefore might have power to make the Creatures,
he endued him with the Abilities of Creation and production. Secondly, that
Vistney might preserve the Creatures, the Lord gave all things into his power,
that might tend to the preservation of those that Bremaw should make, therefore
he made him Lord of the Sun, and Moon, of the Clouds, Showers, and Dewes
that fall upon the Earth, Lord of the Hills, and Valleies, disposer of the
changes of the year, the conferrer of Riches, health, and honor, and
whatsoever tended to the well being of Man, and the rest of the Creatures.
Lastly, that Ruddery might be a fit Executioner of Gods Justice, God gave into
his possession whatsoever might tend to the destruction of living Creatures;
therefore Ruddery was made the Lord of Death, and Judgment, and whatsoever
might tend to the punishment of Man, whether it were Sickness, Famine, War,
or Pestilence, or any thing else that might be a plague for sin.

According also to the several Assignations of these persons to their
particular Charges, they were alloted a determinate time of Abiding upon Earth.
Because the work of the Creation was concluded in the second of their Ages
(which was a work assigned to Bremaw) therefore Bremaw was to be taken up to
the Almighty in the conclusion of the second Age. And because the other Ages
were multiplied with people by some that were reserved from destruction,
therefore Vistney was kept on earth till he had doubled Bremawes term of
time, as of whose preservation there was longer need. And because the world
should end in destruction, therefore the continuance of Ruddery was three times
so long, that when the great day of Judgment should come, he might destroy
all the bodies, and carry the souls with him to the place of Glory.

Naught wanted now, but that they should every one in their several turns
show the powers conferred upon them. So Bremaw consulting with himself, how he
might fulfill the charge imposed upon him, grew extraordinarily afflicted in
his body, the strangeness of which anguish vexing him in every part, boaded
some alteration or unexpected event; when lo such travail as happens to
women in labor seized him, and a certain tumor and swelling of his body
withal, according to the sudden ripeness of the burden within, distended
his bowels more and more, and gave newer and greater extremities to him in this
Agony, till the burden (though Bremaw far exceeded the stature of common
men) made two ruptures, the one on the right side, the other on the left; when
behold two Twins, the one male the other female, to wit, Man and Woman did
betray themselves to the world in full growth and perfect stature; who thus
produced and informed concerning God by the instructions of Bremaw, the Man was
by him named Manow, and the Woman Ceteroupa. So giving worship to God the
Creator, and reverence to Bremaw their producer, with a blessing of
multiplication pronounced upon them, they were sent to the East, to a Mountain
called Munderpu^vool, thence to dispread their generations to the West, North,
and South; so they departed, and Ceteroupa brought forth three sons, and
three daughters; the eldest son was called Priauretta, the second
Outanapautha, the third Soomeraut; the eldest daughters name was called Cammah,
the second Soonerettaw, the third Sumboo. As these grew in years, they were in
their several orders dispersed several ways, viz. Priauretta and Cammah to
the West, to the Mountain called Segund; Outanapautha and Soonerettaw to the
North, to the Mountain R^pola; Soomeraut and Sumboo, to the Mountain Supars,
all which brought forth plentiful generations. Thus Bremaw made Man and Woman,
and replenished the earth with the rest of the living Creatures.

Vystney likewise did provide all things necessary that might be to the
sustentation and preservation of the living creatures, that Bremaw had made,
giving them in enioyment such blessings as were needful to a well being.

To conclude, Ruddery did disperse afflictions, sickness, death, and
judgment, according as the Sons of men did by their wickedness inuoke this
smart upon themselves. And this was the order God took for the restoring of
people to inhabit the earth in the second Age of the World* Now how God
provided for the establishment of Religion in this second Age, that these that
lived might fear and worship him, shall be declared in the Chapter next
following, as it is unfolded by the Tradition of the Banians.

CHAP. VIII.
How God communicated Religion to the world by a Book delivered to Bremaw, the
particular Tracts of the same: The first Tract thereof touching the moral Law
laid down with the appropriation of the same to the several Casts, and a
Confutation of the Errors thereof.

GOD knowing that there would be but evil government, where there was not the
establishment of his worship and fear; after the world was replenished a
new, bethought himself of giving them laws to restrain that evil in them
that was the cause of the destruction of the former Age.

Descending therefore on the Mountain M^ropurbatee, he called Bremaw to him,
and out of a dark and duskie cloud, with certain glimpses of his glory, he
magnified himself to Bremaw, telling him that the cause why he brought
destruction on the former Age, was because they did not observe the
Instructions contained in the Book delivered to Brammon: so delivering a book
out of the cloud into the hand of Bremaw, commanded him to acquaint the people
with those things contained therein. So Bremaw made known the Sanctions and
Laws unto the dispersed Generations.

Of the contents thereof if any desire to be informed, the Banians deliver that
this Book by them called the SHASTER, or the book of their written Word,
consisted of these three Tracts. The first whereof contained their moral Law,
or their Book of precepts, together with an Explication upon every precept,
and an Appropriation of the precepts to their several Trybes or Casts. The
second Tract unfolded their ceremonial Law, showing what ceremonies they were
to use in their worship. The third Tract distinguished them into certain Casts
or Tribes, with peculiar observations meet to each Cast or Tribe: such was the
sum of this Book delivered to Bremaw, of which particulars if any desire
more distinct knowledge, we shall propose the pith and substance of this in
that which follows.

First then the Tract that contains the Moral Law, and was by Bremaw
published to the Nations, comprised in the same eight Commandments; which are
these following.

The first Commandment, Thou shall not kill any living Creature whatsoever it
be, having life in the same; for thou art a Creature of mine, and so is it,
thou art endued with a soul, and it is endued with the same, thou shall not
therefore spill the life of any thing that is mine.

The second, Thou shall make a Covenant with all thy five senses. First with
thine eyes that they behold not things that be evil. Secondly with thine
ears that they hear not things that be evil. Thirdly with thy tongue that
it speak not things that be evil. Fourthly with thy palate that it taste
not things that be evil, as wine or the flesh of living Creatures. Fifthly
with thy hands, that they touch not things defiled.

The third, Thou shall duly observe the times of devotion, thy washings,
worshipping, and prayers, to the Lord thy God: with a pure and upright heart.

The fourth, Thou shall tell no false tales or utter things that be untrue, by
which thou might defraud thy Brother in dealings, bargains, or Contracts,
by this cosenage, to work thine own peculiar advantage.

The fifth, Thou shall be charitable to the poor, and administer to his need,
Meat drink and Money, as his necessity requires, and thine own ability
inableth thee to give.

The sixth, Thou shall not oppress, iniure or do violence to the poor, using
thy power unjustly to the Ruin and overthrow of thy Brother.

The seventh, Thou shall celebrate certain Festiuals, yet not pampering thy
body with excess of any thing, but shall observe certain seasons for fasting,
and break off some hours of sleep for watching, that thou may be fitter
for devotion and holiness.

The eight, Thou shall not steal from thy Brother any thing how little soever
it be of things committed to thy trust in thy profession or calling, but shall
content thy seife with that which he shall freely give thee as thy hyre,
considering that thou have not right to that which another man calls his.

These eight Commandments are bestowed amongst the four Tribes or Casts,
appropriating to each two Commandments in several.

First, Brammon and Shuddery the Priest and the Merchant man are bound in
greatest strictness of Religious observance, and hold the greatest agreement
in their worship; and Cuttery and Wise the Ruler and the Handycrafts man, do
most correspond in theirs.

To the Bramanes which are the Priests, they give the first and second
Commandments, as placing the strictest parts of Religion in these two things.
First in the preservation of living Creatures from destruction. Next in
Abstinence from things forbidden, as in the eating of Flesh, or drinking of
Wine* to which observance they do also strictly enjoin the Merchantmen.

Next, more particularly they apportion to Shuddery, as most proper to his
profession, the third, and fourth Commandments, which two precepts inioyne to
Devotion, and bind from cosenage in their dealings, a sin too incident to
those that are conversant in the balance and waights, who are so mysterious in
that particular as may well need an Act of Religion to restrain them from
such fraudulency.

To Cuttery their Rulers or Magistrates, they attribute the fifth and sixth
Commandments, as knowing oppression to be a sin most common to the Mighty,
and inioyning them to Charity, who are best able to relieve the necessities of
the poor.

To Wise the handycrafts man they refer the seventh and eight Commandments,
who have need of some free times of enioyment, yet given to lauishment of
their gettings, if they were not admonished by their Law; as also binding them
from theft, a sin to which they may be invited by opportunity, as they
discharge the duties of their callings in other men's houses.

In fine, to all these they owe a general observance, but are more
particularly cautious in keeping the Commandments appropriated to their own
peculiar Tribe or Cast.

Since then the Laws or Precepts of any Religion, are no further to be
allowed, than they seem to be well grounded, and to carry truth and good
reason with them: Me thinks by the way, here is something to be excepted
against, in this Banian Law, which distinguishing them from men of other
Religions, may be examined whether it may have allowance or no.

The principal part of their Law admitting nothing prodigious to opinion, we
pass over, only that which comes into exception, is that which is laid
down in the first and second Commandment, and is enjoined the Bramanes and
Banians to observe, viz. First, that no living creature should be killed. Next,
that they should not taste wine, or the flesh of living creatures.

Concerning the first, that they should not kill any living creature, the
reason by which they confirm this precept, is because it is endued with the
same soul that man is.

This we deny, for the Banians here seem to halt in their Philosophy, and the
learning of the Ancients, who have delivered, that there is a threefold kind
of soul. First, a vegetant soul, such as is in herbs and plants. Secondly,
a sentient soul, such as is in beasts. Thirdly, a reasonable soul, such as is
in man; which soul has more noble Acts to distinguish it self from the other
two; As also that when the other do interire cum corpore, perish with the
body, this suruiueth, and therefore is not the same soul, as shall hereafter
be proved.

But that this Tenent of theirs denying the slaughter of living Creatures for
Man's use is nothing sovereign, may appear by Scripture, which after the Flood
declares Gods allowance in this particular, G^n. 9.3. Every moving thing that
lives shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given you all
things. Next by the custom of Nations, who differenced in other points of
Religion, yet hold consent in this slaughter of living Creatures; add unto
this the practice of Pythagoras, one whose name they adore, and who did lay the
ground whereon this Sect leans, he killed an Ox, as Athenaus euicteth, lib.
1. Dipnosoph. in this distichon.

Inclyta Pythagorae cum primum inuenta figura est,
Inclyta, propter quam victima bos cecidit.
Neither have they been abhorrent to this practice themselves, if the report
of History may be credited, for Coel* Rodigin reports, that the ancient
Indians (which are the people now in mention) when Liber Pater discovered those
parts, were clothed with the skins of wild beasts, which were before by
them slaughtered. Neither is this observed by the Cutteries now, and therefore
may seem to be a Tradition of their own devising, neither from the beginning
by them practiced, nor by authenticke law enjoined, that it should be an
essential part of their Religion.

And so we come to their second Commandment, which contains in it two
prohibitions to be excepted against. The first, forbidding to drink of wine:
the next, the eating of flesh.

To the first, whereas the Bramanes and the Banians abstain from wine by a
Religious kind of forbearance, at all times and seasons, without the absolute
use of the creature; we answer, that this is a Tradition void of ground or
reason.

First, it is against the common end and use of the Creature, which God has
made to comfort the heart of Man, observing these cautions. First, that men
drink not too much for the quantity. Secondly, for the manner, not in boasting
or ostentation. Thirdly, for the time, that it be not when Religious fasts
require forbearance. Fourthly, for the place, that it be not where the use of
the creature may bring scandal.

Next, those that have abstained from wine, have abstained for diverse ends,
but not precisely observing the points of this Banian iniunction. The Romans
did forbid their servants the drinking of wine, but it was because they might
not forget the bonds of duty toward their Masters. They did also inioyne their
women to abstain from wine, but it was as Valor. Max. reports, Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
Ne in aliquod dedecus prolaberentur, quia proximus a Libero Patre
intemperantiae gradus ad inconcessam venerem esse consueuit: Least they should
fall into defame, for that the next neighbor to intemperancie is unbridled
lust. The Carthaginians forbad their soldiers the juice of the grape, but it
was least drowsinesse should oppress them in their watch to a public peril.
The Egyptian Priests called Sarabaitae, did for temperate ends abstain from
wine, but it was not for ever. That false Prophet Mahomet, by his Law forbad
the drinking of wine, but it was a Tradition and Imposture of his own, and the
very Mullaes and Priests do not observe it always at present, as I my self
have beheld. The Levites were forbid to drink wine, Leuit. 10.9. but it was
only before their entrance into the Sanctuary, that as Tremelius observes,
they might not deliver the Counsels of the Lord with a troubled mind, but know
what was fit for their administration: this was no perpetual prohibition. The
Nazarites vow was to drink no wine, but this was not ever, but in the days
of separation. Numb. 6.2, 3. The Rechabites vowed to drink no wine, but this
was arbitrary, and not by Religious obligation, and not for ever, but for 30.
years, the space between Iehu and Ioachim the latter, and Zedekiah King of
Judah. The civil abstinence nevertheless is not to be condemned, but this
absolute disannulment of the use of Gods Creature.

Again, the confirmations of men most temperate do condemn this interdiction
of wine. Gallen called it the nurse of old age: Mnesytheus allowed men laxare
habenas, to loose the reins in merry and harmless Potations. Rigid Seneca
said, though a man ought not by drinking to drown his sense, yet he might by
drinking drown his cares. Plato that leaned to some of the opinions that this
people hold, said that wine was a remedy of God against old age, that a man
might have Vsum liberaliorem vini, a more liberal use of wine; and others
think, that Pythagoras did not altogether abstain from the Greek wines. To
conclude, History reports of these ancient Indians, that they were (...), i.
e. vini amatores, Lovers of wine. Coel. Rhodigin. lib. 18. cap. 31. reports,
that at the death or Funeral of one Calanus, there was a strife or contention
managed Acratoposiae, of healths drinking, and he that gained the victory, who
was called Promachus, emptied four great drinking Bowls. So that this Law
prohibiting the use of this Creature, was not from the beginning, neither is
observed of all, and therefore seems no prohibition worthy of observance or
iniunction.

To the second prohibition, laid down in their second Commandment, concerning
the eating of flesh, we thus make our entrance.

First, it is certain, that these Bramanes or Banians will not eat of the
flesh of living creatures, that have either had life in them, or the likeness
thereof; Eggs therefore come within the precincts of their abstinence, because
they suppose the life to be in the shell, by which they become hatched or
animate; Roots also that are red are abstained from, because they hold
consanguinity with the color of blood. Neither will they cure their Feauers by
Phlebotomy, but by fasting, because they suppose some of the life issues with
the blood. The reason why they would deter men from eating of flesh, is
because they suppose there is a kind of Metempsychosis or passage of souls
from one creature to another, that the souls of men did enter into other
living creatures, which should make men to abstain from tasting of them. Which
opinion of theirs, that it may appear to be vain, we will show first who
were the Authors of this opinion, concerning such Metempsychosis, and how it
has had his succession of maintainers. Secondly, what is the effect and
substance of this opinion. Thirdly, show the reasons by which it is maintained.
And lastly, proceed to the refutation of the same.

First, then for the original of this opinion, though certainly these Indians
are a people ancient, yet may it not be thought, that this opinion began first
amongst them. First, because History that is the light of times, affirms them
to be slaughterers of living Creatures. Next, because Plato and Pythagoras that
have name for defending this Metempsychosis or Metempsomatosis, have an
honored mention amongst the people. It is likely therefore that they have met
with some of their writings, in this particular, by which they have become
known to them. Thirdly, because Iamblichus with Chaeremon the Stoicke, think
it to be first maintained amongst the Egyptians: That from the Egyptians then
it came to the Grecians, that after it had been rife amongst them, it was made
more tenable by the wits and learnings of Pythagoras, Plato, Empedocles,
Apolonius, Tyanius, and Proclus, and might in Liber Paters discoueries of those
parts, be dispersed amongst this people, as well as by a Scholar of
Pythagoras, who spread it in Italy, where it found favor with Numa Pompilius
that superstitious Emperor, and was maintained by the Albanienses, and
Albigenses, confuted by Athanasius.

Secondly, touching the substance of this opinion that gained the Patronage of
so great Scholars. They did hold, that there was a passage of souls of one
Creature into another, that this Transmeation was of the souls of men into
beasts, and of beasts into men: hence Pythagoras auerred himself to be
Euphorbus, and Empedocles in his verse affirmed himself to be a Fish. This
made it an abominable crime to eat flesh, least as says Tertullian in
Apologet. Cont. gent. Cap. 48. Bubulam De aliquo Proauo, Quispiam obsonaret:
Some should eat up the Oxeflesh, that had swallowed up his great Grandfathers
soul. This opinion gained propugnation and defense by Pythagoras, and Plato,
by this means; because that believing the souls immortality, it might gain
assent with others by this thought of its suruiuing in other bodies, after its
relinquishment of the deceased, as Greg. Tholoss. affirms in his Syntax. Art.
Mirab. lib. 8. cap. 12.

Thirdly, the reasons by which they do induce assent to this Transanimation of
souls, were these, because the soul was impure by the sins and corruptions
of the body, therefore it was needful it should be sublimed from this
corruption, by such transmeation out of one body into another, as Chymicall
spirits gain a purer essence by passing through the Still or Limbecke, diverse
times; every Distillation taking away some of his gross part, and leaving it
more refined. Again, because it was meet the soul should make a satisfaction
for the filthiness it had contracted, by remaining in the prison of the body,
an exile from blessedness a longer time, till this passage from one body to
another had so purified them, that they might be fit to enter into the Elysium
or place of bliss.

Lastly, in confutation of this opinion for prohibition of eating of flesh from
supposall of a Metempsychosis; we maintain that there is no such
Metempsychosis, or transanimation of souls.

First, the immortality of the soul we euince without this Chymera of the
fancy, by an argument drawn from man's dissolution: this is the nature of all
things that are compounded, that they should be resolved into that which they
were at first before their conjunction. Man is compounded of soul and body,
the very dissolution of these two in death declares this, for that cannot be
separated that was not before conjoined. This composition was by life, and a
creature without life, being in the soul alone, it is manifest that the soul
had it before ever it came to the body, or else that which was dead could never
have lived by the means of that which was likewise dead. If the soul had this
life before the body, it must needs have the same after in his separation, and
by consequence is immortal.

Next in confutation of their reasons for this opinion: We answer. First, that
the soul is not cleansed by such Transmeation from body to body, but rather
defiled by that filthiness those bodies contract, as water becomes defiled
by infusion into an unclean vessel. Much more, since they affirm the souls
of men enter into beasts, which are creatures of greater impurity. Besides,
those spirits that are subtiliated by Stils and Lymbecks, the fire is
effectual to their subliming, but the bodies have not the goodness in them
that may tend to the souls greater purity, in such Transmeation. To conclude,
it is improbable the soul should be enjoined to such a satisfaction for sin,
as tends to its greater defilement. These reasons therefore avail little to
confirm the souls Transmeation in the manner premised.

We in the last place shall prove this Metempsychosis, to be no other then a
vain imagination, by the reasons following.

1. Then, that the souls are not derived from one another per traducem, by way
of traduction, appears by Adams speech to Eve, Genesis 2 23. This is bone of my
bone and flesh of my flesh: he does not say, soul of my soul and spirit of my
spirit. It appears then, that though she received her body from Adam, yet
she had her soul from God. And this is that which Zachery affirms, Zach.
12.1. The Lord forms the Spirit of a man within him: whence Augustine says,
Eam infundendo creari, and creando insundi, That the soul being put into man
was created, and by creating was into man infused; if therefore God created
some, why not all?

2. Of spiritual things and corporal, there should seem the same manner of
increase; but the bodies have new beings, therefore the souls.

3. If the souls were purified by their passage from one body to another, then
that man that had the soul last, should be capable of all that knowledge that
was enjoyed by them that had it before, and so the Infant should be an
experienced creature in past occurrences: but we discern no such extraordinary
ripeness of knowledge in one more then another, but that all our habits are
gained by industry; which whilst Plato would excuse, saying, that the wandering
souls did receive from the devil a draught of the cup of Oblivion, and so
were forgetful of that which is past; Irenaeus thus taunteth him: I^ Plato had
trial that his soul was obtused with such a draught: I wonder that he could
remember, that his soul had lost her remembrance.

Lastly, if this were true, it would follow, that the souls of beasts should
be immortal, which would be absurd to think in these better knowing times.
Having therefore proved this opinion of passage of souls out of one body into
another to be a fancy, and nothing real, this may be no just cause to detain
them from eating the flesh of creatures, that have had life in them. Neither
would they, if there were great reason to the contrary, permit it as they do
in the Casts of Cuttery and Wise, whom if they pleased they might restrain by
the like iniunction. All which thus euidenced, this already delivered may be
sufficient to publish concerning the first Tract in the Book delivered to
Bremaw, touching the Moral Law.

CHAP. IX.
Of the second Tract of the Book delivered to Bremaw, containing their
Ceremonial Law, in their Washings, Annointings, Offerings under green Trees,
Prayers, Pilgrimages, Inuocations; Adorations, together with the forms of
their Baptizings, Marriages, and Burials, customary amongst them.

THe second Tract of the book delivered to Bremaw, comprised certain
ceremonial injunctions by them to be observed in the particulars following,
the knowledge of which being something material to set forth the Religion of
this people, shall be the Subject of this present Chapter.

First, then they are enjoined to frequent washings of their bodies in Rivers:
The original of which custom they say began with this second Age of the
world, and was made a part of their worship, to keep in memory the
destruction that was brought upon the world, for their defilement and sin.
The Ceremony observed in their washings is this: First, to besmeare their
bodies in the mudde of the River, the Emblem of man's filthiness and
corruption by nature; then walking into the River, and turning their faces
toward the Sun, the Bramane vtters this prayer: Oh Lord, this man is foul
and polluted as the Clay or Mudde of this River, but the water thereof can
purge off the defilement; do thou in like manner cleanse away his sin, so
diuing and plunging himself three times in the River, whilst the Bramane
iterateth the name of the River wherein he washes, called T^ppee, with the
names of other Rivers in India, celebrated for these customary washings, as
Gonga, and N^rboda, with other like Rivers, the party shaking in his hand
certain grains of Rice, as his offering on the water, receiving absolution
for sins past, is there dismissed.

Secondly, they use a certain Unction in the forehead of red painting, that
having certain grains stuck in the glutinous matter, is as their testimony
that God has marked them for his people; this is no other then to keep in
mind the memory of their Baptism, which accordingly as the Mark vanishes,
is daily by them renewed, according to their Washings, with the utterance of
certain words accompanying the action, to put them in mind to be such as
becomes Gods mark.

Thirdly, they are enjoined to tender certain Offerings and Prayers under
green Trees, the original of which custom they derive from Wise, to whom
they say God appeared by vision under a Tree, as is formerly mentioned, with
iniunction of worship in those places; so that the Bramanes under such green
Trees, erect Temples to Pagods, in which they give attendance to perform
Religious Rites and Ceremonies, to such as repair thither. The Tree
peculiarized for this worship, is called by some, as by Pliny, and others,
Ficus Indica,, the Indian Figtree; and by Goropius Becanus, affirmed to be the
tree of life that grew in the Garden of Eden; how far sorth to be believed, I
refer to St. Walter Raleighs 1. Book of the History of the World, Part 1.
Chap. 4. Parag. 1.2.3. where the more probable opinion is given. Certain it
is, that to this Tree much is attributed by them, and they suppose some notable
mischance shall happen to that party that violateth or iniureth the lea^ bow
or branch of the same. It is a Tree of fertile growth, whose branches be
spreading, ample, and spacious, from whose boughs so dispred, do descend
certain stemmes, that rooting themselves anew in the earth, propagate an
offspring, and so dilate it, that it seems beyond the custom of other Trees
to be capacious. To this Tree when they repair, they thither bring Offerings,
there they receive Unctions, and there are sprinklings of several colored
powders; there they pay their Adorations, which they number by the clapper of a
little Bell; there they pray for health, for riches, for fruitfulness of
issue, for success in affairs, there they often celebrate their Festiuals
with great concourse. In which Maygame of superstition to make further inquiry,
would be but vain and fruitless.

Fourthly, they are enjoined to certain prayers in their Temples, which may
hold some resemblance with common Service, were it purged of superstitious
Ceremony; the sum of which devotion, is the repetition of certain names of
God, dilated and explained, where also they use processions, with singing, and
loud tinckling of Bells, which chaunting is of their Commandments, with
offerings to Images, and such like impertinent services.

Fifthly, they are enjoined to Pilgrimages to Rivers far remote, as to the
River Ganges, there to wash their bodies, and to pay their offerings, that the
concourse of people repairing thither is great, and the golden offerings of
Treasure and Jewels thrown into his silver waves, invaluable; he is likewise
esteemed blessed and purified from sin, that can dye with a palate moystned
with that water.

Sixthly, another portion of their worship they bestow in Invocation of
Saints, to whom they attribute the powers of giving success to several
affairs, they therefore that would be happy in Marriage, inuoke Hurmount;
they that are to begin the works of Architecture, Gunnez; they that want
health, Vegenaut; the Soldier in his assault in feats of Arms, cries,
Bimohem; the miserable inuoke, Syer; and they that are in prosperity, give
their Orisons to Mycasser.

Seventhly, their Law binds them to give worship to God, upon sight of any
of his creatures, first presented to the eye after the rising Sun: Especially
they pay their devotion to the Sun and Moon, which they call the two eyes of
God; as also to some beasts which they hold more clean then others, they give
extraordinary kind usage; as to Kine, and Bussalaes, to whom they attribute so
much innocence and goodness by the souls of men entering into them, that they
besmeare the floores of their houses with their dung, and think the ground
sanctified by such pollution.

In the eighth place, touching their Baptizings or naming of their Children,
the Ceremony thereof is different in the Cast of the Bramanes, and other Casts.
For those that are of the other Casts, are only washed in water; then some of
the kindred of the party delivered, menaceth the point of a writing pen
against the forehead of the Child, with this short prayer, That God would write
good things in the front of that Child. All those then that are present saying,
Amen to that prayer; they give to the Child the name by which he shall be
called, and so putting an Unction of red ointment in the midst of his
forehead, as a sign that the Infant is received into their Church, and marked
for one of Gods children, the Ceremony is absolved. But then the Children that
are of the Cast of the Bramanes, are not only washed with water, but anointed
with oil, with certain words of consecration, in this manner: Oh Lord we
present unto thee this Child, borne of a holy Tribe, anointed with oil, and
cleansed with water; unto which adding the former Ceremonies, they all pray
that he may live a righteous obseruer of the Law of the Bramanes: so enquiring
out the exact time of the Child's birth, they calculate his Nativity, gathering
by the position of the twelve signs of heaven, the chances or mischances that
may happen unto him; all which they conceal, and at the day of the Child's
Marriage, (which they accoumpt one of the happiest days in his life)
publishes the dangers past, and the coniecturall evils to come in the sequeale
of his life.

In the ninth place, concerning their Marriages: It is considerable, that the
time is different from the custom of other Nations, for they Marry about the
seventh year of their age, because they accoumpt Marriage one of the most
blessed actions of man's life; to dye without which, they accoumpt it a great
unhappiness, which often happens by protractation and delay of time* as also
that the Parents might before their death see their Children disposed, which
comes to pass by these early conjunctions. Next for their contract in
Marriage, the Parents of the Children, do prepare the way by private
conference; the intention and purpose being made known, and betwixt them
agreed upon, then there are Messengers and Presents sent to the Parents of the
Maiden to be married, with the noise of Trumpet and Drum, and the singing of
songs in the praise of the perfections of the Bride, which may truly give her
the merit of one worthy to be coueted and sought unto: which presents being
accepted, then there are gifts sent back to the Bridegroom, in token of their
acceptance of the nuptial proffer, with like singing of Encomiasticks in
praise of the Bridegroom, seeting him forth to be so well composed, as may
well deserve acceptance. So the Bramanes appointing a day for the
solemnization of the Marriage, then there is a certain Show, to publish to the
whole Town this Marriage intended. This Show is first by the Bridegroom, who
in Nuptial pomp attended with all the men's Children in the Town, of the same
Tribe, some on horseback, some in Pallankins, some in Coaches, all adorned
with Jewels, Scarfes, and Pageant like habiliments, make their Cursitation
round about the most public streets in the Town, with Trumpets and kettle
Drums, and gilded Pageants; the Bridegroom is distinguished from the rest
by a crown on his head, decked with Jewels very rich. And having thus
published himself: The next day follows the Bride in like pomp crowned,
attended with all the Girls of the same Tribe in no less bravery and
triumphant accommodation, exposed to view of the Spectators. The day drawing to
his decline, they repair home to accomplish the full Rites of Marriage. The
Ceremony observed in their Marriage is, that they never are conjoined together
but at the going down of the Sun, at which time a fire is made, and
interposed between the Married couple, to intimate the ardency that ought to
be in their affections; then there is a silken string that incloseth both their
bodies, to witness the insoluble bond of wedlock, that in Marriage there
ought to be no desertion or forsaking one another. After this bond there is a
cloth interposed betwixt them, showing that before Marriage they ought not to
make their nakedness known one to another; this custom they say was taken
from the meeting of Brammon with Sauatree, who because they were naked, covered
their immodest parts, till the words of Matrimony were uttered. So the Bramanes
pronouncing certain words enioyning the man to afford all things convenient
to the woman, and charging the Woman to loyalty in the marriage vow, with
pronunciation of a blessing of fruitful issue to them both; the speeches
concluded, the cloth interposed, rest away; the bond by which they were engirt
unloosed, and after that, full freedom to communicate themselves to each
other. Dowry there is none given, that the drifts of Marriage might not be
mercenary, save the Jewels worn on the Bridal day; and to the Feast none
repair but those of the same Cast. To conclude, in marriage they have some
particular legal injunctions, by which the Tribes are differenced: as first,
that no woman may be admitted to second Marriage, except in the Tribe of Wise,
which are in the handycrafts men. Secondly, that men in all Tribes are admitted
to second Marriages, except in the Bramanes. Thirdly, that every Tribe do marry
of such as are of his own Cast: Therefore the Bramanes must marry with such as
are descended from the Bramanes; and the Cutteryes, with such as are descended
from the Cutteryes; so likewise the Shudderyes. But the Wyses are not only
enjoined to match into their own Tribe, but into such as be of their own
Trade; as a Barbers son, to a Barbers daughter, and so of others to keep
their Tribes and Trades from commixtion.

Lastly, as for their burials, this is their custom; when any man is
desperately sick, and past hope of recovery, they inioyne him to utter
Narraune, which is one of the names of God, importing Mercy to Sinners, of
which mercy at that time he stands most in need. His spirits languishing,
they stretch out his hand, pouring fair water into it, as the offering of his
life, praying to Kistner upon the God of the water, to present him pure to
God, with this offering of his hand. His life being departed, they wash his
body as a testimony of his cleanness and purity; this is the Ceremony observed
in the visitation of their sick. After this, for the burial of their dead: it
is after this manner. First, they bear the dead body to a Rivers side
appropriate to such purpose, where setting the Corpse down on the ground, the
Bramane utters these words; Oh earth, we commend unto thee this our Brother,
whilst he lived thou had an interest in him; of the earth he was made, by the
blessing of the earth he was fed, and therefore now he is dead, we surrender
him unto thee. After this putting combustible matter to the body, accended and
lighted by the help of sweet oil, and aromaticall odours strowed thereon;
the Bramane says, Oh Fire, whilst be lived, thou had a claim in him, by
whose natural heat he subsisted, we return therefore his body to thee, that
thou should purge it. Then the son of the deceased, takes a pot of water,
and sets it on the ground, upon which he sets a pot of Milk, when
throwing a stone at the lower pot, he breaks it to sheards, which rendereth
the water to loss, and perishing; the vessel of milk above defrauded of his
support, powers forth his humidity on the ground likewise, upon which the
Son thus moralizeth the action; That as the stone by his violence, caused the
vessels to yield forth their humor: so did the assault of sickness ruin his
Fathers body, and bring it to loss as milk or water, that is spilt on the
ground, never to be redeemed. The body then being incinerated or burnt to
ashes, they disperse the ashes abroad into the Air, the Bramane uttering these
words: Oh Air, whilst he lived by thee he breathed, and now having breathed
his last, we yield him to thee. The ashes falling on the water, the Bramane
says: Oh water, whilst he lived thy moisture did sustain him, and now his
body is dispersed, take thy part in him: So give they every Element his own,
for as they affirm man to have his life continued by the four Elements, so
they say he ought to be distributed amongst them at his death. After this
funeral solemnity, the Bramane presents to the son or nearest kindred of
the deceased, a Register of the deceases of his Ancestors, as also reads to
him the law of Mourners. That for ten days he must eat no Beetle, nor oil
his head, nor put on clean clothes, but once every month throughout the whole
year, on the day of the month in which his Father deceased, must make a feast,
and pay a visitation to that River that drunk up his Fathers ashes. Since
these laws and injunctions, there has sprung up a Custom amongst them, that
the women that survive their husbands, should offer themselves up alive to be
sacrificed in the flames with them, which to this day is observed in some
places, and for some persons of greater worth, though the examples be more rare
now, then in former times, of which custom Propertius thus speaks.

Foelix Eois lex funeris vna Maritis,
Quos Aurora suis rubra colorat aquis:
Namque vbi mortifero iacta est fax vltima lecto,
Vxorum suis stat pia turba Comis.
Et certamen habent laethi, quae vina sequatur
Coniugium* pudor est non licuisse mori.
Ardent victrices and slammae pectora praebent,
Imponuntque suis or a perusta viris.
The English.

A happy funeral Law those Indians hold,
Where bright Aurora shines with beams of gold,
For when in fiery brands the Husbands lie,
The Women stand with hanging tresses by:
And strive who to their Husbands first may turn
A body chaste into the flaming vrne;
Whilst to the fire they yield a constant breast,
And with parcht mouths, do kiss their loves to rest.
But though Propertius makes this to be a witness of their conjugal
chastity; yet Strabo makes the ground thereof to be the Indian women's
disloyalty to their husbands; who in former times by secret means, untimely
poisoned them, to enjoy their Paramours: The Raiahs therefore to restrain this
practice, did procure the Bramanes, to make it an act of Religion to interdict
second Marriages to the women, and that after the decease of the husband, the
woman should no longer survive, that so they might become more careful of
their preservation. The chaster sort, to gain an honor out of the infamy cast
upon their Sex, did by voluntary sufferance remove all suspicion of such
machination of evil, since they were so ready to cope with the terror of
death, to confirm their love: The Ceremony whereof is this; When their
husbands dye, they array themselves in their best ornaments and Jewels, and
accompany the body to the funeral pit, singing all the way encomiasticke
Songs, in praise of their deceased husbands, expressing a desire to be with
them: the body then being laid in the Grave, the woman with a cheerful
countenance imparteth her Jewels to her dearest friends, leapeth in to the
Corpse, whose head she lays in her lap; the music sounding aloud, the
pile is kindled by the fire, and set on a flame, whilst she makes herself a
Martyr to approve her love.

These obseruances, partly enjoined by their law, and by themselves instanced
in their present practice, may have been sufficient to give you information,
what might be the substance of the second Tract of the book delivered to
Bremaw: what the third Tract imported, and how it is confirmed by their present
Manners and Customs, we shall glance at, in the following Chapters.

CHAP. X.
Of the third Tract delivered to Bremaw, concerning their four Tribes or
Casts; their iniunction to follow that order of Government, and so touching the
first of those Tribes, called the Bramanes; the deriuation of the name, their
kinds, the number of their Casts, their Ministerial discharge, Studies, and
School discipline.

AFter the consideration of the Ceremonies enjoined and observed by them in
matters of their worship, as it was the Subject of the second Tract of the
book delivered to Bremaw: Now follows the third Tract, declaring in what
manner of order or distinction they should live, and what was meet for every
one to observe in his own particular Tribe.

And because there could be no invention more commodious for the government of
the world, then was used by the four Tribes in the first Age, as to have
Bramanes to instruct the people in matters of Religion; to have Cutteryes that
should sway the Scepter, and keep men in obedience; to have Merchant men that
should use Traffic and Trade as did Shuddery; to have servile and manufactory
men, that should serve the uses of the world in the handicrafts, as did Wise:
Therefore they were by this Tract bound to keep their own peculiar Tribe or
Cast, and to observe what was proper to the faculties of each in several;
which accordingly was done, and is yet continued so far as it lies in their
power to conserve this Ancient form of government and policy: wherein if I
shall somewhat digress from their injunctions, which for the most part present
things less pertinent to be known, to a more particular display of their
manners, I shall better discharge the parts required in this Tract.

The Bramanes then being the first of these Tribes, something shall be noted in
particular touching them; and first of the name Bramane. Suidas is of opinion,
that they are called Bramanes of one Brachman, that was the first prescriber of
their Rites. Postellus, lib. d. Origin. Cap. 13. and 15. affirms them to be
descended from Abraham by Cheturah, who seated themselves in India, and that so
they were called Abrahmanes; the word suffering a Syncope, they in the tract of
time, for breuity of pronunciation became called by the name of Bramanes. But
they neither know of any such as Brachman, neither have they heard of Abraham,
but affirm they receive this name of Bramanes from Brammon, which was the
first that ever exercised their Priestly function, as they find by record; or
else from Bremaw, by adiection of this particle ( nes) who was the first of the
second Age, to whom the Law was delivered.

Touching the kinds of these Bramanes, taking them for such as discharge the
Priestly office amongst the people, they are of two sorts: First, the more
common Bramanes, of which there are a greater number in India: or the more
special, of which there be fewer, and these be called by the Banians, Verteas,
by the Moors, Sevrahs.

The common Bramane has eighty two Casts or Tribes, assuming to themselves the
names of that Tribe; which were so many wise men or Scholars famed for their
learning amongst them, called Augurs, or Southsayers, of such a place of
dwelling. Thus the prime of them was called Visalnagranauger, that is, the
Augur of Visalnagra, the 2 Vulnagranauger, that is, the Augur of Vulnagra, a
town so called; and so of the rest according to these 82 Casts to be
distinguished, being Bramanes of the discipline of such an Augur.

These Bramanes as they discharge their Ministerial function, in praying with
the people, or reading their Law, have some peculiar injunctions: As first,
that they should strain their bodies into certain mimicall gestures, so as
may most face the people to gaze upon them and listen to them; that they pray
with both their hands open to heaven, as ready to receive the things they pray
for; that they pray with demissiue eyelids, and sitting with their knees
deflected under them, to show their fear and reverence. Next that they must
never read of the book delivered to Bremaw, but it must be by a kind of
singing, and quauering of the voice, which they say was not only practiced by
Bremaw, when it was published; but was also enjoined by God, that they might
make his Law as the matter of their rejoicing.

The Bramanes are likewise the Seminaries of discipline amongst the younger
sort of that Cast, whose orders both in their initiation and entrance into that
manner of learning is obseruable; as also no less in their confirmation, and
ordination to the Priesthood: for first, about the seventh year of their age
they are received to discipline, being clean washed, to intimate the purity of
that Cast; then they are received naked, to show that they have stripped off all
other cares, to apply themselves to study; then their heads are shaven, a long
lock being only left on the hinder part of the head, to show that they must
not forsake their study, if they do, by that lock they shall be drawn back
again. They are bound to a Pythagorean silence and attention, and prohibited
haulking, spitting or coughing; wearing about their loins a girdle of an
Antilops skin, and another thong of the same about their neck, descending
under the left arm. About the foureteenth year of their age (if they be
capable) they are admitted to be Bramanes, exchanging those leather thongs, for
four sealing threads, that come over the right shoulder, and under the right
arm, which they sleep withal, and never put off, but wear them in honor of
God, and the three persons, Bremaw, Vystney, and Ruddery, and as the badge of
their profession; in which ordination they are enjoined: First, not to alter
their Cast or Tribe. Next to observe all things enjoined in the Bramanes Law.
Lastly, not to communicate the mysteries of their Laws to any of a different
Religion. These be the most of the principal things observed by these
Bramanes.

Now for the more special Bramane, by them called the Vertea, he is some man
of the Cast of the Shudderyes, or Merchant men, who for devotion takes this
condition on him; he is one that for his habit wears a woollen garment of
white, descended to the middle of his thigh, leaving the lower parts naked; his
head is always uncovered, as a witness of his perpetual reverence of God
above; they do not shave, but pluck off all the hair on their heads, save
some small remainder on the crown; the like they do from their chinne also.

Of this sort of Bramane there be several Casts likewise; one is called the
Soncaes, and these go not to Church, but perform divine Rites at home.
Another is of the Tuppaes, these go to Church to pray. A third is of the
Curthurs, and these pray by themselves, without society. A fourth called the
Onkeleaus, and these endure not Images. A fifth called the Pushaleaus, the most
strict of them all.

These kind of Bramanes have a Festival called Putcheson, which is kept once
every Month, by five days solemnization, but betwixt each day of the five they
keep a fast; this feast is kept at the ablest men's houses, and commonly at
those times a pension is given, to restrain the death of cattle, or other
living creatures.

More strict they seem to be in many things then the common Bramanes, for the
other are not forbidden marriage, these are; more abstinent they are in diet,
for out of the former Feasts they eat nothing, but what is given them, and
reserve nothing for another meal. More cautelous they are for the preservation
of things animate, for they will drink no water but boyld, that so the vapor
which they suppose the life of the water, may go out. They disperse their very
dung and ordure with a beasome, least it should generate worms that be
subject to destruction; and they keep an hospital of lame and maimed flying
foul, redeemed by a price, which they seek to restore: They have all things
common, but place no faith in outward washings, but rather embrace a careless
and sordid nastinesse. And this is sufficient to note concerning this kind of
Bramane.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the second Tribe or Cast called the Cutteryes, presenting them in
their flourishing estate, their declining estate, and their present estate.

THe second Cast or Tribe being the Cutteryes, had their denomination from
Cuttery, the 2 son of Pourous, who because Domination and Rule was committed
unto him, therefore all Soldiers and Kings are said to be of this Tribe. That
particular of Bremawes book that concerned this Cast or Tribe, contained
certain precepts of government and policy, the knowledge of which being but
of common import, I rather choose to omit, and proceed to show some other
things notable concerning this Tribe, touching their state or condition. These
Cutteryes may then be considered, either according as they were in their
flourishing estate, or else in their declining estate, or in their present
estate.

As they were in their flourishing estate, they were the Ancient Kings and
Rulers of India, especially of that part called Guzzarat, and were called by
the name of Raiahs, which signifies a King, whereof some were of greater
dominion than other, according as they were of greater force. These Raiahs had
principally four men about them of eminency. The first of which were the
Bramanes, who by Southsaying and Augury did show the Kings what time was most
meet to begin their designs to prosecute them with success. The second was
one called the Pardon, which was a man of policy in the carriage of State
business, and dispatched all matters of Judicature, having reference to the
King for Justice. The third was one that was called the Moldar, or the Kings
Chamberlain, who was most commonly present with the King, as the companion of
his conversation. The fourth was the General of the Kings Armies in the field,
called Disnacke, who was sent abroad about all expeditions of war. These were
the four that had chief eminency about the King. Furthermore, these Raiahs
are said to have thirty six Tribes, as the noble families whence they were
descended; some were of the Cast or Tribe of Chaurah; some of the Solenkees;
some of the Tribe of Vaggela; some of the Dodepuchaes; some of the Paramars;
that so no man of obscure birth might press to dignity, but being descended
from some of the thirty six families; thus the Raiahs lived in their
flourishing estate.

Now touching their declining state: It is recorded in their History, that one
Rannedeuill a virtuous woman, did at her death prophecy the decline of the
Banian State, in the time of Rauisaldee chief Raiah, the beginning of which
decline should be in his next Successors days, which they say accordingly
happened as shall appear by the Story following.

It is then delivered in their History, that there was a Raiah called
Rauisaldee, who had a son called Syderaijsaldee: Rauisaldee suffering the
common change of Mortality, his son was careful to express his duty to his
deceased father, in a costly Monument, at a place called Sythepolalpore, which
being finished with great curiosity of Art, and cost correspondent to that
curiosity, being pleased with the work, and desiring to keep his Fathers
memory and his own lasting by that Monument, he consulted with the Bramanes,
to know whether that Temple should long abide, or if that pile of goodly
workemanship^e should suffer ruin; by whom it should be defaced. It was
diuined to him by one Madewnauger, one famous in the discipline of the
Bramanes, that one Sultan Alaudin, a Patan, King of Delee, should deface the
same, as also gain some great conquest in Guzzarat. Syderaijsaldee hopeful to
prevent the defacement of this Temple, by some timely composition, dispeeded
his Bramane Madewnauger, and his Pardon, to Delee, to inquire out the said
Alaudin, and by a sum of money to procure the peace of his Fathers bones, and
the sparing of the Temple. But coming thither they could find no such man of
any eminency, but another in the government: only by strict inquisition they
met with a wood-gatherer there, who had a son so calle^; thither they repair
to the amazement of Alaudins poor parents; They make known the reason of
their coming, and find the boy administering food to a young Kid in his
Fathers backeside. The Bramane proposing to him the high fortunes that should
betyde him in being King of Delee, and in the conquest of Guzzarat, as also the
end of their Message, that Syderaijsaldee did greet him, and did desire him
that when those things should happen and he should inua^e Guzzarat, that he
would forbea^e to deface the Temple and Monument of his Father erected at
Sythepolalpore, as a motive to which favor, Syderaijsaldee did freely present
him with a sum of money, which sum they tendered to Alaudin. Alaudin boldly
answered, that he was not in appearance capable of any such fortunes, but if
the heavens had so set it down in their great volume, he could not alter it,
but must lay waste the Temple, and in the Majesty of his nature refused the
gift and treasure brought him. His Parents better instructed by their own
necessity what was meet for him to do, then his heroicke disposition would
be taught, importuned him to take the treasure, urging their own needs, and
how convenient a help it might be to raise him to those fortunes that were to
him diuined. So apprehending the counsel to be but reasonable, he took the
treasure, and gave an Escript or writing, that albeit the heavens had decreed
that he should scatter some stones of that building, yet he would pick them
out of the Corners thereof in such manner, as should fulfill his fortune, and
make good his promised favor to Syderaijsaldee, in the sparing of that Temple
and Tomb of his Father. By this money of composition, Alaudin gathered
Soldiers, and betook himself to Arms, wherein he proved himself so
resolute, that he gained great fame, whereunto his divining fortunes became
such a Sparre, that he was made King of Delee, and after that made inuasiue
conquests on Guzzarat, fulfilled his promise to Syderaijsaldee in treaty on
the fore mentioned business. In which conquest he overthrew many Raiahs, to
the great ruin and decline of the Banian State: But growing weary of this long
war, and many Raiahs flying to places inaccessible, led with a desire to
return to Delee his native place, he committed the further managing of these
wars to one Futtercon, that was his Cupbearer; in this manner. For Alaudin
considering how great he was grown from nothing (and that accidentally) he
determined as accidentally to heap this fortune upon another; purposing over
night with himself, that whosoever did first present him the next morning with
any gift, on him to confirm the government of that part of Guzzarat he had
conquered. It so fell out, that whilst this secret was lodged up in the Kings
breast, that the fore mentioned Futtercon, the Kings wine keeper, by the rising
Sun tendered a Cup of wine to the Kings hand; who smiled and looked
favorably upon him, and in the presence of his Army, comfirmed him his
Successor in the Government of that he had won, inioyning them all so to
acknowledge him, and to do whatsoever he should command in the further
prosecution of that conquest: so Sultan Alaudin departed to Delee, and the said
Futtercon did further invade Guzzarat, and so did the rest of the Mahoometans
that succeeded him, to the decline of the Banian State and Regiment.

Now for their present estate, some of the Raiahs yielded, others flying to
retyrements impregnable, lay in the Mawe of the Country, and could not be
conquered even to this day: but making outroades, prey on the Cassaloes passing
by the way; and sometimes come to the skirts of their strongest and most
populous towns, having many resolute Soldiers to go on in these attempts of
rapine, called Rashpootes, which implies as much as the sons of Kings; for
being of the Cast of the Cutteries, it is like they were nobly descended, and
some of the Progeny of those that were ouerrunne in the Guzzarat conquest. Of
those that live unconquered at this day, such a one is Raiah Surmulgee, living
at Raspeeplaw; Raiah Berumshaw, at Molere; Raiah Ramnagar; Raiah Barmulgee, and
the great Rannah, who has fought many set battles with the Moguls forces. This
may be obseruable concerning the Cast of the Cutteryes.

CHAP. XII.
Of the third Tribe or Cast called the Shudderyes, of the meaning of the name
Banian, of their Casts, and the form of their Contracts, in buying and selling.

THE third son of Pourous being called Shuddery, and the Profession appointed
him to follow being Merchandise, all such as live in the nature of Merchants
are comprised under this name, and belong to this Cast: that which the book
delivered to Bremaw contained concerning this Tribe, was no other then a
summary of religious aduer^isements, pr^per to the carriage of this Profession,
enioyning them t^ truth in their words, and dealings, and to avoid all
practices of circumuention in buying and selling. What may be further worthy of
note concerning this Tribe (being those that are most properly called Banians)
at present is either concerning the name Banian, the number of their Casts, or
the form of their contracts of buying and selling.

First, under the name of Banians is comprised either such as are Merchants
only, or Brokers for the Merchant, for nothing is bought but by the mediation
of these, who are called Banians, which imports as much in the Bramanes
language wherein their Law is written, as a people innocent and harmless,
because they will not endure to see a Fly or Worm, or any thing living
iniuryed, and being stricken bear it patiently without resisting again.

Next for the number of their Casts, they are equal to the Bramanes, being the
self same Casts, choosing either to be under their discipline, that are
Visalnagranaugers, or Vulnagranaugers, from the peculiar instruction of which
Bramanes they are guided in matters belonging to religious worship, for being
most like unto the Bramanes in their Law, they more strictly follow their
injunctions then the other Tribes.

Lastly, their form of contract in buying and selling is something notable,
and distinct from the custom of other Nations; for the Broaker that beats
the price with him that sells, loses his Pamerin, that is folded about his
waste, and dispreading it upon his knee, with hands folded underneath, by their
finger ends the price of pounds, shillings, or pence is pitched, as the chapman
is intended to give; The Seller in like manner intimates how much he purposes
to have, which silent kind of composition they say their Law enioyneth as the
form of their contract.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the fourth Cast called the Wyses, the meaning of the name, their kinds,
and several Casts; B^emaws time is expired, he is took up to heaven, the
second Age is concluded by the destruction of Wind and Tempest.

LAstly, as the fourth Son of Pourous was called Wise, and was the Master of
the Mechanics or handy-crafts, ^o all manufactory men were to belong to the
Cast of the Wyses. Those directions that were in Bremawes book for these, were
in precepts touching their behauiours in their callings.

This name Wise implies as much as one that is servile or instrumentary, for
this cause as it may be supposed, because they are servile or helpefull to such
as need their Art, as was Wise, and those descended from him, who were endued
with diverse inventions; these people are at this present most ordinarily called
by the name of Gentiles.

Which Gentiles are of two sorts or kinds: first, the purer Gentile, such as
lives obseruant of the diet of the Banians, abstaining from flesh and wine, or
using both very seldom; or else the Gentile Visceraun, called the impure or
unclean Gentile, which takes a greater liberty in diet, eating flesh or fish
or things animate; such are the husbandmen or inferior sort of people, called
the Coulees.

The purer sort of Gentile, as they hold greatest relation in their religious
liberty with Cutteryes, so they agree in the number of their Casts, having six
and thirty, according to the number of the trades or professions practiced
amongst them. In the particular of their handycrafts this is obseruable, that
they make as few instruments serve for the effectuating of diverse works as may
be, and whatsoever they do, is contrary to the Christian form of working, for
the most part. Such is the substance of the third Tract of the book delivered
to Bremaw, concerning the four Tribes or Casts, somewhat accommodate to their
present manners.

This book comprizing in it the Platform of Religion and Government thus
delivered to Bremaw, was by him communicated to the Bramanes of those times,
and by them published to the people, showing what Religion they should observe,
and how they should live in their several Tribes or Casts. After which
according to the prescriptions therein, the Rulers did keep the people in the
order of Government: The Priests or Bramanes did give advise in matters of
Religion: The Merchants did follow Traffic and Merchandising: And the
Handycrafts men did follow their several professions, serving the needs of all
men that had use of them; all things having a good beginning in this second
Age, Religion was embraced, Prayers were made to God, and the three persons,
Bremaw, Vistney, and Ruddery; the banks of the Rivers were frequented, and
daily washings were not neglected.

But after the people were multiplied, the succeeding Generations were not of
the primitive integrity, but the lower the times grew, the worse they were at
the bottom. The Bramanes grew hypocritical and lip-laborious; the Cutteryes,
or Rulers swelled with pride and ambition, cried out for larger Territories,
meditating unjust ampliations of Government. The Merchants grew full of
fraudulency in their dealings. And the Handycrafts grew idle and ouervaluing
their labors.

In this vproare of ungodliness, the Lord grew angry, and full of indignation,
and descended on Mount Meropurbatee, acquainting Bremaw with the wickedness of
the world, who descended and premonished them of the judgment to come, which a
while hushed the cry of their wickedness; but they fell to their old evils
again. Bremaw then interceded for them, but the Almighty would not be
pacified, but took Bremaw up into his bosom, the time of his abode on earth
being expired, that he might not behold the evils of the time to come.

Then the Lord made known his purpose of destroying the world to Vistney,
whose nature and office being to preserve the people, did intercede for them:
but the Lord would not be pacified, but gave charge to Ruddery, whose office
was to bring judgment and destruction on sinners, to cause the bowels of the
earth to send out a wind, to sweep the Nations as the dust from the face of
the earth.

So Ruddery enraged the winds in the bowels of the earth, which brast forth
into Eruptions, and the great body of the world had her trepidations and
wauerings, the day seemed to change color with the night, the Mountains and
hills were hurled from their foundations, and as some report the River Ganges
was carried from her wonted Rote, to run in a new Channel; so the Tempest
destroyed all people, saving a few that the Lord permitted Vistney to cover
with the skirt of his preservation, reserved to be the Propagaters of mankind
in the third Age, and so this Age concluded.

CHAP. XIIII.
Showing the beginning of the third Age, the Restoration of the same by Ram;
new evils bring a judgment, concluding the third Age by an Earthquake or
Chasma.

RVddery having restrained the winds from their former violence, all now was
hushed; but miserable and lamentable it was to behold the earth so desolate and
void of inhabitants, more miserable to see the carkeises that were scattered on
her surface, some blown from the tops of high Mountains, others bruised to
mash, all ruined and destroyed; so that the Almighty repented him of his own
work, and Ruddery was sorry that he should be an instrument of so great fury
and destruction.

But because the head of all the former disorders was from the wickedness and
ill government of the Kings and Rulers, therefore the Lord utterly raced out
all of the Tribe or Cast of the Cutteryes; those that were preserved from
destruction by the skirt of Vistneys preservation, being some few of the other
three Casts or Tribes.

Now because these four Casts were so necessary to the worlds government, that
it could not subsist without them, though the Cast of the Cutteryes perished
intyrely, for their wickedness; yet that they might be renewed again from a
holier beginning, the Lord appointed that from the Bramanes the line of the
Kings should be renewed. So the Chief of the Bramanes that was then preserved
by Vistney, was called Ducerat; the next child that was borne after this
destruction, and which was the youngest of four, was chosen to propagate the
race of their Kings, and Rulers, who being religiously educated, might as well
favor piety as policy, and with holiness and prudence govern men in their
several Tribes.

So he did many worthy Acts, and exceedingly maintained Religion, was a Patron
to the Bramanes, and Churchmen, and his name was Ram; who became so memorable
for his worthy deeds, that his name is made honorable in the mention amongst
them even to this day, that whenever they meet and salute one another, they
cry Ram, Ram, as a word importing the wishes of all good.

It is like that after him there ruled many worthy Kings, but tract of time
rendering every thing worse at the latter ending then at the beginning, brought
forth such as followed the course of the ancient wickedness, and new
ambitions, and new hypocrisies, and new frauds and circumuentions, and daily
breaches of the Law delivered in Bremawes book, began afresh to make intrusion
amongst them.

So the Almighty was again angry, that after so many judgments, the people
would not be warned to his fear, therefore by Gods appointment, Ruddery caused
the earth to open and swallow them up alive, reserving only some few of the
four Tribes, as a last trial for the new peopling of the world again. And
such was the conclusion of the third Age of the world.

CHAP. XV.
The fourth and last Age of the world, Vistneyes rapture to Heaven, the Banians
opinion touching the final conclusion of the World, and in what manner they
suppose it shall be.

AFter this, the Almighty again commanded, that the world should be peopled
by those that were reserved, amongst whom there was one Kystney, a famous Ruler
and pious King, of whose virtues they have ample record, as being one most
notable in the last Age, which they think now by the course of time to be
deuolued upon us; he did wonderfully promote Religion, upon which there was a
reformed beginning of goodness.

By this, Vistneyes time (as they say) being expired, in this place and vale of
mortality; the Lord took him up to heaven, there being no further need of his
preservation, for when this Age is concluded, there shall be a final end of
all things.

But the Bramanes though they suppose time to be running on the fourth Age of
the world, yet they suppose this Age shall be longer than any of the rest, in
the end whereof they say Ruddery shall be rapt up into heaven. These Ages they
call by four names: the first, Curtain; the second, Duauper; the third,
Tetraioo; the fourth Kolee.

Concerning the manner of this final judgment, they hold it shall be more
dreadful than any of the rest, and that it shall be by fire; that Ruddery
then shall summon up all the power of destruction; that the Moon shall look
red; that the Sun shall shed his purling light like flaming brimstone; that
the lightening shall flash with terrors, the skies shall change into all
colors; but especially fiery redness shall ouerspread the face of heaven;
that the four Elements of which the world at first was constituted, shall be
at opposition and variance, till by this Agony she be turned to her first
confusion.

And that the final consummation of the world shall be by fire, they gather
hence; Of such as was the beginning of the world, of such shall be her
dissolution; but the Principles of the worlds constitution, were these four;
Earth, Air, Water, and Fire; therefore by them shall she be destroyed, which
also they gather by the destruction of the several Ages: For the people of the
first Age were destroyed by water; the people of the second Age were destroyed
by wind, which they accoumpt the Air; the people of the third Age were
destroyed by Earth; and the people of the last Age, shall be destroyed by fire.

Then (say they) shall Ruddery carry up the souls of all people to heaven with
him, to rest in Gods bosom, but the bodies shall all perish; So that they
believe not the Resurrection, for they say, heaven being a place that is pure,
they hold it cannot be capable of such gross substances.

The Authors Conclusion to the Reader, together with a Censure on the material
parts of this Relation.
THus worthy Reader, thou have the sum of the Banian Religion, such as it is;
not void of vain Superstitions, and composed Forgery, as well may be judged
by the precedent Discourse, wherein as in all other heresies may be gathered,
how Satan leads those that are out of the pale of the Church, a round, in
the Maze of Error and Gentilisme. I might leave the particulars to thy
Censure, as well as to thy Reading; but since I have detected such gross
opinions in this Sect, I cannot let them pass without a rod trust at their
backs, as a deserved penance for their crime.

To help thy memory therefore in a short reuise of their forementioned
vanities; what seems their first Age to present, but a figment of their own
devising, to confirm them to be the most ancient of all people? as if like the
Egyptians, in the 2. book of Iustine, they only would boast of Antiquity;
and to lay the first ground of Religion and Government, when the Scythians had
better arguments to plead than they. How fabulous and like an old woman's tale
seem their devised Medium for the worlds propagation, in placing four women
at the four winds? And for the second Age and the worlds restoration
therein, if by those three persons, Bremaw, Vistney, and Ruddery, they glaunce
at the Trinity, how prodigious have they made that Mystery; making it rather a
Quaternity, than a Trinity? What a monstrous fancy have they formed and shaped
for the peopling of that Age; and if they aim not at a mark so sublime, what
men shall deserve the Attributes to them appropiate? Touching their Law, the
maine Pillars thereof have been demolished in its Confutation: The Kingdom of
God consists not in meats and drinks. For other their Ceremonies and Rites,
contained in their second Tract of the book, what man of reasonable
understanding does not wonder at their superstitions, which place their faith
in outward washings, lotions, and sprinklings? in worship of Sun, Moon,
and other living creatures, in paintings, unctions, and garish processions, in
offerings under green trees, in cringings, beckings, and bowings to Images,
and other multifarious Ceremonies? all evidences of brains intoxicate with the
fumes of Error and Polytheisme. As for their four Tribes or Casts, as in all
else, how Pythagorically they stand upon the number of four; the world was
formed of four principles; divided into four points of the Compass; to
endure for four Ages; planted by four men, matched to four women; restored
again by four; and to be demolished by four several destructions; in four
several Elements: and to conclude, like Sadduces denying the Resurrection, in
which consists the hopes of the blessed: Of which St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.29. If
in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

All these declare how they have made their Religion a composed Fiction, rather
then any thing real for faith to lean on. Though then the Nouelty of this
Relation may make it grateful to any, who like an Athenian desires to hear
some thing strange or new: I know not wherein it may be more profitable, then
to settle us in the solidnesse of our own faith, which is purged of all such
leuities; for the vainness of Error makes truths greatest opinion, which
duly considered may well move us to say, Micat inter omnes,
Iulium Sydus, velut inter ignes
Luna minores.
That our great light outshines all these as far,
As Silver Moon outshines each lesser Star.


FINIS.
THE RELIGION OF THE PERSEES.

As it was Compiled from a Book of theirs, containing the Form of their
Worship, written in the Persian Character, and by them called their
Zundavastaw.

Wherein is showed the Superstitious Ceremonies used amongst them.

More especially their Idolatrous worship of Fire.

LEVIT. 10.1.2. And Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire before the Lord, which
he commanded them not, and there went out a fire from the Lord and devoured
them.

TERTVL. d. Praescript. c. 22. Scripturae ignem alienum imponentes, hoc est
Intelligentiam alienam a Deo introducentes, Incensum Domino non suaue, sed
execrabile offerunt.

Printed for FRA. CONSTABLE. 1630.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE by the Providence of God,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan.
May it please your Grace:
Having in the former Book presented the Banian, with his Errors and
Superstitions to your Censure: I have in this second Book, brought the Persee
also to the same Bar, to be arraigned upon like Guilt. This Superstition of
the Persee, as your Grace well knows by the Relation of Socrates, in the
seventh Book of his Ecclesiasticke History. Cap. 8. was much weakened in
opinion by one Marutha, Bishop of Mesopotamia, wherein Yesdegerd the last King
of these Persees, became so wavering, that the Magies to reclaim him from
Revolt and vacillancy in the opinion of his holy fire, did convey one under
ground, where their living fire was kept, that might tell Yesdegerd, that if
he did revolt from this worship, he should be deposed from his Rule, and
come to a miserable ending: at the hearing of which voice (conceived to be
some divine message) Yesdegerd grew much troubled, till Marutha brought the
Imposture to discovery, by aduising Yesdegerd to dig under ground, where the
feigned Crier was heard and deprehended in a vault, to the shameful detection
of this close devise* To your Grace then I refer the said Persee, with his
soyled and tainted worship; hopeful your Grace will be pleased to sentence
him to a public Procession, habilimented in the ridiculous vesture of his
own Superstitions, that all good minded people upon view of him, may give him
his demerited shame and defamation. Thus with the humble tender of my service
to your Grace in these foreign Collections, and my prayers that you may live
long to do worthy Acts in Jsrael, I rest,

Bound to your Grace in all dutiful observance, HENRY LORD.

To the Honorable and Worthy Knight, Sr. Maurice Abbot, Governor of the
Company of Merchants trading to the East Indies: Christopher Cletherow
Alderman of the City of London, and Deputy of the said Company, and to all the
worthy Adventurers, Members of the same Society.
Right Honorable:
SJnce the purposed tender of my first Novelty, time that is sometimes
propitious to grateful Intentions, has made me fruitful in a second
producement. As therefore I resigned to you my display of the Banian Sect, so
also may you be pleased to accept this of the Persees: since by the strength of
your favors, and the oportunities of your employment, I have been enabled to
bring it forth also. As for the strength of the Superstition, why the Persees
should make the Fire their God, seems to weak purpose, as one Canopus an
Egyptian Priest once euinced. For upon a time when there was a public Trial
and Contention amongst the Nations, whose God was most powerful, and the
Chaldeans and Persees as Ruffinus testifies, in the second Book of his
Ecclesiasticke History, ostentated their god of Fire; affirming that it was
able to destroy all the Egyptian gods, and Idols of gold, silver, brass,
wood, stone, or whatsoever, and consume them to nothing: Canopus to elude this
Assertion brings in a stone vessel, orbicular and full of holes like a
Cullender, filled with water; and the ventages thereof so cunningly plastered
with wax, that the fraud went vndetected; which being set to manage his
contention with the Fire, the heat melting the wax, gave the liquid humor
within liberty to extinguish the Fire, which was the Persians god; which
project if it seem but circumuentiue and deceiptfull, to justify the power of
the Egyptian god of Stone, above the Persians god of Fire; yet who sees not,
that if so be any be pleased to make the Water his god, it would quickly
extinguish the Fiery god which these Persees worship? and so by consequence
we may hold this a poor Superstition. Howsoever then both these and the
former, seem to be issues illegitimate and branded in the Conception with the
name of base begotten, because they are Superstitious; Yet since our Physicians
in England, have learned to make the poisons in foreign Countries medecinable
and sovereign in our own; J hope the good Christians in England, have learned
also to convert the Heresies of the Heathen, though in themselves banefull and
obnoxious, to uses cauearie against relapse, and defectious Apostasy. Accept
it then Right Honorable, and take it according to his b^st Use, (as men at
some times of the year make of weeds, things both healthful and useful)
from him who would have affoorded you some thing more worthy, if there might
have come any thing good out of Gallile. Jn defect whereof, accept my duty in
this, which shall be ever forward to witness it self in all good prayers and
wishes, for the flourishing and prosperous estate of your Affairs foreign
and Domesticke, as becomes

Your thankful Servant, and Minister: Henry Lord.

THE PROEME, showing the cause that moved the Author to produce the following
Tract.
Having declared the Religion, Rites, Customs and Ceremonies, of a people
living in the East Indies called the Banians, a Sect not thoroughly published by
any heretofore, whilst my observation was bestowed in such Inquiry, I observed
in the town of Surratt the place where I resided, another Sect called the
Persees; who because I did discern them to differ both from the Moore and
Banian in the course of their living, and in the form of their Religion, as
also that the Scripture Dan. 6.15. speaks of the law of the Medes and
Persians that might not alter, finding these to be that same people that are
linked with the Medes, I thought it would not be unworthy of my labor to bring
to the eyes of my Countrymen this Religion also, especially since I never read
of any that had fully published the same, but that it has remained o^scure and
hidd from common knowledge. For this cause desirous to add any thing to the
ingenious, that the oportunities of my Travail might confer upon me, I
joined my self with one of their Church men called their Daroo, and by the
interpretation of a Persee, whose long employment, in the Companies service,
had brought him to a mediocrity in the English tongue, and whose familiarity
with me, inclined him to further my inquiry: I gained the knowledge of what
hereafter I shall deliver, as it was compiled in a book writ in the Persian
Character, containing their Scripture, and in their own language, called their
ZVNDAVASTAVV. But because we should be better informed concerning the People
spoken of, before we lay down their Religion, we will first declare who these
Persees are, and then proceed to their worship.

THE RELIGION OF THE PERSEES.
CHAP. I.
Declaring who these Persees are, their ancient place of abode, the cause of
relinquishing their own Country, their arrival in East India, and their
abode there.

THese Persians, or Persees, of whose Religion we are now to speak of; are a
people descended from the ancient Persians, in times not long after the Flood,
who then had their Native Kings and Governors; but war, that causes an
alteration in States and Empires, brought upon them a foreign Scepter.

About nine hundred ninety six years elapsed, one Yesdegerd, was native King
of Persia, who had his residence in the City of Yesd, near unto the old City
of Spahaun, which is somewhat remote from the new City known by that name; this
City of Yesd was a goodly City in those times, (as those use to be where Kings
keep their Courts) spacious for circuit, sumptuous for buildings, and populous
for inhabitants, where this people lived in flourishing prosperity.

What time the Arabian Captains of the Sect of Mahomet, made invasion into his
Country, about the nineteenth year of his Reign, who having before been
newly assaulted by a great multitude of Turks, that came from Turquestan, he
was forced to fly to Karason, where he dyed suddenly in the twentieth year
of his reign, being the five and fortith King that descended from the race of
Guiomaras, and the last in whom the ancient Persian Monarchy concluded.

The Mahometans upon the death of Yesdegerd, carried all in conquest before
them, and subjected the Natives of the Country as vassals unto them; and as
new Lords bring in new laws; they contented not themselves to bring them to
their form of government in State subjection, but also in matters of Religion,
to live according to Mahomets Constitutions, compelling them to be circumcised
according to the Mohammedan custom, contrary to the form of their own
Religion and worship.

These Persees, not enduring to live contrary to the prescript of their own
law, and less able to reject their yoke, many of them by privy escape, and
as close conueyance as they might of their goods and substance, determined a
voyage for the Indies, purposing to prove the mildness of the Banian Raiahs,
if there, though they lived in subjection for matter of government, they might
obtain liberty of conscience in course of Religion.

So repairing to Iasques, a place in the Persian gulf, they obtained a fleet
of seven Iuncks, to convey them and theirs, as Merchantmen bound for the
shoares of India, in course of Trade and Merchandise. It happened that in
safety they made to the land of St. John's on the shoares of India, and arrived
together, at or near the Port of Swaley, the usual Receptacle of such Ships
as arrive there. Treaty was made by some of them, with a Raiah living at
Nuncery, publishing their aggreeuances, and the cause of their commimg thither,
as also their suite to be admitted as Soiournors with them, using their own
Law and Religion, but yielding themselves in subjection to their Government;
upon payment of homage and tribure, they were admitted to land the Passengers
contained in five of their Iuncks.

The other two Iuncks remaining, one of them put into the Road of Swaley, and
treated with a Raiah that then resided at Baryaw near unto Surrat, who
entertained them on like conditions to the former; but the Raiah of that place,
having wars with a neighboring Raiah, who got the conquest, the Persees that
resided with the conquered, were all put to the sword, as adherents to the
Enemy.

The last Iuncke coasted along the shoares, and arrived at Cambaya, where they
were received upon the prementioned conditions, so that howsoever this people
have been dispersed in India, since their arrival, it has been from some of
these places. Thus they lived in India, till tract of time wore out the memory
of their original, and the Records of their Religion being perished, they
became ignorant whence they were, being assigned to the profession of
husbandry, or the dressing of the Palmitoes or Toddy trees, till being known
by the name of Persees, they were agnized by the remnant of their Sect abiding
in Persia, who acquainted them with the Story of their Ancestors, and
communicated to them both their law, and instructors in the worship according
to which they were to live: And these be the Persees, of whose Religion, we
are to treat in the Chapters following.

CHAP. II.
Containing the Opinion of the Persees, touching the Creation of the world, and
the Creatures therein; together with a short mention of the Flood, and the
general division of the following discourse.

NOw after the consideration of these Persees, of whose Religion we are to
speak, we proceed more particularly to the Subject of this book, which is
their worship and Religion; wherein first comes to be rendered their
opinion touching the Creation.

Touching this, the Persees affirm, that before any thing was, there was a
God, that was the maker of all things, who when he did determine to make
himself known by his works in the Creation of the Universe, and the
creatures therein, did divide this great work of the creation, into a sixfold
labor.

First then, they say he made the heavens with their Orbs, a place most
glorious and pleasant, which he adorned with great lights and lesser; as the
Sun, Moon, and Stars; as also he did make the Angels, which according to
their several dignities, he placed in their several Orders one above another,
which place he made a habitation of blessedness, for such as should live
holily in this life, and having thus done, that he might teach us to do great
designs with consideration and advise, he rested five days from the work of
further creation.

Next he made Hell, in the lower parts of the world, from which he banished all
light and comfort; that as heaven might be a place of happiness, to those that
are good and please the Almighty, so this might be a place of horror and
punishment, to such as offend his Majesty; wherein as in heaven, so God had
made several mansions that exceeded each other in dolor, which were
proportioned according to the degrees of offenders; about which time Lucifer,
the chief of Angels, with other of his Order, conspiring against God, to gain
the Soueraignety and command over all, God threw him from the Orb of his
happiness, together with his confederates and accomplices, dambd him to hell
the place that was made for offenders, and turned them from their glorious
shapes, into shapes black, ugly, and deformed; till the times of the world
should be consummate, when al offenders in general should receive their
sentence of punishment and condemnation. So God having accomplished this second
labor, desisted from the work of the creation five days more.

After this, the Almighty begun the third labor of the creation, which was
to make the Earth, which together with the Waters called Seas, make this lower
world like a Globe or Ball, so agreeing together, that the Seas humidity makes
the Earth fruitful, and the Earths soliditie, boundeth the waters in their due
confine; which work thus finished, God suspended the work of the Creation for
five days more and rested.

The fourth labor was to make the Trees, Plants, and Herbs, that so the
earth might bring forth fruits pleasant to the eye, and taste, and for the
comfort of the Creatures living in the earth; this also done, God rested and
gave the former respite to his labors.

The fifth work was to make Creatures fit to abide in the places forementioned,
as Beasts of all sorts, to forage in the green pastures; Fowls to clean the
Air with their nimble Pencions; Fishes to swim in the unknown depths of the
watery Ocean. The world thus replenished with creatures, God resumed his wonted
rest and intermission from this labor.

And lastly undertook his sixth labor, which was the forming of Man and Woman,
to whom the rest of the Creatures were made ministratory and servile, whose
name their Records deliver to be Adamah, and Euah, who being the first two by
whom the multitudes of mankind should be propagated: God as they affirm, did
cause Euah to bring forth two twins every day: for a thousand years
together, death did diminish none of the numbers of mankind by mortality.

But Lucifer thus deposed with the rest of his Order, grew malignant both to
God and man; and as God did good, so he labored to do evil, and to perturbe
his actions, and tempt men to sin and wickedness, laboring to make man
odious to his Maker, as also making himself an enemy to all goodness, which
God yet did not fully revenge, as knowing nothing but evil to be in him and
his confederates.

But the better to prevent his mischief, set certain superuisors over his
creatures to preserve them in that state wherein they were at first created.
Thus to one Hamull was committed the charge of the heavens; to Acrob the
oversight of the Angels, that they relapsed not as Lucifer had done; to Ioder
the oversight of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; to Soreh the care of the Earth;
to Iosah the command of the Waters; Sumbolah had the charge of the beasts of
the field; Daloo of the Fish of the Sea; Rocan of the trees; Cooz of Man and
Woman; and Sertan and Asud to whom God had given strength and power, were made
the guardians of Lucifer, and the evil spirits, to master and conjure them
from mischief to Gods creatures, who yet notwithstanding the watch of Sertan
and Asud, did much mischief in the world by suggestion and temptation to
wickedn^sse; which made God offended with mankind for their wickedness.

The sins of men growing great, they say it appears in their Records, that
there came a Flood or Inundation, which ouerflowed the Earth and the
Inhabitants thereof, some few only God preserved to propagate the generations
of the times following; that so there might not be an utter ruin of mankind.
These generations were dispersed to people the earth again, from which all
Nations have had their descent. And as their Historiographer Mircond reports,
in times not long distant from the Flood, these Persees had a Race of Kings
that were their proper Governors, continued for above a thousand years by the
succession of five and forty Kings. The first whereof was Guiomaras, who as
Mircond reports, was the son of Aram, the son of Sem, the son of Noah, by
the Persees called Adam Asseny, that is, the second Adam; the last, in whom the
Monarchy of this people concluded (as is before showed) was Yesdegerd. The
Abridgement of which Chronicle I would have gathered from them* but that I
found it to agree punctually both i^ matter, and order, with that translation
of Mr. Grimstones, called Estates and Empires, etc in the Chronicle of the
Kings of Persia, to whom I refer those that desire information therein.

What Religion this people had in the Reigns of Guiomaras, Syameck, Ouchang,
Thamull, Iimshed, Zoack, Traydhun, and Manoucher, unto Lorasph, which was their
fifteenth King, is not the scope of this present work, though then they had a
peculiar kind of worship. But the Religion that is the Subject of this
book, is a Religion that was received in the Reign of Gustasph, the son of
Lorasph, their sixteenth King in succession, concerning the worship of Fire:
in the defense of which Religion Gustasph was so zealous, that he made war
against Ariaseph, King of Turron, for that he reprehended him in a letter about
this worship.

Having then limited this Book to his proper Subject, three things in general
are to be treated of in this work. First, to declare who was their Lawgiver,
how their Law was delivered, and came to be received of Gustasph King of
Persia. Next to show the substance of their Law. Lastly, to proceed to other
Ceremonies observed by them, not improper to this present Tract.

CHAP. III.
Concerning Zertoost the Lawgiver of the Persees, his Parents, the Omens that
did forerunne his Nativity, their interpretation, his perils in his Birthplace,
his escape into Persia, and the Accidents happening in his Travails thither.

COncerning the Lawgiver of this people, it is left recorded in their old
writings, that there lived in Chyna, two poor people, of honest fame and
reputation, married together as man and wife, the man was called Espintaman,
the woman Dodoo* these two having long lived in the state of marriage without
issue, the woman earnestly prayed that God would give her a son; her request
was heard, and much time passed not ere she conceived and grew pregnant.

About the time of this woman's Conception, she saw a vision presented to her
in a dream, that filled her with great fear and terror, for she conceived
that the heavens were of a light fire over her head, and that a flaming
redness had ouerspread the firmament, which drove her into a great Agony, when
on a sudden there rushed into her sight four Griffins, of grimme and horrid
appearance, who seazing on her body, did from her womb seem cruelly to tear
out the child she had conceived, to her great fear and despair of life: when
on a sudden stepped in a man, of person goodly, and of warlike Aspect, with a
truncheon on in his hand in rescue of her, who with fury and resolution
vindicated and recovered the Child from the Griffins, that would have torn it
in pieces, and with gentle hand putting the Child into the womb of his Mother,
did by sovereign Art close up the rupture, that was by the Griffins torn and
dilacerate; whose Agony thus mitigated by this worthy Person, the Griffins were
driven away, the fierynesse of the heavens altered, and Dodoo awaked out of her
dream and slumber.

But the Passion she suffered in this vision, fixing the forepast occurrences
more strongly in her phantasme, she related to her husband the particulars of
her dream, whose passages being so remarkable, she conceived it to be an Omen,
either for good or evil touching the child in her womb; whereof being
desirous to be satisfied, she with her husband repaired to one that was a
Southsayer, to be informed touching the significance of this vision. The
Diuiner informed them, that this vision partly foretold good, partly evil,
that should happen to the Child that was in her womb; that by the fire which
gave light was imported some strange Revelation, that should be showed to the
Child, even to the enlightening of the whole world, which in that it did shine
in heaven, the revelation should be touching some heavenly business; by the
Griffins was set out Enemies that should endanger the life of the Mother, but
principally endeavor the destruction of the Child; by the Man was signified
God above, who should repress the might of those enemies, that they should
neither effect their cruelties on the mother or child, but also those dangers
should he driven away, as appeared by the restitution of the heavens to their
wonted estate, and the driving away of the Griffins from the woman: with which
interpretation, Espintaman and Dodoo being highly satisfied, they rerurned home
awayting the hopes that lay folded up in this Child.

Time having his accomplishment, played the Midwife and brought forth this
Child, who was no sooner brought from the dark womb to open light, but
bewrayed the joys he was to bring to the world in open laughter; so the time
coming when he should receive his name, they called him Zertoost, which
imports as much as a friend to the fire, because the Southsayer had
prognosticated such good to him by the fire his mother beheld in the vision.
But these notable things concerning this Child, could not so be concealed, but
that they were bruited to the ears of the King of Chyna, who fearing least he
was borne to deprive him of his Kingdom, or some of his Successors, did
underhand send the Griffins dreamed of, that is; certain Conspirators to
betray Zertoost to destruction; who attempting evil against him, had their
sinnewes shrunk up, and came to untimely ends; so that every one was
discomfitted in attempting evil against one whom God so miraculously
preserved. But about twelve or thirteen years of Age, a great sickness took
him, which the King hearing of, he wrought secretly by a certain obscure
Physician, to administer to him poisoned physic, if by such means he might
rid away his life: but Zertoost sensible of their evil practices toward
him, refused both the intruding Physician, and his banefull medicines, and
weary of the wickedness of the place, solicited his Parents to fly into
Persia, by which means they should avoid those mischiefs, that the King
intended toward them, which would at some time or other, either bereave them
of him, or him of them. They chary of their hopes in him, harkened to his
advise, and did by the rising of the next Sun, betake themselves to escape
away; the various accidents that befell them by the way we omit, only it is
delivered, that meeting with deep Rivers that impedimented his passage, he
congealed them with hard frosts, and so past over, and after long travail
arrived at the King of Persia's Court, in the Reign of Gustasph lately
mentioned, his Parents applying themselves to such courses, as might best
procure the supplies of living; and Zertoost wholly dedicating himself to the
service of God and Religious devotions, as to which from his Infancy he seemed
inclined.

CHAP. IIII.
Showing Zertoosts meditation of the Worlds wickedness, he goes out to
enquire of God some Revelation for the Worlds better government, he meets an
Angel, is rapt to Heaven, his request of the Almighty, his Vision, he
receives a Book from the Lord, and returns back from heaven again.

ZErtoost thus arrived in Persia, and there making his aboade, upon a time went
into the fields, and reuoluing in his mind the worlds wickedness; how one
followed his lusts, another his pride, another his belly and Epicurisme,
another his cruelty, that one sought the depopulation of Countries, another the
oppression of inferiors, and none observed good Government, or had a good
Religion, or worship amongst them; he began to examine the causes of all
this wickedness that thus reigned amongst men below, and found it partly
because Lucifer had labored to corrupt and make naught that which God had made
good; next because men had received no Laws or good Institutions in those
parts, to restrain them from sin, but every man lived according to his own
devise, liberty, and liking, whether it were evil or good.

Hereof Zertoost more seriously considering, desired God to give him some
Revelation for the worlds better Government, and the establishment of Religion
amongst men, and conceiving the public place where he was, not fit for so
excellent Communications, he went out further till he came to the point of a
valley where two Mountains joined together, when suddenly there descended
before him, as his face was bent toward the earth, an Angel, whose wings had
glorious Pennons, and whose face glistered as the beams of the Sun, saying,
Hayle Zertoost beloved of God, what is it thou requirest? Zertoost replied,
that he desired to enter into Gods presence, to receive some divine Laws to
deliver to the Nations, that so they might live in a better observance of his
fear.

So the Angel adminstring something to him, to cleanse and purify his body,
to make it capable of entrance into so pure a place, bade him cloze his eyes,
and he would transume and rappe him up into that place of glory, where he
should come into Gods presence, whither being carried by the Angel, he beheld
such joys as were too mighty for his feeble senses, so that unable to sustain
them, he fell into a Trance, till God gave him power to endure the height of
those pleasures, and being returned to himself, beheld the glory thereof, and
heard the Almighty speaking as one encompassed with flames of fire, revealing
to him the secret works of the Creation, in what order he made his Creatures,
and revealed to him things to come, showing him that he should receive Laws
for the worlds better Government, and the establishment of Religion, with many
other things not fit to be uttered, neither by Zertoost ever published.

Then Zertoost ready and willing to publish to all people, what might be
needful to bring them to Gods better worship, did desire of God that he
might live so long as the world should endure, a publisher of that Religion
which the Lord had promised to divulg^ by him, till he should make all Nations
believe the Contents of that Book. But the Lord answered, that if he should
live never so long, Lucifer would do more harm, then ever he should do good:
but if upon better consideration he would desire to live so long, his request
should be granted.

So the Lord presented to Zertoost in a Vision, the state of all things past,
present, and to come, where he saw the troubles, sicknesses, and afflictions of
Man* more particularly the state of the Persian Monarchy, how Ouchang was
slain by a stone; how Thamull dyed of a pestilence; how Iimshed was slain by
one of his own Captains; how men followed diverse Religions, and most their
own ways, ouerlabouring themselves in the works of vanity: over and above
God presented to his eyes the seven Ages, or times, of the Persian Monarchy;
the first was the golden Age, that was in the days of Guiomaras; the second
the silver Age, that was in the days of Fraydhun; the third the brazen Age, in
the time of Kaykobad, the fourth the tynne Age, in the time of Lorasph; the
fifth the leaden Age, in the time of Bahaman; the sixth the steel Age, in the
days of Darab Segner; the seventh the iron Age, in the reign of Yesdegerd.
So Zertoost perceiving time to render every thing worse and worse, desired to
live no longer then till he should discharge the message about which the Lord
should send him, and that then he might be translated to that same place of
glory again: So God reduced him to his own proper sense* from which he was
ravished to godlike speculations.

Being thus as he was before, of humane capacity, after he had remained in
heaven many days, the Lord delivered to him the Book before mentioned,
containing in it the form of good government, and the Laws of Religion, that
the Persians should follow, conferring likewise on Zertoost the heavenly fire,
and other gifts that were never bestowed upon any man before or since. So
Zertoost taking the heavenly fire into his right hand, and the book that God
gave him in his left, he was delivered to the conduct of the Angel that
brought him thither, who was called Bahaman Vmshauspan, who taking up Zertoost,
did cleave the Air with his golden wings, till he had surrendered him to the
place where he found him, and so left him.

CHAP. V.
Showing what happened to Zertoost, after the Angel left him, the devil
meets him and reuileth him, he comes to Gustasphs Court, the joy of his
Parents for his return, the infamy Gustasphs Churchman seeks to put upon
him, the Miracles whereby Zertoost does vindicate his fame, Gustasphs four
demands, and his four grants.

ZErtoost was no sooner left by his heavenly Guardian, but Lucifer an enemy to
all goodness met him, and called him a seeker after novelties and delu^^ons, and
told him that God did not love him in such manner as he believed, otherwise he
would have kept him in heaven still, and not have sent him away; or else he
would have granted him to live to the end of the world, when he desired it:
that that book which he had was stuffed with falsehoods; that he should come to
trouble, danger and shame about the publishing of it; as also that he should
be laughed at for his Fire, as being a creature of destruction, and a consumer
of the works of man, and that there was no need thereof in hot climates, but
that if he would depend on him, he could give him a Book of better
instructions, and present to him Objects of better delight, could give him long
life, and honor, and power to work great miracles; that if he did not believe
him, he was a senseless man, and deprived of his wits by his late Visions.

But Zertoost having placed his confidence better, told Lucifer that having
lost that glory that his eyes beheld, he could not speak well of his Maker,
nor be pleased with that great favor God had shown him; but envying at it,
sought not only to disanull his, but every man's happiness, charged Lucifer by
the great name of his Creator, that put him into the dark dungeon of hell,
under the custody of Sertan and Asud, and by the truth of that book, by which
he should in the end of the world be arraigned and condemned; and by that fire
in his right hand, by which he should be burned and tortured, to avoid his
presence as a black mouthed defamer of God and goodness; at which Lucifer
vanished with great horror and fear from him.

Lucifer thus coniured from Zertoosts presence, he proceeded on his way to the
City, where Gustasph had his residence, and so to the place where his Parents
had their abode, who with no small sorrow had bewailed the absence of their
son, and with vain inquest had sought him but could not find him, in whom
their hopes were reposited: who now to their strange joy and admiration, told
them of his Enthousiasmes and raptures, wherein he had received that book, and
heavenly fire, that was so long before prognosticated by his mothers Vision,
and so truly interpreted by the Augur and Southsayer. His parents blessed him,
and became instructed in this new Religion how to worship, as God had
revealed to Zertoost.

These things could not be long hid, for the joys of mothers are not silent,
but in every ear did Dodo^ power forth her Visions in her sons conception,
and the Southsayers interpretation of them, how true the particulars had fallen
out; the late raptures her son Zertoost had in heaven, his Revelations there,
whereof a book written by Gods own hand, and the strange fire he brought
from thence were lively evidences. These rumors being strange to all ears,
and not testified by hearesay, but confirmed by one whose eyes had beheld the
things auerred, got passage, and were carried to the ears of Gustasph then
King of Persia, who therefore sent for Zertoost, of whom he inquired the
further truth of this matter, who affirmed the same to be such as it was
reported, that God had delivered him a book concerning his worship, and
other secret knowledge inducing the worship of fire, whereof he gave some
touches in particular to the King: the King admiring these things, and yet so
certainly informed in the Circumstances, grew wavering in his former
worship, and Religion, and somewhat inclined to Zertoost, so that he diverse
times sent for him, and had much conference with him.

Gustasphs Churchman then perceiving his Sovereign to harken to this new
Religion, wherein he had no knowledge, and that by degrees he lost that grace
he had wontedly from him, did seek to put some infamy on Zertoost, by which
the King might become alienated from him, and that new sprung Religion, wherein
he had no knowledge; and that by degrees began as he thought to sincke too fast
into the breast of the King; for this cause he suborned the Porter that kept
the door of Zertoosts house, which was a Persian, to convey under the bed of
Zertoost the bones of dead men, and the dead carkeyses of dogs, a creature
loathsome to the Persians, of which whilst Zertoost was utterly ignorant, the
Kings Churchman put himself into the presence of Gustasph, with some other of
his Nobles that did not favor Zertoosts innovation, saying, Oh King, what new
Religion is this to which thou stand so much inclined, or what is this new
and strange Lawgiuer Zertoost, whom thou so fauourest? who the other day came
in poor manner into this land, as a fugitive from his native Country, who as
I hear also, was hateful to his Prince and the King of his People, that he
should find such grace in bringing up a new Religion, false and fictious, and
not of that Authority it is pretended to be, being as I am also informed a man
of unclean and beastly living, in whose house at this time, and under whose
bed whereon he hourly lies, thou shall find the bones of humane bodies, the
carkeyses and limbs of dead doges, and filthy Caryon, an abomination to the
eyes of any clean person: continue thou then Oh King in the Law of thy
Fathers, and listen not to this Nouelist; this speech being seconded with some
of the great ones, and the act reported being so odious and abominable,
Gustasph commanded Zertoosts habitation to be searched, and it being (as the
Churchman of Gustasph had reported) effected by the wicked confederacy of
Gustasphs Churchman and Zertoosts servants, Zertoost was cast into prison,
despised and hated of all people.

It happened in this time of Zertoosts imprisonment, that Gustasph had a horse
which he much prized that fell very sick, and there was not any found that
knew his disease, or how to cure him; this being told to the Iaylor, that had
Zertoost in custody, and the King publishing great rewards to him that could
restore him: Zertoost came to the knowledge of it, who told the Keeper, that if
the King pleased, he would cure the horse, or else be liable to the Kings
displeasure; the Keeper so favored Zertoost, that he made known his words to
the King; so Gustasph sent for Zertoost, who according to his promise did
restore the beast, which service was so acceptable to Gustasph, that he was
had into new estimation again, and maintaining his innocence touching that
same blot that was laid upon him, the King gave him liberty, and great rewards,
and by often conferences became nearly in respect with the King, so that a way
was again affoorded to publish this Religion of Zertoosts, who working strange
miracles amongst them, gained credence to be a man come from God.

This book of Zertoosts gaining every day a better opinion then other, and his
great works really demonstrated, showing him to be a man of more divine
endowments, then was found in ordinary men: upon a time the King sent for him,
and told him that if he would grant him four demands, which he would
propound to him, he would believe his Law, and be ever a Professor of that
Religion contained in the book he brought with him. Zertoost then bade him
propose his demands, and if they were such as were reasonable, they should be
granted. The King then proposed them. The first whereof was, that he might
ascend to heaven and descend from thence when he list. The second was, that he
might know what God would do at present and in time to come. The third was,
that he might never dye. The fourth was, that no instrument whatsoever, might
have the power to wound him or hurt him.

Zertoost thus replied, that these were difficult and high demands, neither did
so great power rest in him as to grant them, neither was it meet that any one
man should have them all, for that therein he should rather seem to be a God
then man; yet difficult though they were, that the book of Laws he had
brought, might be known to proceed from God, he would procure that these
requests might be granted to seueral^ persons, but not all to one. So the
first which was to ascend to heaven and descend thence at pleasure, was
obtained for Gustasph, who they say had this power granted him. The second
which was to know what would fall out at present or hereafter, was granted to
the Kings Churchman, that so he might direct the King in his designs, what
should be undertaken, what should be left undone. The third which was to live
for ever, was granted to Gustasphs eldest son, called Pischiton, who yet
lives (as they say) if we will believe them, at a place in Persia, called
Demawando Cohoo, in a high mountain with a Guard consisting of thirty men, to
which place all living creatures else are forbidden to approach, least they
should live for ever, as they do that abide there, who never suffer mortality.
The last, which was never to be wounded with Instrument or weapon, was granted
to the youngest son of Gustasph, called Espandiar, who they say by Zertoosts
prayers, was made invulnerable, that he might put himself into the danger of
Battle, without fear or hazard.

So Gustasph and the other three mentioned, proving the power of these several
gifts, they all determined to live according to the Precepts in Zertoosts
book: wherein that they might be informed, Zertoost unfolded to them the
Contents thereof. The matter or Subject of which book, of what nature it was,
shall be declared in the Chapter following.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein is showed the maine Contents of the Book, delivered to Zertoost, and
by him published to the Persians or Persees.

Having showed who Zertoost was, that was the Lawgiuer of these Persees, in
what manner according to their Assertion he received the book by strange
Revelation, with what wonders as they affirm he wrought Assent thereunto, and
belief thereon, by Gustasph and his Nobles. After this it will perhaps be
desired to know, what this book contained? that this Sect deliver to be
received after so wondrous a manner, which will be the drift of that which
follows.

They affirm then that this book contained in it three several Tracts. The
first whereof treated of that which we call Judicial Astrology, foretelling
the events of things to come, by judgment of the Stars, which by them is
called Astoodeger.

The second did treat concerning Physic or the natural knowledge of things
with their causes, and the cu^es of the diseases incident to man.

The third was called Zertoost, because Zertoost was the bringer thereof, and
this contained their Law and matters that concerned Religion, which books
according as their matter was diverse, so they were delivered to men of several
studies and learning.

The first of these books called Astoodeger, which treated of Judicial
Astrology, was committed to their Iesopps, or wise men, which are known by
the name of Magies.

The second which treated of Physic, was given to their Physicians to
instruct them in that Science.

The third which contained their Law, and matters of Religion called Zertoost,
was delivered to their Darooes or Churchmen, that they might know how to
worship God themselves, and also instruct others in the knowledge of the same
worship; of such three Tracts did this book or volume consist.

These Tracts were likewise divided into certain Chapters, whereof seven were
contained in the Wisemans or Iesopps book; seven in the Physicians book; and
seven in the Darooes or Churchmans book.

But because that which was given to the Augur or Southsayer, as also that
which was given to the Physician, contains nothing concerning the Religion to
be declared, the uses of the former whereof are unlawful, and the knowledge of
the latter in these experient times seems unnecessary, we make addressment to
the third Tract, called Zertoost, which lays down their Law or Religion, as
most appertinent to our present drift, in that which follows.

CHAP. VII.
Containing the particulars of the Book of their Law, as they are apportioned
first to the Behedin or Layman. Secondly, to the Herbood, which is the ordinary
Churchman: And lastly, to the Distoore, which is their Archbishop.

THe common division of men being of such as are of the Layetie, or such as are
of the Clergy; and those of the Clergy being either such as are ordinary, or
such as are extraordinary; it pleased God say the Persees, to apportion and
divide his Law amongst these three sorts of men.

First, then unto the Layman or Behedin, God gave five Commandments, who being
by secular occasions, drawn from the services of Religion, had therefore a
less difficult iniunction laid upon him.

First, to have shame ever with them, as a remedy against all sin, for a man
would never oppress his inferiors, if he had any shame, a man woald never
steal if he had any shame, a man would never bear false witness if he had any
shame, a man would never be overcome with drink if he had any shame; but
because this is laid aside, men are ready to committ any of these, and
therefore the Behedin or Layman must think of shame.

Secondly, to have fear always present with them, and that every time the eye
twinckled or Closed his leddes together, they should stand in fear at those
times of their prayers, least they should not go to Heaven, the thought of
which should make them fear to committ sin, for that God sees what manner of
ones they are, that look up toward him.

Thirdly, that whenever they are to do any thing, to think whether the thing
be good or badd that they go about, whether commanded or forbidden in the
Zundavastaw, if prohibited they must not do it; if allowed by the book of
Religion, they may embrace and prosecute the same.

Fourthly, that whosoever of Gods Creatures they should first behold in the
morning, it should be a Monitour to put them in mind of their thankesgiuings
to God, that had given such good things for men's use and service.

Fifthly that whenever they pray by day, they should turn their faces
toward the Sun, and whenever they prayed by night, they should inclyne
toward the Moon, for that they are the two great lights of heaven, and Gods
two witnesses: most contrary to Lucipher, who loves darkness more then light.

These be the five Precepts enjoined to the Layman or Behedin; now follow
those that are to be observed by the ordinary or common Churchman, called
their Daroo or ^erbood who as his place required a greater holiness then the
Laymans, so his charge was greater, for not only is he by the book of their
Law enjoined to keep the Behedins precepts, without violation, but also to
fulfill these eleven Precepts more, as particular to himself.

First, to know in what manner to pray to God, observing the rites prescribed
in the Zundauastaw, for God is best pleased with that form of prayer, that he
has given in his own book.

The second, to keep his eyes from coveting or desiring any thing that is
another, for God has given every man what he thinks meet for him; and to
desire that which is another, is not only to dislike of Gods disposure of his
own gifts, but to challenge to himself that which God has denied him, and
whereof he sees him unworthy.

The third, to have a care ever to speak the truth, for all truth comes from
God, and as it is most communicated to men of God, so they should most show it
in their words and Actions: but Lucifer is the Father of falsehood, and
whosoever uses it, it may be a sign that the evil spirit is powerful with
such a one, the Herbood therefore shall show himself to be contrary to him,
by his speaking the truth, for all men must give credit to his words.

The fourth, to be known only in his own busynes, and not to enquire after
the things of the world, it belonging only to him to teach others what God
would have them do. Therefore the Behedin or Layman shall see that he want
nothing needful, but shall afford it him, and he shall seek nothing
superfluous.

The fifth, to learn the Zundauastaw by heart, that he may be ready to teach
it to the Behedin or Layman, wheresoever he meets him, for from him must the
people fetch their knowledge concerning God

The sixth, to keep himself pure and vndefil^d from things polluting, as from
the Carkeyses of the dead, or touching meats unclean, for God is pure, whose
servant he is, and it is expected he should be such, abhorring the sight of
all things that are foul and loathsome, and stopping the passages of his
breath, least their corrupted air should enter into him to defile him.

The seventh, to forgive all Jniuries, showing himself the pattern of
meekenes, that he may be thought one that comes from God, for we offend God
every day, yet he gives us things that are good, when we deserve that he
should recompense evil for evil.

The eighth, to teach the common people to pray according to the directions in
the book of their Law, to go and pray with them for any good they desire to
obtain, and when they come to the place of worshipping, to join in common
prayer together.

Ninth, to give lycense for marriage, and to join the man and woman together,
and that no Parents match their Children, without the consent and approbation
of the Herbood.

The tenth, to spend the greatest part of their time in the Temple, that he may
be ready for all that come to him, for to that God has appointed him, and to
that he must bind himself.

The eleauenth and last Jnjunction is upon pain of damnation, to believe no
other Law then that which was brought by Zertoost, to add nothing to it, to
take nothing from it, for therefore was it so miraculously delivered, and such
gifts given to Zertoost, that it might be believed to come from God.

These are the Precepts that are to be observed by the Herbood or ordinary
Church man, contained in the book of their Law. Now their Distoore or high
Priest, whereof they have never but one, to which all the Herboods pay their
observance, as he is above the rest in dignity, so he is enjoined to be above
the rest in sanctity; his Injunctions therefore are transcending, for not only
is he bound by their Zunda^astaw or book of Religion, to observe all that is
commanded the Behedin or Layman, in his five Precepts, and all that is
commanded the Herbood, in his eleauen Pr^cepts, but also to fulfill thirteen
Precepts more as peculiar to himself.

The first is that he must never touch any of a strange Cast or Sect, of what
Religion soever, nor any Layman of his own Religion, but he must wash
himself, because God has made him especially holy to himself, for which
cause he must not approach to God in prayer, with the touch of others
uncleanness.

The second is, that he must do every thing that belongs to himself with
his own hand, both to witness his better humility, as also the better to
preserve his purity, viz. to set the herbs in his own Garden, to sow the
grain of his own field, to dress the meat that he eats, unless he have
his wife to administer to him in that, which is not ever usual.

The third is, that he take the tithe or tenth of all things from the Behedin,
as the Lords dues, and employ it to such uses as he thinks meet, since the
Lord has made him as his Almoner, and dispenser of Charity.

The fourth is, that as he must use no Pomp or superfluity, so of that great
Reuennue that comes yearly to him, he must leave nothing ouer-plus at the
years end, that must not be bestowed in good uses, either in Charitable
Contributions to the poor; or in building of the Temples of God.

The fifth, that his house be near adjoining to the Church, where he must
keep and make his abiding, continuing in Prayer and abstinence, not
ostentating himself to public view, but living recluse and retired from the
world, as a man wholly dedicate to God.

The sixth, that he must bind himself to greater purity then others, both in
his frequent washings, and also in his diet, in feeding on meats accoumpted
more pure by the Law, as also that he live sequestered from his wife in time of
her pollutions.

The seventh is, that whereas the Herbood is enjoined only to be known in the
Law, or book called Zertoost, that the Distoore be acquainted with all the
learning contained in the Zundanastaw, both in that part which treats of
judicial Astrology, committed to the Iesopp or wise man, as also in that
which concerns the Physician, and most especially in the book of the Law,
for it is expected that he should inform all men, and none should be found
like him therein, before he be admitted to be high Priest.

The eight that he must never eat or drink excessiuely, for these are
enemies to the high speculations required in a high Priest.

The Ninth that he stand in fear of no body but God, nor fear any thing but
sin, for he is so to trust in God, that he must not fear what Lucipher can
do unto him.

The tenth that God has given him power over all men in matters of the soul,
that therefore when any man sins he may tell him of it, be he never so
great, and every man is to obey him, as one that speaks not in his own
cause, but Gods.

The eleauenth that according to the wisdom that God has given him, he be
able to discern in what manner God comes to reveal himself, in what manner
Lucipher, and how to descide between falsehood and truth.

The Twelfth that when God manifests him self to him in visions of the
Night, and shows him in what manner he made his works in the Creation, he
should not reveal Gods secretts, but keeping them to himself, should admire
his power, for God does not publish himself to any as he does to his Distoore
or high Priest.

The thirteenth that he keep an ever living fire, that never may go out,
which being kindled by that Fire that Zertoost brought from heaven, may endure
for all ages, till fire shall come to destroy all the world, and that he say
his prayers over it, according as is enordered by the book of the Law.

This is a Summary of those Precepts contained in the Book of their law, that
Zertoost by them is affirmed to bring from heaven, and that Religion which
Gustasph with his followers embraced, persuaded by the forementioned Miracles
by Zertoost wrought amongst them.

CHAP. VIII.
Declaring other Ceremonies amongst these Persees, in their Feasts, and Fasts,
in their Idolatrous worship of Fire, Baptismes, Marriages, and Burials.

THe third particular concluding this Tract, consists in the display of
certain Rites and Ceremonies, observed by this Sect, differencing them from
others in the Contents above mentioned, the particulars follow in their order.

First then, touching their liberty in meats and drinks, and their customs
observed in their Feast and Fasts: Their Law allows them great liberty in
meats and drinks, but because they will not give offense to the Banians
amongst whom they live, nor displease the Moors under whose government they
are, they especially abstain from eating of Kine and Hogs-flesh, meats
prohibited by the Laws of the two former. It is obserueable also amongst them,
that they eat alone, as a means for greater purity and cleanness, for they
suppose they participate of another uncleanness by eating with him: they
likewise drink every one in several cups, proper and peculiar to their
own uses, for the same cause, and if any chance to drink in another man's
cup, they wash it three times, and abstain from the use thereof for a
certain season after.

Secondly, for their Festiualls enjoined by their Laws, they observe six in
the year, and these feasts are celebrated for five days together, each of
them according to the six works of the Creation. The first is called
Meduserum, which is upon the fifteenth of their Month called Fere, which is
our February, for joy that the Lord made the Heavens to be a place of glory,
to entertain such as sear hm. The Second is called Petusahan, which is upon
their month Sheruar, our April, the six and twentieth, for that the Lord had
made Hell, to be a place for the Devil and his Angels. That feast therefore
is a memorial to put them in mind that they take heed of that evil, that may
bring them thither. The third is Yatrum, celebrated upon the six and twentieth
of their Month Mahar, which is our May, in memory that the Lord made the Earth
and Seas, to bring forth Creatures for the use of man. The fourth is Medearum,
kept upon the sixteenth of their Month Deh, which is our August, in memory that
God made the plants and Trees, by whose fruits man is sustained and nourished.
The fifth is Homespetamadum, upon the Month Spindamud, which is our October,
beginning on the thirtyeth day, in remembrance that God made the Beasts, fish,
and foul, Creatures ordained for the sustenance of Man. The sixth is called
Medusan, falling in the eleauenth of their Month Ardebest which is December,
for joy that then the Lord made Man and Woman, from whence all mankind had
their Original.

In the third place, touching their fasts. After every one of their feasts,
they observe a five days Abstinence, eating but one meal a day, in memory
that the Lord after every one of these labors, rested five days, and
whenever they eat of any foul or flesh, they carry some part of it to the
Eggaree or Temple, as an offering to appease God, that for the Sustenance of
man they are forced to take away the life of his Creatures, and these are the
rites most notable touching their meats and drinks.

Now in the second place for their worship of fire, because this is an
Idolatry most notably distinguishing their worshipp from the worshipp of other
Sects. First for the ground of this their worship of fire, it is fetched from
their Lawgiuer Zertoost, who as they affirm, being rapt up to heaven, had fire
delivered unto him from God, and brought it thence together with the Book of
their Law, as the worship by them to be embraced, and by their law enjoined:
moreover they affirm that Zertoost being in the forementioned rapture in the
place of Glory, did not see God, but heard him speaking to him out of the fire,
and when the fire was delivered, received it as the virtue of God, and his
first borne of excellency, and for these causes to be worshipped and
reverenced.

Next for the nature or quality of this fire. The first fire thus worshipped
and idolized, was that Zertoost brought from heaven with him, which was a
living fire, that nothing could extinguish; but whether this have certainly bin
preserved in the succession of time, to be communicable to all, is unknown,
upon defect hereof, they are licenced to compose a fire of diverse mixtures, to
be kept living from time to time, to which they are to perform their enjoined
worship: such is that which i^ idolized in India, where this Sect remains in
a place called Nuncery, that has not been extinguished for the space of two
hundred years, as they affirm. First then this fire consists of that fire,
that is made by the sparks flying from the flint, by the smiting of a steel.
Secondly of that fire that is made by the rubbing of two pieces of wood
together, a custom much used amongst the heathens of ruder manners, by which
they kindle their fires in all places where they need. Thirdly, of such fire
as is occasioned by lightning falling on some tree or thing accendible.
Fourthly of such fire as is called wildfire, which flying from place to place
and lighting on matter combustible, consumes it. Fifthly of artificial fire,
made by Coals or wood, most ordinary in use. Sixthly of the fire wherewith the
Banians use to burn the bodies of their dead. Seauenthly of the fire that is
made by burning Glasses and the Beams of the Sun; of all these Ingrediences
they compose their idolatrous fire, which they call their Antisbeheraun or
Religious fire.

Lastly for their Ceremony or rite bestowed about this fire so variously
composed, and by their Distoore or high priest so tended, that it may not
extinguish: whenever the Persees assemble themselves together to this
worshipp, the Distoore or in his absence the Herbood, together with the
Assembly, encompasse the fire about, and standing about eleauen or twelve foot
distant therefrom; (for they hold it so holy that they fear to approach too
near) the Distoore or Herbood utters this speech: That forasmuch as fire was
delivered to Zertoost their Lawgiuer from God Almighty, who pronounced it to
be his virtue and his excellency, and that there was a law delivered for the
worship of this fire, confirmed by so many Miracles, that therefore they
should hold it holy, reverence and worship it as a Part of God, who is of the
same substance, and that they should love all things, that resemble it, or were
like unto it, as the Sun and Moon which proceeded from it, and are Gods two
witnesses against them, if they should neglect that Religion and worship so
enjoined: as also to pray to God that he would forgive them, if in the
ordinary uses of this Element, so serviceable to man's need, they should either
spill water, which might in some manner quench it, or spitt in it unawares, or
put such fuel to it to keep it burning, as was impure and unworthy of that
holiness, that was in that Element, or whatsoever abuses else they should do, as
they used it in the necessary services of their life. And this is the sum of
their worship touching the Fire.

In the third place for their Baptism or naming of Children, when they enter
them into the Church, this is their form. As soon as ever the Child is borne,
the Daroo or Churchman is sent for to the parties house, who observing the
punctual time of his Birth calculateth his Nativity; after that, consulting
about the name of the Child, at last the Parents and friends approving the same
name that the Churchman gives, the Mother in the presence of them all gives
the name to the Child, there being no Ceremony but the naming of the Infant as
then used. After this the kindred of the Child together with the Infant
accompany the Church man to the Eggaree or Temple, where he takes fair water,
and putting it into the Bark or rynd of a tree called Holme, which grows at
Yesd in Persia, and is admired in this one particular as they affirm, for that
the Sunn of heaven gives it no shadow: he thence powers the water into the
Infant, uttering this Prayer that God would cleanse it from the uncleanness of
his Father, and the menstruous pollutions of his Mother, which done, it
departs. About the seventh year of the Child's Age, when the same is more
capable of his entrance into their Church, he is led thither by his Parents,
to have a further confirmation, where he is taught by the Church man to say
some Prayers, and to be instructed in Religion: wherein when he is prompt, he
utters his prayers over the fire, having a Cloth fastened about his head, and
over his mouth and nostrills, according to their general custom in that
worship, least the breath yssuing out of their sinful Bodies, should taint
that holy fire. Then after Prayers be concluded, the Dar^^ gives him water to
drink, and a Pomegranate leaf to chewe in his mouth, to cleanse him from
inward uncleanness; so washing his body in a Tanck with clean water, and
putting on him a linen Cassock which he wears next his skin, called
Shuddero, which descends to his waste, as also a girdle of Cammells hair
called Cushee, which he ever wears about him, and is wouen like Inckle by
the preachers own hand, he utters these Prayers over him: That God would
make him a true follower of the Religion of the Persees all the days of his
life, of which those garments are the Badge or sign, that he might never
believe in any law, but that which was brought by Zertoost, that he might
continue a worshipper of their fire, that he might eat of no man's meat, nor
drink of any man's cup, but in all things might observe the Rites and customs
of the Persees. All which transacted, he is held a confirmed Persee, and one
of their own Sect.

Fourthly, touching their Marriage and the rites in them observed. They have a
fiuefold kind of Marriage distinguished by several names. The first they call
Shausan, which is the Marriage of a man's son and a man's daughter together in
the time of their youth, where the Parents agree without the knowledge of the
Children; to this they attribute much, and suppose them to go to Heaven that
are married in this state. The second is called Chockerson, when the party once
widowed, is married again. The third Codesherah^san when a woman enquireth out
a husband for herself, according to her own free choice. The fourth Ecksan,
when a young man or Maid dying before they be married, then they have a
Custom to procure some man's son or daughter to be matched to the party
deceased, attributing the state of Marriage to be a means to bring people to
happiness eternal in another world. Those that commonly use this, are the
richer sort, who by a price hyre the parties to such a Contract with a sum of
money. The fifth is called Ceterson, when the father having no Son, a daughter
of his own having Sons, he adopteth some of them, to be his, and maryeth
them as if they were his own Children, for they account that Man unhappy that
has not a Male or Female, a Son or a daughter to join in the state of
Marriage.

Now for the Rite or Ceremony observed in their Marryages, it is this; the
parties being agreed and met together for the purpose of Contracting, about
the time of Midnight, the Parties to be married are set upon a bed together
(for they are not married in their Churches:) opposite to the parties to be
married, stand two Churchmen, the one in the behalf of the man, the other in
behalf of the woman, with the kindred of each by the Herbood or Church man to
either deputed; holding ryce in their hands, an Emblem of that fruitfulness,
they wish to them in their generations. Then the Churchman that stands in the
man's behalf moves the question to the woman, laying his forefinger on her
forehead, saying, Will you have this man to be your wedded husband? who giving
consent, the Churchman deputed in the Woman's behalf, laying his forefinger on
the Man's forehead, moves a like question, of which receuing answer they join
their hands together: the man making a promise to her, that he will give her
so many Dinaes of gold, which is a piece worth thirty shillings, to bind her
to him, implying by that promise to maintain her with all things necessary;
the woman again promises that all she has is his: so the Herboods or
Churchmen scattering the Ryce upon them, prays God to make them fruitful and
send them many sons and daughters, that may multiply as the seed in the
Ears of harvest, that they may live in unity of mind, and many years
together in the state of wedlock. Thus the Ceremony being done, the Woman's
Parents give the Dowry, for the Men give none, and the Marriage feast is
celebrated for 8. days after, when such time is expired, they are all
dismissed. And this is all that may be obseruable about their Marriages or
Matrimonial Ceremony.

In the last place for the Burial of their dead, two things are notable. First
the place of their Burial. Secondly, the Ceremony used therein, differing
them from others. First for the place of their Burial, they have two places or
Tombs built of a round form, a pretty height from the ground, sufficiently
capacious and large; within they are paued with stone, in a sheluing manner; in
the midst of them a hollow pit, to receive the bones consumed and wasted;
about by the walls are the shrouded and sheeted Carkeyses laid, both of men and
Women, exposed to the open aer. These two Tombs are somewhat distant one from
the other, the one is for all those that are of commendable life, and
conversation, but the other is for such as are notorious for some vice, and of
public defame in the world for some evil, by which they are branded.
Touching the Ceremony observed in the Burialls of their dead, whenever any of
them are sick unto death, the Herbood or Churchman is sent for, who prays in
the Ear of the sick Man in this manner, Oh Lord thou have commanded that we
should not offend, this man has offended: That we should do good: this Man
has done evil: That we should worship thee, this man man has neglected:
Lord forgive him all his offenses, all his evils, all his neglects. When he
is dead the Churchman comes not near him by ten foot, but appoints who
shall be the Nacesselars or Bearers, they then carry him on an Iron Biere, for
the law forbids that the body of the dead should touch wood, because it is
a fuel to the fire they account most holy; and those that accompany the dead
are interdicted all speech, because the grave or place of the dead is a place
of rest and silence. Being come to the place of Burial, the Nacesselars or
Bearers lay the body in, and the Churchman standing remoate from the place,
utters the words of Burial in this Manner. This our Brother whilst he lived
consisted of the four Elements, now he is dead let each take his own, earth
to earth, aer to aer, water to water, and fire to fire. This done, they pray to
Sertan and Asud to whom was given the Charge over Lucipher and the evil
Spirits, that they would keep the Devils from their deceased Brother, when
he should repair to their holy fire, to purge himself: for they suppose the
soul to be vagrant on Earth for three days after his decease, in which time
Lucipher molesteth it: for security from which molestation it flies to their
holy fire, seeking preservation there: which time concluded it receives
Justice or reward, hell or heaven. Upon this Opinion they all (as their busynes
will permit) assemble themselves for three days together, and offer up their
prayers at morning, Noone and evening, that God would be pleased to be
merciful to the soul departed, and remit the sins that the party committed
in his lifetime. After the three days are expired, and that they think the
definitive sentence is past what shall become of him, they on the fourth day
make a Festival, and conclude their mourning.

The Authors conclusion to the Reader.
SVch in sum (worthy Reader) is the Religion which this Sect of the Persees
profess, I leave it to the censure of them that read, what to think of it.
This is the curiosity of superstition, to bring in Innouations into Religious
worship, rather making devises of their own brain, that they may be
singular, then following the example of the best in a solid profession. What
seem these Persees to be like in their religious fire? but those same Gnats,
that admiring the flame of fire, surround it so long, till they prove ingeniosi
insuam ruinam, ingenious in their own destruction. And if the Papists would
hence gather ground for Purgatory, and prayers for the dead, and many other
superstitions by them used, to be found in these two Sects, we can allow them
without any shame to our Profession, to gather the weeds of superstition out
of the Gardens of the Gentile Idolaters. But the Catholic Christian indeed,
will make these Errors as a Sea mark to keep his faith from shipwreck. To
such I commend this transmarine collection, to beget in good Christians the
greater detestation of these Heresies, and the more abundant thanksgiving for
our Calling, according to the advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.17. This I say,
and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk,
in the vanity of their mind, having their understandings darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart: but rather that we may pray that God would
establish us in his truth, his Word is that Truth.

FJNJS.

