LETTERS PATENTS MADE BY THE FRENCH KING, DECLARING his intent touching those
of the Reformed Religion.

Published in Roane in the Court of Parliament the seventh day of June, An.
1621.

With two Letters of the Assembly at Rochell unto the Duke de Lesdiguieres.

PRINTED MDCXXI.

Letters Pattents made by the French King, declaring his intent touching those
of the reformed Religion. Published in Roane in the Court of Parliament the 7
day of June, An. 1621.
THe Kings Letters Patents dated in Niort the 27 day of May last past, touching
the protection of his subjects professing the reformed Religion, that shall
continue in obedience and subjection unto his Edicts, and observing those
points that are therein contained, against the inhabitants and others, of what
state and condition soever they be, dwelling, retiring, or withdrawn for
refuge in the towns of Rochell and S. John d'Angely, and all others that
favor them, directly or indirectly, as the said Letters Pattents more at large
declare, being iudicially read, published and heard, by the Kings Attorney
general in his conclusions. The said Court has ordained and ordains, that
upon the back side of the said Letters pattents shall be set read, published,
registered and heard, at the request of the Kings Attorney General, and order
taken that the copies of the same in print shall be sent not only to the
general Courts, but also to every particular Bailiwicks and Vice-counties of
resort, there also to be read, published and registered in every place of
jurisdiction, and kept and observed according to the form and tenor thereof,
enioyning all Judges and substitutes of the said Attorney General, every one
in particular to put their helping hands for and unto the observation, and
punishment of the contradictors thereof, upon pain to answer the same
personally; and to advertise the said Court what diligence they have used
therein, as well touching the publication, as the execution of the said Letters
pattents within the space of a month next ensuing, according to the order
therein taken by this Court this present day. The contents of the said Letters
pattents being as follows. LOVIS by the grace of God King of France and
Navarre, To all men whom these presents shall come to be seen or read,
greeting. The desire that we have always had to preserve public peace and
tranquillity among our subjects, and to impeach those evils and desolations
which leuying of arms ordinarily brings with it, as also those oppressions
and calamities that our people thereby receive, has moved us diverse months
together patiently to tolerate and suffer the excesses, disobediences and
rebellions that have bin committed in diverse Towns of our Realm by some of
our subjects making profession of the reformed Religion, specially in Rochell,
Montaban and others, wherein there has bin, and as yet are holden unlawful
assemblies, which are rather employed to form and erect popular estates and
commonwealths, then to contain themselves within the limits of that obedience
unto us whereunto they are naturally bound: having caused a Seal to be graven,
and under the same, and the hands of the principal persons of the said
assemblies, they have made diverse ordinances, decrees, messages, and
commissions, containing power unto particular assemblies, to command in
provinces and towns, to levy the moneys of our farms and receipts, to levy
men, arms and money, to melt and cast cannons, to send messages to foreign
realms and provinces, and other such like actions, which sufficiently make an
appearance of a greater rebellion and open rising against our authority;
whereof being informed and truly certified in the month of April last; and
knowing that they embolden themselves to enter into these disorders because of
the little surety that they say they have of their persons and liberty of
their consciences, by our declaration made and bearing date the 24. of the said
month of April, desiring to give them all assurances of our good inclinations
toward those that shall continue in their duties, and receiving them into our
particular protection and sauegard: we declared and made known, that the
voyage which we pretended to make into those quarters, was (by our approaching
to those places where the said insolences are committed) there to establish
and make our authority to appear; to the confusion of those that shall be
found culpable, rather then to use any other greater rigor; nor yet to show
that power which God has given unto us for the punishment of such insolences:
but they are so far from looking into their own imperfections, and reducing
themselves unto that whereunto they are obliged, that the greatest part of them
continuing in their bad pretenses, openly run into rebellion, and commit all
sorts of hostility against those that will not join with them: openly
publishing that they acknowledge no other head then the assembly that is in
Rochell, which has caused diverse soldiers levied by the said commissions to
gather together in Saint John de Angely, that make show to withstand our
entrance therein by force of arms, which enforces us (perceiving also that the
same disorder has followed in diverse other Towns of our Realm) to make
preparation to punish the offenders according to their merits and deserts, and
to that effect together with the ordinary course of justice, to use the means
that God has given us for the maintenance of our authority: And to the end
that all our subjects, and specially those that make profession of the reformed
Religion may not be abused by false pretenses, wherewith the said assembly
serve themselves, to divert and turn them from their duties, and that both the
one and the other may be informed of our intents and wills touching the same. We
by the advice of the Princes, Dukes, Pe^res, Officers of our Crown, and the
principal persons of our Council, have made known and declared, make known
and declare by these presents, that concerning our said Letters pattents
bearing date the 24 of April last, we have taken and received, and take and
receive into our protection and special sauegard all our subjects of the said
reformed Religion, of what quality or condition soever they be, that shall
continue and remain in our obedience and under the observation of our Edicts,
which we will also cause to be diligently and carefully observed in favor of
them: but perceiving the manifest rebellions that are committed in our Town of
Rochell, not only by the assembly which is always continued contrary to our
express prohibitions, but also by the whole body of the said Town, Burgesses
and inhabitants thereof, as also that which is done in our Town of Saint John
d'Angely, and the acts of hostillitie which they daily commit against our
person. We have declared, and by these presents declare, all the inhabitants
and other persons, of what estate and qualities soever they be, which at this
present dwell, are retired and refuged within the towns of Rochell and Saint
John d'Angely, and all others that favor them directly or indirectly, or that
shall have access unto, intelligence, association and correspondence with
them, or that shall allow in any sort whatsoever of the said assembly in
Rochell, or the other assemblies, circuites, counsels of provinces, or other
congregations that have correspondence with that of Rochell, and that are
holden without our express permission; relapsed and fallen into disobedience,
and guilty of high treason, and as such their lands and goods to be forfet and
confiscated unto us: willing that process should be made against them,
according to the rigor of our laws and ordinances, by the seisures of their
persons, inuentories of their goods, and other ways ordinary and accustomed,
used in such cases. Declaring also our said Towns of Saint John d'Angely and
Rochell, and all others their adherents, and which with them shall take part in
the said crimes and disobediences, to be deprived of, and to have forfeited all
their rights, privileges, franchises, and other benefits that have bin given
and granted unto them by the Kings our predecessors, and by us. And to the end
that we may discern and know the good from the bad, we will that all our
subjects making profession of the said reformed Religion, as well Gentlemen and
officers, as others of what quality or condition soever they be, and also the
towns and commonalties of the said quality, shall make declaration, in the
Presidents Courts, Bailiwicks, and stuardships of their resorts, of their good
intents touching our service; and that in the same they shall renounce and
disauow, as also protest, not to adhere in any manner to the said assembly of
Rochell, nor to any other assemblies, counsels, of provinces, circuites,
resorts, and others, which (as it is said) have bin and are holden without our
express permission; and that with us they will oppose themselves against all
the resolutions that therein may have bin taken, whereof they shall have
testimonies from the said Courts, etc. necessary and fit for their discharges.
As also we expressly prohibit all Gentlemen and others, not to permit their
children, servants, nor others depending on them, to go into the said towns,
nor to lend them any comfort or assistance whatsoever, nor yet to lodge or
receine into their houses those that shall go thither or converse with them in
any manner whatsoever, upon pain to be holden culpable of the same crime. Most
expressly willing and charging all Bailies, Stuards, Provost Marshals, Judges,
and their Lieutenants, Deputy Stuards, Provost Marshals of our cousins the
Constable, and Marshals of France, and all other our Officers to whom it may
appertain, exactly and carefully to proceed against the persons and goods of
those that shall have incurred the said crime; and to our Attourneys General
and their substitutes, upon the said processesses to make diligent and
requisite enquiries, such as are to be done by them, without respect of any
safeguard or other assurances, that they may obtain from us, by false
suggestions or otherwise, if the said sauegards be not made by Letters Patents
sealed with our great Seal; and that in the same it be expressly set down that
we have given them license to go into, or frequent the said rebellious towns.
We also will and require our loving and faithful Counselors that sit in our
Courts of Parliament, and chambers of Edicts, to cause these our present
Letters pattents to be read, published, and registered in every place, and the
contents thereof to be exactly kept and observed according to the form and
tenor thereof: enioyning our Attourneys General and their substitutes to be
careful thereof, and to make all processes and pursuites necessary and
requisite touching the same, for such is our will and pleasure. In witness
whereof, we have caused our Seal to be set hereunto.

Given at Niort the 27 day of May, Anno 1621. and of our reign the twelfth.
Signed, LOVIS.
And on the back side, Par le Roy. Potier.

And sealed with the great Seal in yellow wax. And further, on the back side
is written, Read, published, registered, and heard at the instance and request
of the Kings Attorney General, to be executed, kept and observed according to
the form and tenor. By force of the decree contained in the register of this
day.

At Roane in the Court of Parliament the 7. day of June, 1621. Signed, De Bois
levesque.



EXTRACTED OVT OF THE REGISTER of the Court of Parliament.
THe Court of the Chambers being assembled, having seen the Kings Letters
patents dated in Niort the 27 of May last, as well for the protection and
safeguard of all his subjects of the reformed Religion, that shall continue in,
and contain themselves under his obedience, and the observation of his Edicts,
making profession thereof as his said Letters patents specify and declare,
against the inhabitants and other persons of what estate and quality soever
they be, that dwell, continue, retire, and are resuged in the Towns of Rochell
and Saint John d'Angely, and all others that favor them directly or
indirectly, and the conclusions of the Kings Attorney General being
considered. The said Court, the Chambers being assembled, has and does ordain
that the said Letters patents shall be read, published and registered, that the
contents thereof may be executed, kept and observed according to their form
and tenor, without any attribution nevertheless of any jurisdiction and
knowledge in that respect to the Prouosts General, their Lieutenants or
Vicebailies; unless it be only for the execution of the said decrees and
reasons, the prisoners being carried and committed to the ordinary prisons of
the said places, and their process made, and judged by the said ordinary
Regal Judges, and by appeal in the said Court, and upon express charge, that
the declarations mentioned by the said Letters patents shall by them of the
said reformed Religion be made, as well by the masters of households, their
children, retinue and servants, above 16. years of age, as also by widows and
women, that is such as reside and dwell in the towns and suburbs of the same
within eight days after the publication of the said Letters patents; and those
that dwell in the country, or are absent from the said towns, within fifteen
days after the said publication, upon the pains and penalties containedin the
said Letters patents; which declarations shall be made before the Bailies or
their Deputies in the open Court, according to the form thereof printed, and
which shall be sent by the said Court, to be delivered freely without any fees
paying to those that shall make the same declaration, as well by the Indges and
Clerks upon pain of punishment.

Dated in Roane in the said Court of Parliament, the Chambers being assembled,
the seventh of June, 1621. Signed, De Bois levesque.

THis day (...) the ^ day of (...) 1621. has appeared before us, (...)
appearing, (...) dwelling in the Parish of (...) aged ^ years, or thereabouts,
making profession of the reformed Religion, who to fulfill the Kings Letters
patents made at Niort the seven and twentieth day of May last past, has
declared, sworn and promised to continue, live and die in the fidelity and
obedience which he owes unto the King; To renounce, disauouch and protest,
not to adhere in any manner unto the assembly of Rochell, neither unto any
other assemblies, counsels of Provinces, resorts, circuites and others, that
are holden, hold, and shall be holden without the express commission of the
King, but rather with his Majesty to oppose himself against all the
resolutions that therein may, have bin, and are taken. In witness whereof, the
said (...) has signed unto the Clerks Register; and whereupon we have
delivered unto him this present writing signed by us and one of the ordinary
Clerks of this Bailiwicke,

The day and year abouesaid.
Letters sent by those of the reformed Religion, assembled together in Rochell.
To the Duke de Lesdiguieres.
MAy it please your Honor, we have refrained from answering unto the two
first letters, which it pleased you to write unto us, for an answer unto our
former, staying till the Gentleman that we sent unto you, had more
particularly reported unto us your opinion touching the state of our present
affairs, as he has done, having at large declared unto us your advice and
good intent to aid our Churches, to recover that peace, surety and
contentment which we seek for, from the bounty of our King, when you shall
have means to speak unto his Majesty, to whom (as you have certified unto us)
you intend to ride. This your Honors good affection, whereof without doubt we
assure our selves, moves us unto those most humble thanks which we are bound
to yield unto you, and augmenteth our desire (together with these presents) to
satisfy your two first letters, as the necessity of our entire justification,
which your desire to know, requires at our hands, hoping that your Honor
having rejected all doubts and scruples which seem to hold you at a stay
touching the pursuit of our convocation and staying in this place, as we may
easily do it, you will easily think it fit to join your good will with our
submissions, for obtaining the fruits and effects of our most humble requests
and supplications to his Majesty; and by that means bereave our enemies of
their triumphs which they make against us, upon the doubt which you seem to
make of the evidence of our good meanings by your first letter, which to that
effect they have published. Whereupon we beseech your Honor to be pleased, for
the resolving of all these difficulties, that we may put you in mind, that the
resolution that we then made of our separation at London, to reassemble again
upon default of performance of such things as were promised unto us, was
grounded upon the promise which was given to you and to Monsieur de Chastillon,
by my Lord the Prince, and the Duke de Luynes, in the Kings name, and by you
unto us; which our Churches having faithfully observed, upon that condition
confirmed their Deputies in all Provinces, or substituted others to meet here
if occasion fell out. It is needless to produce other proofs, or to rehearse
our registers to put you in mind, that as then those promises were made unto
us, upon condition to reassemble together if they were not performed within the
time prefixed: seeing that your Honor is the most sufficient wi^nesse that we
may or can produce, which acknowledge and once again confirm the truth
thereof by your second letter dated the 22 of February last, where you writ
unto us in proper terms, that the same that was granted unto us then upon the
separation at Loudun (upon promise to reassemble) has bin entirely executed,
whereof we will hereafter speak, having first manifested this permission which
you defer to be made evident, and which we esteem ought to be thought and
judged auailable and sufficient without contradiction, and to the contentment
of those that are most scrupulous; if we add thereunto, that besides the
interuention of my said Lord the Prince, and of my Lord the Duke de Luynes, of
whom the eminent quality in the one, and the great favor of the other, can
permit no shadow of disauouching, our good intents have bin much more settled
upon the express word spoken from the mouth of his sacred Majesty, whereof
you are an unreprovable witness, when you told us by your first letter bearing
date the first of the said Month, in these words, saying that the same which
your Honor had promised unto us in his Majesty's name, was confirmed at
Fontainebleau by his Royal mouth to the Deputies of the assembly at Loudun, at
such time as they certified him of the separation. We think it had not bin
lawful for us to desire or to imagine any other permission more auailable or
firmer assurance, then the sacred word of the King. Ink and paper cannot
confer any weight nor authority to the Kings words. And certainly we would
have judged our selves to be unworthy of the favor of our King, and injurious
to his authority, if we had required that permission under a greater security
then his Majesty's word. VVhereupon we beseech your Honor to pardon us, if we
tell you, that then we asked no note in writing, and that it was not denied
unto us. To the contrary it is true, that when we were pressed to separate our
selves, we were offered a note in writing to reassemble if justice were not
done unto us. And many times by diverse of the principal, this speech was
confirmed in open Counsel to our Deputies, that they did not doubt but that we
would reassemble together. But we that fear nothing more then those pains,
and such encounters which our enemies always imagine and devise to do
mischief unto us, at that time desired and insisted to receive some real
contentment upon our complaints, thereby to assure the astonishment and the
perplexities of our brethren, and to restrain the insolency of our enemies,
by such testimonies of our protection and of the Kings good will toward us,
that we might come thither no more, nor fall again into such labyrinths. But
all our instances could prevail nothing, and we were constrained to content
our selves with those promises; from whence our enemies by their secret reaches
knew well how to draw those inconveniences and mischiefs which we foresee and
too well apprehend. Seeing then that the assurance and permission of our
reassembling was such, what need was there (as your Honor says) that our
general Deputies should renew their instance to the King, to permit us to do
it? It had bin a means to call in question an assured promise, and thereby to
prejudice our selves. For we fear not to tell you that which cannot be
concealed from you, that our enemies have by many experiences made us feel,
that as often and whenever those things that are most assured unto us either
by Edicts or by other grants from the King, fall in question, they have that
power to cause that to be withdrawn that was granted unto us, and to cause us
to lose that right which we had obtained. We could show an infinite number of
complaints upon this subject, and how that diverse articles concerning the
strengthening of things to us formerly granted, and afterward infringed, we
have received answers directly contrary unto the precedent grants, and such as
wholly annihilated them. Then who doubts not, but that the same power of our
enemies, which at this day works the denial of those things that were
promised unto us, would not also have caused all the requests of our Deputies
to be rejected. Having thus justified unto your Honor our said permission, and
consequently the equity of our proceeding authorized by the same; it rests
only plainly to show you the occasions, condition and necessity of our
reassembling, and to have recourse unto our complaints. The circumstances of
the time, and of that which has bin omitted or committed contrary to the
promises, shall suffice therein. Your Honor remembers, and your letter
mentions the same, that the King promised us that within six months from
the day of our separation, he would cause Leytoure to be restored, admit the
Counselors of the Religion into the Parliament of Paris, give a writing
touching the guarding of the places of security; that the states thereof
should be delivered unto us; that our requests should be favorably answered,
and the answers thereunto duly and truly executed. And touching the affairs of
Bearn, that within seven months the Deputies of the country should be heard
touching that which they would show unto his Majesty. Our separation was made
upon the 13 of April the last year, the six months from the same day fell
upon the 13 of October following: and in all that time nothing of those things
that were promised was executed, but only the delivery of the writing touching
the guard of the places, what instance and pursuit soever our Deputies
general could make. In the same time the King went to Bearn, during the delay
obtained for our remonstrances, and they being not understood, nor once
hearkened unto; not only the commission to the contrary has bin executed, but
which is more, our Churches have lost all the security and liberty which they
had enjoyed in that country (...) many years together, and in an instant
followed the beginning of all those dangerous consequences which we doubted
from the beginning of the decree of the contrary commission. Upon that time the
six months being past, this grief happened, and none of the rest redressed;
our assembly upon the 25 of November. And if since that the town of Leytoure
has bin remitted into the hands of a Gentleman of the Religion, could the
healing of that old sore so long time suffered, after the feeling of a much
greater grief, be a sufficient means to stay our humble complaints, touching
the same and all the rest. We were already assembled, and our most humble
complaints presented unto his Majesty, when the two Counselors were admitted,
but upon a worse condition then all the former refusals, which bereave us of
the liberty which the King grants unto us by his Edicts, to enter
indifferently in the office, in such manner, that the same grief is so far
from being redressed, that it is rather increased by that means. These
therefore, and it please your Honor, were the occasions of our reassembling,
which yet continues. The miserable estate of Bearn, the denial of the state
of the places of security in Dauphinois, which is openly maintained, (contrary
to the promise made unto you, and which you here confirmed unto us by your
letters) was never granted unto us. To the contrary whereof, your Honor knows,
that particularly from anno 1616. at the conference of Loudun, it was
particularly unto us, and since that by the last promises confirmed unto your
self. As also, besides the public testimonies which you give us here, you may
call to mind, that you have confirmed the same to diverse men in particular,
telling them of the absolute necessity that we have to pursue the same. Then
follows the contradiction made against the 27. article of the Edict, touching
our admission into offices. The favorable answers denied to our propositions;
and the sending of Committees into the Provinces neglected. And lastly the
troops and garrisons left in the country of Bearn, Guyenne and Poictou, which
give an alarm and a just distrust unto our Churches. These are the principal
heads of our complaints; it is not the number, but the weightinesse of them
which makes them important. As also, that those few articles, for the
reparation whereof we have hoped to receive some assurance of the Kings good
will, from the which our enemies by all means seek to estrange us, ought not
to be made a consequence against us; but on the contrary, our obedience ought
thereby to be more manifest, that we contented our selves with that remedy,
to strengthen our patience, besides all so many other infractions that
continually hurt our liberty, which the King has granted unto us. And by the
same reason, our cause ought at this day to be more favored, and our equity
more manifested, if upon the not executing of so few articles, contrary to the
faithful promises made unto us, (whereby our condition being also much
impeached) we have had our recourse to the favor of our King, by our most
humble declarations, in that state wherein he has permitted us to reassemble,
to present the same xnto him. Whereupon we are not able to express the
intolerable grief that we feel, when in regard of these proceedings which we
have followed by lawful means of the respect and reverence that is due unto
his Majesty, we perceive our selves to be condemned by the subtle practices
of our enemies, which slander us to wrong the Kings authority; thereby to
kindle his wrath and indignation against us, seeking to reduce us to that
point, either to incur the effect of his displeasure by open war, wherewith
we are threatened; or for to shun the same we should keep silence in our just
complaints and endure all the wrongs and mischiefs which daily are thrown
upon us. So that from henceforth, men will acknowledge no other obedience in
us, but that we should with patience suffer all the mischiefs that they would
do unto us, without permission to complain thereof: and our griefs and
preuentions made against the falsities and threatenings of our enemies, shall be
imputed to disobedience, and a capital crime. Will not your Honor judge,
that there is a mean to be used in these things? but rather acknowledging as
it seems unto you, that the permission which has bin given unto us by his
Majesty to reassemble, and the importance of the wrongs, either not redressed,
but rather increased, purge our assembly of the blame to be unlawful, or done
without authority; we hope that you will think it more reasonable to employ
that good affection which it pleases you to promise us, and that authority
and credit which the greatness and innumerable number of so commendable
services have gotten you with his Majesty, to make him to understand the
sincerity of our intents, and the necessity of our just complaints rather
then to seek our separation before some contentment be given unto our
Churches; whose disquietnesse makes us the more careful to persist in
procuring their consolation. Which to attain, we have sought to enter into
those ways of respect which we bear unto our King, that might clear us of
that imputation which our enemies seek to imprint in him toward us. To that
end having desired our general Deputies, being by them certified of the
continual refusal which is made to hear them in our names, to represent our
just demands in their own, and the names of all our Churches. Wherein we
persuade our selves that your Honor approving our proceeding, and therein
favoring our said general Deputies, you will also judge that with most just
reason we have given them to understand upon the proposition, where by their
last dispatch, we have bin certified what is done at the Court, that is, (not
to give us any contentment, and to bind us to a separation, upon a pardon to
be given us) that our consciences and the care of the honor and good of our
Churches, will never permit us to consent unto such a thing, that with it would
draw not only a great opproby upon our Religion, but also procure the total
ruin of our affairs. VVhereupon we have bin desirous to inform your Honor
of our opinions and resolutions, to the end that it might please you, according
to the favor which you promise unto us, rather to signify unto his Majesty,
that when his Royal bounty shall think it good to grant those favors which
our Churches require of him in all humility, (thereby to quench in so many
peoples minds the distrusts which the mischiefs that we endure, and the
continual threatenings of our enemies have imprinted therein) it will be a
means more and more to confirm his authority, and make it the same which the
incomparable wisdom of his father the late King deceased, always maintained,
grounding the peace and tranquillity of his estate upon the maintenance of his
Edicts. Under the force whereof, we desire not any further liberty then only
to continue the obedience that we have always yielded without reproach unto
our Kings That (and it please your Honor) is the good which we beseech you to
contribute unto the present estate of our affairs, as we have diverse times
humbly required the rest of the great personages to do the like, and then
specially when for the prevention of the ruin of all our affairs by the
division which we perceived men went about to sow between them and us, we
besought them not to hearken unto a conference propounded unto them, tending
from henceforth to annihilate and make fruitless all the pursuites that we
take in hand, by the order established between us by the Kings permission; and
which is more, to lay on them and all of us the burden of refusals or of
deceits, such as wherewith our evil willers delude the promises which the King
has made unto us. Which we esteeming it to be no less prejudicial to
themselves then to the generality of our Churches, we are persuaded that we
are bound in conscience to beseech you ill, not to give way thereunto. Which we
desire your Honor also to accept of, and not to be a means of excluding that
good and advantage which your authority and favor, joining with our just
requests, may procure unto us. For we do not desire, neither have we any other
intent in the discharging of the offices given unto us, but as much as possible
we may, to strengthen the band of our union between all the members of our
body, and specially those of your rank and quality, and which is more
considerable. So far off are we from seeking any ways or means to overthrow
our selves, by making a separation between you and us, that to the contrary,
since we have bin here, we have had nothing in more nor greater recommendation
then to re-vnite the particulars and the general, by a conjunction of
interest, and one self same affection toward the advancement of the glory of
God and the good of our Churches, under the obedience of his Majesty. Wherein
we are bound to render thanks unto God, that not only the townes' and
commonalties of our Religion, but also all those that hold a greater rank
among us, have made known the most particular assurances of their constancy
in our union: as your Honor also, by the protestation which you have made unto
us of the same, and of the continuance of your services toward the Church of
God, in the profession of our Religion, has done. VVhereupon we must tell you,
that the slanders impudently published by those that hate your virtue, because
of your profession, could never shake nor diminish our persuasions therein. And
in that confidence, and upon the singular assurances that Monsieur de Bonnet
has given us of your good affection to procure (by the Kings favor) some
contentment to our Churches in these occurrents. We beseech your Honor once
again to contribute your good will therein, in such manner, that dispersing
that imputation which our enemies maliciously lay on us to contradict the Kings
authority, our sincere intents being known, our Churches by our sure and
honorable return unto them, may upon their most important complaints receive
that good which they so long time have hoped, and promised unto them, being so
necessary for our conservation and tranquillity. And that so the peace of the
State being fully confirmed, according to our desires, and that of all good
French men, we may see the arbiterment of Christendom in the hands of our
King. And your Honor, by his commandment, in many of his best subjects by
your victorious hands, make the terror of his name and of his forces, strike
into his enemies hearts, who with great desire now more then ever they did,
seek to imbase the authority and the dignity of this monarchy, which for
the good thereof and of the Church is therein reserved. God increase your
years, and his graces in you, to whom we always remain your Honors most
humble and most affectionate servants. The Deputies of the Reformed Churches in
France, and the sovereignty of Bearn assembled in Rochell.

Signed, De la Cressonniere, President. Rosell, Lieutenant. De la Piterne,
Secretary. De la Tour, Secretary.

Rochell the 18 of March, 1621.

The second Letter written by the Assembly in Rochell, to the Duke de
Desdiguieres, dated the second of April, 1621.
THe Letter which it pleased your Honor to write unto us, we have received by
Monsieur de la Roche, who withal has particularly advertised us of your
intent. We persuade our selves that you would not have sent this message, nor
given us that advice, if you had received our last Letter, which contained the
reasonable grounds of our assembling, together with the justness and
necessity of our subsistence, and thereby you would have perceived that we
reject formalities, and by only cleaving unto the special end of our
vocation, which is to redress the evils that our Churches endure, have given
commission to our general Deputies in their own name, and those of our said
Churches to pursue the justness of our demands, as you may more at large
understand the same from them by word of mouth. As by all these proceedings we
justify our necessary resolutions unto your Honor; so it has bin a most
great displeasure unto us to understand your contrary feelings thereof, which
serve to no other end but to increase our just distrusts, and to strengthen the
evil will of those that are the hindrances of the effects of our lawful
proceedings. For to this separation of our assemblies, of late time, all the
practices of our adversaries specially tend; which ought so much the more to be
suspicious to all the members of our Churches, that they would bring us
thereunto by such ways as reduce our affairs into desolation, and our bodies
into opprobrie. For that by abandoning the means of our security, which so
many years we have sought with so great care and pains, we shall cast our
Churches into new labyrinths, whereby they should be reduced into despair, and
would not omit any manner of remedy to withdraw themselves from an unjust
persecution. We know how much we are to attribute unto the advice which comes
from your Honors great experience; but may it please you to remember that which
has ensued contrary to your and our intents, of your entermise of Loudun, and
into how many bad terms our light credit has reduced us, with so great
appearance to meet with no better in time to come, if we should commit the like
errors. To the end that you may bear with us, if the great hurt which that
blow gave unto our conservation, makes us incapable of the separation which
you require of us, so instantly, with your advice joining the reproaches of
disobedience, and the threatenings of hard usage; which things we esteem not
strange in the enemies of our profession, who with drawing from us his
Majesty's good inclinations, take pleasure in slanders and violences, and whom
we know are sufficiently animated not to desist from the desolation of the
Churches in Bearn. But when those that are so much bound to the tranquillity
of the house of God, wherein they had their being, and ought to leave an
honorable and profitable memory of them to their posterity, lift up their
arms against our innocence. It is an affliction much greater unto us then we
speak of. For touching the accusations wherewith we are charged, we expect no
greater testimony of the perpetual obedience of us and our fathers, their
that of your Honors own knowledge, who have so often found, that we were never
so instantly accused of disobedience, but only with an intent to withdraw
those advantages from us, which reason, equity, and the promises of our Kings
made indubitable. These devices being not unknown unto you, we expect better
things from your Honor, conformable to the common profession which you have of
us; being on your part, not only bound thereunto by express words, which to
us ought to be a public faith, and consequently inviolable, but by the
serious remembrance of the rank and authority whereunto God has raised you,
by the singular blessing which he has bestowed upon you, causing it to
increase together with your years, in diverse manner, by the knowledge of his
truth, which is none of the least honors you shall carry with you from hence,
by the holy communion that you have so long time had with the Church of God: by
this means you shall have this testimony in your conscience, to have employed
Gods talents to the profit of his Church: whereupon we tell your Honor, that it
much imports the honor of your profession, to consider how you put your hand
to these affairs, which as ^is pr^ are exposed to the open view of all
Christendom, as a fit means which God puts into your hands to a duance his
glory, and in good time to bring our Churches into an assured estate. If it
will please you to join your credit and favor to the just proceedings of our
general Deputies, which will leave you an honorable mark, and make you live
always in the memory of men. And although some considerations of the world
may move you to be indifferent touching our ruin, (which we expect not from
you) nevertheless we will not distrust in Gods protection, hoping that he will
touch the heart of our King, by the admirable means of his providence, in his
time to effect a full contentment to his people; whom we beseech to make you
fully to understand the malice of our enemies, the importance of our
mischiefs, the sincerity of our proceedings, and the equity of our demands
touching the oppression of the afflicted; that being moved with Christian
compassion, you may make that power and credit which he has given you
available, in your days to see the prosperity of the Church and the state.
These are the humble requests which we have already made unto you by our last
letters, and which now we re-iterate, most carnestly beseeching you to be
assured, that both generally and p^cularly we are your Honors

Most humble and most affectioned servants, the Deputies of the reformed
Churches of France, and the sovereignty of Bearn, assembled in Rochell. De la
Cressonniere, President, Rossell, Lieutenant. De la Piterne, Secretary. De la
Tour. Secretary.

(...) the second of April, 1621.


