A Sermonde made before the King, his majesty at grenewiche, upon good
Frydaye. The year of our Lord God. M. D. xxxviij. By John^ Longlonde, busshop
of Lincoln.

Ad gloriam Christi, and ad memoriam gloriosae passionis eius.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

AL Christen people ought this day especyal above all the days in the year,
to have in their devout remembrance the glorious passion of our savior Jesus
Christ. And to show them selves pressed and ready, ready to suffer and to crucify
them selves with Christ, as well in spirit as in flesh, as well in soul as in
body. To crucifye them selves. I mean, to afflycte the spirit and soul with
an inward remorse, with an inward remembrance of their own wretched lives:
every one to consydre their own synful deeds. Their sins to be so great and
abominable, that it was necessary for Christ the son of God to suffer and
dye for it. To consydre that nothing in this world could pourge nor cleanse us
from sin, but the only blood of Christ, his only Passion and death. And
in this remembrance, to crucyfye our spirytes, to mourn and lament, to weep
and sorrow our said sins, which were the cause why Christ did suffer,
which were the very cause of this his most pityous paynefull Passion and
death. We ought also this day to crucyfye, to afflycte, and punyshe our
bodies, with exterior and outward afflyctyons: with bodylye pains and
penaunces. As I do not doubt, but many good christen people has done both
this last night and this day also. This night past I say, both inwardly and
outwardly. Inwarly, by inward devout remembrance, how and what Passions
Christ suffered this night and day for us. How that this night after he had
eat the Paschal lamb with his disciples, after that he had ministered his
most holy precious body and blood to them and washed their feet: how he
went in to the mount and there prayed unto god the father, a prolixe, a long,
a devout and dolorous prayer: three times desiryng his father to put away that
bloody chalyce, that deathly cup, that paynful Passion, that panguyous
death. At which prayer his mind was appalled, his soul was panguyde, his
body was dysco^fyted, his nature was decayed, his heart full of sorrow, his mind
so wonderfully troubled, that all his nature of the manheed so horrybly was
dysmayd, that he fell in a sweat, and swette water and blood, blood and water:
by that to show his great panguys and pains, both of soul and body, both
inwardlye and outwardly. And in this pityous devout remembraunces, they have
had I doubt not, much pitye and compassyon on the same.

They have also devoutly remembered I trust, how that he thryse rose from his
devout and prolixe prayer, and yoode to his three dyscyples, Peter, James and
John^. And how he found them a sleep, and said to Peter, Petre dormis? No^
potuisti vna hora vigilare mecu^? Peter, o Peter, thou that dyddest promise so
lately to dye with me, and now slepest? I being in this trance and at hand
to be taken? O Peter, how would thou suffer and dye with me, and kanst not
hold up thy heed nor waake with me one hour? What not one hour Peter? They
have remembered also I doubt not, how Christ went voluntaryly toward that
Traitor Judas, and wyllyngly did mete him, and the Iues which came to take
him. And how he asked Judas and his company, whom they sought, for in deed
they knew him not. And showed to them that he was he, that he was Christ, that
he was Jesus of Nazareth whom they sought: and how he amaased them, and threw
them by his secret power down to the ground: and suffered them twyse to arise
and then to know him, then to take him, to bynd him, to hale and lugge him
from post to pyller, and all spytefull ways to handle him. And how they
brought him tofore three Judges, and was before eueryche of them falsely
accused, bringing against him false testamonye, untrue witness, blasphemously
at the last cryenge, Reus est mortis, crucifigatur. He is gylty, worthy to dye.
Crucify him, Crucify him. They bound him to a pyller, and bette him with sharp
scourges and rods, not leauyng in his most blyssed body any hole place from
top to too, from the top of his heed, to the sooles of his feet. Plattynge
with great vyolence a hard sharp crown of thorn on his heed, persynge it
to the sculle, blyndf^^lded him, spyttynge spytefully in his most blyssed
visage, and with their fystes and hard reeds beete him about that most
blessed heed and face, which the Angels, and beats of heaven desires before
althynges to behold. Putting a reed in his hand in stead of a septure,
mockeshly and scornefully knelynge before him and strykynge him, said: Tell us
who struck the now? And who struck the now? And who was that? And who was
this? With soche mockyshe vilanous words and deeds. And when he was thus dault
with, they put upon him a garmente of Purple in mockadge, and was had out in
Pretorium, into the yield hall before the multitude of the Iues. And they seeing
him thus apparelled, thus scourged, thus defaced and beete, cried, Crucifye
him, Crucify him, he is gyltye, he is worthy to dye. And in conclusyon to
satisfy the cruel appetytes of the Iues, he was condemned unto the death: to
the death of the cross, which cross was laid upon him, and bare the same
most part through the city to the place of his Passion, and there was
crucified, and there was set a high, so to be seen and wondered on of all the
people.

And there ayayne he was newly had in dirysyon, and gave him Aysell and Gall,
derydynge and scornefully mocking him with scoffing and scornful words till
he was dead. And then they thrast a spear to his heart. Wherewith ran out
water and blood in our redempcyon. All this with many moo things, many of
you good christen people, have had in your special and most devout
remembrau^ces this night past and this day: sorowynge in your selves to
remember, that ye and we were the veraye cause of his death, and why he thus
suffered.

How dampnable then and how great were our sins, for the which it was
necessary for Christ to suffer and dye? and so to wash us in his most
precious blood? And by these and soche other like devout contemplacyons, to
have remorse in our souls, sorowynge our sins, repenting our ill lyuinges,
calling to god for mercy, having inward sorrow and contricyon, lamenting and
weeping every one upon him self. And though it be percase not pleasant unto
you long to tarry, because ye have this night and day under this manner, weryed
your minds in soche devout contemplacyons, reuoluynge in your hertes this
panguyous Passion of Christ: and your bodies with watch and prayer, herynge
the word of god this day ones, a herynge divine service, with knelynges already
and with prostracions to the ground, knocking your breasts, holding down
your heddes in a mournyng fassyon, weriynge also the body with these and other
afflyctyons, with great and long abstinence, fasting and other many ways,
every man severally after his most secrette and inward devotion: Yet this day
let us take more pain then we would do in other days. It comes but oons in
the year. And one thing shall I assure you of, though your pains shall be
thought much, yet your merit and reward shall be much more.

Let us therefore so order our selves, that god may se the fervent desires of
our souls. Let him se our hertes and loves we bear toward him. Let him se
and perceive how dilygently we do endeavor our selves all the ways we can,
to do and speak that that may be to the high honor laud and glory of him
and of this his most glorious Passion. And to this purpose and end, and that
we may the more inwardlye be styrred to deuocyo^, and love toward our sauyor
Christ: I desire you all to help with your devout prayers.

OREMVS.

THAT we may the more co^modyously now proceed in that we have prayed for, I
will take my ground to speak upon, the words of thapostle which he writes
unto the Hebrews in his xiii. Chapit^ where he consydereth and makes mencyon
of two solemnityes, of two high solemn feasts. duo (...)
One of the old law, another of the new law. That of the old law, was the
figure: that of the new law, was the veryte* That of the old law, was the
shadow: that of the new law, was the body. That of the old law did but
sygnifye the feast of the new law: that of the new law was the self same
feast, the truth, the veryte figured in the old law. That of the old law
was called Festum Propiciationis, Festu^ propiciat^^onis.
the feast of Propiciatyon or of mercy, the feast in which by the sacrifyce
done on that day, the people were pourged from certain immundicyes and
uncleanness, and brought in to the favor of god. The feast of the new law, is
called Festu^ redemptionis, the solemnyte, or feast of redempcyon. Festu^
redemptionis.
On which day we all, ye all mankind, was redemede, washed, cleansed,
pourged, saynctifyed and justified from al our sins: brought and reconsyled
into the favor of god by the sacrifye that was that day offered. And as the
course of the year gothe about, this is the day. The day of redemption, the day
of propiciacyon, the day of mercy and of reconciliacyon, the day that Christ
offered up him self for us.

Hebre. ^^3.
The words of the Apostle are these, Habemus altar de quo edere non habent
potestatem qui tabernaculo deseruiunt. Quorum enim animalium infertur sanguis
pro peccato, in sancta, per pontificem: horum corpora cremantur extra castra.
Propter quod, and JESUS extra porta^ passus est. Exeamus igitur ad cu^ extra
castra, improperiu^ eius portantes. These are the words of the apostle, many
things contryued in few words. And the English thereof is this: We have an
altar. We have an altar (says the apostle:) an altar, and a sacrifyce upon
this altar. And they that serves the tabernacle, may not eat of this
altar, may not eat of the sacrifyce that is offered upon this altar. For the
Apostle here (per metonimia) does put the altar for that that is sacrifysed
upon the altar. The blood of those beasts that were sle^^ne for the
sacrifyce, was brought in to the holy secret high place of the temple where
the arc was, bitwene the high altar (as ye will say) and the veil, by the
bushop, and there offered up for the sin of the people. The bodies of the
beasts that were burned without the pauilyons or tents, for the which,
Propter quod, for which what? for the fulfyllynge of which mystery. Also to
veryfye and fulfill the figure, and that the thing fygured, might be
corespondente to the figure, Jesus suffered without the yate, to sanctify the
people by his blood. Let us go out therefore and suffer with Christ, bearyng his
obprobries and rebukes. Altar. Sacrificium. Pontifex Tabernaculum. Seruiti^^
in tacer-Sa^gu^^s. Sancta sanctoru^ Corpora a^^alium^ Ignis. Castra. Decemdies.
Mensis septimus
These be the words of the apostle now taken.

I will by the help of our Lord god, declare these words in order, even as
they do stand. Here is an altar, here is a sacrifyce, here is a bushop which
did offer this sacrifyce, here is a tabernacle, a serving of the tabernacle,
the blood of the sacrifyce which was offered by the bushop for the sins of
the people, in the most holy place of the temple: and the bodies of the
beasts (whose blood was offered) were burned without the tents, And this
was done the tenthe day of the seventh month. Ye here now the words of the
Apostle. Wherein appears the manyfeste figure of the Passion of our savior
Jesus Christ, which we this day do honor.

In these words the apostle touches the figure of the law, and brynges it to
a spirytual understanding. For it was commanded in the law in the book of
nombers, that the tenthe day of the seventh month, Num^^. ^^*
in the feast that was called the feast of the propicyatyon, of mercy, of
remissyon, or the feast of purgacyon, when the people were pourged. At which
time they should take a calfe and a kydde and slaye them. Uitulus Hircus.
Hebre. ^^.
Whose blood the only bushop should bring in sancta sanctorum, in to the
most holy solemn and secret place of the temple, wherein the bushop never
came, oneles he brought with him blood, blood to offer in sacrifyce. Quia
oi^a penae in sanguine secundu^ legem mundabantur, Sa^g^^^.
and sine sanguinis effusione non fit remissio says the Apostle. Almoost all
sins after the law or in the law, were cleansed in blood and by blood: And
without the effusyon of blood, was no remyssyon. And in that place of the
temple called sancta sanctorum, Sancta sanctoru^ Corpus
the bushop prayed and offered for the people. The flesh and corpse of the
sacrifyce was burned without the tents, without their pauilyons. And it was
not lawful to any that did serve the tabernacle, to eat of the flesh of
that sacrifyce.

Here is a manifest figure (as I said) of the Passion of our savior Christ.
altar quoth
The altar that was consecrate and halowede in this solenuyte of the blood of
the eternal testament, was that holy cross that Christ suffered on. Which as
on this day, he did consecrate, halowe, dignifye and dedicate: And did adourne
and deck the same with the members of his most precious body, more
gloryously then it had been enbrowderede and inserte with precious stoones. For
as gold which is the most precious metal, is made more precious when it is
set with precious stoones, and is dignifyed therewith, whether it be altar,
image, crown, ring or owche: so was this altar the holy cross bewtifyed,
dignifyed, adourned and made precious: with the members of that most precous
stoone Christ, which is as Peter says Lapis viuus, ab hominibus reprobatus, a
deo electus, 1. Peter. 2. Lapis. Christus
probatus, angularis and praeciosus. This Christ is (he says) the lively
stoone, which men did reprove, which god did elect for the approved stoone,
for a corner stoone, for the cheyfe stoone in the building of his church, for
the stoone that joins the walls of the church together, for the stoone
whereupon the faith of Christ, and his church is builded. A precious stoone, a
stoone of price, a stoone of high value, far passing in the estimacyon of a
good christen man, all other precious stoones in the world. This precious
stoone Christ with the members of his most precious body, did deck, adourne
and make precious this altar the cross: When his body was by the Iues with a
violencye, extremely strayned upon the same, that all his bones (as testifyeth
the Prophet) might be nombred. Psalm. 21. Sacrificium.
Upon this aulte^^ was the great sacrifyce of the world offered, Christ him
self. He was the sacrifyce, and he was the priest. He offered up him self to
god his father, for the sin of man. Hebre. 9.
Obtulit semetipsum immaculatum deo vt sanctificaret inquinatos says the
apostle. He offered him self a pure, clean, immaculate hooste to god, to
redeem the world, to sanctify sinners, to justify man.

This Christ the bushop of good things to come (as the apostle witnesses)
entered oons in to the place called sancta sanctorum, Hebre. 9.
not only of the temple: but in sancta sanctorum, in to that holy place of
places, Sancta sanctoru^
in to heaven. He entered with sacrifyced blood like a busshop. Not with the
blood of gootes or calves, not with the blood of rams or bulls: but with
his own most precious blood. For if the blood of gootes and bulls, Hebre
9. Leuit^^* 1^^.
and the ashes of the burned calfe sprinkled abroode, were suffycyente to the
making clean of the flesh: how much more then the blood of Christ? Who
by the holy ghost did offer up him self to god, most pure most clean and
immaculate sacrifice, is able to pourge, cleanse and make fair our coscyences
from the works of death, and to live in the living god?

This is our great bushop as the apostle says, Habemus pontificem magnum qui
paenetrauit coelos, Hebre ^^. Magnu^^ (...) noster christus est.
IESVM filium dei. We have a great bushop, which did penetrate the heuens,
whose name is Jesus the son of god. This is our great bushop, our high
bushop, our universal bushop. This is the heed bushop of all bushoppes and of
the world, named of god (as the apostle says) to be our great bushop,
properly called Summus pontifex the highest bushoppe, the bushop of bushoppes.
For this is he only that is Summus, Hebre. ^^. Su^mus Maximus vniuersalis
pontifex christus
maximus and vniuersalis pontifex. The bushop of Rome therefore ought herein to
be abashed, ashamed and to abhor his own pride. For in this he outragyously
does offend god and blasphemeth him, in that he presumes to take this high
name from our bushop Christ. In that, he takes away (asmoche as lies in him)
the glory of god, the majesty apperteynyng unto Christ. In that, he takes
upon him these names only appropryed unto Christ, Summus pontifex, maximus
pontifex, vniuersalis pontifex: the highest bushop, the greatest busshop, the
universal bushop, the bushop of all the world. I much maruayle how he dare
be so bold to usurp and take these great names upon him. Greater blasphemye
can not be, then to take from god, that that naturally belongs unto him: then
to take from god his glory and honor, then to vendicate and take upon him
soche high names as besemes no Christen man to usurp. Ezeche 42.
God said by his Prophet, Non dabo gloria^ mea^ altri: I will not give my
glory away to any other, to any creature. He does reserve that glory, that
laud and honor that belongs only unto him, unto him self: no man to
attempt so far, no man to take somoche upon him.

Peter, Peter thou were oons bushop of Rome, and the first bushop of Rome,
Petrus pontifex Rome.
dyddest thou ever take this name upon the? Summus, maximus, vniuersalis? No
no no. And why? for the holy ghost was in the. Thou would take no more upon
the then god gave the. Thou were not desirous of worldly fame and glory. All
that thou soughtest for, was for the glory of god: as all that will read thy
sermondes, thy Epystles and thy life, shall soon perceive. Look a great
nombre of bushoppes that next followed Peter in the same see, what were they?
holy martyrs, holy lyuers, which never attempted thus far. Let the bushop
of Rome therefore knowledge his great fault, his high foolye, his unlawful
usurpation, his vnpreestly presumpcion: and humble him self to Christ and god
his great bushop. Would god he would refourme him self. Would god he would
keep him self within the compass of his auctoryte, and no more to encroche
upon other men's iurisdictyons, but diligently keep and over look his own
diocese, and be content with that. Would god he would look upon his
predecessor saint Gregory in his reg^^e, which was a bushop of Rome, a holy
man. Let him learn there how he did rebuke John^ that time the busshop of
Constantinople, for taking on him so hyghlye, in soche names, universal
bushop, highest bushop, greatest bushop: gregorius in registro. libro iiij.
indictione.xxx Epistola xxx^^iij.
and how he proved it to be annenste the law of god. He says there in one
place to this proud bushop John^, what ansfere shalt thou make in that
strayte examynacyon at that last judgment to Christ the heed of the universal
holy church, that go about to have subject unto the, all the members of
Christ, by taking on the the name of universal busshop? In an other place
ayayne in the same book he says unto him, Idem.
who art thou that do presume to usurp a new name upon the of universal
bushoppe, contrary to the statutes of the gospel and the decrees?

God forbid that ever it should come in the hertes of christen people this
blasphemye, in the which the honor of all preesthood is taked away, when a
man shall rashly and arrogantly, take that name upon him. Let this bushop of
Rome therefore humble him self unto our great universal bushop Christ, humble
him self under the mighty hand of god, and know what the apostle does write
of the honor and power of this Christ our great and high bushop. He is he
says, Hebre. ^^.3.4.5.7.8.9.
Pontifex misericors, fidelis, po^^ens, magnus, humilis, paenetrans coelum,
compaciens infirmitatibus nostris, offerens dona and sacrificia pro peccatis
nostris, condolens hiis qui ignorant and errant. Qui potest saluum facere a
morte, offerens preces and supplicationes cum clamore valido and lacrimis, and
exauditus est pro reuerentia sua. Pontifex appellatus a deo. Pontifex sanctus,
innocens, impollutus, segregatus a peccatoribus, excelsior coelis. Non habens
necessitate^ (quemadmodum alii) prius pro suis delictis hostias offerre deinde
pro populi: Pontifex sedens in dextris dei interpellans pro nobis, Emundans
co^scientias nostras ab operibus mortuis Intrans sancta sanctoru^ per proprium
sanguinem. Hic est pontifex confessionis nostrae.

Let all earthly bushops learn of this heavenly bushop Christ. Some of these
propertes are appropryed and belongs only to God and not to man. In some we
ought to follow him. In some we can not, ne ought to do. Misericors.
This our high and great bushop is misericors, says the apostle, merciful.
A merciful bushop, redye to forgive, ready to remyt those that has offended
him. He is not cruel, not vengeable, but full of pitye, full of mercy. And in
this we ought to follow him.

He is pontifex potens, a mighty bushop, mighty and full of power. Potens.
We be but weyke and feeble bushops, not able to do any thing but by his
permyssyon and help. He is able to make sick, to make hoole: to make rich,
to make poor: to set up, to put down. Potens, a mighty bushop, mighty and
able to remyt sin, to forgive, to save both bydye and soul from dampnacyon.
Potens, a mighty bushop and full of power. No power in this world but of him.
Roma. 13.
Omnis potestas a domino deo est. All power is of him. And as he him self
witnesses, Math. 28.
Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo and in terra. All power is given unto
me, in heaven and in earth. Potens saluare a morte. He can save the body, and
save the soul. He can deliver the toone, and deliver the the other from
everlasting death. Who can forgive sin but he? Ma^^. 2.
Quis potest dimittere peccatu^ nisi solus deus? Est potens. He is a mighty
bushop. Of him and by him, Emperors, Kings, magistrates and potestates:
busshoppes, priests, with all other that has power, has their power and
auctorytie. Who is able to turn the wind? to make the wind blow or cease,
but he? Who is able to say and prove, I will now have it rain, now clear:
the son to shine, the water to flow, to ebb, with soche other, but only he?
This is our mighty bushop. Pontifex potens, mighty, ye omnipotens, almyghtye.
He can do all. nothing to him impossyble. Omnipotens.
Ipse dixit and facta suntoi^a, Mandauit, and creata sunt vniuersa. Psalm. 32.
Potens ergo est. He is a mighty bushop. We are not so,

Fidelis pontifex. He is a faithful bushop. Faithful. Fidelis.
He is a faithful bushop to god. referrynge all lauds, all honor and glory
to his father, in althynges that he did, miracles or other. He took never the
more upon him self. He was also a faithful bushop to the world. For he did all
that belongede to the office of a good bushop. The very office of a bushop is
predicare, Tria ad officium episcopi partine^tia. Predicabat. i. Offic^^^
episcopi.
orare, and sacrificare sieve offerre. To preach, to pray, to do^^ sacrifyce
and to offer. He preachede to his people. He taught the world most wholesome
doctrine, whereby he called the people to god, he converted sinners, he called
them to penance. He made them weep and lament their sins. They followed his
person, they followed his word, they followed his ensample. They came out of
all coostes to se him, to here him, to learn of him. Math 14.
They forsook meat and drink, house and home, and folowede him wheresoever he
went, as well in wyldernes as else where. In somoche that after they had
folowede him three days, he being moved with pitye lest they should peryshe
for lack of food being in wyldernes far from succor, fed them twyse
miraculously. Oons, in the desert with five loves and two fysshes, feed five
thousand men besides women and children, and were left twelve great baskettes,
Math. 15*
twelve maundes full of the brokelettes and offals at that meal. At an other
time, he fed in wyldernes to the nombre of four thousand men, besides women
and children, with seven looues and a few small fyshes. And was left of
fragmentes, seven maundes full.

ij. officiu^ episcopi, and predicatoris est orare.
The second office of a bushop he fulfilled also. For he prayed. He was most
devout in prayer, so to teach all bushops and preachers not to presume in
their wit or learning, neither in their capacitye, memory, fair tongue or
vtteraunce: but that the preacher do studyouslye apply his book, with all
diligencye to study: how to speak, whatte to speak, before whom he shall
speak: and to shape his sermonde after the audyence. The preacher ought also
besides his study and preaching, to pray. For by devout prayer, he shall
attain percase asmoche or more, as by study or learning. For without prayer,
the words will little prevail. Look in Christ his life, and thou shall find,
that in every thing he went about he prayed, to show the valiancye the
virtue and strength of prayer. To show our necessytes, our weykenes and
feebleness of nature. He prayed for his people (as Luke witnesses) the space of
one hole night. Luce. 6.
And what a marvelous devout prayer made he for his people in the mount the
night before his Passion? when the chalyce of death was represented unto him?
when he swette water and blood? when he cried thryse Transeat a me calix iste?
Math. 26.
Let this chalyce, let this Passion and blood, let the virtue thereof pass
from me unto all mankind. Let every man have the virtue and merit thereof, let
it work in all folks, let every faithful man and woman be pertener thereof,
let it not be lost but work to the worlds end. This was a merueylous
devout merciful prayer. And ayayne he sufferyng and hanging on the cross,
offered up for his people Preces and supplicationes cum clamore valido and
lacrimis. Hebre. 5.
He offered up his prayers and supplicacyons with a hudge cry, with a pityous
voice, Clamor christi i^^ cruce.
with a lamentable and a deathly shryche, and with weeping tears (to god his
father) he hangyng on the cross, even when the spirit should depart the
body, not then forgettyng his people at that hour when all the people
forgets both the world and them selves. Which cry was so hudge and great,
so marvelous and of that effect, that the heuens trembled thereat, Celi.
Angeli. Sol. Uelum. Terra. Petre. sepul^^ra. Mortui. Ce^turio. Marce 15.
the angels mourned for pitye, the son looste his light, the veil in the
temple ryued in two, the earth quaued, the stoones rent a sondre and brast in
gobettes, the graves opened, the dead bodies rose to life and appeared in the
city. Centurio and those that kept Christ to se the execucyon done, cried,
Vere filius dei erat iste. This was the undoubted son of god. His prayer and
weeping tears were so pleasant unto the father, that it was herd,
Exaudi^^us ^^st pro reuere^tia sua. He was herd, and why? (...). 8.
For it was so entere, so devout, so reverently done, in such a manner and
fashyon, with such a zeal, grounded upon such a charity, sufferynge for our
gylte and not for his own. And for that he did the very office of a bushop,
so enterely to pray and so reverently to offer up him self in sacrifice for
his people, he was herd, he was herd: his prayer was herd of god. And that
is the third property of a good bushop to offer sacrifice for his people.
Every bushop, every bushop for his diocesans and for the hole universal
church. iii. officiu^ Episcopi est sacrificare. Fidelis.
In these three we ought asmoche as we may to follow Christ.

Thus this Christ was and is Pontifex fidelis, a faithful bushop. Faithful,
faithful in his word, true in his promise, deceyuynge no man, but profityng
all. In all that he did or spoke, he sought nothing his own glory, but the
glory of god: teaching thereby all busshops of the world in all that they goo
about, to do it to the laud praise and glory of God. And herein we ought
also to follow him.

Magnus pontifex. He is the great busshop, the high bushop, Magnus
the supreme bushop, the universal bushoppe over all the world. No great
bushop but he. None high, none supreme nor universal bushop, but he. And
herein the bushop of Rome outragiously usurps upon God as he does upon the
world: to take the honor and names (only to god appropryed) to him self.
And does grievously blaspheme and offend god therein. Greater blasphemye can
not be, then to ascrybe to god, that that no ways belongs unto him:
Blasphemia.
or to take from God, that that unto him is appropryed. It is meet therefore he
do betymes and in season leave his unjust encrochementes both annenste his
Lord god and also annenste the world, lest he do provoke God to pour out
all his vyalles of wrath upon him: the vees I mean, the maledictions and
vengeance that John^ speaks of in the Apocalypse. I would advise him to cease
the Iniuryes which he has and daily does annenste the Christ our great
high universal bushop, Apoca. 9.
lest thou exco^munycate and stryke, leefte thou show thy wrath and
judgment annenst him and utterly extyncte his pride and ambicious pretensed
auctorite. For thou will be known, thou will be known god. And thou art
and will be our great universal and supreme bushop what soever the bushop of
Rome shall attempt to the contrary, and thou will punyshe his worldely
arrogancye, and stryke when thou seeste thy time. And though it be long or
thou stryke, yet let him beware, for stryke thou will if thou be utterly
provoked. And when thou do stryke, thy stroke is great, thy stroke is
dradful and soore. It vaynquesheth the body, it sleyeth the soul, it dampneth
both. Beware therefore thou bushop of Rome, and be content with thine own
dioces, with thine own chardge, as other bushops are with theyrs. For further
then thine own dioces, thy jurisdiction do not stretche.

A marvelous blyndnes in the therefore to take upon the to answer for all the
world, and art not able to answer our great bushop Christ for thy self at
that dradfull day of Judgment: when he shall ask but these few questions of
the, Quomodo intrasti? Questiones in iudicio episcopo fiende.
Quomodo rexisti? Quomodo vixisti? Quomodo pauisti? Quae and qualia exempla
dedisti? Quid ad meam gloriam fe^^isti? and huiusmodi. How dyddest thou enter
into thy bushopryke? by me or by the world? unlawfully or lawfully? by simonye
or freely? by labor by paction, or called of god? How dyddest thou rule thy
cure? thy diocese? dyddest thou pray for thy people? dyddest thou preach me
to thy diocesans? dyddest thou give them goostly and bodily food? dyddest
thou minyster spirytuall and goostly salues (the sacraments I mean) to heal
the soores of their souls? How dyddest thou live? dyddest thou cast away
the cure the glory and pomp of the world? dyddest thou follow me in humilyte,
in charity, in compassion, in pouertye, in clennes, and in chaaste living?

How dyddest thou govern thy diocesans? dyddeste not thou make of all things
that thou dyddeste meddle with a money matter? in selling that which was not
in the to sell nor give, that that thou calleddest thy pardons, thy
commyssyons, thy breeues, thy delygaces, reseruacions, exemptions,
appellacyons, bulls and dyspensacions? Dyddest not thou under these pretenses
and like other doings, dysceyue the world? Whatte ansfere shall thou make to
this at that day to our and thy great bushop Christ, when he shall visyte the
and all thy dioces, me and all my dioces, ye when he shall visytte all the
world? what ansfere shalt thou then make? I think verelye thou shalt then
have enough to do, ye and more then thou can wind thy self out of, to
maake ansfere for thy self, for thine own dioces and for thine own
diocesans: though thou usurp not upon other men's as thou do. The Apostle
writes of Christ humblye, and calls him Magnum pontificem, the great
bushop. And he of Rome is not with this word contented, but will have a higher
word for him self, in the superlatiue degree. Maximum. Pontificem maximu^.
The greatest busshop. Oh, where is the humblenes and mekenes that should be in
him? Alas he that takes on him to teach all the world, how can he for shame
suffer such blaphemous words to pass in his name to his great shame and
rebuke: to the great danger of his soul, and to the perylous ensample unto
other. Oh, fie upon pride / it is a common Proverb, Pride will have a fall.

Our bushop Christ was humilis, meke, lowly, and humble in heart. Humilis.
He roode not upon any palfraye nor curragious horse, but upon an ass and that
but oons. He never was borne pompiously abroad in chair upon men's shulders.
He never proffered his foot to any body to kiss: We read that he washed the
feet of his discyples and wyped them. Johan. 13.
We read that Mary Magdalen proffered to have kyssed his feet, but he did
prohybyte her saying Noli me tangere. Touch me not. He would not suffer the
woman then to touch him. Math. 20.
He never had guard to defend him. He never followed the pomp of the world.
He disdayned not to goo upon the ground with his baare fecte. What shall I
say? He gave ensamples enough to the bushop of Rome, to me and to all
bushoppes, to be meke and humble, he to know him self and we our selves, as
if he and we diligently look in scripture, we shall find. And herein, in
mekenes we are bound to follow him.

Compaciens infirmitatibus. This bushop Christ, Compatiens.
had compassyon of our infirmites, of our frayltyes. It is impossible for a
man to know the afflyctions of the miserable person that never suffered
affliction, that never had experience of pains, that never felt what pain
mente. But this bushop Christ, had experience of our nature: how weyke, how
feeble the nature of man is. How weyke of him self to do any good work
without the help of God. How feeble to resyste temptacions. He suffered and
felt the infirmytyes and pains of his natural body. He has therefore
compassion upon man when he does se him fall. He soroweth his ruin. Teaching
bushoppes in especyall before all other, to have compassion and pitye upon the
sinner. To help him spirytually, to comfort him goo^^^* to help him to arise
from sin, to allure him to penance, to draw him to virtue, to make him
know god, to fear his justice, to love his laws. And thus to seek all the
ways he and we can, to save the sinners soul, for whom he shall make ansfere
to god for his own diocesans: soul for soul, blood for blood, pain for
pain, hell for hell, dampnacyon for dampnacyon: For which soul our great
busshop Christ (as the Apostle does wytnes) did offer gifts and sacrifyce,
Hebre. 5.
and sacrifycede him self, having compassion of them that by ygnorancye and by
error did sin and offend God: even when he was in his greatest agonye upon
the cross, he cried to his father forgive them father, Luce. 2^^.
forgive them: they know not what they do, they are ygnoraunt people, they
know not what is what, nor what danger they run in to by this entreatyng
me. They know not their offenses, forgive them father, forgive them. In this
compassyon we ought also to follow our great bushop Christ.

It follows in the formour letter. Est pontifex appellatus a deo. Pontifex
appellatus
He is a bushop, and so named of god. He is the very bushoppe. He offered up
the very sacrifyce, the sacrifyce of his own most blyssed body and blood
whereby the sin of the world was put away. Every bushop of the world is not
named a bushop by god. For some comes in to that office, not by the holy
ghost, not elect of god, (as John^ says) Not entering in ouile ouium per
ostium, sed ascendens aliunde. Some there are that enters in to the fold of
the sheep of god, John. 10.
not by the door: Some there be that enters in to having charge and cure of
soul, not by god: but by worldly means, by worldly labor, by importune
suits and intercessyon of friends, or by their own unlawful labor, by
simonye and such other ways. Such are not named bushops by god. John. 14
Such enters not by the door, not by him that says Ego sum ostium, Ego sum
via veritas and vita. I am the door, I am the way, I am life, I am truth, I
am Pastor bonus, the very true and good bushop that entered by god. And all that
enters otherwise then by god, Christ calls them Fures and latrones, John. 10
thieves, spoylers, raueners, deuourers and deceyuers of the sheep. Their
living shall declare the same. For such as sowro^gfully does enter, do
study their own profyttes and co^modytes. Such receives the fruytes and do
nothing for it. Such suffers their sheep to perysshe for lack of bodyly
and goostly food and sustenaunce, for lack of preaching, for lack of
gyuynge good counsel, for lack of good living, for lack of good ensample.
And such for the most part lives noughtely, carnally, fleshly, vicyously,
pompyously, worldly, and not bushoply nor priestly. For they came not in by
god, nor by grace. Christ says, John. 10.
Qui intrat per me, saluabitur, and ingredietur, and egredietur, and pascua
inueniet. He that enters by me shall be saved. Et ingredietur and egredietur.
And he shall goo in and he shall goo out. What is that to say, He shall goo in
and he shall goo out? To goo in and to goo out, I think he means by going
in, that he shall have grace to enter studyously in to the holy scripture,
daily and nyghtly to medytate, to study and to profytte in the laws of god.
Et egredietur. And he shall explayne and truly interpretate and publyshe it
unto the people. Et pascua inueniet. And he shall find there plentye of
spirytuall food for him self and for his people. To edifye their souls, to
instruct and call them to the knowledge of god, to feed them plentyfully,
that they shall not lack necessaryes to their souls. Let us therefore so live
that we may be called Pontifices appellati a deo.

This our great bushop Christ is also, Pontifex sanctus, innocens,
impollutus, segregatus a peccatoribus, Hebre. 7
excelsior coelis, sedens a dextris dei, emundans conscientias nostras a
peccatis, intrans sancta sanctorum, per proprium sanguinem. He is Sanctus. A
holy bushop, Sanctus*
and wylleth us to be holy in our co^uersacyon: applyinge our selves unto
godlynes, to the service of god, to live like bushops like priests: pure,
clean, chaaste, devout, studyous, faythfullye laboring in his word,
prayinge, doing sacrifyce, and ever to be godly and virtuously occupied.

He is Innocens, an innocent. He never sinned, he never offended in word,
thought nor deed. Innocens, Innoce^s
noyinge no creature, profytynge all folks: mekelye sufferynge aduersytyes,
obprobryes, re^^agges, rebukes and reproaches, without grudge or contradictyon.
Innocens and simplex, simplex sine plica. An innocente, Simplex
without plate or wrinkle, without error or doublenes, without hypocrisye or
dyssymulacyon, without flattering or glosynge, without fraud or dysceyte:
not serving the body nor the world, but god. In this we ought also to follow
our heavenly bushoppe.

Impollutus. He was vndefylede. He lived clean without spotte or blotte,
Impollutus.
without wemme or stayne. No immundicye in him, no uncleanness, no moote nor
fylthynes: But all pure and clean, all chaaste and immaculate, all bright and
shynynge in grace and godliness. In somoche that he was Segregatus a
peccatoribus clean segregate from all kind of uncleanness, Segregatus a peccatis.
from all manner of sins, and from sinners. Segregate from them, not from
their company, Math. 9.
For as Mathewe writes, Publicans and sinners came and eat and drank with
him and his disciples in the house of Leui. And he also came as a Phisycyon, to
heal the sinner. And yet was segregate from them (quantum ad participacionem
cum cis in peccato) as touching their ill lyuynges, not being particypante
with them in sin. But came only to heal them, and to rydde them from sin
and soores of the soul. He entered the heuens, not with the blood of kydde nor
goote, but with his own proper blood. For which and for his holiness and
perfytenes Excelsior coelis factus est. Excelsior celis.
He is extolled and exalted above all the angels and beats, above all the
heuens: sitting on the right hand of the father. Whom all the heavenly
creatures does worship, honor and do reverence unto. Where he prays for
his people, and is medyatoure in his manheed to his father for us.

This our bushop pourgeth our conscyences (as witnesses thapostle) he
cleanses our souls, he makes us inwardly beutyous and fair. The bushop of
Rome lacks many of these notable virtues. He has few or noone of these
propertyes, few or noone of these qualytes. He is (as we all are sinners) a
sinner. To whom this word Magnus great, is not conuenyente, nor can be in him
any ways veryfyed. Magnus
For he cannot forgive sin as our bushop does, nor justify as he does,
neither enter in Scta^ sanctoru^ with his own blood as he did. How can he then
be called a great bushop that is (as we all be sinners) a sinner, a breaker of
the laws of god, and daily do or may, fall and sin. And for that cause the
law co^maundede that every bushop and priest should first offer hoostes and
sacrifyce for his own sins, and afterward for the sins of the people.
How can he therefore be called a great bushop or priest?

Our bushop we speak of, is the very great busshop. No doole, no fraud,
no gyle was ever found in his mouth. And when the prince of the world the
devil came to him, he could find no point of sin in him. Wherefore
Gabryell the archangell showing his natiuyte unto Mary his mother, said, (...)
Hic (...) magnus and filius altissimi vocabitur. He shall be great, (...)
shall be called the son of god. And ayayne it is written of him, Propheta
magnus surrexit inter nos. (...)
A great Prophette is risen amongst us. Sin, makes a man small and little,
little in reputacyon both before god and man. Virtue makes man great and of
high reputacyon. Uirtus.
Show me one place in scripture where ye have read, that a sinner was called
great? I trow it shall not be found. Will you here whoo were called great
in scripture? It is written of Isaac Quod proficiebat valde and factus est
magnus valde. Gene. 26.
He profited greatly in virtue, and was made great, great in reputacyo^ of
the world. Moses was called Magnus, Exodi. 11.
great for his virtue. Abraham and John^ baptist likewise. Now Jesus our
bushop is called Magnus episcopus, Luce. 1.
magnus sacerdos. And after him never bushop called Magnus in all scripture,
neither in the reputacyon of man unless it be in comparison one of another. And
so saints and holy lyuers are called great in respect of sinners or other
mean lyuers. But where Christ our bushop comes, which not in comparison of
other, but simpliciter by his own magnytude and greatness and of him self ever
was and is great, of whom it is written. A summo coelo egressio eius, and
occursus eius vsque ad summum eius. Psalm. 1^^.
And as the apostle proves in many places by express word. But now there
is no bushop nor priest in this world, that may worthily of him self be
called great, nor ought to take this name magnus upon him.

This is he therefore of whom it is written, Magnus sacerdos ex fratribus suis.
The great bushop above all other. Leuiti. 21.
And as he is called and in very deed is Pastor pastorum, Pontifex pontificum,
Propheta prophetarum, Sanctus sanctorum, Dominus dominantium, Rex regum. Ita
and magnus magnorum est. As he is called the herdes man of hyrdesmen, the
bushop of bushops, the prophet of prophets, the holy of holiest, the lord of
lords and king of kings: Even so is he called and verylye is Episcopus
magnus. Therefore the prophette did add Magnus sacerdos ex fratribus suis, the
great bushoppe or priest, great of him self, great in virtue and power,
great of him self, and great in comparison before all other. And therefore the
Apostle said Habemus pontificem magnu^, qui paenetrauit coelos, IESVM filium
dei.

We have a great bushop, which did penetrate the heuens, Jesus the son of
God.

Here may ye now se how the bushop of Rome does wrongfully encrouche upon our
great bushop Jesus Christ, to take from him not only this name Magnus, and is
not with that name yet contentede, but adds more videlicet Maximus, Summus,
Sanctus, Beatissimus, Vniuersalis, and soche other. The greatest, the highest,
the holiest, the blysseddest and universal in the superlatyue degrees. And yet
there is no great bushop, but Christ only, no supreme bushop, but he only,
none holy, none blyssed, none universal bushop, but only he. The bushop of
Rome and all other bushoppes are but underlings and unworthy suffragans unto
this bushop Christ.

This our Christ (as witnesses the apostle) is pontifex nostre confessionis,
Pontife^^ nostre co^fessionis.
the bushop whom we do confess to be our great bushop, our high bushop* our
supreme bushop, our holy blyssed and universal bushop. Which names are
reserved only unto Christ, and to no earthly bushop. Not to the bushop of
Rome, not to the bushop of Jerusalem, not to the bushop of Antioche* nor of
Constantinople, nor to any other bushop. No^^ earthly bushop to presume to take
upon him these high and holy names only to god appropryed.

God of thy goodness thou may and I trust will oons make this vayngloryous
bushop of Rome, first to know and knowledge the Christ to be the only
supreme and universal bushop of the world. Secondarylye to know him self,
his weykenes, his frayltye and his presumpcyon. To know his office and bounden
duetye unto the god. To know his own dioces, and to usurp no further.
Thyrdlye to have a low, humble, meek heart and stomach: to fear the god and
thy judgments, to knowledge his onwe faults, and vsurpacyons and to redress
the same.

Now to return unto our matter it follows in the letter first taken, Litera.
De quo edere non habent potesta^^e^ qui tabernaculo deseruiunt. They that
does serve the tabernacle may not eat of this sacrifyce. Edere de tabernaculo
quid sit? 2. Corint. 3.
We christen people that ought to hold the truth and verytye and not the
figures, let us enquire and search, Non literam occidentem, sed spiritum
viuificantem: not the letter, but the spirit: not the bare gra^matical sense,
but the spiritual: not the carnal understanding, but the inward thing
mente thereby. Tabernaculu^ quid
What is then spirytually this tabernacle? What is it to serve this Tabernacle?
And what to eat of this sacrifyce? Corpus.
This tabernacle is our body. How shall I prove that? Here what the apostle
says, believe him. What says he? he says, Qui sumus in hoc tabernaculo, 2.
Corint. 5.
ingemissimus: grauati, onerati, eo quod nolumus expoliari, sed superuestiri:
Vt obsorbeatur quod mortale and corruptibile est a vita. We that be in the
tabernecle of this mortal corruptyble body, we mourn and lamente. And why?
For we are grieved and burdened with our mortal and corrupt flesshlye body,
for that we would not be spoiled but have a new garment: desirynge to have
that which is mortal and corruptyble, to be clean taken away from this life.

Who are they that says this? Who are they that are grieved, burdened, weryed
and find fault with this body? Iuuenes
The iolye huffaas and ruffelers of this would? The young galandes of the
court? The lustye Iuuentus, youth? No no, no. None of these. For there is
nothing in this world more pleasant more acceptable to them then the body.
For all there study is how to please this body, how to deck this body, how
to feed this body, how to take the ease of this body, the pleasure of this
body. Every way seeking and inuentynge, how to follow the voluptye and carnal
desires of this body. We se how they study to set forth this body, to
fashon it, to make it appear more gorgyous, more syghtye and better in making
and shape then God maade it. Now with this fashon of apparel, now with that.
Now with this cut and that guard. I cannot descrybe the thing, nor I will
do. But I se it far wide, far out of frame, few keeping them selves
within their bounds: but for the most part outragyouslye, excessyuely, and
excedyngly out of order. In especyall mean men, serving men, bestowynge upon
one pair of hoses, in manner asmoche as his half years wages comes unto. Alas
how can this be borne? how can this co^tynue, unless they have lyueloode to
maintain it, as they have not? And so in all other their apparel ratably
they do abuse them selves. It is far wide and out of the nocke. It is not
well. All the world do se it. All the world speaks of it, and sees what
inconuenyences does follow thereof: and yet no man puts to his hand to
the amendment of it. Ou^^ lord amend it, and put in good men's minds to
remedy the same. How we feed this body with meats and drynkes of all
sorts, and with the diuersy^^^ of the same, to quycken the appetite: How we
(...) to please this body with rest, with ease, with quyetn^^^ with games,
with sportes and other pastyme: How ^^^^^dyous we be to have worldly
substance to maintain this pride and pomp, this sloth and glotonye: ye to
follow the fleshly, filthy, voluptuous pleasures of the body: All the world
may perceive it. And they that so do, shall one ways or other feel it: either
here with myserye, pouertye, syckenes, plaage, or otherwise: Or else where,
with pain and punyshmente. Corpus inimicus homini. Tres inimici spirituales.
Septe^ peccata mortalia.


This body is the greatest enemy that man has, and sonest does bring man
unto dampnacion, which is easy enough to prove. For we have but three goostlye
enemies, the devil, the world, and the body. And there are but seven deedlye
sins: Pride, wrath, Envy, Sloth, Glotony, Couytous, and Lechery. Of the
which seven, but two properlye are applied to the devil, wrath and Envy: Two
to the world, pride and couytous: And the body has three to him appropryed,
Sloth with all his kinds, Glotony with all his fellowship, and Lechery with
all his branches. And I rekonne moo dampened by sloth, glotonye, lechery, and
with their branches: then by pride, wrath, envy, and couytous with all their
raafull. So consequentlye I rekon the body, to be the ancient enemy, the
great pursuer of man, the great poysoner of the soul, the great occasyon of
the dampnacyon of the same. This body is so infeste and busye in temptacyons
of the flesh, that many do say (as I have herd them speak) that man can not
live chaste, for it is Donum dei, a special gift of god, and every man has
not that gift, as Solomon says, Sap^^en. 8.
Non possum esse continens, nisi tu dederis domine. I cannot live chaste unless
thou Lord god do give it me. Forsothe true. And no more can I have Charity,
Faith, Hoope, nor any other virtue: but of the gift of god. All virtues are
Dona dei. He gives all these virtues and other like unto us, if we will: if we
couyte to have them, if we make means to have them, if we will with devout
mind desire them of god. Therefore says the Euangelyste Mathewe where he
speaks of Chastyte, Math. 19.
Non omnes capiunt hoc verbum, sed quibus datum est. All do not take this word
but they that god gives it unto. All are not apt to live chaste, nor all do
dyspose them selves thereunto. Therefore christ added unto it, Qui potest capere
capiat. He that may take it, take it. What is this to say, He that may take it
take it? Forsothe it is to say, He that will take it, take it. So that he
does not constrayne any man that is at liberty, that has not maade vow to
the contrary to this nor to that, But leaves it to his own free will. And
therefore says, He that may take it, take it. This word Potest, may as I
think be taken here, as it is in many places of scripture, Posse pre velle.
Posse.
May for will. As here in John^. Credere no^ potuerunt. i. Credere noluerunt
after Chrysostom. John^. 1^^
They could not (he says) believe, that was asmoche to say, They would not
believe. Again in John^, Christ said to the Iues, Non potest mundus odisse
vos, me aute^ odit. John^. 7
The world can not hate you. What is this to say? But that the world will
not hate you, but me the world hates. We say also in our vulgar tongue, I
can not love that man for his condicyons. Yet I can love him if I will, but I
will not love him for his ill condicyons. And again, Non potest ille fieri
bonus. He can not be good. And is no more to say, but he will not be good.
Another notable ensample we read of Christ in the gospel of Mark. (...)
That after he had raised from death to life filiam Archisinagogi, He went
from thence into his own country where he was borne. There he taught so
meruelously, that many of them said, How has this man this learning, these
gifts of workynge virtues and miracles? Is not this the son of Mary? Is not
this the brother of Jacob and Joseph, of Judah and Simon? Be not his systers
dwelling hear among us? And thus blasphemed and slaundered him? To whom
Christ maade answer. There is no Prophet without honor but in his own
country, in his own house and among his own kynne and acquayntance. And
follows there, Non poterat ibi vertutem vlla^ facere, nisi paucos infirmos
impositis manibus curauit. Et mirabantur propter incredulitatem eoru^. He
could not do there any miracle, but healed a few sick people with touching
them. Who will say that Christ and god could not do miracles there, to whom
nothing was nor is impossyble? To whom althynges are light and easy to do?
Yet the Euangelyst says even so as I have rehearsed. Why if the Euangelyst
so say, then must it needs be true that Christ could do no miracles there?
Ye forsothe. It is scripture, and scripture is and must be true.

Why how shall we then save both these, That to Christ there is nothing
impossyble, and that Christ could work no miracles there? Uerylye scripture
must be taken as the holy ghost and his instrumente the Euangelyst mente it.
When Mark said, Christ could do no miracles there but a few, he meant that
Christ would do no miracles there for the ingratytude of the Iues, and for
their incredulyte and lack of faith. Non potuit for no^ voluit. He could
not. wherein he mente, that he would not. So to the former saying, Capiat qui
capere potest. Every man be contynente and chaast that may. Every person that
may keep it, keep it. And is no more to say, but every man may have chastity and
keep chastyte that will, having the grace of god, with the help of him and
his grace. whereof the apostle says, Phillip. 4.
Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat xp^s. I may do and sustain althinges in
him and by him that comfort me, our lord Jesus Christ. And both him and
his grace thou may have if thou call and sue for it, if thou will apply
thy self to receive it, as anon shall to the plainly appear.

But how is it possible for him to live chaste that has a desire to be ever in
company of women? or for women to live chaste that has desire ever to be in
company of men? In company of light and suspecte persons? suspecte places?
secrette and alone? How is it possible for him to live chaste, that has a
lascyuyous petulant eye? a wanton light countenance? gasynge in every woman's
face? whereby he is tracte and drawn in to concupyscencye? No man, no man can
live chaaste nor clean, as long as he has a lecherous eye, ears given to
here every light scurrilous taale, wanton words provoking to sin. Thou
can not possyblye live chaast as long as thou have pleasure to be co^uersant
with women, as long as thou delytest wantonly to ^^angle and talk with them.
As long as thou haste pleasure in unclean touchynges, in wanton halseynge,
wanton enbrasynge, or in wanton kissing. As long as thou vseste to resort
unto suspecte houses, to suspecte places, to suspecte persons. As long as
thou vseste carnal conuersacyon, carnal delectacyon, ouermoche pleasure in
fedynge the body excessyuely with delecate meats and drynkes, and with like
other as I have touched.

Look in scripture how many has fallen by soch co^cupyscencye of the eye, of
the ears, of the mouth, of the hands and soforth. And we shall find many
marvelous and dangerous ensamples hereof if we reed scripture: as in Dyna, in
the wife of Putifare, (...)
in hol^^fernes, in Judas, in Solomon, in Samson, and in David the king with
many many moo. Flee therefore these occasyons, and thou may live chaste with
the help of the grace and goodness of god. Call often upon him for help. Pray
deuoutlye and worthylye unto him for this gift of chastyte, and apply thy
self thereunto, and god will give it the. Gyd will give it unto him that
devoutly and contynually do ask it, to him that will have it, to him that
will labor and seek means to attain it. He says in scripture plainly,
Petite and accipietis, pulsate and aparietur vobis, querite and inuenietis.
Math. 7.
Ask and ye shall have, knock and the door shall be opened unto you, seek
and ye shall find. And follows, Omnis qui petit accipit, qui querit inuenit,
and pulsanti aperietur. Omnis. Every one that asks shall have, and they that
seeks shall find. And to him that do knock, the door shall be opened. These
be the words of god, and must needs be true, taken in their true sense as
Christ spoke them. For many one asks and gothe without his desire. Many one
seeks that cannot find. Many one knocks and yet cannot come in. And why?
Does not Christ say, Every man that asks shall have? Every man that
seeks shall find? Every man that knocks shall come in? Yes forsothe. Ye
shall therefore know how saint James does declare this text, and how this
letter is to be understand. Saint James says, Petitis and non accipitis. And
Christ says, Petite and accipietis. I^^to. 4.
Christ says, Ask and ye shall have. James says, Ye ask and ye have not
that that ye do ask. To whom shall we give credence of these two? To Christ
or to James? Christ says ye shall have, James says ye shall not have. What
is moore contrary then to have and to not have? Is there any contradyctyon in
scripture? God forbid. God forbid but scripture should be true, and in all
places true. How shall these two then stand together? Read forth a little
moore in James, and thou shall soon know what Christ mente when he said, Ask
and ye shall have. Why what says James? Petitis and no^ accipitis inquit, ^^o
quod male petatis, vt in concupiscentiis vestris insumatis. Ye ask, ye pray
and make peticyons: and yette it is not granted you. And why? Quia male
peritis. For that ye ask that that ye should not ask, for that ye ask that
that ye ought not to ask. Ye ask either that that is not meet for you, not
wholesome for your souls: either else you despair and are doutfull in your
asking, not having very co^fydence trust and faith in god, but doutynge*
hesitances doutynge in the power or goodness of god: or asking those things
that ye will abuse to your co^cupyscency: as in pride, in glotonye, lecherye
and soche other to the hynderance and damnacyon of your souls.

Ask that which ye should releue with the necessytes of your souls, Quid
petendum?
or the great need of your poor neighbors souls. Ask soche things as are
necessary for thy spirytual relefe and comfort, for the well of thy soul, to
live chrystianly, purely, in clennes, chastity and in other virtues, and to be
a faithful chrystyan, a true servant to god. Ask these and soche other
constantly, ask faithfully, ask devoutly, ask co^tynually: and god then will
here the, god will then grant the thy boon, and open his bosom of grace,
and pour out his mercyes upon the. And then shall thou find and have that
thou sekest for.

I read in the gospel of Luke a parable of a man that had a friend came unto
his house. (...)
And he not having wherewith to bydde his friend welcome, yoode to a friend of
his about mydnyght, knocking busyly at his door, desirynge to lend him iii.
loves of bread* His friend ansfered saying, I pray the trouble me not to
night, my door is shut, my servants are in bed* I can not now rise to
give the. The other continued knocking, knocking still till he that was in
bed Propter improbitatem, for his importune and busye calling, arose and
gave him asmoche as he had need of. It follows in the same letter, that Christ
said, I say to you, Ask and it shall be given you, Seek and ye shall find,
Knock and it shall be openede unto you. And follows. Uerylye I say unto you,
every one that asks receives. And he that seeks fyndeth. And to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. And follows yet in the same letter, Who of you
will ask your father bread, will he give him a stoone? If he ask a fyshe,
will he give him for a fyshe a serpent? or if he ask an egg, will he profer
him a scorpion? As so say, nay. As so say he will give you your desire and
peticyon. And yet follows. If therefore you that are sinners do know how to
give and what good gifts to give unto your children, how much moore then
does god your heuenlye Father know what to give, how to give, and how ready
will be to give the good spirit, the holy ghost, the gifts of grace: to them
that asks of him gracyous and godly peticyons? This parable Christ spoke to
animate and encourage us all to ask of him when we do lack, and what we
lack. And therefore says even following, Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye
shall find, knock and the door shall be opened unto you.

But thou must se thy peticyon be honest and reasonable, standinge with the
honor and pleasure of god, and with the wealth of thy soul. Ask no tryffles,
Ask no worldly pleasures, no carnal peticions, no fleshly requests: but
godly and heavenly things. Ask grace, ask mercy, ask forgyuenes of thy
sins and soche other, as did the Publycane, Mary Magdalen, Manasses, David
and the Niniuytes, with many other moo, and obtained. Thus ask, thus knock
and call, and thou shall have. But thou must also persevere and continue in thy
asking. Thou must call still upon god, ask still, knock still, seek still,
sue still unto him. Seek all the ways that thou canste ymagyn how to atteyne
thy peticyon and gracyously to be herd. Ask digne, Digne.
worthily, and thou shall have thy asking. He asks digne, wisely, worthily
and perseuerauntly: that does ask with the entere affectyons of his heart,
with a devout mind, with an inward devotion, with a secrette cloose heart
toward god: with syghynges, sobbynges, wepynges, and with a contryte heart:
with abstinences, fastings, mortificacyons of the body, watchynge in holy
meditacions, studyinge in god, redynge in holy scripture, holy exercyses of the
body, with often prayers, with a high faith, with a very confydence and
trust in god: searching all the ways that can be, to attain grace of thy
lord god, to come to thy godly purpose. And under this manner do and ask,
and then god will here the, then god will help the, then god will grant unto
the thy ryghteous boon and peticion.

For he is ever most priest and redye with his grace, to make to all faithful
peticioners, his commandments and other virtues to be light, easy and
possible to be observed and kept, if he be faithfully, instantly, devoutly,
enterely, and continually required.

Under this devout manner (with the help of his grace) it is put in our
liberty, either to grant or (...) the consent unto temptacyon. Else should
not sin (...) imputed unto us. For though we can not be without the
infirmitye and sycknes of concupiscencie which (...) it self (simpliciter
taken) is no sin, (...)
but pena (...) the pain of sin, a weykenes of the body inflycte (...)
sin, a disposycyon to sin, and an inclynacyon to a fleshlynes, yet it is in
our election with the help of his grace, not to follow the passions of
concupiscencye. Without concupiscence this mortal body can not be. But
having the grace of god, it is in our power to resyste and withstand it. For
scripture says, Ec^^le 18*
Post concupiscentias tuas non eas and a voluntate tua auente. Si praestas
anime tue concupiscentias, faciet te in gaudium inimicis tuis. Again.
Desideria carnis non perfeceris. Galat. 5. Roma. 6.
And to the Romans. No^ regnet peccatu^ in vestro corpore mortali ad
obediendu^ desideriis eius. And Moses in Genesis says, Subter te est appetitus
tuus, and tu dominaberis illius. Gene. 4.
Follow not thy concupiscence, and turn from thy will and sensual appetie
says Salomo^. And ayayn, If thou give to thy soul occasyon of co^cupiscencye,
thou shall maake thine enemies rejoice. Ayayne, follow not the filthy desires
of thy flesh. Let not sin reygne in your mortal body to obey to his
desires. And in Genesis, Thine appetite shall be under thy dominyon, and thou
shall be ruler thereof. And instructs us how to chastyce our bodies and to
keep them under, Ephesi. 3.
saying, Mortifye your members, mortifye the sin that reygneth in your
members. Mortifye fornicacyon, immundicye and uncleanness, turpitude and
libidinous desires. Mortifye all ill concupiscencye and auaricye. For these
rehersede flesshlynes, does maculate both the body and soul. Mortifye
therefore all these your members. And Christ says in Mathewe, Math. 11.
My yocke is pleasant and sweet, and my burden is light and easy. And John^
says, His commandments be not heuye nor grievous. 1. Johan. 5.
And Christ by these exhortacyons shows him self to be most desirous to
have us live clean, and he ever to be most priest and ready with his grace, to
help us if we cry and call, if we make humble suete with devout peticyon unto
him, applyinge our selves all that we can, to use soche devout means as shall
help to the attaynmente of the same, as the holy servants of God does. Who
utterly does refuse and abiecte these worldly pleasures, this bodylye
comfort. For they felyth this mortal body that they do bear about, to be
a grievous burden unto them, what for sorrows, sycknes werynes, fatigacyons and
other natural diseases: for tentacyons and intysementes unto sin, ever
provoking to ill, and for other grievous and intolerable labors, burdens and
pains. They desire therefore to be eased of this burden. They desire with the
Apostle Mori, and esse cum Christo, to dye and to be with Christ. They desire
to be immortal and impassyble, that they so might be rydde out, of, and
from the carnal mocyons, concupiscences and the desires of the flesh. And
that is it that the apostle says, Ingemissimus. We mourn, we lament and
sorrow. And why? Eo ^^ nolumus expoliari, sed superuestiri. They mourn for
that they after the natural desire of the body, would not be spoiled of this
natural life, but to have a new garmente put upon this body. What garmente
is that* Uerylye the vesture of immortalyte. Vt obsorbeatur (inquit) quod
mortale est a vita. To have all that is mortal and corruptyble, to be put
away: To have all fylthynes of sin and tentacyon, to be obsorpte and cut
from the body: and to do on Christ for their garmente, as the apostle says,
Roma ^^
Indui^^ini dominu^ IESVM Christum. Do ye on Jesus Christ, live a Chrystly
life* ^^ Chrystians life, a virtuous life, a godly life. Follow* follow Christ
in his living, in humblenes and mekenes, in continencye and chastyte, in
clennes and holiness in benignyte and obedience, in temperancye and pacyencye,
in love and charity, in goostly wys^^om and spiritual gladness, in peace and
goodness, in modesty and sufferancie: with soche other virtues of the spirit,
which the Apostle reherseth in the fyfth to the Galathyans. Gala^^* ^^.


Thus the Apostle reherseth the miseryes of this body, which young men do
set so much by, and holy men somoche despises. And shows the natural
desire for the great natural love that is between the soul and the body
never to depart, but to be ever together: as appears by the ensample of
Christ in his humanyte showed, in time of that great agony and co^flycte that
was between his body and soul: as yesternyght in his prayer, thryse cryinge to
his father to have that bloody chalyce of death to be removed, in remembrance
whereof, he swette bloody drops, blood and water pirled down to the ground
most aboundantlye from all parts of his most blyssed body. And yet
referred he his mind and will to his fathers will. So naturally desired not
to dye. And casting away that will of nature, following the will of the
father, desired to dye for the redemptyon of man. Which redemptyon could not
be done without his death and passion, Math. 11.
cryinge to his father, Non sicut ego volo pater sed sicut tu vis, fiat
voluntas tua.

Even so the holy servants of god, had as Christ had, two affeccions:
one natural, another supernatural and above nature. Consideringe the natural
desire, they would not dye. But yet lamenting the miserable co^dicions of the
body, desired to have the body clothed with the weed of immortalite, and to
be made clean from all corupte fylthy desires, from all unclean inclynacyons.
Consyderinge on the other party, the supernatural desire, they cried eueryche
of them with the Apostle, Cupio dissolui and esse cum Christo. We desire to
dye, we desire to goo out of this corrupt body that somoche does disquiet
us, we desire to be with our lord Jesus Christ. Thus they desired that they
might so be rydde from the carnal desires and affectyons of the body:
which deceyueth the best man in the world, if he be not well ware.

And thus to serve the tabernacle of this body, is none other, Seruire
tabernaculo quoth?
but to follow and fulfill the desires of the flesh. And they do serve this
tabernacle, that does live volupteously, carnally, fleshly, and fylthely:
following every mocyon, every tityllacyon and affectyon of the body: as in
glotonye, in commessacyons, and ebrietyes. They do serve this tabernacle, that
lives in slouthfulnes, in ydlenes, in cubilibus and in co^cupiscentiis,
having their pleasure to lie in the beds of co^cupiscencye, in luxus and
lecherous living: sousyng them selves in voluptie and carnal behauour. And
they that thus do, do serve the tabernacle. And all soche, have not license
to eat of this solemn high sacrifyce of this day: I mean the most
blyssed body and blood of our sauyoure Jesus Christ. For the apostle says,
Qui panem domini indigne ma^ducat, aut calicem domini indigne bibit: iudicium
^^ibi manducat and bibit. 1. Corin. ^^1.
Et reus e^^t corporis and sanguinis domini. Who soever do eat the body of
our lord unworthily, and unworthily do drink his blood: he does eat and
drink his own judgment, and shall be gyltye of the body and blood of
Christ. Look every man therefore upon him self, And do as the apostle does
say, Probet semetipsum homo, and tunc de illo pane edat and de calice bibat.
Let every man prove him self, let every man search his own co^^^scyence,
ransake his soul, seek every corner thereof, pourge and make him self
clean, no sin to remain* no spotte nor blotte, no taste nor smacke, no
color nor affectyon of sin: And then let him with a reue^^rence and a
filial confidence, eat of this food and drynk^^ of this cup. Then shall he
have the effect and merit of this meat and drynge, of this passion and
death, of this body and blood.

In this feast of propiciacyon the carkases and bodies of these beasts slain
for sacrifice, were burned and consumed with fire Extra castra, without their
tents. Which signified that now in time of the new testament, in this
feast called the feast of our redemption, Extra castra.
how that Christ that lamb, which saint John^ baptyste spoke of, the lamb
of god, Math. 7.
that takes away the sin of the world, the very sacrifice of the new law:
was had out of their tents, out of the city, out of the yates of the city,
in to the open field and hill of Golgotha, the mount of Caluary, and there
suffered, there his most blissed body was tortured with such pains, as the
cruel Iues could with their myscheuous and deuyllyshe wits contryue, ymagyne,
and invent. But why was not this body of Christ burned and consumed with fire
without the yates, as was their sacrifyce without the tents? The reason is
this. The passion of Christ is called Combustio, passio xp^i co^bustio.
a burning, for that his body was decocte, parchede, and consumed to the
death upon the cross with the pangues he suffered in that hudge fire of love,
of charity, of tribulacyon of Passion and death.

For in the old law, every grievous, bitter and paynfull Passion is called
Combustio, a burning, As it is written in Iosue, Iosue. 7.
Quicunque in hoc facinore fuerit deprehensus, comburetur igni. Who soever be
taken in this fault, he shall be burned in the fire. And after it follows in
the same Chapter, Iosue commanded the Israelites to stoone Acham filium Zare
for his like offenses to the death, and to burn all his goods in valle
Achor. So that it appears evidently, every paynfull death, to be called a
burning. But why would not Christ suffer within the tents, within the City,
within the yates? Certaynely, for because that within the tents and City, was
committed so much ydolatry, soche abominable lecherye, so filthy aduoutry,
so stynkynge fornicacyon with soche other. What shall I say? I say that in the
City reigned all sin.

Due civitates. Ciuitas Jerusalem.
Saint Augustyne says, two loves makes two cities. The love of god makes the
city of Jerusalem* a holy city, the city of god within man's soul. And in
this city reygneth humilitye, mekenes, obediencie, charity, faith, hoope,
abstinencye, chastyte, prudencye, temperancy, justice, co^stancy, with such
other virtues. The love of the world makes the city of Babylon, Ciuitas
babilonica.
the city of the devil within man's soul. And in this city reygneth pride,
pomp, vayneglorye, arrogancye, dysdayne, ire, wrath, rancour, malice,
displesure, hateredde, envy, slander, murder, slouthe, ydlenes, worldly
pastyme, pleasure, glotony, bankettyng, great welfare, auaryce, gyle, deceyte,
oppressyon, usury: with soch other. Of which city the prophet says, Psalm
5^^.
Vidi iniquitatem and contradictionem in ciuitate, dic ac nocte circundat eam
super muros iniquitas and labor. In medio eius iniustitia. Non defecit de
plateis eius vsura and dolus. I se iniquite and contradictyon reygnynge in the
city, as well annenst truth as annenst justice with all that they may,
promotynge iniquyte, oppressynge truth and innocence. And so continually day
and night as far as the compass of the walls gothe. And upon the walls he
saw iniquyte, impiete, laboring in sin. These mal^^dyes with many other
does compass this city, both within and without. These abhominacyons does
in this city reygne. And over this he said, that in the mids of this city,
reygneth wrong doings, iniuryes, with afflictyons and oppressyon of poor
people. In the streets of this City reyneth vsurye and gyle, falsehoode and
diceyte in all manner of kinds. Yet there is one thing one ill which the
prophet saw not in this city. What is that? That which specyallye above
other things should have been seen. What is it? That which most is abused in
this world. I pray the what is it, maake no moore a do: tell it? That which
almoost destroyethe the church of Christ. Then I pray the show it. Show what
it is, let it be known that remedy may be had and the thing helped. What is
it? Simoni^^
Forsothe it is Simony* Simony. Choppynge and chaungynge, byinge and selling
of benefices and of spirytuall gifts and promocyons. And no better
marchandyse is now a days, then to procure vousons of patrons for benefyces,
for prebendes, for other spiritual lyueloode: whether it be by suit, request,
by letters, by money, bargayne or otherwise, ye whether it be to bye them or
to sell them, thou shall have marchandes plentye, marchandes enough for it.

These vousons are abroode here in this city. In which city? In most part
of all the great city of this realm. In the shoppes, in the streets a
common marchandyse. And they that do come by their benefyces or promocions
under soche manner, shall never have grace of god to profete in the church. I
could speak a great deal more in it, but little shall now serve, for that
they be here present that may help it* that can help it, and I trust in
the great mercy of god, they will help it, help to destroy the great
abusyon of it. For it is now far wide, far out of the nocke, far out of
frame, and has great need of admendemente. I commend the redress thereof to
god and to them that has the auctorite to do it, to correct it, and to amend
it. Would god there were an enquiry made thorowout this realm, how many has
under Simony and Simonyall patron, entered in to their benefices? Oh what a
raafle should be found? Let them beware, let them beware of the words of
Peter spoken to Simon Magus which would have bought Donum spiritus sancti,
Simon Magus. Actu. 8.
videlicet dare spiritu^ sanctum in signo visibili per impositione^ manuum.

He would have boughte of Peter that power to have given the holy ghost by
visible sign, that was to have given to men power and auctoryte to have
wroughte miracles, to have healed the sick, or to have spoken all kinds of
languages, by layinge his hands on them. And would have sold soch power for
lucre and for money, spirytuall for temporal, temporal for spirytuall. Peter
seeing his deuyllyshe mind, said unto him. Pecunia tua tecum sit in
perditionem. etc. Thy money shall be to thy confusyon and dampnacyon. Perysshe
thou and thy money with the, for that thou would give money for the gift of
god.

We reed like storye in the book of Kings, 4. Regu^. 5. Giezi.
of Giezi, that after Heliseus had healed Naaman principe milicie regis Syrie
of his leprye, which brought with him to give the prophet for his health,
Talentu^.
ten talentes of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, with ten chaunges
of rich apparel, whereof the prophet would none. That seeing Giezi, ran
after Naaman when he was departed, and said unto him, My master Helis^^us
has comen unto him two young men from the mount of Ephraim, the children of
the prophettes. (...)
Give them one talent of silver, and eueriche of them double change of thine
apparyll that thou broughtest with the. And he gave him two talentes and all
the apparel he asked. To whom the prophet his master said, For this (...)
deed, the lepry of Naaman fall upon the and to all thine issue and succession
after the for ever. And straight out of hand, he was strycken a great leyre.
Se now in these two ensamples the heuye hand of god upon Simonakes.

Simonye is to give or to sell a spirytuall thing for a temporal, or a
temporal for a spirytuall. Simonia quid?
And all they are Simonakes that does either bye or sell benefyces, prebendes,
spirytuall promocions, the sacraments of the church: either with money or
money worth: by unlawful means, unlawful service, unlawful suits, with a
corrupt mind in obteyninge spiritual promocyons, or otherwise like. And till
soche Simonakes be weeded out and deposed from their spiritual lyuelode, that
they come so by, it shall not be well in the Church of Christ, christen souls
shall peryshe. For soche be not Pastores, sed fures and latrones: priuye thieves
and open robbers, more regarding the fruytes and profet^^es, then the souls
that Christ so derely bought with the price of his most precious blood.

But how is it then, that our great prophet saw not this great abhominacyon
to reygne in the city as he saw other? Surely he saw it. And is contained in
this word Iniquitas, which he doubleth and twyse reherseth it in the place
before taken. Iniquitas. ii.
Where in the first iniquite is contained all temporal and bodily sins: in
the second iniquite is contained, all spirytuall iniquite and sins of the
soul.

And for that soche abundancie of iniquites, and of unlawful pactyons and
other sins does reygne vsuallye in Cities, in tents and in houses. Christ
therefore would not suffer within the tents, within houses nor in cities, but
did reprove soche wicked Cities saying, Ve tibi Corozain. Ve tibi Bethsaida.
Nam si in Tyro and Sydone fact essent virtutes, Math* 11.
quae fact sunt in vobis, olim in cinere and cilicio egissent poenitentia^.
Woo be to the Corozain. Woo be to the Bethsaida. For if soche virtues had
been showed in Tyro and Sydon, as has been wrought in you: soche preachynges,
soche opening of scripture, soche wonders and miracles, soche godly
instructyons and ensamples: they would vndoutly have done penance, lyinge in
the ashes, in the dust, prostratynge them selves like great penitentes unto
thearth* wearynge here next unto their bodies, and would have cried for
Mercy, Mercy, Mercy: and never to have risen till they might have perceived
the great mercy of god to have wrought in them.

Verumtamen. etc. But I shall tell you one thing says Christ. The sins of
Tyro and Sydon shall be at that day of Judgment more remissyble, more easily
punyshed and not so dampnably, as your sins shall be. For it is moore
grievous to repel faith, virtue, and the truth of the word of god: then
never to hear the word of god and to dye in gentilytie. And it is moore sin
to know the laws of god and not to keep them, then not to know them and
never to observe them. For scripture says, Lu^^e 12.
Sciens voluntatem domini and non faciens, vapulabit plagis multis. And so
Christ prayed in time of his passion most specially for the ygnorant Iues
that crucified him, not knowing him. He cried pater ignosce illis. Father
forgive them. And why? He shows the cause. What is it? Quia nesciunt quid
faciut. They wot not what they do. They wot not what they do. He alledgede
for their excuse, their ygnorauncye: that he might the sooner opteyne mercy
for them. And so to show that they that does offend by ygnorauncye, do not
so grievously offend, as they that do offend by malice or of knowledge. He
prayed for ton^^ more specially then for the other.

And follows in the same letter. And thou ^^apharnau^ that haste been extolled
to the heuens, whose fame has been spread far and nere, wide and brood for a
famous city, because of the notable preaching the word of god and miracles
within the showed: And because thou haste rejected this word, and not following
the holy ensamples and miracles that has been done in the, Vsque in infernum
descendes. Thou shalt descend into hell. Thou shall be more grievously
punyshed then the Sodomites. For if the Sodoms and Gomors had herd that
preaching and seen those miracles and virtues that thou haste herd and seen,
they might have stand till this day. For they would have done penance as
did the Niniuytes at the preaching of Jonas, and have been so saved by
penance. I preach and do miracles among you my self said Christ. Ye
hear all truth by me preachede, ye se all kinds of miracles by me wrought.
Yet ye will give no credence, but of malice do repunge and reiecte that that
ye know to be true, to your extreme dampnacion and confusyon. And to reiecte
the word of god and his truth when ye here it and know it, it is moore
grievous sin then the sin of the Sodomites. For it is Peccatu^ in spiritum
sanctu^, wyttynglye to impunge the truth of the word of god. which sin is
accounted irremissible. Never to be forgyuen, neither here neither else where.

By these rebukes and exclamacyons made by Christ annenste these cities, we may
soon perceive and conjecture, how much ill, how great perils, what
abundance of sin does reygne in cities to the dampnacyon of the sinners, ye
and many times to the dampnacyon and destruccyon of the cities, if it were not
for the prayer and good living of some good people: which many times causes
god to spaare and forbear his struck of vengeance that he would else give,
Gene. 18.
were it not for them. As we reed in Genesis when Abraham maade desire to god
to spare Sodom and not to destroy it if fyftye just people might therein be
found. It was granted him, but so many might not be found within the city.
Then maade he further desire, if that five and fourtye might be found, which
could not be. After, came down to forty just people, they could not be
found. After that descended to thyrtye. They could not be found. After came
to five and twentye, yet it could not be. After to ten, and could not be so
many just people found there, but all wretches and sinners, all deuyllyshe
lyuers, four persons except. Then god departed from him, and no more would here
him.

What and god would so now determyne to come down with his hand of
punishment, and say, Discendam and videbo vtru^ clamorem qui venit ad me opere
compleuerint, an non est ita vt sciam? Gene. 18.
To view the cities of the world now a days? What abhominacyons should he
find in them worthy extreme punishment? What fornicacyons, what aduoutryes,
what stupour, what deflourynge of virgyns, Sodomitical and unnatural sins?
What scortuous houses, lecherous beds, aduoterous chambers, flesshly
concupyscencyes, surfettynges, dronkenes, glotonous living with soche other
thereunto belonging? What fraud, gyle, dysceyte? What falseheed in byinge and
selling? What vsurye, Simonye, blasphemye, periurye, ydolatrye, with other
iniquites of all kinds? He should find he should find in a great sort of
cities, burghes, tounes and houses: stynkynge lecherous beds. I fear far
beyond home, far beyond the abhominacyon of the Sodomes. And yet he
spaareth. Yet he holds his strikynge hand. Yet he withdraws vengeance by
the prayers and good living of some Abraham's, of some of Abraham his children,
of some good men and women. And yet I fear the end what will come thereof if
we amend not in ceason, if we amend not in ceason.

I fear the vees, the vees in scripture: the Ve tibi, Ue. ve. ve
Ve vobis. The threateninges of god, and the curse of god given in scripture. I
fere they will fall upon us, if we do not penance in ceason. Surge ergo. Surge
qui dormis. Arise out of thy bed of sin thou lecher. Arise out of thy den
of sloth. Arise out of thy custom of sin. Arise from thy wyckednes thou
sinner. Arise, arise. We say god is merciful. We say god will forgive. We say
ask and have, and so forsooth. And we bring the people with fair promises in
our preachynges into soche presumpcio^ of the mercy of god, that we almost
neither fere him nor his justice. Beware, let us christen people beware, for
god does threaten us with these dradfull words. Luce. 10
Ve vobis, ve vobis. Tollerabilius erit Sodomis, and omnibus ciuitatibus
gentium in die iudicii q^ vobis. Woo be unto you sinful lyuers, woo be to you
false christen people, that does not observe the laws of god, woo be to you
for your abhominacyon of living. It shall be more tolerable to the Sodoms and
Gomors, and to the cytyes of the gentyles at that day of judgment, then to
you.

Loo christen man, loo. God does fery over and defarre that dradfull account
of our lives and deeds till the day of Judgment. Where and when he will
minister justice and not mercy: unless it be that he dampneth not the sinner
so depely as he has deserved. And this dradful day and great accomptes we
regard not, we fear not, we take no head of: but then we shall feel and have
experyence of it to our great fear, to our great dampnacion and pain, if
we provide not therefore in ceason.

But why shall it be moore tolerable to the Sodoms and gentyles then to false
christen people at tha^^ day? Ueryly for that they herd never the word of god
declared among them. They had never the prophettes nor scripture. They had
never the gospel taught them. We have Moses and the prophettes. We have the
old testamente and the new. We have the Gospel and the holy scripture
publyshed, taught and preached among us: spoken, opened, declared, and
manifestly showed unto us. We have it in Hebrew, in Greek, in Latin, and in
English. We have it in our own mother tongue. We joy and reiose much and
so may we, that we so have it in our vulgar speech, that we here it, that
we reed it, that we have it in our bosoms and hanging at our gyrdles, that
it is daily preached among us. But what shall all this profette, if we live
not thereafter? if we live not well and Chrystyanly? What shall we be the
better for it if we amend not our lives? We continue for all that in sin, we
do no penance, we fear not god nor his threatenynges in Scripture, we fear
not his justice, we fear not his judgment, we fear not hell. The sins of
the Sodoms, of the Gomors, of the Corozaites, of the Bethsaites and of the
gentyles, shall be more remissyble, of less dampnacyon and less punishment
then ours: then ours that are Christen people, that have the scripture so
redye at hand and lives not thereafter.

Saint Augustyne says of Aristotele, August^^nus.
Omnium Philosophorum profundius racet in inferno. Of all the Philosophers that
ever were, Arystotele lies loweste in hell. And why? For he had most knoledge
of all philosophers, and was driven by his natural knoledge, (...)
to know prima^ causam, god: and yet worshypped him not. So we christen
people, we have the books and gospel of Christ. We have all the scripture in
English, we have knowledge of god and of his laws: and yet do not we live
thereafter. What shall we say to it* but that, omnium hominum iacebimus
profundius nos christiani in dampnatione in inferno. Of all the people of the
world, if we be dampened, we shall be most grievously dampened. We. we christen
people.

I promise you, Lapis offentionis Petra sca^dali. 1 Petri. ^^ Roma. 9. Esai.
8.2^^.
I promise you this gospel of Christ (as it is written of Christ him self) is
Lapis offencionis, and petra scandali. Which words were spoken both of
Christ and of his scripture. Peter shows in his first Epistle, and is
grounded in Esai, that god did put in Syon a stoone, a high stoone, a great
stoone, a corner stoone, a prouede stoone, a chosen stoone, a precious stoone.
And that they that believes in this stoone, shall be saved. Saying further,
This stoone shall be honor to you that does believe in him. This stone shall be
to them that believes not in him, Lapis offentionis the stoone that the
workmen, the buylders that David spoke of, Psalm. 117
did reprove and reiecte, Lapidem quem reprobauerunt edificantes, hic factus
est in caput anguli. But that notwithstanding, this stoone is maade the cheyfe
stoone in all the building, the cheyfe stoone in the wall. The corner stoone
that joins and holds fast all the work together. This stoone is Non
credentibus, lapis offentionis, The stoone of offense, the stoone of slander,
Christ is lapis angularis.
to them that offends in word. Here are marvelous sayings. Who is this
stoone? and what is this stoone? Christ is this stoone. Christ is the great and
high stoone that bears the hole church, that buyldeth to the heuens, that
holds up al, that joins the walls together, Lapis approbatus
ioynynge the Iues and gentyles in one church. Lapis approbatus, a proved
stoone, a tried stoone, Lapis electus. Lapis preciosus.
tried, tried to be a firm strong stoone. Lapis electus, a very elect
stoone, chosen of god to the work of our redemptyon. Lapis preciosus, a
precious stoone, for that the godheed was joined to the manheed. And as this
stoone is to those that lives Chrystyanly, honor, reward, defense and
proteccyon: even so is he to synnefull lyuers Lapis offentionis and petra
scandali. A stoone of offense, a stoone of slander, and so said Simeon in
the gospel, Luce. 2.
Hic positus est aliis in ruinam, aliis in resurrectione^ cui contradicetur.
Christ th^^s stoone was, is, and shall be in to the ruin and fall of many,
and in to the rysynge and saving of many. In ruinam multorum. In to the ruin
and destructyon of many. Of how many? surely of all those that presumes upon
their own justice, upon their own deeds: that does not believe in god and in
his scripture. He shall be into the ruin and dampnacyon of them that will be
seen and taken in the world outwardly for just and ryghteous, and be
inwardly holowe, false, wicked and sinful, ypocryus and untrue to god. To
these and soche other, Christ is Lapis offentionis and petra scandali, and in
ruinam.

He is called a stoone for the similitude and propertye of a stoone. He was
called Lapis and Petra. Lapis Petra Christus.
And both words does sygnifye a stoone. Lapis a little stoone, Petra a great
stoone. Lapis, after he is polyshed: Petra, before he is polyshed. Christ was
Lapis offentionis when he appeared here in the world, and showed him self to
be but a very little stoone, a stoone not polyshed. Little. So little that he was
not known. Little, for he was humble, meek, low, vile, poor, reiecte,
reprouedde, naught set by, and of no reputacyon. He was then Lapis
offentionis. Over trodden of the world, not regarded, but reiagged and out
cast of all. Not had in estimacyon, evil entreated of the Iues, for that he
showed him self in so humble, meek, and so lowlye a fashon.

They took no heed of this little stoone, they saw the frail flesh the
body, but the majesty of his godheed they saw not. They considered the
mortal man, whom they might have known for god by his works, but would
not. They thought they could not stumble at so little a stoone, and went
about to break him in pieces, utterly to put him out of fashon, out of
memory. But the more they hughe upon him, the more he grew, the more he
waxed, the more his fame spread. As Daniell witnesses saying, Danie. ii.
Creuit lapis and factus est mons magnus, qui repleuit totam tarram. This
stoone grew and increased, and was maade a great hill, and replenyshede the
hoole world with his majesty and power, with his word and with his miracles.

Even when the Iues had beaten him in gobettes as ye will say, beatyng and
scourgynge him, raggynge and rentynge his precious body, naylynge him to the
cross, thinking so utterly to have destroyed him and his name for ever. Did
not he then grow like to a great mountain? Did not his name and fame then
spread through the world? Did not all creatures then confess him to be god?
In token whereof, did not the veil of the temple rent in twain? Ueluin.
Terra. Saxa. Sepulcra Mortui. Sol.
Did not the earth quauer and quaake through the world? Did not the stoones
break in gobbets? Did not the graves open? Did not the dead bodies rise from
death to the life and appeared in the city to their acquayntaunce? Did not
the son and the bodies above loose their light by three hours space through
the world? Did not Dionisius Ariopagita then reedynge in Athens, dionisius
(being but an infydele and a Pagan, but yet a notable Philosopher) saying
these marvelous wonders say, aut deus patitur, aut machina mu^di statim
dissoluetur? Either god does suffer death, either the hoole world shall now
peryshe and be destroyed? Latro. Luce 23.
Did not the thief openly confess him to be god even when he was most deryded
of the Iues? Cryinge, Remember me lord when thou come in to thy kingdom?
Remember me Lord? remember me? Did not Christ in token that he was very god,
Christus.
grant unto that self same thief, then and there Paradyse? Did not Christ in
the departure of his soul cry cum clamore valido? Clamor.
with an hudge voice which never man did but he only at the departing of the
soul? Did not Centuryo and all that were with him, Centurio Luce. 23.
seeing these great wonders that were then showed openly cry Vere filius dei
erat iste? Undoutedly this was the very son of god? Populus
Did not all the people that were present at this great spectacle, goo home
to their houses holding down their heedes, being as men amaased, abbashed,
strycken with great drade and heaviness, fearing the end what should follow,
knock their breasts? Percutientes peeto ea.
As whoo say alas what have we done? This was the son of god? The great
prophette of the world? The savior of mankind? Alas what have we done?

How merueylously grew the fame of Christ abroad more and more even at his
death, even when the Iues thought his name should have been clean extincte and
utterly forgotten. Did not that noble and just man Joseph of Arimathia (of
that city of Judah) come boldly to Pylate and asked the body of Jesus to take
it down and burye it? Joseph.
And he and Necodemus took it down from the cross, Nichodemus.
and wrapped it most reuerentlye in a fine clean Syndone, a clothe of rayns as
it were, a fine clothe: and sprynklede this precious stoone the body of Christ
plentefully and abundantly with sweet and fragrante Aromates, with myrre and
Aloes, with spyces of the best sort to the mountenance of one. C. pound
weight, precyously confecte and myngled: and put him into a new tomb wherein
never body was buried before? and laid a great stoone upon him? honorablye? But
was here all? Nay. Maria Magdalena. Iacobi. Salome.
The three Maryes Maria Magdalene, Iacobi and Salome, markynge where he was
buried, bought Aromata, spyces and the most precious vnctyons they could
get for money, to dress and anoynte this precoyus body. And because it was
to laate that frydaye to do their obsequye and service thereunto, and on the
Sabbath day it was notiefull to do soche things: They came earlye therefore on
the Sunday in the morning to the tomb with these precious spyces and
vnctyons, to have minystred to this holy body obsequye, honor and reverence.

And going by the way, one questioned with another, whoo shall lift up this
great stoone from the mouth of the tomb? Math. 28.
We are women, and are not able to do it. Whoo shall do it? And in mean time
came a great earthquaue, and an angel came from heaven and removed the stoone
and sat upon it. He was as bright as the lightening, his clothes as white as
the snow. And for fear of him, the kepers that watchede the sepulcher, fell
down amassed, as they had been dead, as men in a trance: and straight
thereupon came these Maryes, and would have entered the sepuchre, and were waare
of this young man, an angel in that similitude, appearing in a white vesture,
being on the ryghtsyde of the tomb. And for fear of him, were merueylously
astonyed.

To whom the angel said, Women: be not afraid. I know that ye do seek
Jesus of Nazarethe which was crucified. Resurrectio xp^i.
He is not here. He is risen, as he said before he would. Come ye nere and
view the place where he was put. Goo your way, tell his dyscyples and Peter
this, and he will be there before you. He appearede afterward unto them, and to
his discyples many times and many ways, proving him self by many euydent
arguments and proves to be veraylye risen, as in the gospel openly appears.

The fyftieth day after his ressurection, he ascended to the heuens, Ascentio
Christi.
and sytteth on the right hand of the father in glory. He shall come again
and judge the world. Whose fame and name is now openly known and spredde
over all. Over all the world.

Se now how he is grown from a little stoone, in magnu^ saxu^ in to a great
hudge stoone, into a great rock, in to a great hill, ye into a great
mountain* He was here in the world lapis offensionis, and petra scandali. He
was here grievously offendede, outragyouslye slaundered, and to this day is,
both offended and slaunderede, by thy wretchede living thou sinner, by thy
sinful deeds, by thine inobediencye in breakyng his laws, in blasphemynge
his name, and otherwise offendynge his majesty. Beware, this stoone else
shall fall upon the, this stoone shall utterly destroy the if thou look not
the better unto thy self. This stoone else shall co^dempne the when he shall
come at that day: when this scripture also that thou haste so usually in thy
hands, shall condemn the for that thou knew it, reddest it and herdest it
declared unto the, and followed it not. For scripture says as is before
rehearsed, Lu^^e. 1^^.
Qui cognouit voluntatem domini sui and non facit, vapulabit plagis multis. Qui
non cognouit and non fecit, plagis vap^^labit paucis. He that knows the will
and pleasure of his Lord and does it not, he shall be bette with many strypes.
And he that knows not his lords pleasure and does offend him, he shall be
punyshed, but more easily.

And to return again to this stoone. Likewise as a stoone lyinge still is
many ways profitable and hurts no body, Soli^^^^do.
unless he will wylfullye stir the stoone, or stombe at the stoone, or hurt
him self negligently annenst the stoone: Even so Christ our savior is a
profitable stone to all them that faithfully cleueth unto him, and he defends
them from storms and from aduersytes that may chance to their souls by
temptacyon or otherwise. But if we negligently or voluntaryly do offend him,
if we slander him, and despise his commandments, not obeynge his laws, not
following the wholesome instructyons of his scripture: we stumble then at him,
and he and his said scripture shall accuse us and co^dempne us at that day.
And he shall be to us, Lapis offentionis and petra scandali. A heavy stoone, a
weyghty stoone, and shall fall upon us, press us, break us, conuycte us, and
condemn us unto everlasting death, and pains.

It follows in the letter taken, Extra porta^ ciuitatis etiam passus est
Christus. Extra porta^.
Christ suffered not only without the tents and city, but also without the
yates of the city. For the yates of the city were also spottedde with sin.
By the gates of this city are understand the gates of the city of man's
soul, of whom the prophette writes by an other word, Ieremi. 9.
Mors intrat per foenestras. And calls them here wyndowes and there gates.
Death enters in to the soul by the wyndowes or gates, by the five senses of
the body, which are called the five wits of man. Death and sin enters by
these in to the soul. How? verylye by sight, by smelling, by hearing, by
touching, and by tastynge. And Christ never sinned in any of these, nor any
other ways, but suffered death without gylte, that we by this his godly
ensample, may so shut these gates of our souls that no carnal desire, no
fleshly living, no fylthynesse do enter in to our hertes by them. He
therefore went out of the city, out of the tents, out of the gates. And as he
went out of the gates to suffer for us, to sanctifye us by his blood: so let
us goo out of these gates, out of all carnal affectyon and from all
delectacyon of these our five senses, from all fylthy living, from all
occasyon of sin that does corrupt our souls by any of the five wits. And
let us suffer somewhat for Christ that suffered somoche for us.

Exeamus igitur says the Apostle. Exeamus ad eum extra castra. Exeamus. Let
us goo out, let us goo out. From whence? out of the tents, out of the
cities, out of the gates, out of our tabernacles, out of our bodily and
fleshly lusts, fleshly desires and fleshly conuersacyon, for it stynketh in
the sight of god. And as long as we abide within the compass of fleshly
living and carnal co^uersacion, so long we shall not come to god. For to him
we can not come, unless we go out, unless we flee the corrupt body and his
fleshly affectyons. Ye shall se that it is mete so for us to do, by ensample
of them that are good married people living after the true rules of matrimonye.
For though the act of matrimonye be lawful, honest, and necessary,
merytoryous, and of high merit if it be well observed, Ye and as the Apostle
does call it Honorabile connubiu^, Hebre. 1^^.
and thorum immaculatum, Honorable matrimonye and the pure clean immaculate
bed: the bed without sin if it be dulye observed: Yette it is not
sitting nor comely for the married man or woman, straight from that bed,
straight from that lawful merytoryus act, to come to this great sacrifyce, to
this heavenly food, to eat of this flesh and blood of Christ and god. For
the said Apostle where he writes to the Corinthians, does plainly counsel
them that are maryede, by their own free will and mutual consent, to
absteyne from that lawful meritorious act ad tempus, for a time, for the time
of prayer: to the intent their prayer may be the moore devout and better
herd. How much more then wyllethe he them to absteyne from that act when
they shall goo to receive this high sacrifyce? this holy food? god and man?
Does not he to them that will eat of this sacrifyce say, Probet seipsum
homo, and sic de illo pane edat. etc? Let every man prove him self, search his
conscience, pourge his soul: and then eat of this blyssed sacrifice, then go
to it with a reverence and high deuocio^. We must therefore first goo out from
these cities, out from these tents, out of these gates of this carnal body,
and forsake the filthy corrupt fleshly abusyons that are commonly used and
committed in all these senses: and then pourge us, cleanse us and maake us pure
and apt to receive this holy sacryfyce. For many filthy ymaginacyons
remains of these fleshly acts, many ill circumstancyes, not meet having
them to eat of this holy meat. Therefore first pourge and apt our selves to
the receyte thereof. And then we goo Extra, then we goo out, then we goo out
with Christ that suffered Extra portam, without the gate of the City.

Now if the good devout married man and woman by the counsel of the Apostle
does absteyne Ad tempus ex co^sensu vt vacent orationi, ^^. Corint. 7.
for a time by their own mutual consent, to give them selves moore devoutly
to prayer, that so their prayer may be the better and sooner herd of god: Ad
sacerdotes.
Much moore then ought we priests of co^gruence and duty to live clean and
chaast, which are bounden daily, nyghtly, hourly, ye contynuallye either to
pray, or to study, or to preach, or to give good counsel, or to offer up
that most holy sacrifyce for the people and our selves, or to be ever redye to
minyster the sacraments at all times, day and night as necessyte shall
require, and as they shall be called upon by those that has need to call for
the same: Now to christen and confirm, now to minister the sacraments of
penance and order, now the sacraments of matrimonye, of the altar, and
extreme vnctyon. So that we bushops and priests in especyall and above all
other, ought of our congruence and of very duetye, ever to be in a redynes,
ever to be clean, ever to be vndefylede and unspotted in our living as nyghe
as frayltie of nature will suffer, that our prayers may be the better herd,
the moore alowede and more pleasant in the ears of god, and that our
ministracions may be to him more acceptable, moore profitable to our souls,
and moore desirous and pleasant to the people for whom we are ordained
minysters. And let eueryche of us follow the counsel of the apostle. Mortifye
our members of our body, keep under the flesh, Collosse. 3.
extyncte vices and concupiscencyes of the same as nyghe as we may, And say
with the same Apostle, Galat ^^
We be crucified with Christ to the cross. We live not as the body will, but
Christ lives in us. Christ's life we live or ought to live, him we ought to
follow. And this is the going out of the tents, this is the going out of the
cities and gates, which the Apostle speaks of saying, Lite^^e^^.
Exeamus (...) eum extra castra.

But what shall we do there when we be thus gone out of the gaates to Christ?
It follows in the letter, Improperiu^ eius portantes. (...)
We must bear improper^^ eius. We must help to bear his great cross, his
weyghtye burden the great reproach I mean, the reprofe, the rebukes, the
viletyes, the contumelyes, the obprobryes* the abloquies, the pains, the
Passions, the pangues and the cross. Penance, penance I mean, tribulacions,
aduersyties, miseryes and infirmyties with Christ's and for the love of Christ.
For his love to bear pacy^^ently the reproach of the cross, the reprofe of
the world, in following thy Christ, in bearing his cross, in doing thy
penance, in following him in perfyte and christian living, in despisyng the
world, in punyshyng the body and soche other: if we list to be part takers
of this holy sacrifyce, of this immaculate lamb, the lamb of god which was
as on this day offered upon the altar of the Cross for us.

The Apostle says, Galathi. 6.
Ego porto stigmata Jesus Christi in corpore meo. I bear the marks of the
wounds of Jesus Christ in my body. Stigmata quid?
Stigmata. Stigmata are called the scotches, the marks or scarres, that are
left in the flesh after a wound is healed. And here does signify the
infirmityes, the aduersytes, the tribulacyons and afflictyons both of the
mind and of the body, which the Apostle suffered for Christ.

For he was beat, he was scourged, he was banysshed, enprisoned, tormoyled,
lapydate and stooned. He was reiecte and had in hatered of the world, with
sufferynge innumerable iniuryes for Christ his saake, as in his Epystles
appears, 2. Corin. 11.
saying. In laboribus plurimis, in carceribus abundantius, in plagis supra
modum, in mortibus frequenrer: quinquies quadragenas vna minus accepi. Ter
virgis coesus, semel lapidatus, ter naufragiu^ perpessus, nocte and die in
profundo maris. And besides this, following reconeth up the great heepe of
dangers and aduersytyes he suffered. And all for Christ. Therefore he says, I
bear the marks and scarres of Christ: not mine own, but of Christ and for
Christ, for speaking and preachinge him, for shewinge of truth and of his
word.

And thus the sacrifyce of the old law does sygnifye and figure unto us
spirytually, the very sacrifyce of the new law. And by both of them, the
apostle admonysheth and exhorts all christen people to live soche a pure
life, as that which was figured in the old law, may be by us taught, of us
received, borne away, and fulfilled in the new law.

And as the bodies of the beasts so killed in sacrifyce were burned Extra
castra, Corpora co^butta.
without the tents: even so Jesus Christ was turmoyled, tortured, passyoned
and payned, killed and slain in sacrifyces without the gates of the city. So
instructynge us to suffer without the tents, without the cities and gaates: I
mean to cast away all vtwarde and bodylye pleasures, all carnal affectyons,
which are commonly used in cities and tounes. And to suffer, to suffer for
Christ penance and pains, to punyshe and afflycte the body that has lived
so noughtely, that has offended god so grievously: and from henceforth to
live without deedly sin, to live a chrystyan life, clean from sin, in a
clean body and a clean soul, and to forsake suspecte places where syn is
used, so every way to flee the occasyon of sin. The occasyon of sin and
danger of the soul.

This sacrifyce in the old law, Leuitt 16. Noue^ co^ditiones huius dici.
was commanded to be done the seventh month, the tenth day: saying, The
seventh month, the tenth day, ye shall afflycte and punyshe your souls. That
day, ye shall do no vile work. That day, ye shall be cleansed and pourged from
all your sins. That day, shall be your Sabbath day, your day of rest. That
day, ye shall afflycte and punyshe your souls with perpetual relygyon. That
day, shall be to you most solemn and festyuall. That day, shall be called
holy. That day, shall be the appointed day when ye shall pray for all the
multitude of Israel, and for all their sins.

Will ye se now how this day of the old law called Festum propitiationis,
does quadrate and agree with this day of the new law called Festum
redemptioni^^? (...)


Ye shall understand that by the seventh month, for that the nombre of seven
which is the nombre of the Sabbath kept every seventh day, is understand the
time of grace. The Sabbath day, is the day of rest, of quiet and devotion. To
quiet your selves in god, to apply your selue all ye can that day to his
service, abstenyng that day from all vile works, in especyall from sin
which is the most vile work of all, and betokenethe the time of grace. In
which time Christ came into the world and suffered, whereby he gave grace to
the world, and maade the year of grace, the great Iubilye, the joyous year,
the year of gladness, the time of comfort the very Sabbath day to the holy
fathers that were in Limbo deliueryng them from pain, gyuynge them the Sabbath
and restfull day of eternal glory, and to all their folowers that lives
Chrystyanly.

Annus iubileus.
This was with them the year of Iubilye. This was the year of grace, the year
of mercy, the pleasant year that Esaie speaks of Christ, saying,
Spiritus domini super me, eo quod vnxerit me dominus. Ad annunciandum mansuetis
misit me, Esai. 6.
vt mederer contritis cord, and praedicarem captiuis indulgentia^ and clausis
aperitionem: vt praedicarem annu^ placabi^^em, vt consolarer oe^s languentes,
and dimitrere confractos in requiem. and cetera. The spirit of god (he says)
is upon me, and has anointed me, the father has sent me to show to meke
people grace, to heal contryte penitente persons, to preche pardon and
remission to captyues, liberty to prisoners, to preach the year pleasante to
god, to comfort all sick and sore, to put those that are weryed in pain into
rest. Dies sabbati.
This day is this Sabbath day, the day of rest. This day Christ made Sabbath
day, holy day among his saints in Limbo. This day he changed their darkness
in to light, their pain in to pleasure, their bands in to liberty, their
prison and hell in to Paradyse, their heaviness in to joy, their sorrow in to
comfort, their labors into quyete, their misery into glory. What shall I
say? I say all this signifies, that we ought to keep our Sabbath day holy,
quietly, in heavenly contemplacyon, sincerely in devotion, deuoutlye in prayer,
obsequiously in god. That day, that day to absteyne from all vile works, from
all sin, from seruytude and bondage of the devil. Under this manner we ought
to keep the Sabbath day. But all this we turn vpsodowne, as the common vulgar
is, turn the catte in the pan. Which is asmoche to say. Nothing is
observed taht ought to be observed, but do even clean contrary, to that we
are bounden to do.

This Sabbath day we maake now most vile. In this Sabbath day we do most
offend god, and do commytte most sin, both in the church, in the city,
in the town, in the villadge, in the house, in the field, in the body and in
the soul. Look, look and consider well the behauyour of the world in these
things. And we shall soon perceive the mischeues and the abhominacyons that
are custumablye vsede on the holy Sabbath day: in pride, in vaynglorye, in
arrogancye, in disdain, ypocrisy, blasphemy, perjury, inco^tinencie,
fornicacyon, aduoutrye, inceste, sacrilege, unlawful games, glotony,
dronkenes with other soche moo infinyte abusyons. Think you that god is
pleased with soche keeping of our Sabbath day? Nay, nay. The devil does mock
soche keeping of the holy days. Does not the prophet say, Deriserunt Sabbata
vesti (...)* The deuylles does deride mock and scorn your holy days? this
manner of keeping your holy days? (...)
And god shall stryke it, god shall punyshe it, god will aduenge it. It is his
day, and ought to be kept in holiness. And to him only.

And if we well consider the tenth day of the seventh month that the law
speaks of, it is this day* Decimus dies septimi mensis.
Because the nombre of ten apperteyneth Ad decalogum, unto the ten
commandments. For in the commandments is the perfection of all the law.
And the perfectyon of the law was as on this day declarede, opened and
perfited, when Christ hanging on the cross, even at the departure of the
soul, cried Consummatu^ est. Johan. 19.
All is fulfilled. All that is written of the son of man concerning man's
redemptyon, is in this passion fulfilled and done. Here Christ fulfilled all
the ten precepts.

Here he fulfilled all the co^maundmentes in this one Passion, in the love he
baare to the father by his obedience unto the death: and by the love he baare
unto man in sufferynge this death for him. Math. 22.
In hiis duobus pendet tota lex and prophetae. In that he showed so high
charity as never was showed before. The apostle says, Finis praecepti charitas.
And again plenitudo legis dilectio. 1. Thimo. 1.
Charity and love, is the very end, the very fulfyllynge and perfectyon of
the law. All this law of god stands in love. In love of god and love of thy
neighbor.

But when was charity and love moore liberallye showed then upon this day?
Christ all days of his life, showed ever abundant love and charity to the
world: in preaching, in teaching, in showing to the people the ways to god:
in instructynge them to virtue, in fedynge them, in healynge them, in workynge
among them all manner of miracles.

multi gradus charitatis.
But that that ye call the high point of charity, was never showed till this
day. For there are many degrees of Charity. It is a great point of Charity
(as says saint John^) when thou see thy neighbor in necessyte, not to
shut thy bowels of mercy annenste him: but to help him, and refreshe him
with somewhat in time of his great need. 1. Johan. 8.
That if thou do not, Quomodo mane^^ charitas (...) says Ioh^^* How does
charity remayn in the? This (...) all men to help the^^ ^^edye in time of
necessyte. The poor person that is in extreme need, not to suffer him to
peryshe for lack of meat, of drink, of clothe, of harbor, of (...), of
(...), of wrappynges, of dressynge, of (...) forte. Suffer him not for lack to
dye at thy gate as Lazarus did at the rich man's door and was dampened
therefore: ever since cryenge to Abraham for one drop of water for his
comfort and relief, and is denied, never shall have it, butte for ever burn
in hell. An high point of charity therefore is it, to help, help and succoure
the nedye in time of his necessyte, of extreme miserye. Ever in soche case to
put to thy merciful hand. For as saint Ambrose does say, Si non pauisti
occidisti. If the miserable wretch dye for want of thy comfort and relief,
thou sleest him. Thou shalt maake answer for him, as Dives does for Lazarus.
Reed the storye in Luke the syxtenth. Charity therefore I say requires every
person after his habilitye, to aid, comfort and succoure the nedye, every
one according to his habilitye, in case of need. Is there any greater charity
then this? Ye forsothe. Luke writes of a man that labored in going from
Jerusalem unto Ierico: Luce. ^^.
And thieves fell upon him, spoiled him, robbed him, wounded him and left him
for dead. There lyeynge soore wounded at point of death, it chanced a
priest to pass by. He saw this soore man lyinge there, Prisbite^^.
grievously gruntynge and groninge, and passed by, having no pitye nor
co^passyon upon him: not somoch, as to give him one word of comfort. Likewise
after him came by a deacon and passed forth, Diaconus.
showing no point of mercy, no compassyon, no pytye, no comfort, but let
him lie. Samaritanus
After him came by a Samaritane. This Samaritane seeing this miserable person
thus spoiled, wounded and left for dead: moved with pitye and compassion, drue
nere, and put to his hands and comfortably handlede the wounds, scoured them
with wine, refreshed and anointed them with oil, gently and welfauouredly
wrapped and lapped them, and layinge him upon his beast, brought him in to an
house, and diligently looked unto him for his health. The next day came to se
him, and gave the owner of the stable two pence, saying unto him, Take charge
I pray the of this weyke soore man. And what so ever thou do bestow moore
upon him for his health, I shall at my return allow it the, what soever it
cost. Here was a high charity, here was a great love, here was great mercy,
high pitye and marvelous compassyon showed.

3. Math. 18. Debtor.
Is there any greater charity then this? Ye forsothe. What is that? Mathewe
writes of a great man that had many detters, and among all, one was
brought forth that owed to him ten thousand talentes. This vulgar talente was
accounted inter Iudeos and Hebreos to conteyne. Talentu^ quid?
CC.lxxxvii. li. and.x.s^. So that ten thousand talentes appears to be a
wonderful sum and a marvelous great debt. This great man required his
money. The dettour had it not to pay. This great man commanded his dettour
and his wife, his children and all that he had to be sold, and he to have
the money in recompense of his debt. This dettour did prostrate him self to
the earth, and maade humble suit and peticyon unto this great man, saying,
Sir, have pacyence and suffer me a while, and I will pay you all my dettes. The
lord moved with pity, forgave him all, and put him and his clearelye to
liberty.

Here was a marvelous great charity. Is there any higher charity then this?
4. Math. 18. Peter.
Ye, ye forsothe. What is it? Peter came to Christ and asked him a question.
How often his brother offendyng him, was he bound to forgive him, seven times?
Christ answered. I say thou shall forgive him not only seven times, but
seuentye and seven times. But what if he offend the seven score times, shall
thou forgive him* Ye though it were seven hundred times, ye seven thousand
times, Ye toties quoties as saint Jerome expounds it. Ieronimus.
As often as ever he does offend the, so often art thou bounden for gods
saake to forgive him his offense. Non iniuriam, sed offensam. The iniuryes and
wrongs thou art not bounden to forgive, but may by charity sue for thy right
by course of law, and sue for thy money, thy lands, thy goods and soche
other. But thoffence, the dyspleasure, the trespass, the heart burning, the
manner of doing the thing: thou art bound toties quoties to forgive, toties
quoties as often times as he does trespass the: and not to owe any grudge or
displeasure annenste him. That if thou so do, thou show a high charity.
But if thou do both forgive the offense and also the injury, thou show a
far greater charity.

But is there any higher point of chariti^^ th^^ this? These are great. Yet
there is one passes them all. What is that? Forsothe when a man will suffer
(...) to save his friends life. Ye but whoo will do tha^^* Whoo will
voluntarylye dye for his friend? Man^^ there are that will be bound, that will
spend and (...) their goods rather then their friend should misca^^^* But
whoo will dye for his friend? We reed and se many times, the father, the
mother does put them selves in danger of life for their child. We se also
the servant for the master being in danger, does venture to run bitwene
his master and the dagger point or the dynte of the sword, and runs upon
death to save his masters life, ye and many times is sleyne in his masters
defense, by reason whereof his master escapes. Is not this a great love? yes
forsothe. Ye but he did this upon adventure, upon a hasarde as ye will say.
He might as well by manheed, fortune, or chance medlaye have escaped as to
have been slain, which makes him the bolder. Ye but what father or or
mother, what child or servant will wylfully, patiently and without
resystence, lay down his heed upon the block, or run to the gybbytte or
golow tree, or otherwise: wyllfully, voluntaryly, pacyently and without
resystence dye for their friend or foo? We reed of none unless it be the
holy martyrs that voluntarylye did suffer for the love of god. And this is the
greateste charity we spaake of yet. For John^ says, Maiorem charitatem nemo
habet, q^ vt anima^ suam ponat quis pro amicis suis. Johan. 15.
No man may have a greater charity, then to dye for his friends. There can no
love nor charytie be greater then this, can there trow ye? Ye forsothe. What
is that I pray you? what is it?

Mori pro inimicis. To dye for thine enemies. Quis est hic and laudabimus eum?
But whoo will so do? Show one since the beginning of the world, Ecclesi. 31.
and we will laud him and praise him above all other. For soche one is praise
worthy. Can we show one soche? Ye forsothe. Where shall we find him? where
shall we find him? Yonder he lies. Where? In yonder sepulcher. What is he?
what is his name, tell us that we may know him? His name is Jesus Christ,
Jesus of Nazareth.

O Jesus of Nazareth. Yonder in the tomb lies thy most precious body, thy
lively body, not dead, but a live. A live. Nam Christus resurgens ex mortuis,
iam non moritur, Roma. 6.
mors illi vltra non dominabitur. Quod enim viuit, viuit deo. Christ is risen
from death, now he is not dead. Death shall have no more dominion over
him. That he lives, he lives in god and to god, he lives and shall reygne
ever a live. He dyed oones for us, and his death was our life* His
ressurection was the cause of our ressurection. His ascentyon was and shall be
the cause of our entrye in to heaven and possessyon there. This is he that has
showed this high point of charity. This is he that has done this valiaunte
act. This is he that has suffered death for his friends and for his foos,
for his lovers and for his enemies, for the and for me, for all the world.
This is he. This is he that did put him self wylfully in his enemies hands,
that voluntarylye suffered this vile, rebukefull, slanderous, panguyous,
payneful and shameful death of the cross, and now is the most glorious
death of deaths. This is he that washed and pourged us all in his blood, that
redeemed us, that justified us, that restorede us from death to life, that
brought us out of thraldom, that maade us free, that has reconcyled us unto
the father, that has restored us to grace, that has maade us Haeredes,
haeredes dei, Roma* 8.
cohaerede^^ Christi. That has maade us enhereters, enhereters to god,
coenhereters with Christ, with him self. This is he whom we ought to laud,
to love, to serve and praise, whom we ought to honor and worship, to adoure
and do sacrifyce unto, for that he has done somoche for us that none else
could nor would do. So that on this day was fulfilled all things that was
promisede in the law concerning the redemption of mankind. Therefore,
Therefore this day may be well signified by the tenthe day of the seventh
month. In which day the very quyete and rest was granted unto all
faithful people. And the perfytenes of the law (which is charity) was
manifestly this day declared in this high work of the redemptyon of man.

It follows in the letter, Dies c^^leberrimus
Erit vobis dies iste coeleber^^imus, and vocabitur sanctus. This day ye shall
keep most solemn, most high and festyuall, and shall be called holy. Whoo is
he that does not se this day of very duty to be kept for a high day? for a
holy day? And so to be called, and so to be taken, and so to be accounted,
and so to be kept and holden? In which day (as the year gothe about)
Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus, 1* Corin 5.
our Paschal lamb Christ and god was offered, by whose blood the world was
redeemed. In this day of the immolacyon of the very Paschall lamb Christ,
Israel was delivered from the seruitute of the Egyptyans. Pharao the devil
with all his company and malygne power, were drouned in the red See, were
overcome, suffocate, vaynqueshed, and utterly dyscomfete by the blood and
water that gusshed and ran out of the side and most tender heart of this
our Paschall lamb Jesus Christ.

Luce. 11. Fortis armatus.
This day Fortis ille armatus, that strong gyaunt the devil, which Luke
writes of, which was armed and accompanied with so great a multitude of
sinners of all sorts. Arma. Galea.
Whose armoure are Luxuriosi, lecherous people. His helmette and heed piece
Superbi, proud people. His bow Detractores, detractours, slaunderers and
backebyters: Areus.
Whoo shuteth their arrows far and wide, and wounds men in there name and
fame that are absent and far of. Sagitte.
His arrows are Infamia, Infamye and slander, backebytyng, detractorius
words and ill reports. Scutum.
His buckeler or shylde are Ypocrite, ypocrytes, dissymulers, setters forth of
holiness by vtwarde pretense and show, but the devil of ypocrisye is within
them. This great and mighty gyante, which so strongly by violence, Gygas.
kept A trium suum as says the Euangelyst, myghtely kept his castle the
world, kept it by tyranny, by violencye and strength, from the first fall of
man till this day of Christ: but was as on this day utterly overcome,
overthrown, vaynqueshed and conuycte, utterly discomfette and cast under
foot: and maade so feeble and weyke, that now he is not able to overcome the
least person that is, unless it be he that will wyllyngly be overcome as
saint Jerome says, Debilis est hostis, qui vincere non potest nisi volentem.
Ieronimus.
He is a weyke enemy and can overcome none, utterly none, but those that will
wyllynglye be overcome, as the Apostle also does witness unto the
Corinthyans, saying, God is faithful in all his promyses. For he does not
suffer you to be tempted further then ye may bear: but ever is redye with his
gracyous assystance and help, either not to suffer the temtacyon to be more
then thou may resyste or overcome, either shall so temperate and mitigate
it, that thou may resyst it, if thou call upon him for help.

Could the devil think you overcome saint Katheryn, saint Margarite, which
were but of.xiiii. and xv. years of age or there aboutes? Nay nay nay. No
neither the devil, nether the world, neither the prysons, neither the yngyns
of wheles, neither the fire, neither the sword could overcome these two young
damysels: but stronglye they did overcome the devil and all his bend, as may
appear to those that will reed there lives which are red in the church, as
when Maxencius being an Instrumente unto the devil, perswadynge saint
katheryn from the faith of Christ unto ydolatry, by him self, by rethorecyans
and learned men of the highest sort of learning, but neither with his fair
promyses, neither with his threatenynges, neither with his tortures, engence of
the wheles, neither with their learning in Rethoryke nor other wise, could
revoke her from the faith of Christ, but ever she said fat^^or me nihil aliud
scire nisi Christum deum esse, and hunc crucifixu^. I knowledge me to know
none other thing whereby I shall be saved but by Jesus Christ the sonn^^ of god,
and he to be crucified. And by his crucifyxcyon and death to be saved. None
other ways to be saved, but by his death and Passion.

And how saint Margarete that young damysell overcame the devil, and his
membre and instrumente Olibrium, which nether with his citacyons, neither with
his fair promyses, neither with his sharp threatenynges, neither with
enprysonmentes, neither with passions nor torments, could neither persuade her
to his fleshlye voluptuous desire, neither to fall to his ydolatrye, neither
yet any ways to forsake her spirytuall spouse Jesus Christ: but said, As
Christ has suffered death and passion for us, so shall I most gladly suffer
for him. Thus both of them being but damyselles and maidens and of very
tender age: stronglye overcame the devil and all his members, and all their
temtacyo^s.

It follows in the former letter, A stronger then he came. etc. A stronger
the^ he came says Luke, a stronger. Fortior eo venit. There came a stronger
then he was. Whoo was that? Christ our champyon, Christ our heed and
captain. He fought for us this day a batell, and was sore wounded and slain.
But by his wounds, by his Passion, by his death and blood: he wanne the
batell, he had the victory, he overcame his enemy, he spoiled and took from
him all his armoure, artylery, power and men, in whom all his trust and
comfort stood in. Arcu^ co^triuit and co^fregit arma and scuta combussit
igni. s. infernali. Psalm. 45.
Christ braake his enemies bow, Christ destroyed his armoure, Christ burned
his buckler, Christ took away all his power and strength, Christ put him to
fleyght. This day Christ triumphed upon the cross, and every way overcame this
our ancient and cruel enemy the devil. Princeps huiusmu^di
This day the prince of darkness the prince of this world the devil, by victory
of the cross was repelled, put out, and banyshed. This day Christ with his might
and power descended to the hels in his soul and godheed, and brake open the
gates as ye will say: entered the prisons, took out spolia belli, the spoil of
the field, the spoil of the batell: animas sanctorum, the souls of the holy
fathers and mothers, whom the devil by his tyranny, unjustly there kept. This
day Christ by his cross as with a keye, opened the gaates of Paradyse, and
brought thither these holy souls before spesyfyed, and gave them thereof
possessyon, restorynge them to their right enherytance.

What shall I say more? I say this day the great mediator between god and man
Jesus Christ, very god and very man, did put away, raase and cansell
Cyrographu^ illud, that write that obligacyon of sin, which was written
annenst us, whereof thapostle to the Collocensis does testify saying, Delens
nobis oi^a delicta. quod aduersus nos erat. Cyrographu^ decreti quod erat
co^trariu^ nobis. Col^^os. ^^*
And Christ cancelled this obligacion and blotted it clean out, and brake the
seal, and put away sin, and put away all soche title whereby the devil might
any ways calenge or claim us. Ye and pleased the father and reconsyled us to
him, so pacifyinge his dyspleasure by sheadynge his blood upon the cross.

What feast therefore is more festival or ought more solempnly to be kept then
the feast of this day? or more to be had in reverence? And for that there is no
commandment for this day to be kept holy, I think it to be, because every
man, woman, ye and child having reason: are moved in their own consciences,
grounded upon a great zeal, love and entiere devotion, this day among all
other days of the year, to keep holy: in remembrance of this most blissed
passion, in remembrance of the great benefytes that came to man by the same.

For if the universal church does solempnyse and keep holy that day in which
apostle, a martyr, or virgyn departs out of the labor, toylinge, and
vexacion of this miserable world unto rest, to glory and joy: how much more
ought we then solempnly and devoutly to keep this day holy? in which our heed,
our savior, the heed of the hoole church Jesus Christ, went out of the world
to the father by passion and death? and brought into Paradyse with him an
infinyte nombre of holy patriarchs, prophettes, martyrs, confessors, virgyns
and beats of all sorts? Not only delivered them from the labor and toilyng
of this miserable world, but also delivered them out of that dungion and prison
of hell, and brought them to the glory and fruition of the joy in heaven, by
the glorious victory by him done as on this day upon the Cross?

This is therefore a day to be sanctyfyed, to be kept holy. This is Paschalis
dies, the pachal day, y^ pashe day, the day that Christ passed out of this
transitory world to rest. And what soever he be that gothe out of this
laboryous life to rest and joy, he gothe unto the said rest and joy by the
virtue of the cross and passion thereon sacrifysed, as on this day. Here was
the ground, here was the beginning, here was the foundacyon and occasyon of
all our joy and glory we look for.

This day the Cross was maade an instrumente whereby the gaates of hell (as ye
will say) were opened, the stocks broken, the bands loosed, the darkness
expelled, the pain voyded, and bondage put to liberty. This Cross as on this
day, was like to the staff of David, with which as he overcame Golyas, so
Christ in this cross overcame the devil. This Cross this day was made the
keye, whereby the gates of Paradyse and heaven were opened. This cross was this
day ma^^de the standard erecte and set up in sign and token of eternal
victory. Whereby our spirytuall enemies are daily put to flight and dyscomfet.
Whereby our hope and comfort is fortefyed. Whereby we are defended from the
power of the malygne spirits. From their temptacyons, from all their
aduaunces, from all their pompes. This cross was maade this day the way
whereby we are brought ab exilio ad patria^, from exile to our country. This
cross with the passion of Christ wrought upon the same is maade this day our
assurance whereby we shall attain the everlasting glory. So that now it
appears to all the world, that this day is festival, holy, gracyous and
glorious. A day to be hallowed and kept holy. A day to give lauds thanks and
praysynges to god for his great beneficial acts showed unto us and for us as
on this day.

Some percase will obiecte and say, if this day be so solemn as we speak
of: Obiectio
why do the Church then maake this day soche tokens of mournyng as it does*
If it be so high a day, where are the signs and tokens of the feast? where is
the solemn ryngynge of belles to matyns, to mass, to euensong, to divine
service? Where are the solempnytyes of the masses said and song, as are in the
other festyuall days? Where are the solemn songs of discant, pricked song,
faburden, square note, regalles and organs? Where are your warblynge voices*
reeches and pleasant reports in your syngynges? where are the rich
ornaments of the aulters the rich vestimentes, coopes, plaate and jewels,
wont upon such days to be set upon the aulters? Where is the great welfare,
the great dynners, the double service, the delicate meats and drynkes on
such festival days wont to be used? Where are your musical Instruments of
all sorts, and your blowynges to dynner with trumpetttes? Where are your
harpes, your lutes, your cymballes, your flutes, your taberettes your,
drunssades, and dowcymers? Where are your vialles, your rebeckes, your
shakebushes: and your sweet soft pleasant pypes? Where are your merye
communicacyons, your merye iestes, fables and taales wont to be had at your
table for merye pastyme on soche days? All, all this is put under foot, all
is this day in a muetie, in a scylence. All soche things are on this day
turned vpsoodowne, turned in to sadness, into mournynges, and into dolorous
lamentable fashyons.

No priest this day does celebrate, but only one in every church: and he to
be the greatest priest of auctorytie within the same Church: in sign and
token, that Christ which was Magnus sacerdos secundu^ ordine Melchisedech,
Hebreo. 6.
the great priest after the order of Melchisedech, did suffer this day, and
offered up him self upon the cross to the father, to the father of heaven for
man.

These solemn songs and instruments of the church, this day are turned In
Luctum and Lamentum, in to mournynges and lamentable tunes, in to flattes and
faaes, in to baase low breestes, in to straung tunes, in to submysse soft and
sobre mourning voices: so vtwardly to show, the inward mourning and
inward heaviness of our hertes: mourning and lamenting this panguyous Passion
of Christ, as men redye to suffer with him and for him, as true penitentes
cryinge to be perteners of this Passion and death, cryinge to have remyssyon
of our sins. Cryinge Ignosce pater, ignosce pater, Luce. 23.
Forgive us our sins Lord, forgive us our sins father of heaven. And for
all other kinds of musycall instruments, this day we do use prayer. Devout
prayer. Cryinge to god, calling for mercy, diligently suynge for remissyon of
our sins. And even whiles the meat and drink is in our mouths, to
remember the aysell and gall that the Iues this day gave him when he cried on
the cross Scitio. I am a thyrste.

This day for the precious apparel, some wears sack clothe, some here
next unto their bodies. Some gothe wolwarde, some baare legged, baare footed
like great penitentes, and not like as men gothe a holidays in precious
apparel. But black, black: in black in token of our sins, for which
Christ dyed.

And for delicate meats and drynkes, some fasteth this day to only bread
and drink, some to bread and water, some to fruytes and potages, some
absteyneth till night, as their bodies are able to bear every one after his or
their deuocyons, and abilytyes of their bodies. And for myrthe and merye
co^municacyon, some are this day in continual silence and contemplacyon* in
secret and inward remembrance and study of this glorious passion of Christ.
How, what, what manner, what panguyes, and under what fashon he suffered. Some
in co^tinal prayer, every one after soche deuocyo^ as god gives him grace.
This is the manner and fasshon of keeping the solempnytie and feast of this day.
But all these vtwarde doings, of silence, prayer, contemplacyon, fasting,
abstynencye, going wolwarde, baare legged or baare footed with all soche
other: if it be not done with an inward mind, with an inward devotion, with
a true heart, a true faith to god and for his love: I will not give a straw
for it. If it be not done for his love, it is not vayleable, not profitable,
nor meritoryous. Beware of dyssimulacyon, for if that come abroad, all is
marred, all is dasshed.

But why is this vnwonte manner of solempnytye observed and kept this day
only, contrary to all other days of the year? I think verylye that five
causes may be alleged and assygned for it, 5. cause co^dicionis huius diei.
videlicet Legis praeceptio, Peccatorum nostrorum deploratio, Supra mortem
Christi compassio. Exterioris solennisationis translatio. Et excellentissime
festiuitatis summa religio.

The first cause is, as it is written in the law Sabbatum requietionis est.
Affligeres animas vestras. Again, Omnis anima quae non fuerit afflicta in hac
die, exterminabitur de plebe. This is the Sabbath day, Sabbatu^ requietionis.
the day of rest: This is the day in which ye shall afflycte and punyshe your
selves. Ai^as vestras, your souls, your minds, as well as your bodies. Again,
Every man that does not this day afflycte and punyshe him self, shall be
banyshed and put out from my people says god. Se ye now whether the manner of
the obseruacyon of this day kept by christen people, do not agree and
quadrate with this letter, even as it is written to be kept in the law.
Seeing that no day in the year, man does so well absteyne as this day: Ye
both from vile works of the body, and also from sin: keeping this day
holy, affyctynge them selves as well in body as in soul, in fasting and
prayer, in going some wollwarde, some in here, in knelynges, prostracions and
knockynges their breestes: in lyftynge up their hertes to god, and inwardlye
lamenting their sins, with many other ways afflyctynge and punyshynge them
selves this day before all other days in the year. Ye and do keep this day
high and holy, and under soche a fashon, that they do specyallye absteyne
this day, from soche kind of sins, as they do in other holy days most
offend in. As in multiloquye, stultiloquye, scurrilytye. From jangling and
much language, from folyshe and scurrylous speech, from wanton words, from
light behauyoure, from swearynge and idle oaths, from periurye and blaphemye,
from voluptuous meats and drynkes, from filthy and flesshlye living, and
soche other usual sins.

This day with all diligencye that they can, they do avoid and flee utterly
(for the most pa^^re) all kind of sins that are in other times most used and
haunted: and studiously do use them selves in virtue, in prayer, in devotion,
in meditacyon and contemplacyon, in studyinge Christ, in devout remembrance
of his paynfull passion and the great benefytes of the same: ever cryenge and
calling upon god for mercy, for remyssyon, for indulgencye and pardon of their
sins, and to be parteners of the high merytes of this most blyssed
Passion, and that they may be thereby pourged, cleansed, justified, and thereby
brought unto the enherytaunce of heaven. And under this chrystyan behauyour good
people do this day holyly, devoutly and penitently pass their time in
holiness, in contemplacyon, in prayer and penance. In somoch that he or she is
wondered upon, ye despised and reiecte among the good people, that does not
use them selves better and more devoutly this day, then an other day. That do
not this day use them selves moore godly and chrystyanly, then any other day.

The second cause of the solompnyte and devotion of this day is Deploratio
peccatorum nostrorum. That 1 Petri. ^^*
Christus mortuus est pro peccatis nostris, iustus pro iniustis. Christ dyed
for our sins* the ryghteous for the unrighteous, the good man for the sinner,
Christ for man. Christ I say dyed for our sins. Not only for the sins
which soch a synguler person or soche a man does: but for the sins of the
hoole world, which were done from the beginning hitherto, and that shall be
done to the worlds end.

The other three causes why this unwont manner of this solempnitie is under this
fashon observed and kept this only day, I shall reserve it till the next
year or some other conuenyent time as shall be thought most expedyent for the
audyence. And in mean season shall exhort you all in our Lord God, as of
old custom has here this day been used, every one of you or ye depart, with
most entere devotion, knelynge tofore our savior lord god, this our Jesus
Christ, which has suffered so much for us, to whom we are so much
bounden, whoo lies in yonder sepulcher: In honor of him, of his passion and
death, and of his v. wounds, to say.v. Pater noster.v. Aues, and one Creed.
That it may please his merciful goodness to make us parteners of the merits of
this his most glorious Passyo^, blood and death. Whoo have you in his
merciful keeping and preseruacyon, Jesus Christ, Qui regnat cum patte and
spiritu sancto per infinita secula. AMEN.

DEO GRATIAS. Dominus dedit.
Imprynted at London in Paul's Church yearde at the sign of the maidens heed
by Thomas Petyt.


