THE LIFE OF GREGORY LOPES THAT GREAT SERVANT of God, native of Madrid,

WRITTEN IN SPANISH BY Father Losa Curate of the Cathedral of Mexico. AND SET
OVT BY FATHER Alonso Remon of the Order of our Lady de la Merced, with some
additions of his own.

monogram of Jesus Christ IHS


PRINTED AT PARIS. M.DC.XXXVIII.

TO HIS HONORABLE AND NOBLE FRIEND, S. KENELME DIGBIE LEARNINGS BEST ADVANCER.
THE opinion, which upon diverse occasions you have expressed, you had of the
excellency of this small work; and the great esteem wherein you kept it
always by you in spanish, enboldned my unskillfulness, to bestow upon it an
English being: such assurance are you able to give of the worth of whatsoever
you undertake to prise, or praise. Now if as your word went before the press,
so it may please you to permit your noble name to appear in the Frontispice;
and to take it into such a degree of favor, as to stand betwixt the Saint and
Censure, I dare promis he will be looked on and liked by the most, yea even by
the best understandings be judged to speak excellent truths with profitt and
admiration; and herin you shall still add to the high rate the world putts
upon the riches of your mind: which makes you your countries admiration and
pride, and the envy of other nations, who would judge it no crime to mistake
you for one of theirs; did you not by the frequent and fervent testimonies of
your incomparable zeal, love, and affection to serve our best King and
Country, put them out of that dream. But what do I do? I dare not give
sail into the Ocean of your vast soul, which is capable of all things from
the highest to the lowest, in perfection. Not that I dread censure of
flattery, where every one is ready to subscribe, if I could find any end; or
to write themselves, of they could find any beginning of your praises (plenty
making us all poor in this too plentiful a subject) But that your obligations
have made me too much your servant, to be willing to obscure what I am not able
to illustrate. I will only therefore, give my long imprisoned thoughts leave to
appear in words, confessing with all sincerity and truth, that for my part, I
never met with Magnanimity matched with such mildnes: such admirable knowledge
accompayned with such humility: so great ability attended with such
affability: nor so perfect courtshipe in conjunction with so great piety. In
a word the Court meets with nothing more polished, more obliging, more
endearing: The Army with nothing more generous, resolute and undaunted: The
school with nothing that either makes more deep and strong co^ceptions; or
more happy and graceful productions. And yet that which is justly most
admired and beloved in you, is, that that Piety which you teach the world to
practice, teaches you to make frequent and fair retreates, from thence to a
Religious Cell or solitude, which seems indeed to be the Center where your
soul reposeth; and where, being removed out of the noise of the world, you
better discern what God speaks to your heart. Please Noble Sr. to admit this
trifle, as a sign of gratitude; till time present something, whose bulk may
be better able to bear your praises: and permit that I, in the interim, may
honor myself with the title of

Your most humble and devoted servant N. N.

THE LIFE OF GREGORY LOPES THAT GREAT SERVANT of God, native of Madrid,

WRITTEN IN SPANISH BY Father Losa Curate of the Cathedral of Mexico. AND SET
OVT BY FATHER Alonso Remon of the Order of our Lady de la Merced with some
additions of his own.

PRINTED AT PARIS. 1638.

OF THE BIRTH, PArents, and country of Gregory Lopes and of the beginning of
his Vocation.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
GREGORY Lopes was borne at Madrid, in the year of our Lord 1542. on the
fourth of Iulie upon which day was celebrated at that time the feast of S.
Gregory Thaumaturgus, Bishop of Neocaesarea in Pontus but since is transferred
to the 17. of November. He was baptized in the Parish of S. Giles and was named
Gregory by his Parents, because he was borne upon that day.

This is all that is known and ca^ be auerred of his lineage, house, and name,
for those that were most inward with him, were of opinion that Lopes was not
his own, but rather that the holy man had assumed it the better to conceal
his noble family. For there appeared in his behavior, a certain generosity
under that humble gravity, and that freedom of spirit and resolurion: in what
business soever, a respect, and courtesy so acco^modated to every ones quality,
as all were persuaded, that he was descended of a noble house.

None could ever hear from his own mouth, what he was, for being asked by
some grave personages, and such as were most familiar with him, who he was, and
of what country, he answered: what avails that? Father Francis Losa a great
servant of God, who had, bin Curate of the Cathedral of Mexico, and left all
to accompany and converse with holy Gregory, and to cherish and tend him (as
he did until his death) treating of the same thing in the book which he did
write of his life, and how he had earnestly entreated him some few days before
his death, that he would tell him who were his Parents, he affirms, that he
made answer only in these words. since I came into the field to lead a
solitary life I have held only God for my Father; my brethren by this time are
dead, of whom I was they ou^gest. Such was his silence in this, though
remarkable in all things.

It is probable that he had his calling even from his childhood, because Father
Losa askeing him upon an occasion if God began to dispose him for his service,
as soon as he had the use of reason, he said he knew not certainly whether it
was then or a little after, but that he was certain that our Lord had called
him very soon, and that he never was a chid in his manners, and so he was wont
to say, as one that had found it by experience in himself, that which the holy
Ghost said by Hieremy, that the man was happy that carried the yoke of our Lord
from his youth.

In his childhood he did learn to read, and write, wherein he became so
excellent, as that some things which he has left written with his own hands
seem to be printed, he did never study Latin, nor any science, so that
whosoever did hear him treat of many verities both natural and divine, so
clearly and distinctly as he did, might easily gather that without doubt he
had no other Master but God.

He had a desire even almost from his infanty, to live a solitary life far from
his parents, and therefore being very young, he went to Burgos, and from thence
to Navarre; and lived six years upon a mountain in the company of an hermire,
in great poverty obedience and humility, till at lenth, God so permitting, his
Father went to seek him, and finding him out, brought him to Valladolid where
at that time was the court of Spain, and there placed him with a Gentleman of
good account, to serve as his page, much against Gregory his will: but neither
the braueries nor fassions of the court could make him forgett God, and his
inward recollection, where unto he perceived his calling was, and he was wont
to say that whilst he served in that place, and was sent upon errandes, his
chiefest care was to go talkeing mentally with God.

Lastly groweing in years and haueing attained the twentieth year of his age
or there abouts: and (as much as may be gathered) his father and Mother being
now dead, he resolved upon that which he had allwaies determined and purposed
in his mind, and taking with him some little things which were necessary for
such a long voyage, he took his journey toward Civil, with intent to take
ship for the indies, visiting some holy places which are in the way in Castile,
and Andalutia; he passed by Toledo, where whilst he prayed in the great Church
and visited many Relics, and pictures that are there, he confessed that one
day amongst the rest God did him, in that place, such a special favor and
grace as he had never received the like till that time, but he would never tell
what ir was.

From thence he went to our Ladies of Guadalupe, where he spent some days in
watching, and continual prayer, beseeching that glorious Virgin the guide of
the exiled, that she would obtain of her blessed son to enlighten him in his
journey which he purposed: and it is certainly thought, as much as could be
gathered by that little which he declared (for he did not reveal his thoughts
to any body) that the Mother of God at Guadalupe commanded him by a particular
revelation, to go to new Spain, which journey he took in hand and performed
very joyfully.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. How he arrived in new Spain and of the exercises wherein
he there employed himself.
AFter he was embarked, the fleet wherein the went, endured some tempests,
which seemed vnusualle to the Mariners in those parts, but it seems that all
these were slights of the devil who as soon as he gets knowledge of any
soul that is to war against him, he presently begins to trouble her, and
desires to hinder her from going forward, either covertly with the color of
goodness, or openly by opposing her. but all these tempests passed over and he
arrived safe at the post of S. Iuan de Lua: there he gave thanks unto God for
his good success, and went to the City of Veracruz where he did declare
somewhat of his mind and purpose in coming to the Indies, because most Men go
thither to increase their fortunes, and he, it seems, had read that which S.
Augustine says in one of his Epistles: if you would be a good Merchant, and
heap up store of wealth, give that which you cannot keep, and you shall
receive in exchange, that which you cannot loose, give a little and you shall
receive a great deal, because for these temporal goods, which you distribute,
there shall be given you an eternal inheritance: so he being furnished with
clothes, money, and some other little things to the value of eightscore pound
starling, he gave away and distributed it all, for the love of God keeping
nothing for himself but what was necessary to cover his body, which was a suit
of ordinary cloth of rash, with which he went from the City of Veractuz to
Mexico, travailing, those 240. miles with many incommodities in his sustenance,
because he never asked any thing of any body, neither for Gods sake, nor for
any other respect.

As soon as he came to Mexico, being, as is said, before excellent in the art
of writing: least he should give himself any occasion to be withdrawn, from
his purpose never so little, he did fly idleness (because as the poet Lucan
says, that is the effect of idleness) and he settled himself to write first with
a Scriuener by name San Roman and afterward with the Secretary Turcius; it was
Lent at that time he was in Mexico and he fasted it all with bread and water,
and with the greatest abstinence, silence, and austerities as was ever seeene
in any secular Man: And this is manifest by a letter which Leaves Zapata writ
unto him about 29. or 30. years afterward, which came to be in the year of
our Lord 1591. It is dated from the Mines of Iaxio and written unto Gregory
Lopes who was then in Santafe in great esteem for his sanctity as shall be
said hereafter. The tenor of the letter is this.

About 29. or 30. years ago whilst that I dwelt in the street of Tabusa in
Mexico, there came out of Spain, and lodged in my house a Gentleman clothed
in rash, and amongst other tokens, he fasted that Lent with bread, and water,
he was called Gregory Lopes: they say that you are called so, I pray do me
the favor to write if you be he, and to co^me^d me to God in your prayres.

And that he was, the same, it is manifest by his answer, which he sent back in
the same paper in these only words: I am he that you speak of, I will do as
you request me. A sentence worthy of so great a personage; a wise lesson and of
great moment, to teach the profane custom of this present age, to spare their
words and paper.

Gregory Lopes staid in Mexico, only till he could get by his writing, where
withal to pass to Zacatrias whether he had a mind to go; as soon as he came
to those mines, and saw, the confusion and covetousness, those wranglings,
oaths, and periuries, the suites in law, quarrels and misfortunes of those Men
so drowned in avarice, by reason of that Mineral, he was much discontented,
and great was the dislike that he had whilst he was there, especially when one
day he saw with his own eyes, that, at such time, as the Carts went away with
the silver to Mexico, two men,, which seemed to be discreet, fell out about a
certain interest, and killed one another at the same time without regard to
give account, either of the goods to the owners, their souls to God, which was
the greater loss.

This troubled Gregory very much, being sorry for the loss of those two souls
and being inwardly stricken he trembled with fear to see how much God was
offended in that place, and how easily Men went to hell. From that time, he
begane to make more have, to put that in practice, which he had determined in
his mind, namely to go and live in the wilderness solitary, fearing, least
delay might be hurtful, since that the staying of Esau in hunting made him
loose his fathers blessing: and it is the opinion of wise Men, that in war and
in the way of virtue, delay is for the most part hurtful with this resolution,
he changed those clothes he wore, which were reasonable good, for a sack cloth,
and went 24. mile farther into the Country, to the Valley of Amvac, amongst the
Chichimecos, whose crueltic was in those time much feared by the Spaniards,
because they did eat Man's flesh, and committed many other cruelties: but he
having God in his heart, feared no man, and so it came to pass that these Men,
or beasts (for so they showed themselves to others) were so courteous to him
as that they helped him to make e little cottage after the manner of an
Hermitage, which we may well say, was the first that ever, was in new Spain
with that name.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of the solitary life which he began to lead in the Valley
of Amayac amongst the Chichimecos.
GRegory Lopes began his solitary life as he was entering into the one and
twentieth year of his age, which is a matter of great importance, to wit, to
begin even from ones youth those exercises, which are to continue all ones
life, and S. Ambrose said, that this was the honor of young Men, to learn the
fear of God from their tender years. Therefore the first thing, that Gregory
did, for the better performance of this his solitary life, was to make the two
first steps, the one with the fear, the other, with the love of God, offering
himself up ito his hands, and putting himself under the shadow of his most
assured protection, with these words. Lord here I go forth only to serve
thee, and not for any interest of mine own; if I do perishes, on thy account
be it. By Gods fault no Man perishes, because he gives every one, that, which
is sufficient, if he will make his benefit of it for his salvation. And our
ruin allwaies proceeds, and is caused by ourselves as all the holy Fathers
do understand and as may be gathered by many places of the holy Scripture,
especially by the words of the Prophet Isaie in the 13. Chapter. Thy perdition
O Israel is thy own work, from me only thou had help that thou might not
have bin destroyed, if thou would have helped thy self with it. So Gregory by
those words did not mean, that his soul might be lost for want of Gods
assistance, he himself doing, what lay in him because that cannot be imagined
of a Man endued naturally, with such an understanding, and supernaturally with
so much light, but, by this manner of speech, he intended to declare his
affection: and truly words coming from hearts enkindled with love are
always to be piously interpreted, conformably to the affection which does then
rule in them.

Here by we might gather the nature of this act of Gregory, which proceeded
from two apprehensions which he might have had of God at that time. The first
was, of a holy fear of the combats which offer themselves in the desert; the
which proceeded out of a perfect knowledge, which God had given, him, of his
own weakness. The second, of a great confidence, which he put with all in the
goodness and metcy of God; for the just man by trusting in God, loses not, his
fear, and by the fear of himself, casts not away his confidence in God.
Then if we refer it to the affection of confidence, his act is to be declared
thus: Lord here I go forth only to serve thee, and not for any interest of
mine, if I perish, upon thy account be it; as if he should say; I am sure that
by thy fault I shall not perish; but I am rather of opinion that this proceeded
from a holy fear, and that which he could have said, was: Lord here I go
forth not for my own interest but only to serve thee, if I do ruin my self
it will not be by obeying thee in this vocation which thou give me, but
because thou have determined for mine own unworthiness, to suffer me, to perish
in that estate thou have put me in, as Saul did loose himself in that course,
wherein thou did put him, not by thy fault but his own.

From the very instant that Gregory Lopes made this act, he found the favor of
God in himself very efficacious, and began with great courage to walk in the
narrow path of perfection; in the which he never retired back one foot, or
staid, nor ever lost sight of that light, with which God did direct him in this
way. He armed himself with continual abstinences. He used himself to eat but
once a day allthough his meat was but short, and of little nourishement; for
the most part of his time it was only Maiz or Indian wheat tosted which the
Indians call Cacalote, and he observed this custom so strictly even till his
death, that upon no occasion, yea though he were grievously sick, he would ever
break it. He did never eat flesh; yet if any sent him some slices of beef in
alms he received them tha^kefully concealing his abstinence, but he did never
eat them. Rolls of Indian wheat were his ordinary bread, and those but
sparingly, and less then sufficient sustinance to live upon, if God had not
sent him such favor as might well seem his, in so much that his manner of
life, and nourisheme^t seemed rather miraculous then natural.

THE IIII. CHAPTER. How the retyring of Gregory, seemed to some excessive, and
his manner of life suspicious, and the reproaches which he thereupon endured, and
of a notable miracle which our Lord wrought by him.
ALthough the life of Gregory in the wilderness, was so extraordinary, and so
retired from the conversation of Men, yet there were some that did carp at that
estranging of himself, especially, because they did not thoroughly penetrate
that inward practice of his soul: and the exterior, which they saw, was
different from that, which is commonly seen in such like Men, that are given
to spiritual exercises; because they saw that upon many holydaies he did not
go to Mass, and that he had no spiritual books; those sla^derers of his
blameless life, not considering that the way, which Gregory took, and wherein
God had enlienghted him; was so inward, so secret, and so solitary, that even
his soul it self, as he often said, did stand in fear, and suspected her own
body. And thus much touching the sla^der, for not vsesing books of devotion,
and vocal prayer: as for his hearing of Mass upon days of obligation, this
might excuse him, that the nearest place to his Cottage or habitation was 24.
or 30. mile off; yet upon great days he always went to hear it, and
afterward returned back to his widernes. But it is no new thing that the just
and friends of God, suffer such like persecutions, for as S. Austin says very
well: persecution is that which disposes the servant of God, for the glorious
crown, which is ready for him in heaven; and Lactantius says, that an
Emperor or Prince could not know the valor of his Nobility, if he had not
enemies for their exercices and trial. Besides this, some imputed it to great
folly in Gregory Lopes, seeing him choose that wilderness before any other, for
his aboade in which, those Chichimecos, a rude Nation, did every day kill and
eat such Spaniardes as they could get in their hands, as if there had not bin
thousands of Angels garding and watching the nakedness and solitarines of
Gregory, in regard of that Lord, whom he served, no man daring to touch him;
yea not to look on him without respect, because, that were to touch God in the
apples of his eyes, as he himself says, by the Prophet Zachary, of those who
trouble and disquiet his faithful servants. But many of the soldiers, who
passed that way, being ignorant of such deep philosophy, called him fool and
mad Man, and said unto him: friend you smell of the grave, but the soldier of
Christ did little regard, these fears, for God had infused such a love and
reverence toward him, in the minds of that barbarous people, that allthough
they killed the other Spaniardes with their accustomed cruelty round about him,
yet when they came to the place, where Gregory was, they reverenced him and
saluted himwithsuch courtesyas they were capable of: and not only they but also
other India^s, that were more ciuilised, and understood our language, seeing him
apparelled in that manner, like an hospital brother, and thinking him rather
an Ecclesiastical person then secular by his garments, instead of saying
Deogratias unto him, they said Teogratias; and such was their courtesy and
kindness toward him, as that they offered, him some conies and tunas; a fruit
much esteemed in those countries, showing themselves in all things so loueing
and ready to assist him as if he had him their Countriman, kinsman, or brother;
and by this may be seen the love, and respect which they bore him, that seeing
him build that cotta or hermitage, the Indian Chichimecos themselves did help
him to finish it, bringing boughs and stones, and making mortar, such is the
force of good example and humble life, as it is able to tame and soften the
hearts even of wild beasts. And so said the Emperor Adrian, as Dion relates,
that arms and Majesty had given him the Empire, because, they made him
dreadful, and that courteousnes and clemency did maintain it, because
clemency begets love. But nothing does so much declare and set forth the
great force of meeknes, sweetness in words, lowlines in carriage, cheerfullnes
of countenance, as that manner of extolling which David uses in the 44.
Psalm, where speaking even literally of Christ, he says, that, one thing for
which the eternal Father did bless him, was for the comelines and grace,
which was spread in his lips.

But all that which we have said hitherto, is little in comparison of that
which now we will say. Oh sweetness of behavior! oh good example in life and
manners! how powerful are you not only on earth, but even in heaven? The holy
Man Gregory haueing finished his little cottage, thought good to make himself a
little garder after the manner of the ancient hermits and Fathers in the
desert, but he went on but slowly in his work being very weak both by reason
of continual contemplation, frequent ecstasies, as also by reason of the
austerities, and mortifications he used, standing allwaies on his feet with his
head bare both in the sun and wind; eating only now and then a few herbs and
morcells of Maiz which the Indians did throw unto him; being besides of a weak
constitution, as may be seen by his physiognomy his picture (whosoever either
for curiosity or devotion desires to see it) is very well drawn in the
Imperial house of the Society of Jesus at Madrid (which is in Toledo street)
in the Church upon the side altar on the left hand going up to the high altar
in the picture of S. Ihon Evangelist in the I Will of Pathmos. A certain Spaniard
by name Andrew Moteno had a farm near unto that place; he came sometimes to
help the holy Man to work in his garden, and to make a ditch and a bank,
which he did round about to convey away the water, and that it might serve
instead of an hedge or enclosure; and as he came one day amongst the rest to
see him and help him, from the top of an high hill which did look into his
garden, he saw a thing very strange and worth the relating. Gregory was digging
in his garden, and round about him were many Angels of rare beauty richly
attired and in diverse colors. Some of them did dig others carried earth out of
the ditch, and others helped Gregory to lift up his arms. The man was
astonished and stood in amazement above two hours; he told it to his wife, who
was called Donnia Maria de Mercado, and, at her entreaty he returned to see the
same vision and miracle many other mornings, till he was assured, that it was
no dream nor imagination, but a real and true vision seen with his corporal
eyes, and a manifest miracle, which, it was the will of God, should be
published and made known.

The V. CHAPTER. Of the remedies, with which God did furnish him against the
combats, which he did sustain at those times.
Great was the austerity, which he used in mortifying his body, not sparing
himself one instant, nor affording himself any ease: and not only this, but
also want of necessaries gave him abundant occasion to merit. But all this was
sweet in comparison of that interour exercise, to the practice of which, God
did continually stir him up. And though in particular it be not known, in
what kind, this exercise was, yet he told me often times, that such was the
vehemency of his combat, that he maruailed how he could hold out and that his
hair did stand an end when he remembered those times. This he said, being now
an old beaten soldier and much pracctised in the like combats. Upon an
occasion that offered it self, he did with great modesty tell one, that was
well affected unto him, that he had had a combat and spiritual wrestling with
the devil which was so violent, that blood burst out at his ears and
nostrills. The remedy he used in these occasions was prayer, wherein he
continued day and night, and he was feign to use all his strength in this
combat, least he should yield. But amongst the affections which God did give
him in his prayer for hisstre^gthe^ing and co^fortt, there was one a very
singular one in using those words, Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in caelo and in
terra, Amen Jesus; the which he said continually, in so much as for the space
of three years, he said them mentally as often as he drew breath, without
ceasing or once forgetting: neither did his eating or drinking or talking with
any Man, make him intermitt this exercise: and I once asking him, if it were
possible to remember himself of those words, as soon as he awaked, he
answered yes: and in such manner, as that finding himself awake, he did not
breath the second time, until he had said them. A rare thing yet not
impossible for Gregory, being it was agreeable to the great vigilance and
perseverance that God had given him; in whatsoever he imagined to be the will
of God or profitable for his soul. At three years end, where in he had
practiced himself in meditating upon those words, and profited much by them
resigning himself wholly to the will of God in whatsoever he would dispose of
him, it pleased God to put him in another exercises not so much of words, as
of deeds; that was an ardent love of God, and his neighbor, in the which that
religious soul settled her self as in the most heroical virtue, and most
pleasing unto God. Thus with so firm and sure a foundation, he went always
increasing and ascending from one virtue to another, never slakting that
amarous effect of Charity in which the divine goodness had grounded him, as
shall be said hereafter.

THE VI. CHAPTER Gregory Lopes goes to the plantation of Alonso de Aualos and
determines to return to Mexico by the persuasion of Father Dominick de
Salazar.
GRegory liked well of his ha^itation in the town of Amyac because he did
there enjoy freely his solitarines, and had occasion enough to exercise his
poverty and patience, in wanting commodities for his life and convenient
sustenance; and therefore he would not have changed his habitation, but that the
love of his neighbor (whom he desired to love as himself) did seem unto him
to require it; because his manner of liueing in the desert, being so new ad
unusual in those parts, some rude. and ignorant people, did marvel that he
did not hear Mass upon Sundays, and holidays, especially haueing no
occasions nor labors in the country to excuse him from the precept of the
Church, it seeming unto them, that only temporal necessity was sufficient to
dispense with him, and not the particular calling of God, and instinct of the
holy Ghost, who did bring unto the deserts of Nitria in Egypt, and to many
other parts, great numbers of Men, who did lead a Monastical or Heremiticall
life not haueing opportunity in one year, no nor in many, to fulfill that
precept, or others such like from the which in the judgment of all learned and
virtuous men they were lawfully excused; and Gregory himself knew that very
well, yet nevertheless he yielded to the frailty and ignorance of those people,
and to avoid all scandal, he went to Alonso de Aualos his plantation, where he
had commodity of hearing Mass, Alonso de Aualos received him with much love
and courtesy, and offerred him a house and garden of a very good air, and
understanding that he did not eat flesh commanded his steward to employ an
Indian to catch fish for him, Gregory accepted of the garden, but would not
consent by any means, that any Man should be set on work for him and so for
the space of two years which he spent in that place he lived only upon milk,
and curdes, this time expired (understanding that it was the will of God) he
determined to return to Zacatecas, and the night before his departure, as he
was expecting day light to take his journey, the terrible earthquake began,
which was in that Country in the year 1576. and as Gregory was going to open
his window, the beams of his chamber fell without doing him any harm. In this
journey he came to a manor of Sebastian Mexia, who gave him good
entertainment, which he required with his virtuous example and good advise, the
which made such impressio^ in his host that presently laying aside his rich
apparel he clothed himself in sack cloth like Gregory Lopes, to whom he bore
such an affection and respect, that he determined to put both soul and goods
in his hand to manage and dispose of them according to the great prudence,
which he understood that God bestowed upon him. But he suspecting it, and
knowing that Sebastian Mexia was shortly to die, thought it was not for his
purpose, to take upon him the charge of other men's goods, who to serve god more
freely, had discharged himself of his own: and to the great grief of the^
all, he continued his journey.

At that time Father Dominick de Salazar, an eminent Man of the order order of
the Dominicans, went about preaching amongst the mines and villages adjoining
upon Zacatecas. This man through the great familiarily he had with Gregory, was
so taken with his good spirit, and manner of life, as that he did earnestly
entreat him, to go to the convent of S. Dominick in Mexico promising to
procure him both lodging and diet, where he might live more quietly and
securely exercising apart his prayer and other exercises of his calling, and
yet not want the commodities and profit, which a life in community, especially,
of relgious Men, brings with it. Gregory believing that this course would be
no hindrance to those exercises of prayer and contemplation, which God had put
him into, determined to follow the counsel of so learned a Man, and so great
a servant of God as was Father Dominick, and accepting of the opportunity and
alms he returned to Mexico, ha^ing bin in the said Villages of Amayac Aualos
and Mexias man^our almost seven years, and ^wo Months, wherein he served a
certain man upon an occasion, which I will relate. He clothed himself as is
said before, with a course sack cloth, and having with time worn out his
clothes, he thought good to earne wherewith to cover his nakedness, seeking in
that place a service. He came to a rich farmer, who received him willingly, and
gave him in charge to look to his house hold, and see them do that which
belonged to their office. Gregory did that with such care on the one side, and
on the other with such love and humility, as that he filled all with the
admiration of his virtue, love of his good carriage and desire of his company;
but he haueing got enough in two months space to put himself in clothes, took
his leave of them leaving them sorry for his departure, which they could not
remedy neither with entreaties, nor tears, nor money which they offerred him.

Whilst Gregory Lopes walked in the wilderness, great were the terrors, with
which the devil endeavored to affright him, make him turn back and leave
off his holy purpose; sometimes with the roarings and the howlings of the wild
beasts, other times with the cruel deaths, that the Indian Chichimecos put the
Spaniards unto every day in that place, othertimes he assailed him with diverse
in ward temptations, and therefore the more crafty, and deeeitfull, but he had
presently recourse to his prayres and such weapons as God had given him for his
defense, which was a total resignation wherewith he put himself, and his
affairs in the hands of God. He did repeato those words, wherein he had found
such light and erudition, fiat voluntastua, etc. and prestrate on the ground in
the sight of God he said: oh Lord thou art a Father and all things are done in
thy presence, and with thy will. With this he got new strength to go on in his
way.

He lived in great poverty, as is said, yet he never as ked alms, neither in
this time, nor ever after in his life, but trusting wholly to the divine
Providence, he did eat that which Men gave him of their own accord without
asking, and when that failed, he did earne it with his labor. He passed many
days, only with Indian wheat tosted, and some lents only with purslane,
whereby he came to have a great weakness in his stomach, which gave him occasion
to merit all his life time. Sometimes he used to exercise his body in his little
garden, and he did seldom or never eat of the herbs, which he planted and
cultiuated, but very charitably gave them to those that passed that way. He did
spend every day some time in the holy Scripture, and some times his lecture was
in the Epistles of S. Paul in Spanish, before they were forbidden, of which we
shall speak more at large in another place.

THE VII. CHAPTER. He returns to Mexico, and having bin at the convent of S.
Dominick, he goes to Guasteca, to continue his solitary life.
AS soon as he came to Mexico, he went straight to the convent of the
Dominicans to meet with Father Dominick Salazar, who was to procure him a Cell
in that place according to his promise: but understanding, that he was not in
the city at that present, he declared his business to some grave and learned
Fathers of that order; who answered him, that they could not possibily give him
a cell unless he did take the habit which they offered him very willingly: but
he haueing staid there some days expecting his patron, in whose word and
favor he put much confidence, at length they assuring him that he would not
return very soon, and that when he was come, he could not obtain his desire,
and withal persuading himself with this, that his vocation was not to live in
community but solitary, he took his leave of that holy convent with much
grief both to the Fathers and also to himself, being to leave such holy
company; but he esteemed it his more assured course to continue in his first
vocation and way which our Lord had showed him, and wherein he had profited so
much already, and for that purpose he determined to go to Guasteca, because
he was told that it was a wast and unpeopled Country, but very fertile of wild
fruits, on which he might live. Gregory made choice of this seat to live
solitary in, and though he might have had cause to fear his infirmiries and
weakness of body, yet he was more afraid of being troublesome to those that gave
him entertainment, a thing wherein he was always very wary and discreet,
Therefore relying wholly upon the divine Providence, he settled himself in that
place until God did ordain otherwise; the fruits herbs, and roots of the
field were his food, he fought valiantly the battles of our Lord, continuing
the exercise of the love of Goda^d his neighbor, wherein, as is said before,
the divine goodness had grounded him and given him increase.

THE VIII. CHAPTER. Of a grievous sickness which he had and of an ill opinion,
which some had conceived of him about that time.
GRegory Lopes would have spent the rest of his life in that wilderness of
Guasteca, if he had perceived that it was the will of God who showed that it
was otherwise, by means of a vehement fit of the bloody flix which he sent
him, in which he continued many days all alone, with the discommodities that
may be imagined, in great want of all things necessary for his cure, and even
for his ordinary sustenance, till it pleased God, that a priest of a very
exemplar life, by name I hon de Mesa who instructed those people wihout any
stipend, spending his means freely among the poor and needy, sending
presently for the sick man cherished him in his own house with all diligence
and attendance. He was brought very low with this sickness, until that being
very much weakened, by reason that he had not eaten anything in many days
before, he fell a sleep, but wakned again untimely, with a little strength and
stomach to his meat, and in a short time he perfectly recovered. Nevertheless
his good host would not suffer him to return to the wilderness again, but
keept him in his house almost four years with great edification both to
himself and his neighbors round about, who moved with the report of his good
carriage, came to see him, although he never revealed to any what he was, what
his vocation, nor the mental exercises which he used, only his outward
behavior was that, which made many both admire and love him; yet there wanted
not some, that did behold him with a quite different eye, and so framed
different conceits of his manner of life; for having no office nor exercise, as
they thought, to employ himself in, they deemed him to be an idle fellow, and
one of no worth; yea their suspicion passed farther, for some thought him an
heretic, although they saw him come to hear Mass, and comply with the other
outward obligations of a Christian, as well as the rest.

And because upon this occasion, I got the first knowledge of his manner of
life, I will here set down the relation, which they gave me of him. About that
time, there came a priest from those parts, to the city of Mexico, and amongst
other businesses, which he came to treat of, one was that their lived in that
place, a man, who he feared very much, was a Lutherane heretic, because he did
not carry any beads about him, nor showed any other such signs, with which
good Christias showed their devotion, and vprightnes of heart. I asked him,
whether he spoke well in things touching our faith; he answered, that he seemed
to be well grounded in the Catholic doctrine, that he knew all the bible by
heart, that in his behavior he was blameles, and that he was almost allwaies
alone, as if he had great businesses though he did not impart them to any. He
stays a great while in the Church, and we cannot not get out of him, of what
country he is, who were his parents, or kinsfolk, and liueing in the world he
does not meddle with any thing of this world, as if he did not live in it. I
replied familiarly, that I would not have that priest be like unto Hely, who
thought, that the changes which Anna made in her countenance, at such time as
she prayed earnestly in the presencee of God, were caused by drunkenness, if you
should see a thief without his beads, you would not therefore account him an
heretic; how much less a man of so good a life, so conversant in the holy
Scripture; and whose eonuersation seems only ton be with God. The priest
conuiced with this reason, answered, that he liked well of that which I told
him, and that it was likely, that he was a very good man, and said moreover: I
will carry him a hat for he wears none (perhapes because he has none) and I
will not inform the Inquisition of him as I thought to have done. This passed
betwixt the priest and me concerning Gregory Lopes, whom I knew not of till
then; neither did I then know his name allthough by the said relation, I
conceived a good opinion of his manner of life, God beginning then, though I
knew nothing, to show his great favors and mercies, which he was to do me by
means of this his servant, as shall be said hereafter.

THE IX CHAPTER. His aboade in Atrisco, his return to Mexico, and the
examination which the Metrapolitane made of his spirit, and manner of life.
THe desire which Gregory Lopes had to live unknown, and the great care, which
he used to conceal his spirit and heroic virtues, made him often change his
dwelling, imitating herein the ancient hermits who fearing least they should be
known and honored by Men, did travel continually from one place to another:
so he, having bin, about four years in Guasteca, seeing himself known and
much esteemed both by Spaniards and Indians; by the instinct of the holy Ghost
(for it is to be thought that he never chaged his habitation without it) he
departed toward Atrisco, and being within a league of the town, God brought
him unto a man of good esteem, by name Ihon Perez Romero who gave him lodging
and all things necessary for his maintenauce in his manor. Gregory was there
well treated, because his hosts were good Christians, and benefited themselves
with the good counfailes and examples which he gave them (for that was the
gratifying and recompense, which Gregory left to them, that entertained him,
and wheresoever he came) the temper of the country was very agreeable unto him,
and the rivers, brooks and pleasantnes of the fields did further him much in
his devotion and recollection. But it was not the will of God, that he should
stay in that place above two years, because the sower of coccle, the enemy of
our good is wont to hide the virtue, and darken the light, which shines and
enlightneth, that others might not profit themselves, nor go forward in the
service of God, as did those hosts of Gregory, and many of their neighbors
round about. Therefore the common enemy used for his instruments, certain
religious men, that lived in that place, none of the learned, but it is
likely their intention and zeal was good, though not secundum scientiam, who
seeing such great mortification, and so composed a behavior in such a young
Man, such an admirable wisdom, virtue, and spirit in one that had neither
studied, nor ever wore any religious habit, wherein he might have got such good
parts, they were much scandalized, and did fear where there was nothing to be
feared, and sorgetting that saving, that, the hood makes not the Monk, and
that which the Prophet says: Happy is he O Lord whom thou instructs and
teach thy holy law. They did so much aggrauate the matter before him that
was then Archbishop of Mexico, that he thought it necessary, to make very exact
inquiries, to learn the truth; which being performed according ^o the order of
law, he declare ^y decree and public sentence, the great virtue and innocence
of Gregory: who, having got by this a greater name and opinion of fanctitie
amongst all men, took his leave of John Perez Romero, and leaning him and all
his family sad for the loss of such holy company by which they were so much
edified, he took his journey toward Mexico, and from a place near Tescuro,
lifting up his eyes, he espied the house and sanctuary of our Lady of Remedies
on the other side of the city; and thinking that there might be there, some
habitation, wherein he might continue his solitary life, he travailed straight
toward that place, without entering into Mexico, and seeing that it was a place
dedicated to the Mother of God, he rejoiced exceedingly, and purposed to
remain in that place in service of the Queen of heaven: God disposed all this
for the good of many souls in that place, who profited much in virtue by the
conversation and company of Gregory. At his first comeing, and for some months
after, none knew what he was, and there were scarce any that made any esteem
of him because he was very wary in making any outward show of the favors,
which God did unto him, but seemed outwardly a simple Man, of few words and of
a shallow understanding; none did resort unto him, none did light upon that
treasure, which God had in secret in that wilderness. By reason of this he was
in great necessity, and want of sustenance, in so much that I have known him
pass many days, only with wild quinces; but, time running on, men began to
take more notice of him, some devout persons, who did there keep their
nouendialls inuiting him now and then to dinner, and they did behold with care
and attention, their guests new attire, and manner of life; some were edified
by his conversation, others did beware of him, holding it a suspicious matter
to stray from the common course, others less advised, judged him to be a Man
of ill life and a dissembling heretic, and therefore did abhor and fly his
company, and he in that kind suffered much with wonderful patience, allthough
I could not hitherto learn any notable thing, that happened unto him in that
place. This came to the ears of the Archbishop Don Pedro Moya de contreras of
good memory who like a vigilant and careful Prelate, thought good to inform
himself of the life and behavior of Gregory Lopes, and the spirit, by which he
was directed. I went about that time to our Lady of Remedies to see him, and by
the conferences which I had with him, I remained well satisfied touching his
spirit, and judged him, to be a man of solid and well grounded virtue. I gave
this relation to the said Archbishop, and told him that was my opinion; he for
his more satisfaction, and better performance of his office, would have this
business examined more exactly, and gave in charge to Father Alonso Sanches, of
the society of Jesus, a man of great zeal and learning, and much addicted to
spiritual life, and well experienced in it, to examine Gregory Lopes with all
care and diligence; making (as they use to say) an anatomy of him, and to
acquaint himself with his emploiments, exercises, and manner of proceeding. The
said Father went with this commission to our Ladies of Remedies where he spent
much time with Gregory, propou^ding unto him very precise questions concerning
the Catholic faith, his customs, and spirit, to all which he answered with
such breuity, and humility, that he left him always more in doubt, so as his
desire of getting out the plain truth clearly, was increased in him.
Therefore thinking, that to use any other means, was but to go about the
bush, he determined to speak to him plainly, and so with a grave and seure
countenance, said these words will declare my self unto you: my Lord Archbshop
sends me to have knowledge of his sheep; therefore, answer me clearly, and
plainly; to this Gregory made answer: it is uery ^itting, that I should obey my
Father and Prelate, and you in his name; this being premised, Father Alonso
Sanches began a fresh to sift him over and over, asking him many very subtle
questions in matter of faith, and Christian doctrine; to all which he answered
clearly and distincly, grounding his answers upon the holy Scripture, and
relating the heresies which had bin raised against the Catholic verity,
me^tioning the times and the chiefest of the Archheretickes, together with the
holy writers and Doctors, who did impugn and write against them: this he did
with such weighty sentences and grave words, that the father remained
astonished, but much much more he wondered at the good satisfaction, which he gave
to all the doubts and objections he put unto him, touching his spirit, and
manner of life, and found that he was endued with much prudence both divine and
humane. Hence it came to pass, that the said father remained not only well
satisfied touching the spirit of Gregory, but also his great friend and deuote.
He gave an account of all this, to the Archbishop who was exceeding glad, that
a Man of such virtue had joined himself to his flock, and from that time
forward gave command that he should be cherished, and often visited, I being
always the messenger. The first time, that I spoke with the Archbishop, after
that Father Alonso Sanches had given account of his commission; he told me,
that among other things which the Father had told him in praise and favor of
Gregory, he said these words, Truly my Lord, in comparison of this man I have
not yet begun my spiritual A. B. C.

THE X. CHAPTER. Of his going to the Hospital of Guasteca, and the exterior
and interior exercises, wherein he employed himself in that place.
GRegory Lopes had lived two years in the house of our Lady of Remedies when
he found himself very weak, and tormented with a pain in the stomach, and the
colic; and by reason of these indispositions, those cold, and blustering
winds, which do ordinarily blow in those high Countries, were very hurtful to
him, and therefore it was necessary in regard of his health, to go to the
Hospital of Guasteca which is seated in the Marquesate of Valle 36. miles of
Mexico. As soon as the Archbishop understood his resolution, he sent him an
horse of his own stable, and some dainties by a servant who was to accompany
him and serve him in his journey. Gregory Lopes, the Archbishops servant and I
departed from our Lady of Remedies, in the year 1580. toward Guasteca, and so
great was the esteem of those, who had conuersed with him in that place, that
at his departure, all made means to get some part of his poor
household stuff, which was at that time two or three sheepskins, which served
instead of a bed, and a little pitcher to keep water in. And allthough I
endeavored also to get one of those sheepskins, I could never obtain it,
though I was Curate of the Cathedral, and so well known by all: such was the
affection, and devotion, with which the good people did ask them. I left
Gregory in his way to Guasteca, least I should be wanting to my office in
Mexico. Gregory therefore in the company of the Archbishops servant, arrived at
Guasteca, where he was received by brother Stephen de Herrera, allthough the
commodity was but small, by reason of the great poverty which the hospital did
suffer in its beginning. He lodged him in his own chamber, having order to
give him that which was necessary for his sustenance, and not to employ him in
any thing. The brother used him with all love and kindness, as he did use to do
all, that repaired thither; who though they were many in number, by reason of
the pleasant temperature and wholsomenes of that air, and the Hospital poor
at that time; having neither rents to maintenance the poor, nor houseroome to
lodge them, nor any thing wherewith to build, yet it never was wanting to their
cure and relief: a thing truly, which if we did consider it only humanly,
would seem impossible and far from the truth: but such was the courage of
Bernardin Aluares the founder, not only of that Hospital, but also of that of
the Conualescents in Mexico, and of many others which are spread over all new
Spain, that he deserved his most prosperours successes, for the relief, and
help of many. I remember that when I asked of this great servant of God, his
good will, that Gregory Lopes might be received in that Hospital, he answered
me: would to God, Father Losa, that I could bring all the poor Men in the
world to my hospital, I trust in Jesus Christ, that he would maintain them
all: be it with all my heart as you desire: and well may it be seen, that this
hospital was governed by Gods providence, for within two years after it was
founded, there was in that house of Guasteca, allowance for 72. persons, and
from that time forward it has increased so much, that now, God has provided a
table in that desert for all sorts of poor and needy people both men and
weomen, spaniardes, and Indians, that come to the hospital to be healed not
only out of new Spain, but also from Guatimala, and Peru, for the good
entertainment which they find there, and abundance of all things necessary for
their health and relief, and the great care and charity with which they are
looked unto, so as almost all that go thither, with almost incurable
diseases, in a little time recover their perfect health; and thus much in
brief of this famous hospital, because I thimke that Gregory Lopes his being
there at the beginning of it, was no small cause of of its increase. In this
place therefore Gregory had his maintenance sure, under the title of voluntary
poverty, and laying aside care of all things (allthough the care of temporal
things did never molest him) he gave himself wholly to contemplation and
mental exercises, practicing himself in the love of God and his Neighbor, in
which he had labored many years. But all though the exercise was allwaies the
same, yet the increases every day were new, he was all the day retired in a
chamber by himself, he went out only to hear Mass upon Sundaies, and
holidaies, and some of the week days, and then also only to the hospital
chapel, and if at any time he failed there, he went to the Monastery of S.
Dominick to hear it there; and though that place was very pleasant by reason
of the many good springs, fields, and groves of trees, and prospects, yet he
seldom or never went out to see them, for being of a weak and tender
constitution, the ill smell of the contagious diseases, which are there cured,
did much annoy him: for this cause some of those that assisted in the hospital
did murmur against him (for it is no new thing for Martha to complain of Mary)
as an unprofitable impertinent and idle Man. But those that did attentively
consider the actions of Gregory, did esteem of him otherwise; for they found
in themselves the favor and aid, which God gave them by means of his
prayres, and that by them was increased their bodily strength to assiste the
sick both day and night They also perceived the gift of counsailing which God
had given him, wherewith he did comfort those, that repaired unto him in their
afflictions and pains. He had an especial faculty in pacifying many of the
diseased, who either through their ill conditions, or violen^es of their
diseases, were so testy and froward, that the infirmarians could not brook
them, so that these things considered, he was no small help to the hospital,
especially being a man, that had no office or obligation to meddle with any of
these things, for he was never one of those brothers that look to the
Conualescents, and Bernardin Aluares had as is said before, given express
command, that he should not be employed in any thing. I have observed (not
without profit of my soul) that the devil our enemy, having got the worst,
and being overcome before in any kind of combat returns to the fight afresh,
in such manner lifts up his head, and with that fiercenes assaileth again,
as if he had gone away before with the victory: so he did again encounter this
man, as if he had had only to deal with our weakness, and as if there were not
with us, and within us, the favor of Almighty God, and the aid of Christ the
strong armed, as often as we ask it with faith, and hope. Gregory knowing well
this defense as an old soldier under our captain Jesus Christ; when I did
tell him of any of my combats either interior, or exterior, he answered with
the holy Ghost: he that is not tempted, what does he know, as if he should
say, he knows nothing. In those days that admirable Man, Father Peter de
Prauia, a Dominican, a mirror and pattern of wisdom humility and religion
(who had renou^ced a Bishopric, being then first reader of divinity, and Vicar
General of the Archbishopric of Mexico (his soul I hope is endued with much
glory in heaven, with his holy Father S. Dominick) went very secretly to to
Guasteca, to be assured of the life and conversation of Gregory Lopes; and it
is likely that such a personage, so free from passion, was moved with
sufficient cause, to go for that purpose in person: in fine he made particular
enquiry of his manner of life, and was so well satisfied of him, that from that
time forward, he bore him more love, and respect, and I noted this, allthough
the said father, allbeit he imparted to me other things of more importance and
secrecy, yet he never made me acquainted with his intention in going thither.

I have also understood, that the Bishop of Guadalaiara with all care and
diligence, made inquiry of the life of Gregory in those seven years, which,
as we said, he lived in his Diocese, and when Satan had used all his power to
darken the life and fame of this great servant of God, he allwaies came forth
more pure and bright, like gold out of the furnace.

Gregory did another work of great profit in that hospital, for he writ a
book of Physic, partly out of Sundry experiences, and partly by the great
knowledge of the properties, and natural virtues of the herbs, where with he
was endued. The hospital brothers made great use of this book, both for the
curing of their sick, and when they went about all the country toaske alms.
And such was the good success of those remedies and medicines, which they did
apply to sundry diseases by the prescription of that book, as if the author
thereof had spent many years in the study of physic. He spent some time in
making and mending his poor clothes, for he had a particular faculty even in
that, and he did both cut-out and make up all his own clothes (even to his
gray gaberdine with which he covered himself) excepting a hatt, which he never
used, unless he travailed much in the Sun. He did not make himself any new
shoes, but he mended them so well, as that one pair would last three years.

THE XI. CHAPTER By reason of a grievous sickness he returns to Mexico, and
from thence to San^afe.
IT pleased God, to remove that lamp to another place, there to shine and give
light for a while, and therefore he sent this his servant a fever, allthough
at first it was not known to be so; he with great courage, mortification and
patience kept himself on foot for three days space as well as he could, until
the vehemence of the disease made him ly down, and be let blood fourteen
times, which in such a weak body, would have bin enough to have taken away his
life; but God preserved him to be an instrument of his greater glory and the
profit of many, so that, allthough he came almost to the last gasp, yet he
recovered again, but so, that there were left after his sickness, some very
troublesome remnants, as was a great inflamatio^ of the liver, and a little
lingering ague, which was not quite rooted out. For this reason he was forced
to remove to a cold habitation, to wit to a town three leagues from Mexico
called S. Augustine, he lodged in ^he house of John Escouar, who had entreated
him in Gu^steca to come to his horse; from thence he writ to me giving me
notice of his arrival. I received his letter having my foot in the stirrup to
go to see him in Guasteca. I went to S. Augustins, where I found him very
weak and ill accommodated for want of attendance, and not thinking it
convenient for just reason; that he should r^maine in that place, I brought him
with me to Mexico, and kept him in my house some months, whilst he was
mending; during which time, he assisted many devout souls, who came to visit
him, and confer with him about their affairs, and such was the good that he
did in this kind, that it might easily be perceived, that God had brought him
for that purpose to this city, allthough he never stirred out of my house all
the time that he lived here (but only to hear Mass in the College of the
Society of Jesus) even not to see the Lady Marquess of Villamanrique the
viceroies wife, who had a great desire to see him and had requested me thrice
to bring him to the Palace, but he excused himself to me saying, that he had
no need of the Lady Marquess, nor she of him. and in this act he showed no
small courage, especially the Marquis being at that time in great esteem and
his lady obeyed and respected by all Nevertheless some years after, Gregory
understanding, that the Marquis was much troubled with a visit, that came to
him out of spain, said unto me: now I would visit the Lady Marquess if she
would send for me, and the Marquis were at that time in Tescuco, and Gregory in
Santafe; where by may be seen how far he was out of the ordinary strain of
human courtesy, since that in time of prosperity he denied the visit, which he
could easily have made, and in time of adversity he offerred himself to do it,
being then above 4. miles going and coming.

He was not as yet perfectly recovered in Mexico, and his lingering ague did
not forfake him, he was very weak and had but little stomach to his meat; on
the other side he longed for his desired solitarines, and allthough he had
strictly observed it within my house at Mexico, yet he made more account of the
commodiousnes of the Country; and therefore I went about carefully, to seek
out some seat near the City, where he might enjoy his solitarines, and I
might often see him, and in some manner relieve his sickness and poverty.
Whilst we were in these thoughts, it fell out one day, God so disposing, that
we went out both together, to see a little village called Sa^tafe; six mile of
from Mexico, the administration whereof belongs to the Deane and Chapter of
the Church of Mechoachan: it seemed unto us very fit for our purpose, by reason
of its good ^emper and wholesomenes of the air, and the pleasantnes of the
trees and springs, which are wont to make a solitary life more pleasing,
allthough Gregory did not much regard those recreations, all his conversation
being interior, as shall be said in another place. I dealt with Doctor
Hernando ortis de Ino^osa first reader of divinity and Canon of the Cathedral
of Mexico and at that time governor of Santafe, who like a virtuous Man and
willing to further all that was good, very freely gave Gregory leave, to dwell
in a house somewhat distant from the viliage which stood near the water that
runs to Mexico. He gave order also that the Indians should bring him all
things that were necessary for his sustenance, at the cost of the hospital
which is founded there, and belongs also to the Church of Mechoacan. Gregory
Lopes haueing obtained this license of Doctor Ortis went to that solitary
dwelling the 22. of May 1589. being whit-munday where he continued his
exercises of prayer and contemplation until his death, as shall be said by and
by.

THE XII. CHAPTER. Of the life which Gregory Lopes did lead in Santafe, and of
his daily exercises.
THis aboade was new unto Gregory, yet very fit for his spiritual exercises,
the which were not new unto him, but always the same, that God had taught him
from the beginning, though allwaies with greater progress. He was in that
little house all alone, almost seven months without conuersing with any man.
I visited him as often as I could, and sometimes, as I think, some other
devout persons that lived there abouts, who by seeing him at the Parish Church
upon holidaies at Mass, were much edified, and by this occasion came to visit
him. By these my often visits, I discovered every day, more and more of his
great riches in ve^ and spirit; whereby I be came very desirous to live in his
company. I desired of God both by means of other devout persons prayers and
also my own, that he would let me understand his holy will, because in some
men's opinion, the emploiment, which I had in Mexico, was much to Gods service;
for I had bin above twenty years Curate of the great Church, and had the
charge of such poor people as were ashamed to beg, whom I did provide of such
things as were necessary, with the alms which I did continually ask for that
purpose, for ten years and more; for which reason my Superiors doubted very
much, whether it was convenient to give me leave or no to retire my self to a
solitary life. At length it pleased God so to dispose this matter, as that I
resolved that this course was couenient, and my superiors condescended unto
it, and gave me license which till then was denied me; so I came to dwell in
Santafe, about Christmasse of the same year 1489. where I attended upon
Gregory until his death observing diligently all his words and deeds, both
day and night, to see, if by familiarity and common conversation, I could
discover any thing, that was contrary to the good esteem, which I had of his
extraordinary virtue; but it was so much increased in me, that every day his
spirit seemed more admirable, his virtues more heroical and his conversation
more celestial. In this time I heard from his own mouth most of that, which
is here related, though he did never speak purposely of those things that had
happened unto him, but only upon diverse occasions, when it seemed necessary for
my profit, or the good of other denout persons; and all this hapening so
seldom and so unawares, that I did not take sufficient notice of it, to carry
it away; neither did I think I should out-liue him so much, as to be able to
write of him, and this which is written of him is very little in respect of that
which is wanting. Those admirable things, which I marked in him, would be very
hard to be related historically, only I will note, that his life was uniform,
so as that which he did one day, he did another, and with this rule he passed
months and years. Therefore I will briefly set down how he spent the day and
night, that hereby we may gather some little part of the great virtue, which
was in him.

At break of day he did open his chamber window that he might begin to dispose
and order his days work; and washing his face and hands, as soon as it was
day light he read in the bible a little more then a quarter of an hour, and
then shut his book again. His end in reading that book, was only because it
was the holy Scripture, and because God had given it him to read; and also,
that if he did not understand some thing the first time, he might understand it
the second: especially, because he did bear such a respect and reverence to
the holy writ, that upon the reading of it, he grounded that which he had to
do in the day time, and that so constantly and duly, as that some few days
before his death he said; I have not read in the bible these ten days, I do
nor remember that I have omitted it so long a time before, since I began to
live solitary. After he had read the Scripture; he betook himself to his other
exercise, which was so inward and secret, as that by no outward signs, it
could be perceived of what kind it was, whether prayer, meditation, or
contemplation, if it was of sad things, or joyful, whether he was in action
or passion, whether he spoke with God, or God with him, only it might be
gathered by his great modesty and gravity of coutenance, that he was
continually in the presence of God, never loosing sight of him; allthough he
never imparted these things to others, yet he told me those things, which I
have writ of him, and shall write hereafter. He did also upon an occasion
which I will here relate, declare some thing to Don Fray Domingo de Salazar
then Bishop of the Philippines, who returning from thence to Mexico, to go to
Spain, passed by Santafe on purpose to visit Gregory Lopes, with whom he had
had great familiarity, as is said before in the fourth Chapter. This prelate,
among other things desired him to tell him, what exercise he used and wherein
God, had employed him? to which he answered plainly that his exercise was to
love God and his neighbor. The Bishop replied: you told me these same words in
Amayca five and twenty years a go, how is this? have you bin allwaies doing
the same? Gregory answered: I have allwaies done this, though there be
difference betwixt that times work and this. Whereby it is evident, that the
presence of God, which Gregory practiced, was not merely that only, but was
accompanied with a fervent love of God and his neighbor which is the end of
all the divine precepts, and the highest degree of perfection, that can be
attained in this life. This he gave himself to both morning and eue^ing and the
most part of the night. These were his prayers, these his meditations, this was
the daily bread, whereon that religious soul did feed. And though he gave
himself to this all the day, yet I did mark, that in the morning chiefly, he
was with this exercise, as it were, transported. He had no certain place nor
posture of body which he did ordinarily use in it; most commonly he did stand,
or sit, or walk in his Chamber; sometimes he went out into a gallery, which
was near his chamber, to enjoy the sun a while. In his latter years he could
not kneel, by reason of his weakness of body. At eleauen we did dine both
together, with another guest if there were any, for Gregory did not estrange
himself from any, especially not from devout or religious persons. In dinner
time our discourse was of God, or of some natural things, out of which he did
draw some Spiritual consideration, grounding very profund doctrine upon them.
After dinner he spent sometime in these kinds of discourses. When there was any
religious person present, that made up the third, he did harken very
attentively unto him, but would never begin any discourse himself, unless he
were asked, or the present occasion did so require. At other times, I did read
unto him some saints lives out of Villegas his Flos Sanctorum; S. Francis his
Chronicles, the book, called the spiritual meadow, and other such books, and
this exercise lasted two years and more. His time of recreation being ended,
he retired unto his chamber, still continuing in his union with God. which he
did never interrupt, neither with eating, or talking, or any other outward
occupation: he did never sleep in the day time, so that he had the more time to
converse with God. If toward evening (for it seldom happened in the mornings)
there came to visit him, any body that desired to talk with him in private
about business, he denied entrance to none, he gave counsel and comfort to
all, and offered to all his assistance in his prayers unto God without
exception of persons or times, so that in these last years he was much
visited, not only by the common sort, but much more by religious Men and
Clergy men, and men of great learning and authority. There were many gentlemen
and great Ladies that had recourse unto him, sometimes in person, othertimes by
letters, making him acquainted with affairs, and desiring his counsel, and
prayers also for their good success. But amongst others, Don Luys de Velasco,
Marquis of Salinas (who was President of the Council, and had bin twice
Viceroy of new Spain, and once of Peru) came some times to visit Gregory
Lopes, for the great affection and respect which he did bear unto him, and
stayed with him sometimes two or three hours together; and he found in him
sufficient understanding to treat, not only of his private affairs belonging
to his soul, but also of the public belonging to the government of the
kingdom.

In this manner Gregory spent the euenings, before sunset he retired himself to
his chamber, and did not come fourth again till the morning. He never used
cadle light, from the time that he went into the wilderness, which made some
ask me out of curiosity, what he did all the night in the dark, not
considering, that his exercise, being interior, did not depend of this
material light, but of the spiritual, which neither day nor night was
wanting. He did never eat supper as is said, and so was all alone in the
dark, until mine and a half, or ten, and then he laid himself down upon
his little couch, covered only with a mean couerlet; and this was the softest
bed, that ever he had, for at first the bare ground was his bed, afterward
some sheepskins, and some few years before his death he accepted at my earnest
in treaty, a little thin mattresse, and the couerlet I spoke of. In this manner
he did sleep, to my thinking, not above two or three hours in all the night;
for he did spend the rest awake in contemplation till day light, when, as is
said, he opened his window. He used all the days of his life, the self same
exercises as is said, and in this manner he passed over the time that he lived
in Santafe, until it pleased God to take him away to enjoy everlasting rest.

THE XIII. CHAPTER. Of the death of Gregory, and of the most remarkable and
admirable things, which then happened.
ANd now it seemed, the time approached, wherein Gregory was to pass, from this
momentary life, to an everlasting, there ^o receive the reward, which God has
prepared for his faithful servants, for in the Mo^th of May 1596. he was
stricken with an air, which did so distemper him, as that he never found
himself so weak and ill disposed and presently he lost his stomach
altogether, in so much as that he could not swallow down any thing but liquid
things, and them also with much difficulty. Few days after he fell into the
flux (a disease troublesome, nnd dangerous in such a weak body) yet he would
not suffer, that a Physician should be sent for, partly, because of the
experience which he had in the cure of that disease, and partly, because he
knew, that the strong medicines, which the Physicians use to apply, would in
less time wast the little strength, which he found in himself, and seeing me
solicitous by reason of his disease, and that I desired much, that some
remedies should be applied, he said unto me: now, Father Losa, let us walk
Gods pace, as if he should say, that conformity and resignation of mind was for
those times, and not to be talked of, when there is nothing that troubles us,
but all goes well with us: so he was used to say commonly, that resignation is
altogether deeds, and has no words. He spent some days after this manner,
with that patience and courage as he was used to suffer his other sicknesses.
until upon the day of S. John Baptist the 24. of June, I thought it fitting to
give him the blessed Sacrament, and askeing him whether he thought it good to
receive it then, he answered yes, and that he rejoiced much, that it was upon
the day of S. John Baptist his especial patron. I gave him the blessed
Sacrament, and fearing that his death did draw near I had some holy oil in
readiness against it was needful: for besides his great weakness and illstomach,
he had got a hicket that was very painful unto him, and his pulse did beat
with intermissions: notwithstanding all this, such was his courage, that the
very same day that he received his Viaticum, and all the days following he
rise out of his bed, and made it himself; he made himself ready, and allwaies,
even to his death, he did rise to the stool, and though commodity was offered
him, yet he would mortify himself in not using it. He grew weaker every day,
not being able to eat any thing at all, he only sustained himself with strong
waters, which were sent him in great quantity from Mexico, by persons of
quality; which when he received, admiring at the providence of God, he said,
with great feeling: ^hou art wonderful, o Lord, for that a Man who in all the
world does not possess a pin of his own, should have need to live upon waters
of kings and princes, and should find those, that would give him them without
seeking for. Now the day of the glorious Apostles S. Peeter and Paul was come,
and I doubting that my sick man would not out-liue that day, thought it most
secure to give him Extreme Unction. He was very glad that this Sacrament was to
be administered unto him upon that day of the Princes of the Church to whom he
was much deuored, and had allwaies a desire to serve. The time being come,
wherein I was to give him absolution in virtue of his Bulla Cruzada, I bad him
call to mind some sin, though of the years past, that I might absolve him, and
apply unto him the Indulgences of the Sea Apostolic; whereunto, he answered,
that by the mercy of God he did not feel any thing trouble his conscience; the
which was to be understood of mor^all sins: whence may be gathered that h^
never committed any in his life: because he was not ignorant, that none ever
lived without venial sin, ^xc^pting our Lady: though, it might be also, he
said that he did not remember any venial sin, not because he had never
committed any, but because he had not committed them wittingly, and being asked
suddenly, it might very well be, that he remembered none. With that I gave him
the Sacrament of Extreme Unction; afterward importuning him, that he would
suffer sheets to be brought him, to ease him somewhat of his pains, he
answered: now that I am anoiled I may receive them, and, thinking that his
death drew near, I said unto him: will you die now? then speaking to himself,
he said: now nature will thou die? showing by this, the pity and compassion,
which the spirit had of the body, or the higher part of his soul of the lower
and sensitive: for Gregory understood very well, this division and anatomy of
the inward Man and the outward, and the parts of both, and he was used to
discourse very elegantly of it. So vehement were the pains, which he endured
in his body, as that I once asking him, how he did, and where was his pain? he
said, that from the sole of his feet to the crown of his head there was no
part free from pain; ad besides this, our Lord on the other side did afflict
him in the most interior and sensible part of his soul, so that both inwardly
and outwardly he might have abundant occasion of merit. In this kind I will
tell one thing that was generally known in Mexico, though perhaps all do not
relate it so precisely as it happened, and therefore it is not amiss to set
down the truth. I will conceal the persons names because those that know
them will easily guess the right, and those that do not know them, there is
no reason why they should.

Amongst those persons of quality that came from Mexico to visit Gregory in
this his last sickness, there was a great Lady, who was wife to a noble man,
that served the king in an honorable office. She did not give such Good
example in the city as she might have done, both in matter of bravery and
excessive expenses, as also in playing at crades, wherein she lost much time and
money also, drawing after her some other noble weomen, who, under her wing, did
dare to give scope to that vice, their husbands not being able to hinder them.
This Lady came to Santafe the third of July seauenteen days before Gregoryes
death, to visit him, and cherish him, for allthough in the things aforesaid
she was somewhat faulty, yet for works of merey, and compassion toward the
poor and afflicted, she was much to be commended. As soon as I understood of
her coming, I sent word unto her, that she should not come into the house;
having made such little use of his prayers and labors for that having bin here
before, she had not left off playing art cards, and taken away the scandal
which she did give thereby, being a purgatory to so noble a gentleman as her
husband was; therefore she might return to Mexico, for there was no means to
see the sick man, neither would her alms be welcome unto him. She made
diverse replies, and in messages backwardes and forwards, were spent three or
four hours, I still denying her leave to come and visit him. Whilst therefore
this Lady expected the last resolution and answer, that deuote of ours, whom I
spoke of, and others also certified me, that she came with a great desire to
amend, and leave of her idle life, and gaming, and that therefore it would much
avail for her entire amendment, to comfort her, and yield to that which she
did so much desire, wherewith I was satisfied, and of opinion that she should
see him. As she came in at the door, a far of he said unto her: Father Losa
had promised, that you should not come in at this door; to which she answered:
he has reason, but I will amend. As soon as she saw Gregory she took much
compassion of his infirmity, and began presently to serve him with her own
hands sitting on her knees at his bed side, and to dress his meat, for in
that she had a special faculty, though she had a greater in commending herself
earnestly to his prayers, and making use of that good occasion in time before
it slipped away; for whilst she was here, she was every day both morning and
evening with the sickman a great while, beseeching him upon her knees, and with
tears, in her eyes, that he would pray for her, and take her soul into his
charge. Heerwith she began to feel a great alteration in her mind; for now she
did take content in treating of heavenly matters, and of ame^ding her life; and
there in my presence she did burn a pair of cards, which she had brought
with her in her sleeue, to pass the time withal and came to me to confession,
and after that time I perceived a change in her soul. In fine some few days
before she was to return to Mexico, having bin one morning, as she was wont to
do, entreating the sick man to assist her with his prayers to our Lord, she
turned to me very joyful, and said: Father Losa bear me witness, that Father
Gregory Lopes has promised me, that when I dye, he will come for my soul to
carry it to heaven, because I do not know the way And to Gregory Lopes she
asked him: do you make me this promise? to which he answered: yes, I promise
you. After this discourse ensued two things very remarkable; one was, that the
pains and torments of Gregory did increase very much, the other was, that this
Lady fell into the same disease, whereof Gregory died: yet notwithstanding, she
stayed two days in this village serueing him as much as her sickness would give
her leave, and pouring out, being upon her knees before him, abundant tears of
repentance. With this assurance she returned to Mexico, because her sickness
increased, and at her taking leave Gregory said unto her: fare well, for we
shall not see one another again by reason of our weakness of body. As soon as
she came to her house, she did write unto me some good sayings whereby she did
show, that her soul was touched by the powerful hand of God, and among other
things she said unto me, that the Physicians of her body did apply to her
disease many good medicines, but that she did most desire, that the Physicians
of her soul would remember her often in their prayers to God. Her infirmity
waxed greater, together with confusion and sorrow for her sins, and signs of
true repentance. At the same time I did also perceive that Gregory his pains
were increased; for that Lady being almost at the point of death, there came
hither Martin Lopes de Guana a publik Notary, to visit our sick man, as he did
use to do at other times, with a message from the said Lady, who desired him
to be mindful of her, and he requested the same in the name of all his house
and his own; whereunto Gregory replied, as one that had a great weight upon
him: so I do, I feel her ly very heavy upon me. This seemed strange unto me,
for I never perceived any thing in him that did molest him, or that he
complained of but only in this occasion To conclude the Lady died, leaving
behind her great tokens of her salvation, and showing, at the hour of her
death, such signs of true repentance, and sorrow for the ill example, wherewith
she had withdrawn other persons after her, as that this sudden alteration was
of no less edification, then the disorders and loosenes of her life past, had
bin of scandal; and within few hours the news of her death coming to us, I
told it unto Gregoty, and he with a joyful countenance said only these words:
God is powerful. I asked of a brother of the Conualescents who never went out
of Gregory his sight, whether at that time and hour when the Lady died as they
told us, he had perceived any unusual thing; and he told me, yes, for he saw
him besides himself and, as it were in an ecstasy at the same time; whereby I
did gather, that it had pleased God, to accomplish Gregory his promise, and
that he had bin present in spirit at the death of his deuote, and carried her
to Purgatory that afterward he might carry her with him to heaven, when he
departed out of this life. Of this I have no certainty, but it may be piously
believed according to that which is here related. I have here told this
history, to declare somewhat of the zeal which Gregory had of the salvation of
souls, and to show that the love of God and his neighbor, which he did
continually exercise was not a mere speculation and built only in the air,
but that the loss of souls spiritually went even to his heart, and that with
all his strength he did seek their recovery, though at his own cost, and by
enduring the punishements due to another sins, as it seems in this occasion he
suffered those which the other should have done; for besides the grievous
pains of his body, which he did suffer from his head to his feet, his inward
torment was very vehement, which he did undergo from the time that he took
that soul into his charge, in so much as that he did wonder at himself, and he
that never complained of any thing, in this time did say with great feeling:
Jesus, God help me, what a Purgatory is this? and once, as I was about to leave
him upon some business he stayed me; saying: keep me company. Truly the saying
of Jesus Christ to his Apostles keep me company, had in it a great mystery;
showing by this, that he found himself in his soul destitute of that joy,
wherewith our Lord was used to comfort him in such occasions at other times; but
the strength with which he did suffer this, the integrity of his faith, and the
confidence which he did put in God, was that which I did most admire at in him:
and because his ordinary exercise after he went out to live solitary, was to
revive that faith, and make a more straight union of his soul with God,
therefore his heroical virtue in this kind, appeared clearly when occasion was.
I was wont to ask him in this his last sickness, how he went on in the exercise
of his continual act of the love of God, and he allwaies, even till his death,
answered, that very well; and, to make this more evident, I will here put down
in particular some questions which I asked him when I saw him most troubled and
the answers which he gave me. I once asked him, whether so great pains did not
separate him some what from God? he answered: not a jot; another time seeing
him much afflicted, I said unto him, now is your mind upon God? he said and
where should it be else? his death being nearer, whilst he was in his agony, I
asked him; now are you well fixed upon God? he said, I am not ill, upon an
other occasion, haueing bin much recollected, he turned unto me and said:
Perseuera^ce with peace avails much; and as I comforted him, saying, that our
Lord did lead him through crosses, as his beloved so^: I am glad, said he, I am
glad that his will is fulfilled in me. Lastly when I thought it was time to
give him the holy candle, I said these words unto him: now it is time to go,
and see the secret, will you have the candle (alluding to the history which he
did know, of king Alonso the wise, who being in the like passage, said, give me
that candle, let us go see that secret) whereunto Gregory made answer with a
wonderful confidence; there is no secret, all is clear, it is noone day with
me. This is not to be understood so, as that Gregory should say, that at that
instant he did see God clearly: for that kind of clear vision has seldom
happened in this life; the clearnes, which here he did speak of, is that of
contemplation, which holy men do call a clear knowledge, because this light
of contemplation joined with the general light of faith, causes such a
security, and a special kind of certainty of the divine Mysteries, as that in
comparison of the orainary knowledge of the faithful, it is called a clear
knowledge, though in respect of the clear sight of God, it be but obscure.
Gregory spoke of this clearnes when h^ said, all is clear, and, to say, that
it was noone day with him, was no great exaggeration, because the light of
contemplation goes far beyond the light of noone day: With this inu^ncible
courage and valor, full of faith, hope and char^ty, tak^ng a little while
after, the candle in his hand, he yielded up his soul to his Creator, to
continue for all eternity (being swallowed up and overwhelmed in that infinite
se^ of the love of God) that excellent act of love wherein (as much as in
possible for human frailty in this place of exile) he had allwaies endeavored
to exercise himself and excel. He died on saturday at noone, on the 20. of
July of the year 1596. upon which day the Order of the Carmelites does
solemnise the feast of Elias the first Father and Founder of the solitary life,
which Gregory Lopes had so perfectly observed. He lived 54. years, and 33. of
them in solitude, His body remained as if he had bin alive, and, as we that
were present did conceit, with a certain brightness. At the same time we felt
a very pleasing smell, which came from his body, and remained in the chamber
wherein he died: and (which is more to be admired) his winding sheet kept the
same smell, and his clothes do retain it till this day. It is also worthy of
noting, that there being present at his death the Canon Nicolas Martinez
Rectour of this place, and my self, who had bin 20. years a Curate, and three
other devout lay men, none of us, did think of saying for him a Responsory of
the dead, such was the joy that we did feel by seeing him, and was caused by
his happy passage. His body was laid in the Church of this village, by order,
of the Doctor John de Cerua^tes Vicar General of the Archbisoprick, and now
Bishop of Guaxica, who understanding of Gregory his sickness whose sanctity was
well known unto him, came to visit him some days before his death, and to
desire him that he would cause himself, to be buried where it should please the
Archbishop of Mexico, or his Vicar General. He spoke first with me about this
matter, before he talked with him, and I answered him that at that time Gregory
did not take any care for his burial, that all was at my disposing, desiring
indeed that his body should remain in the Church of Santafe; but I would not
determine until I had spoke with him; and telling Gregory what the Vicar
General did require, he said these words: let the Vicar General his will be
done, for that is the will of God: and so this being taken under witness before
a Notary the Vicar General commanded that it should be buried in this Church,
yet so, as that it should be lawful to translate it to the Cathedral of
Mexico when it pleased the Archbishop, providing hereby with much prudence and
mature judgment, that if in process of time it should please God to declare
by miracles, how much he has bin pleased by this his servant, the city of
Mexico might be honored with the treasure of his holy body. There were present
at his funeralles many devout persons, and of good account who had flocked
thither from Mexico and other parts only for that purpose, and brought with
them torches and whatsoever else was necessary for the better sole^nising of
the office, which was performed by Don Alonso de Motay Escouar Deane of the
Church of Mexico, who was then Bishop elect of Guadalaiara and now is of
Tlaxcalla. His body was enterred near the high altar on the gospel side,
and many persons that touched him 24. hours after his death found his limbs
so flexible as if he had bin alive, though commonly dead bodies, as soon as
they become cold, use to grow stiff so as their joints cannot be bended. Some
say that God is wont to bestow this gift and particular privilege upon virgins
bodies, as it is likely that he was. At his burial also the foresaid smell
was felt, wherewith the peoples devotion was so increased, that they cut off
pieces of his garment very greedily, thinking themselves happy if they could
but get any thing that was his. They solemnised his funerals upon S. Annes
day, and Doctor Hernando Ortis de Hinoiofa Canon of Mexico, who died being
chosen Bishop of Gautimala, made a sermon at them,

This was the maruailous end of this servant of God whose memory deserves to
be kept and reverenced by all, not only the citisens of Mexico, but also of
Madrid his country, for besides the obligation which all the faithful have to
worship and honor the relics, and memories of saints, these have a
particular, the Province of Mexico by enjoying these precious relics, and the
most famous town of Madrid the court of the Catholic king, because it is now
evident that he was borne there, and Christened in the Parish of S. Giles which
is that we spoke of before and is the Church of the Franciscans discalceate,
and the Parish is at this day incorporated with S. John's.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
OF MANY OTHER maruailous works of the life and death of the servant of God
Gregory Lopes.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Wherein are treated many notable things by which it has
pleased God to manifest the sanctity of Gregory Lopes.
GOd is a faithful friend of his servants, as says the Spouse in the
Canticles, and it is seen by this, that one of the properties of true friends
is to procure by all means possible, when it is necessary or convenient, to
make known and lay open those good parts which ly hidden and concealed in
those whom they desire to honor and reward. And this is the Title which
Nabuchodonosor gave unto the God of Israel, after that Daniell had interpreted
his dreams unto him, saying: Truly your God is God of Gods, Lord of Kings,
reuealer of secrets, and interpreter of great, and hidden mysteries.

Gregory died to the eyes of the world (I mean of Men addicted to the word and
forgetful of their salvation) but he lived in the memory of the faithful, and
of the true Christians, to whom God began, to reveal in the death of his
servant, how acceptable his life had bin unto him, of this we have infinite
testimonies and be this the first.

At the same hour that Gregory died a certain religious woman much exercised
in virtue and interior conversation (with whom this holy Man was used to have
communication in the union of spiritual life) being at her prayers rapt in
spirit, she saw him come toward her, saying these words: sister I am going
to heaven, you are not to go so soon, because your presence is necessary for
the service of God, and the comfort of this monastery; this said, he presently
vanished away; leaving her soul much edified and resigned to the will of God,
though her desire was to be freed from that mortal body, and be with Christ.
And before the news of Gregory his death came to Mexico, she told this
revelation to her ghostly father, who being certified of the truth advised her
not to diuulge that which had bin revealed unto her, until it pleased God to
declare what was to be done: he did also counsel her to pray more earnestly
unto God to assure her whether this was a vision from him or illusion of the
devil, and twelve days after she told her ghostly father, that it was the
will of God that this should be revealed unto me, because I had inquired of
what had past; and moreover, that these words were spoken unto her, by the
mouth of her heavenly spouse Jesus Christ. Wherefore, think thou, Gregory is
placed near me? because he left all temporal things for my sake, and lived
with inward recollection and silence.

I have bin told of a religious woman whose virtue and spirit is well known
unto me, how that five years before Gregory his death, laying herself down
upon her bed after Prime, because at that time she was sick, God showed her in
her sleep, the heavens open and all the religious Orders, and Martirs going out
in procession: and more over our Lady with many of the weomen saints, and our
Savior Jesus Christ with Apostles, and she being amaysed at this vision, it
was told her that they went to visit holy Gregory who was sick. Afterward she
understood that he was like to die, and that he had not earen any thing in five
days.

A certain person whose wisdom virtue and humility is well known to all,
moved with an affection of devotion and love which he did bear toward this
holy man, did desire him, some days before his death, to remember him, and he
promised him to do so, and the first saturday night after Gregory his death,
this man saw in his sleep a vision wherewith he waked; and that which he saw was
the likeness of holy Gregory, whose blessed soul did, as it were, unite it self
unto the others body, and made him praise God in his ^aints, especially in the
holy con^esiour Gregory with great Iubily: and this past for a while; and he
remaining very joyful and much comforted, he began again to feel himself
touched over all the body, and awaking therewith now the second time, that shape
of Gregory did enter into him moving him after an extraordinary manner and
making him praise God, in such sort as it was not in his power to cease one
instant, and withal made him understand, and acknowledge, how unworthy he was
of that favor, and how much he was obliged to serve God, and be grateful for
that visit of his faithful friend.

A servant of God of approved virtue (whom our Lord teaches and incourageth by
many ecstasies and rapts) being one day, ten years, before Gregory his death
sore afflicted and full of pain, he began to consider with himself the
excellence of Gregory his spirit, and being in this consideration rapt in
spirit, there was set before the eyes of his understanding an image so clear
and transparant as that he could see through it, and it was told him: such is
the soul of Gregory Lopes; where at he did both wonder and reioyee very much,
and told it unto Gregory who answered not a word.

A religious Man that led a spiritual life, much addicted to prayer, whilst
he was praying in the quire; had such a clear knowledge of his being nothing,
given him by God at the intercession of Gregory, as that it much edifieth all
that treat with him, and withal such a great love of God, and vnio^ with his
divine majesty, that two months being past since he received that favor, he
has never discontinued that union, but allwaies perseuered in one continual
act.

There was a certain Priest, that was much affected to the virtue and spirit
of Gregory, and had great hope to find favor in the ^ight of God by means of
his ^rayers; he considering sometimes with himself (a little while after
Gregory his death) how happy he was and gracious in the sight of God, once in
his sleep he seemed to hear a voice which said Ask; and in confirmation of
this word he asked some thing of God which till that time he could never
obtain, and it was granted him presently the same day; and by the same means
he obtained other things, not only for himself but also for others.

To another devout man, that came to ask counsel of Gregory being now dead,
as he was used to do whilst he lived, it was said: judge not thy neighbors,
and be more temperate, wherewith, he told me, that he had reaped much profit in
his soul.

Many other things like unto these have bin wrought by our Lord, whereby
appears the great glory, wherewith the divine goodness has honored Gregory
aft^r his happy passage, and made known his great sanctity by a number of
miracles.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Of some Miracles which God has wrought by the relics of
Gregory Lopes.
GOd is wo^t to exalt his friends, not only in their heavenly country where
they live for ever, but also in this place of exile where they die, and to
honor those at their death, who honored him in their life, working miracles
by the just man to the end that his good works may be known, the power of God
honoring him with miracles who had served and honored God with his virtues.
And because the sanctity and virtue of Gregory have bin so excellent, therefore
the divine goodness has done, and does still every day, so many miracles by
this his servant, as that if any curiosity and diligence had bin used in
gathering them together and approving them by this time we night have made a
good large relation of them, and I hope in God that he will yet work more for
his greater glory, the honor of this holy man, and our profit and edification;
I will here only relate some of the most certain and approved.

The same day that he was buried, and Indian woman of good account, wife to the
governor of this town, being lame of one arm and in great pain, at the same
instant, as she took Gregory his hand in hers, to kiss it, she found herself
perfectly sound and free from all pain, giueing God thanks for the mercy he
had showed her by this his servants means.

A little girl of five or six years of age, was sore tormented with a disease
(which she fell into by eating of earth) very dangerous by reason of great
obstructions and swelling in her belly, together with a vehement ague, and
beatings in her head and heart; and four days after Gregory his death being
much afflicted she said unto her Mistress, who was a Lady noble by blood but
more for her Christian like behavior, and recollection which she made choice
of, and observes in the Monastery of the Conception at Mexico: Mother, least
that God should take me away apply unto me that little welt of Gregory Lopes,
which was given you, for he will cure me; she did so leaving the child at night
with a great fever, and when she rise to Mattins, as she was wont to do, in
passing by she went in to see how the child did, whom she found a sleep and rid
of her ague, and awaking her; asked her how she did, she answered; well, for
the saint has taken away my pain. The said lady rendered many thanks to God
for this so great a miracle.

Another great woman in Mexico, was tormented with a headache, in such manner,
as that she was like to loose her senses, and finding no help in any remedies
whatsoever; she laid upon her head a sl^eue of Gregory his doublet, which to
her great happiness was kept there in great devotion and reverence, and she did
presently take her rest, free from all pain.

A child of three months old, the first and only son of his parents (who were
of the best rank of Mexico) was sick of a fever not being able either to
suck or sleep: whilst all those of the house, and of the kindred also were
troubled hereat, one of the maids re^embred herself of a certain relic of
Gregory which was in the house, which being laid upon the child's head, he
presently fell asleep, some hours after awaked, took the teate and was well;
his parents, and those that were present, gave many thanks unto God and his
saint for this miracle.

In the same city there was a Priest who was so troubled with the toothache, as
that for three days and three nights he could not have one instant of rest,
and by reason of its vehemence his face was much swelled; his mother gave him a
piece of Gregory his garment, and he with faith and devotion applying it to his
cheek, presently fell a sleep and slept from nine of the clock at night until
the next morning, and then awaking he found the swelling of of his face
assuaged, and himself without any pain, attributing this sudden recovery to
the intercession of this saint and giueing God thanks for it,

In the house of a Gentleman of Mexico, a man well known in this kingdom,
there befell unto a slave of his such a sudden accident and great misfortune,
as that all held him for dead of a vehement fit which he had; a gentle woman
that was present calling to mind that she had in her keeping a piece of the
shirt in which Gregory dyed (which I had given her) she caused a little cofer
to be brought her, and taking out the said relic, she laid it upon the sick
man's forehead, and presently he came to himself again whole and sound, though
with much a do: and being asked what he had felt, he answered; nothing. All
that saw this accident, with its circumstances could not but attribute this
cure to a miracle which our Lord wrought by his servant Gregory Lopes.

In the city de los Angelos an honorable Lady was brought to the poinct of
death by a violent fever, which she fell into being great with child and near
her time; but the infant dead in her womb her husband seeing her in this
danger, entreated a brother of the Conualescents by name John Valleio to visit
her; he went and carried with him a little piece of Gregory his garment, and
applying it to the sick woman's neck said unto her: put your hope in God and
reverence this relic of Gregory Lopes, for by his intercession you shall be
restored to your health: it seems she did so, for being delivered of that
creature, she remained sound.

The said brother applied the same Relic to a sick woman in the same town,
who had such a grievous headache, as that for a long time she cried out
continually both day and night: he wished her to put all her confidence in God,
and firmly to believe that he would give her her health, by the merits of
Gregory Lopes. She presently recovered rendering many thanks unto God, and
remaining devout unto him who by his intercession had freed her from so great
pain.

In the city of Taxca a young man was infected with a pitiful leprosi, and
after he had tried many medicines, and spent much in the curing of it, and all
in vain, a brother of the Conualence^ts gave him a little piece of Gregory his
garment, bidding him apply it to his neck, and take this servant of God for his
Patron with an assured hope to be healed; and it came to passo, that within
eight days he found himself clear of the leprosy, and diuulged this miracle,
publishing every wherewith much gratitude, the wonderful works of God and the
praises of Gregory.

In a village of this kingdom, called, Higualapa, a gentleman had bin, for the
space of 16. months, troubled with a grievous pain of the collik, not haucing
in all that time scarce a day nor hour free, especially the last twenty days,
in which his pain did not diminish a whit nor give him one minute of rest As
it happened there was present a gentlewoman wife to the chief Justice of that
province, who told him, that many miracles had bin wrought through the
devotion, which those of her house, did bear unto Gregory Lopes, and that if
he, with the like faith, would make him his mediator to the divine goodness, he
might assure himself of his health. The sick man hearing this took a piece of
Gregory his shirt, and applied it to the place where he felt his greatest
pain, and holding it there a little while, he presently voided a stone of the
bigness of a pine kernel. Herwith he recovered and never after felt that pain,
and held it for certain, that this happiness, and safety did befall him by the
merits and intercession of Gregory Lopes, to whom he was ever after very devout.

A brother of the Conualescents, named Alonso de la Fuente was six years in
the hospital of Guasteca, almost allwaies siek, full of emplasters and both
legs full of holes and corruption. The chief brother seeing him so incurable,
and that besides these and other sores and pains, there was gown in his
forehead a swelling as big as an egg, and another, not much less in his
anckle, both very painful, he removed him to the hospital in the Island, of
S. John de Vlua, thinking that he would recover in that place because it was of
a hotter temper. But it fell out quite contrary, for he grew much worse by
reason of the moistnes of the sea and the cold north winds. This brother being
one day sad and troubled in mind recommended himself to God and all the saints,
and earnestly besought Gregory Lopes to obtain him his health; and remembering
himself of some relics of his which were given him at Guasteca, he applied
them to his head with a night cap and to his leg with bands, throwing the
emplasters and patches, which he wore, into the sea, and in three or four
days after he had applied the said relics he found himself perfectly cured
of all his diseases, swellings and sores without any other medicine, and he was
never troubled with the^ afterward, whereby he plainly perceived the force and
efficacy of Gregory his intercession.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of the knowledge in the holy Scripture, which God infused
into Gregory Lopes.
ALlthough Gregory Lopes never studied any kind of learning, not so much as
Grammar, or even Latin, yet he understood the holy Sctipture, and turned it
into spanish (in the opinion of some learned men) with such propriety and
judgment, as if he had spent all his life in the study of the Latin tongue
and Divinity, so as many that saw him turn over the bible, and read it with
such strange readiness, in diverse occasions that were offered him, would have
rather thought he had red things written in his own Mothers tongue; then
translated them out of another. He had by heart all the historical part of the
Scripture, of the Gospel of S. Matthew and S. John word by word, and those
things which were said by the other two Evangelists more then was by these; the
Epistles also of S. Paul and the Apocalips. To conclude he had such a perfect
knowledge of all the holy Scripture, that being asked of any place or sentence
whatsoever, he answered with incredible readiness and certainty.

Father Peter de Prauia, being Vicar General of this Archbisoprick came to
visit Gregory whilst he was in my house at Mexico recovering his health, and
he cha^ced to ask him about a place in the Scripture, which after long
studying he could not find either in the Bible, or the Concordances, Gregory
hearing it said this place is not in all the Bible but there is another like it
and it is this; opening the Bible he presently showed it to the Vicar General,
and it was the same that he sought for.

Three Doctors of Divinity of the university of Mexico conferring with Gregory
in this village of Santafe, about some hard place of the Scripture, entreated
him withal to tell them if there was any place in Scripture, that treated of a
certain matter which they mentioned unto him. To the ^eard places he answered
very ^learely, and gave them one very ^roper for their purpose, which ^hey had
not found, though they ^ad studied that matter very diligently: whereat being
much astonished, they said in my presence: here is a learned man indeed, what is
our knowledge in respect of his. Beatus homo quem tu erudieris Domine, Psalm. 39.

Certain religious Men very learned, being in Santafe spoke a sentence as out
of Scripture, in his presence and he said: that is not Scripture; they much
wondering hereat looked into the bible, and found that he had said true. It was
a thing worth admiration how certainly he knew in how many places of the holy
Scripture, this thing, or that thing was said? or whether it was in it or no?
to this purpose a religious man a public reader of the Scripture, and one that
had conuersed with him, said unto me (as one that knew him) these words: I do
not talk with any man about the holy Scripture with such warines, as I do
with Gregory Lopes.

Certain prebends being in company with him, told of another that was present,
how that he knew all the Psalter by heart: he answered; that which is to be
esteemed is, if he can make use of it when it is requisite; for in this he was
singular, that he could call to mind both the things which he knew and their
places when it was needful.

There were some Preachers, who haueing occasion to retire themselves to
Santafe, when they were to make a sermon, were used to say, that they needed
not their Concordances where Gregory was.

Don Pedro Moya de Contreras visiting his Archbishopric, came to Guasteca
where Gregory did live at that time, and sent unto him by me to ask a doubt,
whereunto he answered so profundly as that I did not dare to bring him the
answer, but re^ning with the message, I said unto him; I had rather that you
would hear Gregory his reasons from his own mouth then from mine, and so he
will answer you when you go to see him. When the Archbishop had bin with him,
and heard him, he remained well satisfied and much amassed, and said unto me: I
never thought that he knew so much.

Father Dominick de Salazar, who died being first Archbishop of the
Philippines, spoke in this manner of Gregory twenty years before his death, in
the presence of three grave and learned religious men of the order of S.
Dominick: how is this Fathers, that we, with all that we have got by studying
in all our life, know not half so much as this young man does?

Many learned persons, that came to ask him doubts out of the holy Scripture,
returned well satisfied, and amassed at the great knowledge, which it had peased
God to bestow upon this his serua^t^ amongst others came a Doctor of Divinity
who some days before had bin present at some conclusio^s out of the holy
Scipture which had bin defended in the schools of the society of Jesus at
Mexico upon that place Malach. 3. Ecce ego mittam Angelum meum, etc. and asking
Gregory what was the meaning of that place, he brought so many exquisite things
upon it, that he Doctor affirmed, that there was no more, nor even so much
said in all the Conclusions.

THE IIII. CHAPTER. How Gregory Lopes was directed by the holy Ghost, in the
spiritual manner of life.
GOd did not only teach this his beloved scholar the holy Scripture; as is
said, but also, and in a more excellent degree, he instructed him in a
spiritual course. which he was to follow in a most eminent manner, and was
also to be a guide and Master to others. For this holy man by the light of his
understanding, knew his own person, and, as far as I could understand, he did
see as distinctly his own spirit with the eyes of his understanding, as he did
his body with those of his body, and he did clearly discern those two
springs, of his body, and his soul, which rise up so mingled the one with the
other, restrayning the current of the body, and enlarging that of the spirit,
which is very rare; for it is a very hard thing, and such as few attain unto,
to distinguish in ones self, the works that proceed from grace, from those
that proceed from nature, because oftentimes the one are masked with the liknes
of the others; Gregory discerned these very well, both in himself, and others
that asked him counsel in the like doubts.

It once so fell out with me, that haueing bin, for some months space, only
exercised in mental prayer, wherein I found great difficulty and trouble, I had
afterward occasion to go about a certain work of charity, and by the way I
felt such an inward joy and tranquillity of mind, that in those days me
thought I was in heaven. Afterward returning to Santafe and giueing him
account of what had past, I told him that my spirit had dilated it self very
much; he answered me: Father Losa it was your nature that dilated it self: I
did believe him, though at that time I did not understand it; but assisted
through the mercy of God by his prayers, soon after I attained to this verity:
for I was wont to do outward works of charity, which though in themselves
they be virtuous and meritorious, yet have this property, that they recreate
and dilate nature, and sometimes self love creeps in; but in that recollection
I did only use mental prayer, during the which, nature was as it were in a
continual torment and rack, because she was withheld from those exercises,
wherein she was used to find content and delight, though holy and good; of which
kind are these; to relieve the necessities, and seek the good of ones
neighbor, to hear and speak of heavenly things (for these have bin my
employments by the grace of God, for some years) but when I left of this
recollection, to do that work of charity which I spoke of, and recreated my
self with the sight of the fields and hills, nature did return to her former
case and quietness, so as she made no war against the spirit, wherewith I
rereceiued much content, thinking that now I was at peace with my self; but
afterward, when I desired to return to my sole mental exercises. I found
that nature had got more strength then ever to war against the spirit, and
perceiving by this manifestly, that this my peace was not: so much of the
spirit as of nature, I came to see by evident consequence, that Gregory knew my
spirit better then I my self did.

Certain religious men talking in his presence, of things which did help ones
spirit and devotion, one of them said, that music did much avail, for he, by
heareing once eue^song in the great Church at Mexico found his spirit so
revived, as that he had never said his prayers before with such peace and
quietness. Another said, that it auailed much to pray in company with others
because the difficulty, which he found in praying in his Cell, was diminished,
and taken away by the presence and example of those, that did pray with him.
Gregory let the^ go away without speaking a word unto them about that matter.
I did perceive that he could easily have freed them from their error, and
showed them that it is nature that is helped and recreated, by those means, and
not the spirit, as might be seen by the success which I had; and because the
reason, why some in prayer do help themselves with the company of others, is
because our nature is quickened, and takes delight, that her good works are
seen, as may be seen in those, who take a discipline and give alms in public;
therefore such as those following the content of nature, pray better in company
then alone. I asked him what was the reason, that he did not advise and
instruct those religious men in this, he answered me; because that were to
hinder their journey, for with that staff they go on a little, and without it
they would sit down.

Our Lord had given him a great quicknes of judgment in distinguishing tho^ghts
or words which, was idle, and which not; and in speaking of God he could very
well discern, when it proceeded from nature; and when from God: to this
purpose he was used to say: many me^ do speak of God more through love of
themselves then of God, sometimes also he said: the love of God is all in
works, it has but few words, and oftentimes it is dumb. From this knowledge
proceeded that rare moderation of his tongue, as shall be said in its, proper
place.

From hence also it came to pass that he never had any scruples, but an
admirable quietness of mind; and no less certainty in matters of faith, wherein
he never had any doubts, notwithstanding his great temptations, and this is
that which he meant at the hour of his death, when being asked whether he
would have the holy candle, to go and see the secret, he answered with great
courage, as is said before, all is clear, there is nothing secret, it is noone
day with me; wherein his meaning was not that his faith had no obscurity in it,
but that he had no doubt in matetrs belonging unto it; for our faith is
obscure, yet so, as it is also most certain, and the certainty of it takes
not away its obscurity, wherein our Lord will have us walk in this life,
captiuating our understanding in his service, as says the Apostle.

I have thought convenient to put down some examples, whereby the greatness of
the light which Gregory had, might be gathered, since that with it he knew, not
only himself and his own spirit, but also other men's. I had great signs and
conjectures (by those things which had happened unto me) to perswad my self, that
he did see other men's souls: being of this opinion, I asked him one day about
five years or more before his death, if it were true, that he did see them, he
answered, no; with this so plain an answer I believed him, and rested
satisfied, but I observed that from that day forwards, he grew every day more
wary, therefore I spoke no more unto him of that matter, but since, I have had,
and now have so many witnesses, so worthy of credit, and such as none can
except against, that I think I should do ill in not affirming it for
certain; and if he said that he did not see them, that is to be attributed to
his great humility and wisdom which made him seek to conceal that gift of
God, as he did many others: neither is it to be thought, that a man so true and
perfect did tell a ly, for his denying of it in this case, might be saved from
a ly by many ways. First it might be that at that time, God had not as yet
done him that favor, but that he did it him afterward toward the end of
his life. It might be also that at that instant, when I asked him that
question, he did not see the souls, but that God gave him light, to see them
at other times, when it was necessary, for the light of contemplation of
spiritual things is not habitual and permanent, but only actual, such as is
that of prophecy which God gives and takes away as he pleases. And so at
that time, when Gregory said that he did not see them (though he did see them
in other occasions) it is to be understood that he did not see them, because
God had taken away that light from him at that present.

A certain person of quality told Gregory, that he had had great temptations,
but he hoped in God he had not committed any sin in them, and therefore that
he had not revealed them in confession. Gregory replied: not so stoutly, for
truly you have bin but a weak soldier; then the other said: then do you
think it good I should confess them? Gregory answered, he did not think that
he had committed any great fault in doing as he did, but to have made an entire
resistance he should have done such and such things; hereby the other, not only
gathered that he had seen his spirit, but also learnt the manner of resisting
better, afterward.

A godly Priest came from a place far distant unto Gregory to be resolved of
some doubts concerning his soul; and he answered him, so to his purpose as the
Priest said: you have told me that which I thought to have asked you, and which
I had great need to be told of; Gregory replied: God seeing your necessity moved
my tongue to speak that which you heard.

There came to visit Gregory a lawyer, who then was married and now is a
religious man, but was allwaies a virtuous man, and by the way he talked with
his companion about certain things touching his soul, which neither Gregory
nor any other man did know, or could know by any natural means, and as soon
as they came unto him before they asked him of any of those things, of which
they intended to talk with him he answered them so directly to all things, as
that they remained satisfied and amaysed, and looking one upon the other,
rendered thanks unto God, seeing him answer them so directly, as if he had bin
asked, whereupon the lawyer took occasion to examine his conscience as often as
he went to visit Gregory, thinking that he saw the most secret thoughts of his
heart; and after the same manner going at other times to ask his counsel, he
answered him so directly before he spoke ever a word, as that he was confirmed
in the opinion, which he had of him:

A religious man of a very spiritual life and very familiar with Gregory; went
one evening to ask him some doubts about his spirit, and because it was
almost night, and he had not the time, which he desired, to treat of that
business, he bid him go take his rest, and that the next morning they would
talk of it. The religious man being that night in his chamber which was under
the holy man his lodging, received inwardly an answer from God of that which he
intended to ask, and a check for coming to ask counsel of a creature, when
he might have it from the Creator, for that he that had given Gregory such
store, would also give unto him, if he would dispose himself for it, and put
his confidence in God; as soon as it was morning, he went unto Gregory his
chamber, who smiled as soon as he saw him, and the religious man began to tell
him how that God that night had answered his doubts: Gregory helped him out to
tell it, and preventing him, for as yet he had not told of the reprehension, he
said these words unto him: and had you not a good reprehension for seeking
counsel of a creature, he answered, yes, father, I had a reprehension also.
At all this he maruailed very much, and assured himself that the holy man had
seen in God all that had past with him.

Another Priest very careful in things concerning his spirit, came to see
Gregory Lopes, and observing him diligently, perceived that this servant of God
spoke to him of all that was in his heart, which though Gregory himself did
neue^ insinuat, yet the priest assured himself that it was so, for that his
soul somewhat inordinately affecting the great favors which he had received,
and which he did hope to receive from the hand of God; Gregory among other
things said unto him: we look for great matters, but truly either here, or
there we must pay for our small humility.

A cortaine person devout unto our Lady was used to say his beads, and by that
means so efficacious for all good and happy progress; had received such
favors from God as that for some years space he was almost in continual
prayer. Therefore seeing himself so well profited in mental prayer, he asked
Gregory whether it were not best to leave off the rosary, that he might give
himself the more to the other? he answered no, (knowing that the worshipping of
our Lady, to whom he was very devout; does not only help beginners, but is
also cause of a happy progress in the spiritual life, ^ue^ to those that
have attained to perfection, and a mean to persevere in it) wherefore he
perseuered a year in that devotion of the rosary, and perceiving that those
heavenly favors still continued in his soul, as one now altogether
spiritual, he determined to leave of the rosary without acquainting Gregory
with it; but within few days after he left it off, he began to feel many
troubles and drouths, and almost no prayer (for to these dangers he exposes
himself, who thinks to make a prosperous nauigatio^ in the spiritual life,
without Mary the star of the sea) he told this unto the holy man without
telling him the reason, which was his leaving off of the rosary; whereat Gregory
smiling said unto him: fall to your beads again; he did so, and it succeeded
so well with him, as that in a short time he came to have the same spirit and
devotion, as he was wont to have; whereupon he was ever after very devout unto
our Lady, and wo^dered much, that Gregory did know the cause of his drouth,
though he had concealed it.

It once happened that there met at Santafe six spiritual men or more at the
same time, who came from diverse parts to confer with Gregory of matters
concerning their soul, and sometimes he answered the^ all in public, and that
so substantially as that they were satisfied in their doubts, and instructed in
what they were ignorant of; but that which I most admired at, was to see in how
few words he answered, for he did resolve great difficulties in two or three
words, and me thought those words were as laws in the minds of the hears,
and sparcles derived from a burning charity; so as they went away not only
illuminated, but also with their hearts inflamed and stirred up to embrace
whatsoever was good.

There came unto Gregory one exceedingly troubled in mind and told him all his
troubles; he answered him only these words: this is a purgatory wherein God
detaineth you, and these were of force to comfort him, and give him great
quietness of mind.

He comforted another Priest much afflicted, only by saying unto him that of
the Apocalips: I counsel thee to buy of me tried and burning gold, wherewith
thou may be rich.

Another found comfort amongst his tribulations and temptations, by hearing him
say: the kingdom of heaven suffers violence and the valiant do win it.

To knights and great persons that desiring to live well in their state, did
ask him what they should do, he said: That which you do for the love of G^d,
and that is enough.

To lawyers, indges, and men of emploiment, he was used to say change your
intention and you will do much.

With these kinds of speeches he did awake some that were a sleep who by
hearing him came to the selves and profited very much of this efficacy and good
effects of his words (which I did allwaies, attribute to his prayers) we shall
speak some thing in the 19. and 20. Chapters, besides that which is spoke of
in diverse places of this book and might be spoken of more at large.

Haueing by long observation perceived, that Gregory did understand
spiritually, whatsoever he spoke or heard I once said unto him: whatsoever you
speak or hear, you understand it spiritually, and he answered me, that it was
true; whereby spiritual men may see the perseverance and constancy of his
spirit, and those that are not, will perceive it by these examples following.

If any Man did say that the bread of Santafe was good, he answered, yes,
meaning the blessed Sacrament, which is true bread of our holy faith. When they
did commend the beauty, good smell and excellence of the flowers of Santafe he
applied it to the saints, whose sanctity had its beginning from faith because
without it, it is imposs^ble to please God: if any one, beholding the springs
and streams of waters which run from hence to Mexico, did say: the water of
Santafe is better in its spring then at Mexico, Gregory yielded it was, meaning
by the spring of Santafe, God, in whom the waters of true wisdom are best, and
he that receives the^ immediately fto^ him has them more pure and wholesome,
then he that receives them after they have passed through human
understandings; when he heard men say; such an one is of a noble house, he
presently considered that true nobility was to be a son of God in spirit; if
any one said that such a Lord or such a Lord was grandy of Spain, he presently
considered that the chief greatness was to be a friend of God, a heater of his
divine words, and to perform heroical deeds in his service. Perceiving this
his wonderful quicknes and readiness in drawing of things to a spiritual and
profitable sense, I was wo^t sometimes (when there was occasion of talking of
any thing, which was hard to be understood spiritually) to ask him the
spiritual sense, as once, a little dust arising in Sa^tafe, which happens but
seldom, those that were present, said: there is dust also in Santafe, I asked
him: how can it be said that there is dust in Santafe? he said: because there
are saints that live in Santafe, who are not come to four and twenty degrees
of perfection, and therefore have some dust of the earth sticking upon them, for
a man perfectly spiritual is all spirit.

THE V. CHAPTER. Of his great knowledge in Ecclesiastical and secular
histories.
MAny would have contented and esteemed themselves happy, if they could have
attained to that knowledge which is already said that Gregory came unto, but
as God is the giver, and Man a subject so capable, it pleases God to set
before our eyes for examples, some men to whom he has given much, by their
industry to confound and condemn the carlesnes of those, that do not prepare
themselves. This holy Man disposed himself so well, as that he is one of those,
who by their own deeds give a sufficient and ampble testimony of this verity
whilst he was in Guasteca, there came to visit him Father John de los Cobos, a
Dominican, an excellent Divine, who had bin a reader in spain before he came
into these parts, and haueing conferred with him for a good while very
seriously he afterward said: that the fame of his wisdom was great, but the
truth far greater. Haueing heard from him very rare things out of the Apocalips
he desired him to make a comment upon it, which he did in eight days, and sent
it unto him to Mexico, without either writing it over twice or so much as
blotting out a word. He receiving it admired very much, both at the speed, as
also the wit, learning, and spirit, which he showed.

There went also to Guasteca to talk with him Father Michael Talauera
Provincial of the discalced Franciscans, whose humility, wisdom and sanctity,
were most renowned in this kingdom. He conuersed with him very familiarly, and
afterward ceased not to admire at his great light and wisdom, praising and
thankeing God for it; in so much as that at his return from thence to
Zacatecas, where Gregory had lived solitary, he did very much extol his
knowledge, and sanctity in a learned sermon which he made there, and among
other things he said this: in this field here has bin bred such a young man,
as that I had rather be he, then a king, Emperor or Pope; and he added: in
departing from him, I felt my soul possessed with the grace which I had found
in him.

Father Manuell de Reinoso, a holy man, and very great Preacher of the order of
S. Francis admiring at the understanding and knowledge of Gregory, held it to
be supernatural; for I (said he) have asked him of diverse places in the
Scripture, and there was none to which he gave not a very good answer; once I
asked him nine of the hardest places which I have seen in all the bible, and
he expounded them to me in a few words and with such propriety, as that he
seemed a S. Hierome. Another religious man hearing him say so went unto Gregory
with other places of great difficulty, and found by experience, that, what had
bin said of him, was true. He knew (with as much evidence as can be gathered
out of the holy Scripture and other histories) whatsoever past, since the
creation of the world to Noe, telling the generations of the sons of God, and
of our first fathers so distinctly, as that without looking in the book he
would rehearse all those linages, their degrees and affinities, and the
differences of the times and ages, allthough it be a thing so obscure even to
the most learned; neither was he ignorant of things that past the sons of men
at that time, whose customs and inventions he did relate very particularly.
The like he knew from Noe till the comeing of Christ, and he spoke of those
times and persons, as if he had lived in them. Having spoke of this family of
God, he discoursed of the bordering nations, putting all into one history, and
accommodating these histories to the times and successes of the said family;
and he did not only know the wars and other things that happened in the family
of God, but also those of the Gentills until the comeing of our Redeemer, and
in my opinion he knew all this as exactly as any other man of his time: He had
by heart the Prophecies of all the Sybilles, he would tell many particulars of
the birth, infancy, child. hood, youth of our savior Christ; and also of his
preaching, death, and the other mysteries, and how much the law of grace
excels the law of nature and the law written. He had in a manner before his
eyes the life and preaching of the holy Apostles, and their Disciples. He
related in particular the lives and Martyrdomes of the Popes and other famous
martyrs from S. Peeter to S. Syluester, and the most remarkable lives and deeds
of the Confessors of most note from S. Syluester to Clement the eighth, in
whose time he died. He told the names, time and conversation of the founders of
religious orders, and of solitary life, and of the Archereticks, condemning
their errors and alleging the Counsels, wherein they were condemued, setting
down also the time, wherein such and such heresies began and ended.

He discoursed very particularly of the history of that beast, which S. John
speakeh of in the Apocalips, which was the city of Rome, and of the ten horns,
which were the ten Emperors, who did most of all persecute the Church, and he
did bring down this history of the Emperors to Phillip the second, in whose
time he died.

He did speak very distinctly of the beginnings and increases of the sect of
the false Prophet Mahomet, of the many countries which were ouerrun, by the
Mahometans, Turks, Ottomans, by nation Scythians and off spring of Magog, and
the Slaughters which they have made of Christians. I have heard him say that
this perverse sect did possess almost three thousand leagues of land reaching
from Europe to China.

He was also very conversant in the histories of the heathens both anchient
and modern, and had knowledge of those famous men whom the ge^tills esteemed,
Gods, as Ianus Hercules and the rest.

He related the conuersions of all nations and countries to our holy faith; and
those that preached the gospel unto them, and also the memorable things
that happened, and that with such certainty, as if he had seen them or read them.

Of all this he has made a Chronology or succession of times from the creation
of the world to Clement the eighth very short yet exact, setting down the mos^
memorable both in the Ecclesiastical and secular affairs; so as many learned
men do earnestly entreat me to lend the^ that book to copy out.

He had gathered also out of the said histories the choicest and best things
that concerned our faith, law and customs, and had reduced them to a calendar
of the days, which he did sometime tell me, by way of recreation, to my great
content and admiration.

THE VI. CHAPTER. Of the knowledge in other sciences, which God gave unto this
his scholar.
GRegory did not only know, both the holy scripture, and moral, and spiritual
things, as we have said, but he was also an Astronomer, Cosmographer and
Geographer. He had a globe and a map made with his own hands very truly and
exactly, for I have heard skillfull men, that have seen it praise it as such;
but that which I most wondered at, is, that ostentimes, when there was occasion,
I askeing him about diverse parts of the earth, even of the Antipodes, he
answered me presently, without studying or thinkeing upon it.

He did understand well the Ana^omy of man's body, and someti^es he told very
curious things of it declaring how admirable the divine wisdom showed it felf
in man.

He was also very skillfull in Physic, of which he writ a very elegant book,
wherein were many experiences which were easy to be made by poor men and
laborers, and sundry properties of s^mples and compounds. The greatest delight
which he took in this art was to make receipts, which he gave to the poor and
needy, written in his own hand, with the best remedies, which the desire that
he had of his neighbors health, did make him invent and compose, for he was
very compassionate; and thefore God gave unto him wonderful success.

He was likewisse very skillfull in husbandry, and was also an herbalist, for
he did not only know the properties and virtue of herbs but also how to make
them better, with sundry liquors which he made, and gave to the he^bes as it
were to drink. I have seen and earten of them so changed by his hand, as that
they seemed of another kind; and he told me that if he did know of any man that
were curious, and a good Christian (least that, if he wanted the fear of God,
he should make them worse and poison them by this art) he would teath him this
art, for the profit of his neightbours.

He was a very good penman, and did write many kinds off hands singular well,
at this day there are some things in this kind, of his making, very admitable,
especially the map we spoke of before, the which being of late much augmented,
excels all that have come out in print, and is so curiously made as that it
see^eth printed; and therefore a grave ^octour to whose lot it fell, estee^eeth
it very much

He had skill even in the tailours ^ade, and could make his own clothes, which
though but mean, yet to be accommodated to his weakness and sickness, did
requite a particular fashion and making; and so he was wont to say, that none
hit so right in the making of them as himself. He did not make himself shoes,
but he mended them so well, that they served him three years and more neither
did he make himself a hat, for h^ never wore any since he went out into the
wilderness; and it is no^ known that he ever had more the one, and that
remained as good as new.

This multiplicity of things in (...) contemplative man, will not seem^
excessi^e (though only one be necesary, and many do rather hinder then
otherwise) if we consider, the sublimity of his spirit, to which the great
number was no hindrance from the following of that which was the principal,
and necessary and I to be resolved of that doub^ did once ask him, if any of
those little things did wholly possess him, and he answered me: I find God as
much in the least of these things as in the greatest, and the reason of this
seems to be because his chief^st end and scope was his creator, so as having
his eyes allwaies fixed upon the fountain, all was but the same water unto him.

I will relate his manner of reading books, as a thing more then natural; it
fell out some times that in ten hours space he would have read over a book,
which others reading never so sast would scarce have ended in a month and
because some will say, that he did that by his great memory, and apprehending
of things only by seeing the title of the chapter; I will bring an example in a
matter well known: for that answer might have place in books, of common
reading, but not of spiritual things, such as is that of the holy Mother
Teresa de Jesus, which as I think he read over in twenty hours, and yet knew
so well all that was contained in it, as there was scarce any man that knew
more of it, then Gregory did; and I have often made trial of this; for I have
sometimes told him of very small and particular things out of that book, and
he has continued on in the books discourse, as if he had bin reading it: when
he did read to others, his celerity, clearnes of pronou^ciation and grace in
reading was very notable.

Our Lord endued Gregory with an exceeding great understanding, quick
apprehension, and such a sharp memory, as that I have often heard him say, that
he never forgot any thing which he determined to keep in mind, and with so
perfect a will that it is very credible, that his continual exercise, was to
be allwaies in an act of the love of God.

As for his stature we may account him of the highest, well proportioned,
without any defect, he was not strong, but rather of a tender constitution; so
as in his latter years he was almost nothing but skin and bone. The hair of
his head, beard, and eiebrowes of hazellnut color, his forehead somewhat
large, and hanging out, his eiebrowes full and arched, and without any space
betwixt them, his ears little, yet it is strange, how well he did hear, his
eyes black somewhat inclining to green, he had allwaies a very quick sight, so
as he could read the least print without spectacles, though after that ague we
spoke of, he sometimes put them on to see a far off; his nose rather little
then great, his lips thin and equal, but that his vnder-lip did a little ha^g
out; his teeth very white and even; his beard well composed, not bushey nor
great; his face long, somewhat pale and wan, so were his hands also by reason
of his abstinence, prayer, and continual mortification. This good natural
disposition and well proportioned feature of body with his rare modesty, was a
pourtraiture and representation of the great beauty of his soul.

This man whom we have her^ painted (or rather whom God has painted out) being
about nineteen or twenty years of age, left his parents, brethren, kindred,
the court of king Philip, all his hopes and fled to the Indies, a journey of
two thousand leagues and more, and finding them in their greatest prosperity,
renounced all those riches and delights, and hid himself amongst the rudest and
most barbarous men that were, only the better to serve and be more pleasing to
his Creator, and many having marked him very attentively, could never perceive
any imperfection either in gestures words or deeds.

THE VII. CHAPTER. How well this servant of God could bridle his tongue.
IF the holy Ghost approves him for a perfect man that does not offend in
words, worthily may I commend Gregory for his perfection, since that in
eighteen years wherein I conuersed familiarly with him, I never heard hin
speak one word amiss. Hereof I can give evident testimony, for since that I
made choice of him even from the beginning, for a Master and companion for the
rest of my life, and that only for his virtue, without any hope of temporal
gain or interest, it is manifest that I had reason to be careful that he whom
I chose for a pattern of virtue, were free from all spot of vice. Besides, I
was warned by wise and grave men to be wary, and live very circumspect,
hereunto also I was moved by the desire of Gods honor and Gregory his good
motives of themselves sufficient to be careful, because the divine majesty
commands us all, to have as much care as we can of our neighbors good: yet
notwithstanding all this care and diligence that such motives require, I never
heard him speak a word worthy of reprehension against any man neither heathen
nor heretic; for he condemned the sect or heresi with many grounds out of
Scripture, and reprehended their vices and sins wherewith they had so blinded
themselves as not to return to the bosom of the Catholic Church, from which
they had separated themselves, but he co^cealed the parties names.

When he was told of any that spoke ill of him, he heard it very peaceably and
midly; and the first thing that he answered was; as for the first, it is
certain that this party has a good intention, afterward he excused him as
well as he could; and he did not only excuse the party himself, but also his
fact without excusing himself at all.

A grave personage persuaded one of the Bishops that live in Mexico, to go and
see Gregory by the way, as he went about the Marquesate of Valle, where Gregory
did live, assuring him, that he would be very glad to have seen a man so
admirable for his sanctity and wisdom. Hereupon the Bishop resolved with
himself, and went to see him; Gregory came out with much courtesy, respect and
humility to receive the Bishop, and after they were both sat down, and those
also that came in his company, diverse things were talked of, but Gregory was
not asked any thing, and therefore he spoke not a word; so when the Bishop had
bin there about a quarter of an hour, being told it was dinner time, he went
away. Some days after, the same man going to give the Bishop the welcome at
his return to his Bishopric, and asking him what he thought of Gregory he
answered that he seemed to him a sensles fool, maruailing at this answer he
asked him if he had talked with him of spiritual things? the Bishop answered
no, then he, I marvel not, said he that not being asked he did not speak,
and not speaking did not show what he had in him. He showed it very well
afterward, when the same man telling him that the Bishop had accounted him a
fool, he rejoiced and said: I should have thought so too if I had see^ a man
of my fashion, and this was not much for Gregory, because God hadgiue^ him a
most fervent love of his neighbor, the which he was used to say, consists
not in words, nor in saying, I wish my neighbor well, but in doing him good
turns.

I never heard him speak an idle word, neither in seeing the heavens clear and
beset with stars, nor in seeing the fiedls green, or bedecked with flowers, or
the crystal waters, neither in the visits of any whatsoever, nor at the
table, or afterward; and I do not call an idle word that which the common
sort means, that is, something unseemly or tending to scurrillity, for such
as these were not to be spoke, nor thought off in such a life as Gregory did
lead; here I call an idle word, as divines and spiritual men mean, a
needless one, and such an one was never heard from his mouth for he did so
square and measure his discourses as that words neither wanted, nor were
superfluous.

I will note here an other thing for the learned, it happened sometimes that
there were in his company some learned men talking of sciences wherein he was
most eminent, yet he held his peace, as if he had bin a clown and ignorant,
unless he were asked, or in other respects which I will speak off by and by.
This was generally known and Dom Fray Pedro de Agurto Bishop of Cibu in the
Philippines a man known in this kingdom, not only for his dignity but also
for his great wisdom, religion and sanctity, affirmed it in a letter of his
in these words. I loved very much, my good and holy Gregory, and if I left of
conuersing with him, the reason was, because he not being used to speak
unless he were ask, and I haueing the title of a Master though standing in
need of that which I might learn from so good and so well practiced a soul,
it might be that my questions and conversation might be thought impertinent,
though it could not be imagined by such an one as he.

That which I did most admire at in Gregory, is that all though it be so
commendable a thing to speak of God and that many discreet and virtuous
persous came from countries far distant to con^erre with him, yet he never
talked to them of God, nor of spirit, or morality, unless he were asked, and
when he did answer, though his answers were profund and admirable, yet he spoke
without any exaggeration in a very plain style, and cut off his discourse, as
soon as he had satisfied the questions and necessity of his neighbor, and as
it happened often that to the question which he did answer there did belong
four or five more, which the standers by would ask of him, he answered every
one so proso^udly, and withal so briefly, as that he went not an inch farther
then he thought was necessary.

It is a thing truly worthy of much consideration, that he being so eminent in
the knowledge of the holy scripture, so we grounded in moral and spiritual
doctrine, so conversant i^ histories, having such knowledge of saints lives, of
the rites and customs of foreign nations, and of other things which we spoke
o^ before, and on the other sid haueing such an excellent memory, a to call to
mind what thing, an whenever he would, yet wash sparing of his talk, as that
he never spoke unless he were asked, (...) without manifest necessity. Methinkes
if Eliphas that harsh fried of Job had conuersed with Gregory as much as I did,
he would not have said: Conceptum serm^nem quis retinere poterit? who can keep
in a speech once conceived? but to make this his warines, more plainly appear,
I will here relate a reprehension that once he gave me.

A little after that I came to live at Santase with Gregory, he told me upon an
occasion, that there was an Emperor, who being in the middle of the sea would
be ser^ed with fresh meat, and in the ^idle of the land would have fish
brought alive unto him, whereunto I said: that was Heliogabalus: the holy man
answered: since we have condemned the fact it had bin sitting to have concealed
the person.

Another time standing at the window, and seeing it rain apace I said: it
raines apace; and at the same instant a flash of lightning sell upon my hand,
as I held it out of the window, I told it unto Gregory, and of the pain that I
felt; he answered: you are well served, since that you speak words that are
not necessary, for I see that it raines apace.

Haueing one day told me a thing wherewith I was very much edified, I asked him
why he did not tell it me before if he knew it, he answered: I do not tell
that which I know, but that which is necessary: and upon another occasion he
said for two years space I shut my lips without speaking more th^e to salute
my host, whom I saw only once in four and twenty hours.

He did not only keep silence in speaking, but, also in writing, for he never
writ of any business himself, neither did he return an answer unless charity or
necessity did require it, and then he did only use those words which were
necessary for the business. I have many of his letters in my hands of five or
six lines, and some shorter, as that which is in the I. chapter of this book.
He wrote some to Don Luys de Velasco the Viceroy in answer of others, and he
did no more but answer at the end of the Viceroies letter: I will do that,
which in this you command me, which was for the most part to recommend some
businesses to God. And though worldly men account this manner of answering,
especially to princes, rude and unmannerly; yet in one that was so far from
compliments and so wary in his speech as Gregory was, it was great prudence and
heavenly wisdom.

He did only speak without being asked, when he undertook the defense of the
honor of God or of his neighbor, or of the truth of the holy scripture and
our holy Catholic faith; and this too when no body else present undertook the
business. For example: if any one was afflicted with temptations or sickness; by
reason of which he did seem in some sort to murmr at God, one would not
think with what pious and grave speeches, he would endeavor to bring him into
knowledge of his own error, ignorance, and of the bottomless Ocean of the
divine wisdom and mercy which was hid under those tribulations, and how much
he was bound unto God; and to put himself in his more then fatherly hands. He
did also defend his neighbor with very prudent reasons as shall be seen in
the next Chapter.

That wherein he showed most spirit and vigor was in expounding some places of
the holy Scriptures, upon which misunderstood the heretics had grounded their
errors, and in such occasions he did not content himself with bringing some
few authorities and reasons, but he dilated himself as much as he could, and
alleged the best senses that he could of the holy scripture; and in those
places, which the heretics said contradicted one another, Gregory used the
same vigor and Christian liberty, yet withal modesty, sor he did esteem it
as his own Mother, having bin brought up so many years at her breasts.

THE VIII. CHAPTER. Of the wisdom which he showed in his answers, sayings and
deeds.
HE did hear very peaceably and midly, and with great attention whatsoever was
asked of him, and with the same mildnes let it pass, or answered it according
as he thought convenient or necessary.

There came to this village to visit Gregory, a religious man Doctor off
Divinity, and entreated me to get him to speak some thing of God: I did so,
and the Doctor, to give him play began to treat of that matter with a great
number of reasons and words; and the holy man being a great while silent, I
entreated him by signs to talk some thing of God whereunto he answered softly
so as the Doctor did not hear, because he was somewhat deaf: silence
edifieth him more then speaking; and allthourgh he stayed there two days and
one night yet Gregory did not speak unto him one word of God. As the Doctor
was going away, I asked him, what, he thought of Gregory; he said: his silence
pleases me very much and Gregory himself said unto me afterward: Father
Losa, I see that many can speak well, let us do well. If any one by way of
disputation, or to try him, did ask him something, which he had premeditated,
and studied before hand, putting unto him his doubt in Latin, he would say. I
praytell it me in Spanish: that being done, the holy man answered: this is that
which you say; giueing him to understand that there was no need of an answer. He
was also wont to ask of learned men, the signification of the holy scripture
in Spanish, only to humble himself unto them.

To those that asked him counsel about going to spain, marrying, or such
like things, he gave no answer for the time present, but said that he would
recommend it unto God; wherein he showed great wisdom; for he knew that in such
businesses it was convenient, that God should dispose the means, and move the
wills, to that which was for his greater glory, and the good of men, and this
was the reason why he would not answer, without first treating with God of
those things: besides he thought it not a matter of any great importance,
whether men did mary or go for spain, but he kept unto himself, out of his
humility and mortification, these and other good reasons, that moved him to
give no answer. But when any asked him whether they should be priests, or enter
into religion, if he did find they had parts requisite for such ^n estate, he
did further them in their resolution of embracing that principal good, but
when he perceived that they wanted those parts, he answered as is said; I will
recommend it unto God.

He would speak very much in behalf of the religious orders, and of the
Prelates and Superiors of them in presence of their inferiors, and those of
their charge and house declaring unto them how great a good it was to obey and
observe their rules and Constitutions.

Unto laymen, when occasion was offered, he gave to understand the eminence of
a religious man's estate above theirs, and the great spirit wherewith the
religious orders were founded; he said that Gods best soldiers were in them;
and to this purpose he was wont to say that a tree in a plain field needs
take good root, but that it is more safe from the violence of the winds in a
woody mountain.

He did all ways defend Princes, Governors, Judges, as well Ecclesiastical
as Secular, with great courage and humility withal, in presence of their
subjects: and when they did murmr at the government, he said: if you were in
the place, it may be you would not do so well as he that is in government; and
if they stood in it saying, that that which the Princes did, diserued to be
amended, he replied: you should tell them so, for what good does it here? to
some that esteemed themselves spiritual men, and yet did murmr, he said: I
do not account him spiritual, no nor virtuous, that judges and murmureth at
his neiggbour. Most commonly he was used to say in such occasions: this thing
cannot be remedied here, let us not talk of it; and with his gravity he gave
such life and authority to his words, as that a man of great account who
talked of the kings gouerme^t, was put much out of countenance, only by hearing
Gregory say unto him the king has as sharp an understanding as any man in
spain, and will you reprehend him? and the same man does yet admire at the
great change which those words caused in him.

He made another also who spoke ill of the government of a Lord, change his
opinion, only by saying unto him: you dare not say so in his presence.

He was very considerate and advised in speaking to every one in his proper
kind, to the husband man, soldier, gentelman and the rest, without taking any
man out of his profession; and to this purpose he commended very much S. John
Baptists wisdom in the counsel that he gave to the soldier, to be content
with his pay, and do no man any wrong.

Treating with spiritual men, least they should judge those that lead a manner
of life different from theirs, as sometimes it uses to fall out, he was wont
to say, that he was much delighted with the variety of men's spirits, because
that with them God did beautify his heavenly Jerusalem, that in the spiritual
course God was the Master, and therefore no man ought to make himself a Master
to another, judging him and desiring to lead him the same way as he himself is
led by God, because that way also is good wherein God directs others.

To those that asked him counsel what they should do, he answered, they
should love God and their neighbors, because that was the high way for all
from the least to the greatest, and that herein one could not do amiss,
because it is our law wherein consists all perfection.

He was also wont to say, that to be allwaies talking of spirit was milk and
the temptation of beginners, and that allthough one had an understanding like a
Seraphim, yet he ought nor desire to make it known without necessity.

He esteemed it better to recommend his neighbor unto God then to speak of
God, unless there were some special need. To those that had already prosited
in spiritual life, he said: it is better to speak with God then of God.

To one that esteemed himself a spiritual man, he said: it would be a great
shame unto you, if it were known that you desired to live in this world; and
for this purpose he alleged S. Paul, who said: we have nor here any permanent
city, but we seek after that wherein we are to continue; and he persuaded
himself that he that lived after this manner might be numbered amongst the
spiritual men.

When he heard some great and miraculous things reported he was used to say: I
had rather have one degree of the pure love of God then all this noise.

He was once asked, whether those that were perfect had any recreations, he
answered, yes, because when one goes a journey he loves to see his horse eat
(for so he called his body) but he said; the perfect man, even in his
recreation, carries a hand over his body quite contrary to the imperfect, who
do not use this mediocrity, for they suffer their mind sometime to be over
much vexed and troubled, at other times to be led with, the delight of their
nature.

ALlthovgh in conversation it be an usual thing for men to laughe at the
carelesnes, ouersights, or rash words of another, or when one is vexed, or his
foot slippeth, or he gets a fall, or comes in with some notable blemish or
mischance, yet he was never seen to laugh in such occasions, but rather seemed
to pity them a new.

When any afflicted person came unto him, he showed great feeling of his
grief, accommodated himself to him, and dismissed him exceedingly comforted.

There came unto this village a noble and virtuous Lady much afflicted, I went
to visit her, and though I stayed a great while with her to comfort her, yet I
could not prevail at all. Afterward she herself spoke with Gregory, who had
so great prudence or rather heavenly spirit in comforting her, as that she went
our saying: I go away satisfied.

When his advise was asked in things that were doubtful and heart to be
resolved, he answered: to morrow will come and we shall be wiser, giueing to
understand that a doubtful thing was not to be resolned, without treating
first with God of it, not that he was o^be understood so that by means of his
prayer he should presently know and resolve it, for that cannot be imagined of
such an humble man. By this saying also (to morrow will come, and we shall be
wiser) he did mean the hour of our death; for then the morning will come for
^he knowing of doubts.

The heavenly wisdom, which he did show in his deeds was admirable; he did
hear Mass with such silence, attention, and respect, and received the blessed
Sacrament with such profound reverence, as that he stirred up all men to
devotion. He would never speak to any body in the Church, but if he had urgent
business with any one, he went out and speedily dispatched it.

THE IX. CHAPTER. Of the fortitude and valor of Gregory Lopes.
IN the judgment of the world it would seem impertinent, to commend such a
solitary, recollected, silent, poor and humble man for courageous and valiant^
but if we consider it with the eyes of our understanding and reason, each of
those things above mentioned does not only show great valor and courage, but
also very plainly discovers the mighty hand of God. Who would not esteem it
valor, that a young man of ninteen years of age, endued with such parts and
natural gifts as we have seen, should forsake parents, kindred, house, country
and the kings court. which he had begun to follow, and with it such great hopes
of preferment, and go two thousand leagues and more into exile, to live in a
desert so full of perils, amongst the most savage, and barbarous men of new
spain. It seems very evident, that this strength was given him by God, for in
my opinion it is exceeding great courage in such a young man, to recollect
himself, and in such manner to conform himself to the will of God, as never to
go or say any thing that might be displeasing unto him, and to endeavor with
all his strength, to blott out all things out of his mind, so as neither to
desire nor remember any thing besides God or that which was manifestly his
pleasure and glory. Who could give such virtue besides that most mighty hand?
since that this is a thing of such difficulty as that to recollect ones self
inwardly for a little while, eue^ to a virtuous man, it seems as if he were
to go up a steep hill or scale an impregnable wall. And it were so indeed if
Gregory had not undertaken this enterprise with great courage and confidence in
God; saying with David: in my God I will pass over the wall what strength was
requisite for so many years recollection, with such strickt silence,
discommodity and poverty? Walking so long a time in the narrow path of virtue,
and never known to go back one step? but this strength will be better known
by him, that shall weigh well, and consider the difficulties of this journey,
the enemies that are in it, the combats that offer themselves and the field
wherein they are to be fought.

The enemies are the devils, so much stronger then we by nature, as the
natural power of an Angel exceeds that of men, a^ therefore our nature, as
inferiou^ does tremble in the presence o^ any of those spirits. Moreover, he
that walks in the way of virtue, has for enemies and adversaries, sinful
men, because he is contrary to them ^n his works, and oftentimes God
sufferreth the just to be persecuted by the just, and holy men opposed by holy
men, and this is a grievous persecution; but the most grievous and tedious is
that which a virtuous man, causes to himself, when by light from above he
knows, that all this comes unto him from the hand of God, who plainly
shows him that all those enemies and adversaries are as it were officers of
the divine justice, who come unto him with the power which God gives them; the
heavens become unto him as hard as brass, his soul he finds in an abyss of
tribulation, and as it were quite abandoned of great valor and courage.

The combats are as great, as is the number and subtilty of the enemies, for
they are never wont to make truce nor be weary of fighting, and out vices never
cease to persecute us.

Neither is the field, wherein these combats are sought a ^sse ^gne of valor,
for it is our inward part, wherein the spirit fights with ^he flesh, and the
flesh with the spirit: and this is a very painful war, because he that
gives the wounds, feels them as much as ^e that receives them and, the
resistance of the flesh cannot be brought under without great labor of the
spirit, because the subtilties and stratagemes of the invisible enemies do
there enter in, so come the blows and wounds.

Whosoever should know the labors that Gregory did herin undergo, and the
great progesses that he made in such occasions (as may be seen throughout this
history) he would easily see how valiant and courageous he was, especially two
things considered. The first is, that since that heliued so inflamed with
charity to wards his neighbors, he was partaker of all their afflictions and
griefs, and made them partakers of his pains in praying for them He was
tempted with all of them because he had as much feeling ^f their temptations,
as if they had bin his own. The second is, that Gregory did eat this bread of
sorrow very dry for though the divine goodness be wont to give spiritual
delights to those that walk in the spiritual way for the easing of their
troubles, yet this valiant soldier would never receive the^, beseeching God to
take the^ away from him, because he would serve his king for his Majesty's own
sake, and not upon hope of recei^ing those spiritual co^tentments, in part of
payment of his good will and love; for at the beginning God had bestowed on him
the gift of tears, but he besought him to take it away for the said reason.

He had also a most ardent desire to see the Humanity of our Savior Christ in
this life; but perceiving that this desire did keep him back, and in a manner
diminish his resignation, he did presently endeavor to mitigate it, contenting
himself with this, that God ^ould show it him when it was ^is holy will.
Gregory put away from himself all those comforts, because he desired to serve
God without pay or any charges borne in this life, and therefore he died so well
content that God led him by the way of the Cross. For all the many murmurings
which he heard against himself, some judging him an heretic, others a fool,
others a vagabound he never excused nor answered for himself, but defended and
excused those that spoke ill of him.

Some of his friends upon a certain occasion told him of a great stir that
was raised against him, he answered them: God forbid that I should trouble and
distract my mind with thinking on it, and therewith continued still as quiet as
he was before they told him of it.

A certain man of great account desired me to inform him of the estate of the
Hospital of Guasteca, and after I had given him account of all things, I told
him that there was a man there called Gregory Lopes, of such and such virtues,
spirit; and prayer; and what does this man, said he, in the Hospital? I
answered, that he was there allwaies in a chamber at his prayers, and never
went forth; then he said: to this man could I willingly give two hundred
stripes; and when we told this story afterward to Gregory, he smiling excused
him, saying: he says well for an idle fellow does well deserve two hundred
stripes, and gentlemen that are full of business, cannot easily understand what
inward exercises are.

It was never perceived, that he had any desire to be esteemed or known, and
he has often reprehended me for praising him, he never cared for the visits of
the Viceroies, Prelates, and nobility, but rather showed, when occasion was,
withal modesty and good respect, that he did not take any content in those
visites when they did not concern the glory of God or his neighbor his good;
and though the holy man did much esteem the great piety and wisdom of Don
Luys de Velas^o the Viceroy, yet he entreated him to excuse his visits,
alleging good reasons for his request. In those visites, that great persons
made unto him he did allwaies show an humble gravity, and assured token of his
great mind.

The Inquisitours gave order that his book, which he made upon the Apocalips,
should be seen and perused by Don Fray Pedro de Augusto Bishop of Cibu, who
gave in approbation, that he had never seen a better exposition of those divine
revelations; that he admired how he could say so much, with such certainty and
shortness; that he did believe he had supernatural light given him for the
writing of that book: and when the Inquisition meddled with that business,
Gregory did not show (nor do we think he had) any trouble of mind nether would
he keep a copy of it nor speak a word of it, even as if it had bin none of
his work.

Such was his greatness of mind, as that he never acquainted any man with his
griefs and afflictions, nor sought comfort from any creature, yet he was wont
to tell, for the good of his neighbor, things that had happened unto him in
times past.

Many times in they ear, he did endure great pains of the stomach and of the
colic, yet he never complained, nor changed countenance, nor the good
posture, that he was used to keep, when he was in best health, so as I did not
know his infirmities, but only by his great weakness, and extraordinary ill
stomach. One time seeing him much fallen away, I asked him: what aile you that
you are so weak? He replied 15. days together I have bin troubled with a fit
of the colic; and by these means I came to know his diseases which were so
great, as that they made me pity him and wonder how he could exercise such
constancy and austerity of life with them.

He was ordinarily sick of a fever, which he cured by diet, enduring hanger,
if need were, for three, or four, or five natural days, he never used bed
even in his great sicknesses.

whilst he was in Santafe, he had the toothache for a year together, and I had
never known it, but that he went twice into the field for herbs, that he
knew were good to cure him; and sometimes he could not eat for pain. Having
once hurt one of his great teeth, he would not let me send for a barber to pull
it out, but pulled it out himself by a very painful means; such was the
desire that he allwaies had of finding some occasion to suffer; for men that
are united to God, use to find as much content in suffering, as others find
commonly in their joy and ease.

This valiant man told me, that the devil did once assail him in a visible
shape; and I askeing him how he did defend himself, he answered me in these
words: I thought that I could not do a better thing then that which I did, so
I continued it with all my strength, and he vanished away and never tempted me
visiblily again.

We never heard him speak any good sentence, which he did not put in practice
when need was; and he was wont to say to this purpose: misery it self is not to
be, desired, but a will to endure it with moderation of mind; and so he endured
all these that hapened unto him with such an invincible and constant mind, as
that he did not seem subject to change; therefore from the first day that I saw
him (which is 18. years ago) I presently perceived in him a certain
excellence which I had not seen in any other man. This opinion increased in me
even till his death, and also since his death it increases with the wonders,
which God does daiely work by him.

But to return to the intent of this Chapter, what courage and valor might a
soldier have, who from a poor country fellow should come by feats of arms
to be a Grandy of the king his court? but how much greater valor is necessary
for a spiritual soldier, of himself poor and abject, a son of Adam, to
become great in the court, of God, and since that Gregory is come to that
height of honor as to be great in the court of heaven, it is fitting that his
valor and courage should be known, that so we may glorify God in this Saint,
gathering by that little which is written here, the great abundance that God
has bestowed on him, in comparison of which this that is written is nothing;
partly by reason of the care which he used in concealing his virtues, partly
for fear least I should exceed the breuity which I had intended in this
relation, telling only those that were so open to the view, as that they could
not but be seen.

I asked him one day how he could so much conceal his virtues, it seeming unto
me an heroical and hard thing to do, he answered me that sentence worthy of
eternal memory: To conceal ones virtues is not a thing hard unto him that
has a lively faith, for if a man do certainly believe, that all his virtues
shall be seen in the court of heaven, what will he care, whether they be known
or no in the village of this world.

THE X. CHAPTER. Of the humility, and inward poverty of Gregory Lopes.
I should have been very happy, if God had given me any part of the great
inward poverty, which he bestowed on this servant, the which consists in
having the heart free from all love of creatures, and giving himself wholly to
the love of his Creator, for it may be said of this holy virtue peculiarly,
that those that practice it can speak better of it then those that study it,
and consequently I should better declare Gregory his virtues if I had some of
it. What an excellent pattern of it this Saint has bin may partly be
understood by that which I saw with my own eyes, and by what I gathered by the
auswers he gave to many men in diverse occasions.

The sons of Adam, have for the most part ingrafted in them a desire to be
esteemed more excellent the^their neighbors. Gregory was so free from this
that he allwaies preferred others before himself, and to that purpose I have
often heard him say: since I begun to live solitary I never judged any body, I
esteemed all men better and wiser then myself, and therefore unless I were
asked, I never gave counsel to any man, nor made myself a teather of others.
Of this all that co^uersed with him are witnesses, and we have seen by
experience, that because he would not make himself a Master to any, God has
ordained that he should be unto many. From hence proceeded the great care that
he allwaies had to excuse those that did judge him; and as I told him one day
that there were many that slaundered him, he answered: I have allwaies excused
them not only in words, but also with all my heart in deeds. From hence
also it came to pass, that he did not desire his speeches should be valued,
and therefore he never went about to premeditate and compose the words, that he
was to speak, before hand; and he told me to this purpose, that once (it was
before he began his solitary life) he spent some time before hand in thinking
of the discourse that he was to make, and that afterward he had no occasion
to speak it, whereby he was advertised not to loose time in composeing his
words, trusting in God that he would give him those that were convenient when
need was, and for this cause God gave him the grace never to commit any error
in his speech, for all the words that he spoke seemed full of divine wisdom;
the Lord of heaven and earth revealing unto this humble servant those things,
which he has hidden from the prudent and wise of the world.

Eight days before his death there came to visit him a religious man very
wise and virtuous, and his great friend, and among other things that he talked
of, seeing his life in danger he asked him very familiarly: must we go now to
enjoy God? thinking that he would tell him of the hour of his death; but this
humble servant of God answered him with great admiration: Does your reverence
ask me this? it shall be as pleases God; as if he should say: you that are
wise, do you think that I know the hour of my death? I do not deserve so
much; wherewith the religious man was much edified.

Three or four days before his death, there came in to see him an Indian
woman of this village, and as I was speaking to her in her own tongue, because
he did not understand it, he said unto me, note well what she says,
peradventure she will give me some good advice; wherein I noted his great
humility, since that he thought himself of less worth then an Indian woman,
and that she could tell him what was convenient for him now in the end of his
life.

More over men are wont to have another affection, that is, to think of what
is to befall them, from which Gregory was very free, for he that desires
purely to serve God, esteems all such cares as lets and hindrances; and
therefore he never thought of courses of changing his life what should become of
him whether he should die of hunger or cold; or should be bedrid, whether he
should liuelo^g or a little while, whether he should do such or such things
for the service of God or his neigbours good; because he knew there was wont to
be in these and the like thoughts, if one were carried away with them, some
secret temptation of the enemy, or at the least loss of time, and for this
reason, like a wary and humble man, upon occasion of such thoughts he allwaies
said; I am nothing, I am good for nothing; contenting himself with doing that
which God in his holy law commands him, and not judging himself worthy of
other things in times to come, though he was always prepared in mind to do
whatsoever the divine Majesty, did ordain.

One time, as some were talking in his presence of the sumptuous tombs that
some men build, and of their competences about places and chappells, he said:
when I die let them bury my body where they will, so it be in holy ground, but
if they do not, it will so annoy them as that it will make them quickly
enterre it.

He was so far from taking care and providing for himself for the time to come,
as that he would not suffer that any body else should take care for him; for
when I went about to look for another place to live in, because the air of
this village of Santafe was not very commodious for his weakness and sickness, he
allwaies said unto me: let no man be solicitous for me, for God will have a
care to provide as shall please him.

He had his heart also free from all curious affection, both temporal and
spiritual, into which some contemplatiues use to fall, so he told me
sometimes, that since his choice of solitary life he had never desired to see
any thing of the world, even not his parents, country, or friends, etc. Neither
did he desire to see the Angels, nor have ecstasies, nor revelations, for he
said that he only desired to see God, yet allwaies with this resignation, that
it should be when and how it pleased God; and that the rapts, and ecstasies that
he desired in this life, was to conform himself every day more and more with
the will of God, and fulfill it in all occasions with all certainty and truth.

We perceived in this holy man a thing worthy of consideration, which was, that
he never rejoiced for any temporal thing, nor gave it entrance into his mind.
His joy was God, and his delight and glory was to do his holy will, and
benefit his neighbor. Upon a certain occasion I told him that I did greatly
esteem that virtue; he said unto me: it is a shame for us that live in the law
of grace, and have wholly renou^ced the world to esteem this, since Queen
Ester being wife to a great Monarch, said: Thou know well my Lord and God,
that since I was brought to this palace, until this present day, thy handmaid
has not ioyed but only in thee.

From the first time that I visited him at our Ladies of remedies, i^ pleased
God out of his mercy to give me such a care of Gregory, that if it was
necessary to do something for him, never so hard, I should not have stuck upon
it. So I assisted him in whatsoever he had need of, visiting him wheresoever he
was, and because he was in Guasteca, I asked alms three years together for
the poor of that hospital, a thing which was to me in those times, more then
any one can immagine: and to say all in a word, from the time that I knew him,
until he died in my company, which were eighteen years, methought I could
have bin content to have bin his slave, and he knew it very well and showed
himself very grateful; yet I dare affirm, that never any one saw him rely or
put the least hope in that which I did or could do, nor that he set his
affection upon me in any excessive manner for all whatsoever I did. For in all
the good turns that he received, he allwaies beheld God as the author of
them, and the creature as the means, whereby the divine godnes and providence
did send them: so as his gratitude toward his benefactours was in God not in
himself, beseeching earnestly his divine Majesty to requite that good work,
that was done unto him, since that he moved their wills to do it.

In like manner he endeavored that for any good work of his toward his
neighbor, the thanks should not be given to him, but only to God, as we did
often see, that when some went to ask him doubts, he did not answer them but
prayed unto God to tell it immediately to themselves, that the thanks for that
knowledge might be given unto God, and not unto him, neither whole nor in part.

THE XI. CHAPTER. Of the outward poverty of Gregory Lopes.
SInce the time that he went into the wilderness, and offered himself up wholly
unto God, he never possessed any thing of his own. To this purpose he was wont
to say, that when one takes delight in outward poverty, it is a sign that he
is inwardly rich.

This great love of poverty made him devise sundry and admirable means, whereby
to excel in it. Wherefore as for the first, he would not use any certain kind
of attire; but in diverse times he wore suchapparell as God did send him; for in
the first eleue^ years it was course sack cloth, afterward in Atrisco his
host gave him some gray cloth to cover himself and that was the best garment
he wore in all his life.

The bare ground was his bed whilst he could pass with it without endamaging
his health; afterward he did ly upon some shepskins, until his great
feeblenes and diseases forced him to take a little quilt very thin and a
couerlet: this was his best bed, and he accepted of it at my importunity, as is
already said.

His chamber was very poor; for he would never accept of hangings, or other
furniture were it never so mean, even when he was very weak and sickly.

He washed his clothes himself, partly because he was very cleanely, as also
because of his indispositions; at some times in the year he washed his feet,
and he himself warmed the water in the sun, he never let any body wash them
for him, neither do I know that ever any one saw his bare skin.

He was so temperate in his diet, that he never did himself harm by eating,
either fruit, though he loved it very well, or any other meat, but only once
by eating of green herbs and wild quinces. To this purpose he was wont to
say that poor men ought to look well to their health, and not to exceed in
eating or drinking, least they should be burdensome to their neighbors.

In the beginning of his solitary life he eat no flesh, afterward when he
conuersed more with men, he eat of that which was set before him, but he never
eat but one meal a day.

His moueables were only a bible, a map and a globe, which, as is said, he made
with his own hands, and two other books that he had wriren.

Notwithstanding his poverty, it was the will of God that he should never ask
any alms, neither by words, deeds, nor signs, nor even by making show of a
good life, the which is wont without words to move men to give alms; because
the divine Majesty would have him live in this manner to let us see by
assisting him so punctually in all his necessities, that his divine Providence
never fails; and if for some time he did permit him to endure want of
necessaries, it was to the end that his merits increasing his rewards also
might increase. How often in travailing has he come weary to his lodging? and
stayed there without eating any thing? at night laid himself down upon the
bare ground, and betimes in the morning travailed some leagues on foot? for so
he was used to do, there being no body that took any care to supply his want
and poverty; and I do not marvel much, for Gregory by his countenance seemed
rather a Lord then a poor man, though oftentimes he endured extreme hunger,
thirst, wearines, toil and labor into which God brought him in diverse
occasions. I know well that this is much, but yet his strength and valor was
such, as that allthough God had brought him into more and far greater wants, he
would not have shrunk from his purpose of observing poverty, for he had
purposed not to ask any thing, hoping that God would relieve him as he
allwaies did.

Perceiving how much sometimes he was in commodated whilst he was in my house,
by not asking any thing, one day I said unto him: if I saw my self in
necessity, I would ask alms to shame and humble my self, he answered me: But
not I. Then I replied: methinkes I should do ill in not asking that which I
had need of; to this he said: for you, you say well, and this is a good course,
but not for me; for God directs every one in his proper way.

In his latter years he was used to drink a little wine in the morning, for
if he did not take it, he was much tormented with the pain of the colic, and
the stomach; and though I had allwaies a care to give it him, yet I could not
allwaies come to know when he had spent it. One day seeing him very weak and
pale, I asked him what he ailed? he answered: I have not taken a draught of
wine this morning, and therefore I have bin in great pain. I began to be
troubled, because I had no wine in the house to give him; but God assisted him
very punctually, for even at that instant there came a friend of mine, and
brought us a little good wine.

He was so constant in not asking any thing, as that once I found him making a
web of thread of a little clout, and asking him what he made that for, he told
me that it was to sow with, and though he knew that I had thread, he did not
ask any.

Seauenteen years and more before his death, I had a desire to give him all
that he had need of, assuring my self that it was the will of God that I should
do so: and though I had made known unto him this my desire, he never asked
any thing of me; at length perceiving by so many experiences the way wherein God
did direct him, I did use from time to time to lay before him some things,
that I thought he might have use of, and he did take what he had need of.

There was another thing in his poverty very admirable, that is, it seems that
God would have this his servant eat of other men's leauings, like a true poor
man, for I have often observed, that whatsoever was dressed purposely for him,
did him harm. Of this I have long experience, for seeing him so weak and
feeble, I caused some dainties to be made for him, and as soon as he eat them
they did him harm, and he himself entreated me to make nothing for his own
person, but I, imputing this to his desire of not being troublesome, and also
of living like a poor man, did again cause something to be made ready of
purpose for him, and it so fell out, that by the harm he felt in eating of
those things, he came to know that they had bin made for him, and then he
declared himself, telling me plainly that he would not have any thing made
peculiarly for him.

And so I have perceived that if cloth, or linen, or any other thing was
bought for him it did him harm, though on the other side our Lord did bring
him into such necessity, by infirmities, and weakness, as that it seemed a thing
impossible to be able to endure that which he did, and when in this last
sickness there was need of particular things, he forbad me to cause them to be
made for him: but if any sent them out of charity, I should take them, in good
time; yea perhapes his death was hastened by some things that were made ready
for him, which some learned and very virtuous m^ thought necessary, for which
cause the holy man held his peace at that time, and received them with patience.

It seems that God was his steward, and would not let him in this life spend
any thing of his heavenly patrimony, and seeing that Go^ kept him so short I
said once unto him: it will not be said of you: bona terrae comedetis; he
answered: it is true, and as God does it, sol desire it should be; and truly
for such occasions as these, is the resignement and conformity of man with God,
when on the one side God brings him to such a near pinch, and one the other,
man endures that want valiantly with joy and contentment.

THE XII. CHAPTER. Of the mortifications and sufferings of Gregory Lopes.
THe mortification of this most patient man (being in so high a degree, as that
it cannot be discerned by those who with their carnal eyes behold spiritual
things and judge of others by themselves, was the most rare and admirable that
has bin seen: as soon as he went into the desert, he kneeled down upon the
ground, and taking his discipline in his hand he began like a valiant soldier
of Jesus Christ to chastise his body and use it hardly. But his Captain and
most wise Master would not leave a business of such importance in his own
hands, ^t said unto him: Alius cinget te (...) ducet quo tu non vis: as if he
^ould say: I will have a care to p^ch you, for thou must walk after my pace
not I after thine; the which God did perform, giving him matter of merit by
whole handfulls, not only outwardly in his body, by the continual sicknesses
that he sent him, and the discommodities and labors tha^ he inspired him to
undertake and suffer with more then manly courage, hut also inwardly in his
soul with other pains far greater, wherewith he tried him.

He began to exercise him in wardly in such grievous and painful things, as
that the great patience that our Savior had given him, stood him in very good
steed, and though he engaged all his strength, yet God brought him so to the
utmost in this exercise, as that he was so far from going farther with a
greater burden, as that he thought it impossible to carry that which he did
already bear. He told me that his nature did tremble when he thought of that
exercise, and that therefore he would not make a particular relation of it to
any one; but although we do not know in particular those things that he did
inwardly suffer, at least by the answers that he gave to those that came to
tell him their inward afflictions, some of those wherein God had exercised him
may be gathered (...) for he did answer with so many particularities that all
men did easily perceive; that he was a Master in such troubles, and did comfort
themselves to see him in such a sure harbor after so many tempests, and when I
talked with him about those troubles, saying that they were very painful, he
answered me: Father Losa there are Men that bear burdens thirty times greater
then this; whereby may be gathered that in matter of such like troubles, he did
suffer more then he did teach.

For he that had an earnest de^re to keep his soul undefiled, and did all
ways employ himself in chaste and fervent prayer, how much would he be troubled
and afflicted with a flood of carnal temptations, imaginations and
representations of dishonest things which the devil represented unto him very
lively, and with a worse and more alluring impression then the real things
themselves could make, and though God gave him the grace to tread all this
under foot, yet he could not but feel great pain and sorrow, seeing himself
hanging only by the slender hair of his own will, wherewith he was in danger
to consent, and especially, because at that time God opens the eyes of those
that are to thrive spiritually and makes them see the danger they are in, to
the end that they might walk with more heed and warines in the narrow path of
virtue.

What pains might Gregory suffer in these occasions and dangers? since that
his enemies were not tired either day or night with fighthing, nor fled were
they found resistance, nor were ashamed where they found virtue? especially,
since that they not only environed him without, but were also within him,
provoking him to evil, and opposing him in goodness. Nevertheless these pains
so great and so dreadful were delights and contentments unto Gregory, who
endured them for the glory of his God. In like manner he behaved himself in
enduring the battery of reasons which the enemy brought against our holy
Catholic faith; the impossibilities, snares, intanglings, doubts, which upon
this suhiect he did raise; for faith being the ground of spiritual life, the
temptation against it is a torment inflicted by the devil himself. Gregory
suffered this constantly, continuing strong in his faith, and with his profound
humility made his adversaries instantly wanish away.

The soldiers of our Lord are also wont in the like recollection to be
tempted with the spirit of blasphemy, yet he that knows how to fly
spiritually, and has found delight in the love and praises of God, with such
excellence as Gregory did, returns allwaies conqueror from this fight, and
gets life by the hand of his enemy.

In the spiritual life, men are not a little nor seldom mortified and
afflicted with a kind of swouning, whereby the devil seeks to stop their way;
for the soul desiring to please God and walk in his ways, finds sometimes
in herself such a kind of remissenes and weakennes, as that it seems unto her
a thing impossible to go a step farther, and knowing, that if she does not go
forwards, she displeases God; and that to please him she must go on merrily,
great is the pain she feels in perceiving herself so unable to follow that
which God would have her. God gave unto this his servant the valor and courage
that is requisire for the suffering of these things with patience and profit,
and for the gaining of the victory, strengthening him in these occasions with
humility and knowledge of himself by which he might attribute all the good that
he; should do afterward, to the divine goodness as the fountain of all good.

Perfect men suffer also other kinds of pains wherewith they are much
molested and afflicted; for haueing already attained to an excellent degree of
charity, they grieve at other men's evils as if they were their own: it cannot
be expressed in few words in what continual grief and affliction our Gregory
did live, seeing the blindness of sinners, the obstinacy of heretics, the many
souls that every day are damned, for this is that whereof we ought truly to
have a feeling, though he did also feel the sicknesses, hunger, injuries,
wars, and the other grieuances of his neighbors, as if he had suffered them
himself.

Another combat of the devil is, to represent unto those that aspire to
perfection, especially at the beginning, how that all the world will rise
against them, as it has risen up against all the followers of virtue, and how
they shall be persecuted by false witnesses in infamous crimes, and such, as
they do most abhor; and that if they had profited any thing by their good
life and example, all this would turn to scandal and a stumbling block for
other; and though unto some these burdens seem but light, yet the truth is,
that when God gives our adversary leave to straighten these cords, he makes
the servants of God sweat for a long time; for this is a far more hard and
austere penance the^ that of the body, though they seem to us to sit like idle
and loitering me^. The truth hereof God has showed, plainly in Gregory Lopes,
not only in his moderation of mind and patience which he was pleased to give
him in such cumbates and adversities, but also by the wonders that he has
wrought by him, and in him.

I will here note one thing, which for its rarity did much edify me. I observed
diligently for many years, that this admirable man never made a stand in his
spiritual course: and though I sometimes considered that his being continually
in the love of God caused in him that great perseverance, yet I never rested
altogether satisfied, until that as I was thinking of it, it pleased God to
open my eyes, and let me know that this his constancy did proceed from the
continual love of God, and his neighbor for God his sake: thereupon I said
once unto him: cannot you take any rest in the spiritual course? he answered
me with a peaceable and cheerful countenance: I neither do nor can take any
rest, as long as my brethren are amongst so many dangers and troubles: for it
is not fitting that I should retire my self, where I may be safe, leaving them
on the bulls horns; I will not do such an unworthy thing, if I know of one
only that is in danger, I will not take any rest all my life time. That which I
more admire at, is that he never looked upon those contentments, which God is
wont liberally, to bestow in the spiritual life, in consideration of the
progress which men had made, nor that he never recreated himself with the
memory of his dangers and troubles past, nor wiht the virtues which by Gods
help he had purchased; for virtues after they are gotten cause ioyand peace.
The reason why he did not ioyin this, was because, he always fixed his eyes,
not upon that which he had but that which he wanted, neither would he stay by
the ways to rest himself, for God would have him allwaies make more
progresses, and afcend very craggy hills, for he told me once that in those
three first years in which he exereised himself in the resignation above
mentioned, God had made him climb up great hills.

He endured another painful and troublesome mortification in two, as I may
call them, Purgatories which God gave him in this life. The one was of love,
the which as I perceived, he had, when he did live at Guasteca.

The pain that it brings with it, those that have made trial know to be
most grievous, and those that have not come so far, will not believe it. For by
the light which God infuseth into the higher part of the soul, the heart is so
wounded with love, as the sweetness is unspeakable, and the grief such, as
cannot be expressed, the soul faints, because she cannot obtain that which
above all other she desires; There grows in her an ardent, but profitable
impatience, dureing which it has no quietness, rest, nor ease. In this estate
God does sometimes inspire admirable words, particular means and documents of
true wisdom the soul indureth an incredible pain, both in passing through
the tourments which she does suffer, and the joys and inspirations which God
imparteth unto her: and so I did perceive in this holy man a most exceeding
mortification, for he did endure this purgatory of love with such silence as if
he had suffered a spiritual wearines.

The second Pargatory is desire: here with the soul is tormented, when she
sees that she cannot in this life attain to her chiefest good, whereof she
has knowledge; this brought unto Gregory much grief and trouble, for as he
with his quick understanding, lively faith, and purity of spirit meditated and
contemplated the greatness of God, he became endued with so great and amarous a
knowledge of that same greatness, that, he had a most ardent desire to go and
possess it; and as he did perceive that in this life, in running after the
odor of those divine ointments, he could never obtain the good he so much
desired, he rested wounded and grieved, like the Heart that thirsts for the
springs of running water to quench his thirst, and cannot come to them; but of
this, because it belongs to few, we have said enough.

But that wherein Gregory mortified himself all the time of his life, and wherein
he suffered most, was as he told me, in following allwaies, as he did, the
grace of God; for it is certain that one cannot follow grace, unless he fly
from nature: what pain then and mortification would it be to a servant of God
to go on allwaies flying from, and denying himself? for many times grace
requires of us that which is contrary to natures desire, and therefore it is
necessary that one dye, that the other may live. Therefore, that grace might
live, Gregory endeavored to be dead to all creatures; because it is the
property of nature to live to them, and because she desires esteem and honor
for her good works and not to be despised of any, therefore he sought to hide
his good deeds and virtues, and to be despised by the world, as our Savor
was, and following grace, studied how to lay aside all care of temporal
affairs, and bent himself only to seek out and serve God, since nature
inclines to the contrary; and because she is puffed up with prosperity and
dejected with adversity, Gregory by grace was disposed to receive with
moderation of mind, and constancy, what successes soever, without seekeing the
interior content of those or other virtues for himself, but only rejoicing for
the glory that thereby redoundeth unto God. Nature as it were forgetting this,
does in all things seek her own content, and desires all the good for
herself, all her language is, I, and, for me she hates her euemy, rejoices at
another man's harm and repineth at his good. Whosoever shall have read this
book, or couuersed with this Saint, will easily know what use he made of grace
in wishing well to those, who either through malice or ignorance were his
adversaries, grieuing at their misfortunes and desiring all good to them for
God his sake, so as ouercoming himself more and more every day, and growing in
petfection, he did so hunger and thirst after God, as that nothing could
satisfy hi^ He did allwaies endeavor to (...) for the obtaining of that
chief^ good, rowing with all his stre^g^ against the stream of naturall^
light, and swinning allwaies ab^ water, he endeavored to doc^ pleasure and
will of God. Such^ this is the true spirit of more cation: the which he
exercised^ a most eminent height of perf^tion at Santafe, as is evident to
(...) by many tokens.

Having for many, days spa^perceiued that Gregory grew ve^ sick in this
village, because I sa^ him very weak apud pale, (...) thought good to visit
him of^ and to be longer at times in hi^ company, to see if I could give him
any comfort.

I did ask him what pains he felt, and he would not tell me then: at length
after many days, he told me the great pains that he endured in his teeth and
grinders, and other diseases which he had; but I rested not satisfied here
with, b^ng persuaded thad the holy ^n suffered other pains greater ^n these,
therefore I importuned him very much to tell me them; afterward he did that
which he is not known ever to have done before or since; which was to ^er some
what of that which did inwardly pass betwixt God and him, saying these very
words: Thou know well, o Lord, that I have no creature within my soul, nor
suffer any to be there, for thy sake alone, and why do thou after this manner
hide thy self from me? how can thou endure to see me with so many
infirmities, and being able to heal me, do not? but willest have me seek
the herbs that the beasts feed upon, and being able to heal me with a (...),
yet wilt not? and though I am ^e he said not these words, so ^ch for his own
comfort, as for (...) instruction and profitt, yet I re^ined so amaysed to
hear him utter some thing that passed inwardly, betwixt God and him, a^ that
presently I writ down these words which he had said, being the 23. of March
in the year 159^.

THE XIII. CHAPTER. Of his mortifying of his senses.
IT is no marvel, if he, that vs^ such care and exquisite mean to mortify
his interior, was all^ emine^t in the mortification of h^ senses: It is
certaniely though^ that he never went one step (...) feed his eyes with the
sight of any of those things that use to (...) pleasing to that sense; and so,
what he went once, being at Guasteca, (...) see the fountains, he told me,
(...) did it only at my request, and (...) give me content. Being some months
in Mexico, he never went out of door, but only straight to the next Church,
neither could he be persuaded to go to any mo^st^ry of Nuns, allthough by
some he was earnestly entreated. When he came to Santafe, he went out of Mexico
before day, without ever looking upon the streets or buildings. Whilst he was
in this village, he was importuned to go down and see a garden belonging to
the same house that he dwelt in, where was good store of water, green grass,
and flowers, yet he never did in six years time, only one year he went down
for a little water to drink. He did look upon men's bodies with an honest
freedom and free honesty, as if they had bin souls without bodies, or bodies
without life and soul.

Though it be a thing so natural, especially to men of a good understanding,
to be delighted with music, yet in all the time that I knew him, I never saw
him go to hear any, though sometimes it happened to be near the place where he
^s, and oftentimes he told me, that if the music of the great Church of Toledo
or all that is in the world, were but one pace off of him, he would not go to
hear it, but if perchance he were present where it was, he did hear it
quietly and got spirit out of it.

All ill smells were very offensive unto him, yet he would never use any sweet
smells; many nosegaies were offered him, but he for the most part refused them,
some he did take, least by doing otherwise, he should discontent him that
brought them. Sometimes, though but seldom, he would take a white lilly or red
rose, because, as he said, the smell of those flowers is very chaste.

As soon as he went into the desert, he made a purpose never to eat with
intent to please his palate, but only to sustain his life, the which he
observed all his life, in so much as that when I persuaded him to taste of a
Melon, grapes, or figgs (for those fruits are here in great request and
esteem) he would only smell to the Melon; saying: it is enough this year to
have smelt this Melo^; of the grapes he only took one, saying presently, it is
enough for this year; of figgs he only took half an one and said the same.

Allthough he loved fruit very well and desired to live upon it, because as he
said, it was the proper food of man: for in Paradise man should only have lived
upon it God had created so many sorts of it only for ma^^ use, yet as we have
already said, he told me that fruit never did him harm, and I wondering
thereat, he gave the reason, for, said he, I did allwaies eat of it moderately.

That which he did eat of with a good appetite, was bread the sustenance of
the poor, but it seems, he obtained of God to find, even in that, such
mortification and difficulty, as that some years before his death, he could
not eat one ^orcell of bread unless it were first steeped in broth without
salt, fat, or spices in it, and that was his diet at this time, making way for
the bread with some light meat. Sometimes he chanced to keep his bread in his
mouth a good while, and I bidding him remember to swallow it, he said: I
cannot, and that one of the painfullest things to him was to eat; nevertheless
he made much account of his s^nses, knowing of what profit they are to a
spitituall man, if he keep them well mortified.

After a burning fever which he had, there remained a lingering ague, which
held him almost a year, and in this necessity I often importuned him to use
some sheets, but I could never persuade him to it.

I neither can nor ought to pass over in silence, a very subtle mortificatio^
which I perceived in Gregory: for the understanding whereof it is to be noted,
that one of the things wherewith nature is most mortified, is, that the spirit
does not cherish her nor give her any part of that which passes in its self,
debarring her of the part she was to have in the spiritual work. This
premised: I have observed for many years (which we have spent both together,
living in the same house, eating at the same table, and sleeping in the same
chamber) that he did never weep, nor sigh, nor lifted up his hands, nor
shrunk up his soulders, nor spoke any word aloud with God nor to himself, by
which one might come to know his inward affections, a thing which in a man of
so great affection and spirit would amayse any one that knew what belonged to
prayer and contemplation. I admiring much here at said one day unto him: you
being thus allwaies united unto God, and in the presence of such a Lord, do
neither sigh, nor speak, but are altogether rapt in ecstasy with the divine
goodness; whereunto he answered: That is not the reason, Father Losa, for truly I
do sigh and groan almost a thousand times in the day, and am almost allwaies
talking with God though only mentally: I have used this manner now thirty
years, and I endeavor not to give nature any of these feelings (which is to
her no small mortification) because I have found her false and treatcherous.

I became not so perfect in this lesson; but that sometimes going into the
garden to prayer and contemplation, I should forget my self, knocking sometimes
my breast or sighing, and Gregory hearing me would in a pleasant manner say unto
me: Father Losa, give Nature now and then a bit, least she die for hunger: but
he did not give such counsels to other men, but rather advised them to help
themselves with those outward signs, for without them they did not any thing.
I am verily persuaded, that he that shall read with a favorable eye the
penance and mortifications which are here related, will rest fully satisfied
that this heroical man went not into the wilderness to sleep and be idle, but
to do and suffer. I am also certain, that if he would have ^old other
greater mortificatio^s which he endured, a course of such difficulty and virtue
would have caused in us great admiration, it would have also bin much better,
if those things had bin better expounded, that they might be better known,
for I confess that I have left out many things, because I could not explicate
them and make them understood, yet by those that we have set down, one may
perceive that his life was all mortification, penance and crosses.

Now it remains for us to see the profits, that Gregory reaped by this
virtue. First such strength that, as he was wont ^o tell me; he now overcame
with Gods grace all temptations with a blast; Secondly such a dexterity in
sighting, as that his enemies as puissant as they were, could never make him
give back one step, but that he went allwaies getting ground, and putting such
a firm confidence in God, as that if he had a whole squadron of temptations
against him, he should overcome and put them all to flight; and so, though
ueuer so many bid him battle, he never left of the exercise that God had given
him; but even in the midst of them walked on in the love of God and his
neighbor. Thirdly such a peace and dominion of himself in his manner of
combat, as that never any could perceive, whether he was inwardly in combat,
or at peace.

He was allwaies the same without any change, and in him was verified that
sentence: the wise man is stable like the sun, but the fool has his changes
like the moon; and he was used sometimes to repeat it. Fourthly by this his
mortification, he obtained of God, as one already well exercised, to be made
the elder brother, being now able to have a care of his brethren and
neighbors, to fight for them: and that his combats, which he fought for his
neighbors sake, should be accepred of as if they had fought themselves, as I
perceived it often happened, as shall be said in the 19. Chapter of the effects
of his prayers. All this his strength proceeded from the lively faith which he
had in God, whereby he understood clearly and distinctly, the greatness of the
divine goodness and mercy, which sufferreth not any to be tempted above his
strength, therefore he fought his combats with delight, saying with spiritual
contentment, that this was never wanting unto him; and he was wont to say that
whosoever had received that delight from God was already, as is said out of
his swaddling clouts.

THE XIV. CHAPTER. Of Gregory his prayer, when it began, and with what
exercises.
I have many reasons to think that he began to use prayer as soon as he had
the use of reason; this I could gather, by some discourses that passed betwixt
us touching this matter, and by other conjectures which seem almost certain,
as was his custom of saying unto me, that God had called him very soon, that
he had never bin a child, that he had never retired back one step; whereby,
because of his moderation in speaking of himself, and his nicenes in letting
others know his good deeds, it may easily be understood as a thing out of
doubt, that he allwaies used prayer. He told me that when he was a little page
in the court, he used mental prayer, and went upon errands with as much
quietness of mind, as he had six years before his death; and that he did not
loose this quietness, though there passed by Dukes and Earls, and other things
happened that use to be in the court, and that he perseuered in his prayer
amongst those noises as well, as if he had bin alone in a mountain, though
afterward he went on, allwaies by exercise perfecting both his prayer and
quietness. If therefore at twelve years of age he had attained to such peace and
quietness in prayer, it is to be thought that he began to pray, some years
before he came to this degree and perfection; and if these years from the time
that he had the use of reason, until he went into the wilderness were but few,
we may well think that he spent them in the exercise of prayer, especially of
it be true, as we understand it is, that before he came to the court to be a
page, he was in Navarre six years with an hermit, as is said in the beginning
of this book.

The same might be gathered by the courage which God gave him whilst he was in
the court, for allthough he was two or three years in that place, in which are
so many hindrances for those that walk in the paths of God, he had strength
enough to pass through them all without altering his good purpose, but such
valor and courage is seldom got without long exercise in conversation with
God. Besides he was but twenty years old when he came to new spain, and yet
he came so well profited in mental prayer, that he not only endeavored to use
it much at a time but did allwaies continue in it, whether he were travailing,
writing or talking; and he told me that for his better attaining unto it, as
soon as he came to Mexico, he fasted a whole lent with bread and water in the
house of Luys Zapata, with intention to beg of God his favor and assistance,
and to employ him in some place, where he might best serve him, and give
himself up wholly to his divine Majesty. It is clear that such progress in
virtue is not ordinarily got so suddenly, but with long practice of prayer.
More over Gregory was not stirred up to such works by remorse of conscience,
or fear of hell, for God allwaies guided him by way of love: and what greater
sign can there be of his long and settled virtue, and firm love, then to come
to the Indies, and go through the places of greatest riches which were Mexico
and Zacatecas, the country being in the greatest prosperity for riches and
honor that ever it was, and he ^auing in him such parts, as is said, whereby he
might have come to ^nioy the glory of this world: notwithstanding all this, in
the flower of his youth, renouncing all these vanities, to cloth himself in
sackcloath, and retire into a wilderness, that God might there give spiritual
increases in his soul as he had done till that time, as he told me? the which
there is no doubt but they were very great, especially in prayer: and since
that the divine Majesty, the very first day that he led him into the desert,
laid upon his shoulders one of the heauiest burdens and hardest exercises,
that are in the spiritual life, as shall be said in the Chapter following, the
weight of this witnesses this young man's virtue (since that God lays on
burdens proportionable to ones strength) the which being ordinarily wont to be
gotten by success of time and holy exercises, we may easily understand that he
had spent those twelve years wherein he had enjoyed the use of reason in
obtaining virtue by means of prayer and conversation with God, that
afterward all might succeed well with him, according to that blessing of the
holy Ghost, which was often in his mouth: It will go well with that man that
shall carry the yoke of God from his youth.

He did not tell me in particular, the exercises of prayer which he used in his
first years, for, as we said, he never told things concerning himself unless
there were probable occasion of profiting his neighbor; but as for my self, I
have allwaies believed that the ground and beginning of this his course was our
Savior Christ, for he outght to be the entrance of those that begin well, and
we have heard from him such good meditations upon our holy faith, and upon the
life, and death of our Redeemer especially of his infancy and childhood, with
such devotion and spirit as showed plainly his long use and practice in that
kind of meditation: in his first year at Guasteca he showed me admirable ones
of the same matter, and especially of the sacred Virgin Mary, and he counseled
those that desired to profit in the spiritual way to say their beads over
with devotion, to her honor, as being the refuge and safeguard of sinners, and
to persevere in that holy exercise, and esteem it as their honor, to be denout
Disciples to that great Mistress of sanctity.

THE XV. CHAPTER. What were the prayers and exercises which God in spired him
to use, and the profit which he reaped thereby.
GRegory went out into the field, as he was used to call it, of the wilderness,
being one or two months under one and twenty years of age, as far as I could
gather. As concerning his manner of praying, I can tell some thing certainly,
for he could not conceal all from me, for the space of eighteen years which I
I spent in his company.

The first prayer which he used there, were those famous words, O Lord, be
hold I go forth only to serve thee not for any interest of mine in the manner
as is above said and declared, for he would not spend words, but offered
himself wholly to the Eternal Father in those few, making himself his slave,
so as that all his labors and gains should be for his Lord, and this he meant
by (not for any interest of mine) for he desired in all his works, to seek
only the glory of God. The Allmighty accepted his offering made with such a
willing mind, and the divine wisdom undertook the charge to be Gregory his
Master, teaching him that which was convenient. Fiat voluntas tua sicut in
caelo and in terra Amen Jesus; teaching him the same prayer that he had taught
his Apostles and in this prayer he gave him for his exercise, one of the most
excellent works, and hardest to be done, because it co^prehendeth all the
doctrine of the conformity of our will with that of God, which spiritual men
call resignation, and that not in any degree whatsoever, but in the perfection
which those words require, namely that there be such conformity upon earth
with the will of God, as is talked of and practiced in heaven.

It is much to be noted, that the divine goodness would have Gregory practice
himself so long in this exercise, as our Savior Christ was in preaching his
gospel, to give us thereby to understand, that all the perfection of his holy
doctrine consists in the perfect execution of those words.

The careful and studious scholar embraced this divine prayer and lesson with
such good will and resolution, as that for 3. years together, a wonderful
thing: without ceasing or ever omitting, he said it mentally as often as he did
draw breath when he was awake, and considering the little time that he slept,
and the great vigilance which he allwaies used, it is almost impossible to
tell how often he said those words: Fiat voluntas tuasicut in caelo and in
terra Amen Jesus; and he told me that after a years space he did no more
trouble himself to call them to mind thereby to make his acts more intense,
amorous and fervent. I heard him also tell once upon a certain occasion of
spiritual discourse, that if he did not make those acts with great d^u^tion
(allthough at other times he did) the devil at the very instant did assail
him with a multitude of temptations, so that, as he told me, in those times, by
reason of the many temptations that came upon him, he could not possible take
any book in hand, and that those only words served him instead of books and
study, and with them, as with armor of proof, he defended himself from all
his enemies and overcame them; and because he had found by experience the great
force and virtue of those words, he counfailed many persons to repeat them
often with devotion.

During those breathings, his operations were so vehement as that he was
almost allwaies elevated and thought of nothing of this world, and such was
the intensiuenes, wherewith he employed his memory, understanding, and will in
this divine exercise, that allthough, while he was in it, he was assailed with
many grievous temptations, yet as soon as they were past, he did not remember
them. From this exercise of resignation, as from a solid root grew out all his
wisdom and spirit.

When he had exercised himself for the space of three years in this spirit of
resignation, it pleased his heavenly Master to advance him to another degree of
perfection, instructing him inwardly that the height of perfection in this life
was in the practice of these words: Thou shall love God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, and
thy neighbor as thy self; and that he was allwaies to practice this, using all
his forces in it, loving God and his neighbor with one act of love, imitaring
herein God himself; therefore afterward he did not repeat so often as before,
that act of resignation, wherein he said Fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo and in
terre. Amen Jesus; because this often making of acts would rather hinder then
further the continual act of love wherein his soul now was, as he himself
said. For the same reason he left of other meditations and exercises which he
used before, because they should not divert him from his continual act of
love. Gregory endeavored to follow this exercise with the same fortitude as he
had practiced that of resignation, yea and with greater, for row his strength
was increased; So in few years he became so expert a lover, as that he told me
that it seemed unto him a very hard thing to leave off that divine exercise of
love even for a short time, and that therefore without breaking it off he did
eat and talk, and perform all other operations both of body and mind.

Together with this heavenly employment, he began to read the bible, and most
of all at this time, for it happened sometimes, that he spent three or four
hours in the day in reading of it, and by this great love toward God he
attained to the understanding of the Scripture. Hereby he got that great poise
and measure in his words, the great prudence and wisdom he showed in his
answers and counsails, and the equality in loving his neighbor and himself
wherein he did much excel, for in all his good works, he esteemed himself as
one of the rest of the world, and desired as much to obtain mercy for them as
for himself. From hence also proceeded his purity of mind in prayer freedom
and Dominion against his enemies, and the severe mortification of his senses.
Now in praying he did not use such violence and force as he did before, but a
more refined and dedelicate act, less sensible, but more prefect. In this
manner he went on every day increasing in perfection and that after such a
manner as that many spiritual men were deceived, seeing him so conversant in
other arts and sciences, it seeming unto them, that this would divert him from
praying; but he was so far from that as that in his last years he attained to
such high degree, that as he has often told me his interior man did work
without imparting any thing to the exterior, and that he did not reduce the
conference that he had with God into mental words but to another language
which should seem to have excellent effects. To conclude, by means of this
exercise he attained unto that excellent union with God, which he allwaies
endeavored to practice, and his heroical virtues, and to say all in a word;
together with this, there came to him all that is good.

THE XVI. CHAPTER. The spirit of Gregory is made more manifest by the answers
which he gave to certain questions
I have thought convenient here to set down some answers which Gregory Lopes
gave upon certain occasions to the end that by them his spirit might somewhat
more appear, which since that it was so interior, may be the better known
out of these.

A certain religious man both spiritual and learned (one whom Gregory well
esteemed and conuersed with more then with any other) asked him, if he had any
particular times and hours of the day, or night appointed to make his act of
love more inte^se, if peradventure it grew slack or cold whilst he was at
table, or otherwise employed in offices of charity toward his neighbor, or
for the comfort of those that conferred with him? he answered that he had no
set times, neither that he had need of any, because there was not any created
thing that did hinder him, or make him grow remiss, that his inward operation
was allwaies in the same estate, that it was almost become natural, that he
had never gone back in the perfection of the union which God had given him, but
that he allwaies went forwards, and that by means of this union he had got
whatsoever he knew, because God had allwaies bin his Master, not books,
though, it was a great comfort to him, to see those things written by Tauler
and Rusbroque which God had imparted to him, and he never ceased to praise and
extol the spirit of the holy Mother Terresa de Jesus.

At another time being asked by the same religious man: sir if you were a
Priest what would you do? he made answer: as I do now; he replied: how would
you have prepared, you self to say Mass? he said, as I prepare myself now; he
asked him further: and how would you have made your Mementos, he answered him;
after the same manner as I do allwaies; and he added moreover saying: if I
were certain to die within these few hours, I should not do any thing more
then I do, for I am now actually giving unto God all that I have, and I cannot
give him more, unless he out of his mercy give it me.

But because it often falls out, that as the soul is loving God, with all
her strength in great quietness, our Lord suddenly raises her up for a short
time to the height of union, drawing as it were the curtain which is between
God and her, God himself dilating her, and making her capable of such things
as she can neither express nor conceive, and when she desires to think and
stay upon that which God wrought in her, she finds that those favors are now
past, the affections of them only remaining behind; the said religious man
asked him again, whether having received such favors, he remembered them
afterward, and whether his soul did allwaies remain in that height, to
which God is wont to raise others for a little time, as is said? he answered
him; that as it is not in man's power to obtain such singular favors of God,
so neither is it in his power to remember or continue them for a long time, and
that he doubted whether there ever had bin any pure creature, except the B.
Virgin, that did allwaies persevere in such an excellent union which God is wont
to give, though in the ordinary kind of union (such as God had given unto him)
one might allwaies continue and profit.

And prosecuting this matter he said further, that unions, revelations,
ecstasies, and rapts were not the top of perfection, nor that it did not consist
in them, though God is often wont to give them, because he works with every
soul according to her capacity, necessity, and disposition, they that are
perfect and well exercised in the act of love, do not require that the senses
should be suspended from their operation, to the end that they may be more
united unto God because the senses are no hindrance to them in their enjoying
God, for he had never had any ecstasy, revelation, or rapt that deprined him of
his senses, the which had never hindered him.

At another time the same man talked with him of some souls which attained to
great peace and ^hward quietness together with a ^assiue union, and, as it were,
enjoying love, which God gave unto them; Gregory answered him that such as
those were good souls and were in a good way, but that perfection and merit is
not so much in those works of enjoying as in that the soul of her part
endeavors with all her might to love God with the perfectest manner and act
that she can; for this is rather to do then to enjoy, and the other is rather
enjoying, then working, because the soul that loves God perfectly, cannot
give him more then she does give him, neither does God require any thing else
of her, for hereof depends all our law and Prophets.

I was once talking with him how gracious in the sight of God certain persons
were who do allwaies employ themselves in praying for the whole Church with a
great zeal of Gods honor and desire of the salvation of souls; he said that
this was a great perfection but such as few had attained unto, and that he had
understood that Mother Isabell de la Natiuidad, a nun of the Monastery of the
Conception in Mexico, now deceased, had obtained it, who as I think for
certain knew by revelation from God, that Gregory Lopes also was wholly given
to this exercise; for in a letter which she writ, she said these words: I am
continually in the office which God has put me in of praying for the whole
Church, as my brother also does; she said this by Gregory, and she was one
free from all falsehood and even from suspicion. Things have bin said in this
Chapter, which in the opinion of those that treat of prayer and spirit, are for
confirmation and testimony of great sanctity, more then miracles; because they
are more infaillible signs of it then miracles.

THE XVII. CHAPTER. Of some other manners of prayer which he used.
NO less wonderful height of perfection and sanctity is proved by other
kinds of prayer, wherein this admirable man (though his continual emploiment
was to exercise that act of lone toward God and his neighbor, and in this
work he used all his strength) employed himself, without diuerting his mind
but rather allwaies increasing the union we spoke of.

When any inward combats presented themselves, he was very willing to fight
them, for the love of God; and after he had overcome, he offerred him in
sacrifice the victory and all the spoils of of that war, and therefore by
reason that he was wont often to overcome, and through the great confidence
which he had in God, he reioiced when he saw whole troops of temptations come
against him, as huntsmen do when they see their pray that they may see it on
their Masters table, and he did not only offer up in sacrifice unto God, the
victories and the spoils of his combats, but also the gifts and strength
wherewith God did enrich and adorn him, making an offering of them unto his God
and giver with a very humble prayer and, acknowledgment, wherein he confessed
him to be the chief good and source of all good, and therefore most worthy, to
whom all things which we have received should be offered, so that Gregory as
soon as he received any favor or gift, presently with a more clear knowledge
and fervent charity directed it to his Lord, without staying on it himself,
because he desired all whatsoever he received, should be his. Such was his
fidelity and love toward God; and in these times he was used to repeat that
sentence of the wise man: you shall find many merciful but a faith, full man
who will find?

He was also wont to offer up unto the Eternal Father the life, Passion and
death of Jesus Christ, his son and our Redeemer. This offering, sometimes he
made for the whole world, othertimes for particular persons, or intentions,
according as he understood that it was the will of God; he made such account of
this Sacrifice or spiritual Mass, that one day talking with me about it, he
told me that God had thousands of priests in the world, who made this offering
spiritually many times in the day and that he did frequent two kinds of
spiritual communions both consisting in ardent desires, the one of receiving
Sacramentally our Savior Christ, the other, of receiving within himself the
Father, the son and and holy Ghost, making himself a living and pure temple of
the Blessed Trinity, and giving it actually entertainment in his heart, where
it might come and allwaies remain.

I asked him one day how he did exercise the love of God and his neighbor; he
answered me, that he only repeated some versicles of David, such as these:
Praise ye our lord all nations, praise ye him all people; All the works of
our lord, bless ye our lord, praise ye him and glorify ye him for ever. Let
all the earth o Lord adore thee and bless thee. Wherewith I remained not only
satisfied, but also well affected to that manner of praving which contains
so much in it.

He was also very careful to pray for our holy Mother the Church, for her
increase, and for the exaltation of our holy Catholic faith throughout all
kindo^es. He did pray very carnestly for those that were in sin, and he said
that this prayer was very pleasing unto God, relating upon this occasion that
which had passed betwixt our Savior and saint Catherine of Siena, who praying
unto him instantly for those that are in mortal sin, heard from his divine
mouth: I entreat thee to pray unto me for them; and he was wont to repeat
those words with much tenderness and commiseration, when there was occasion to
talk of those that are in sin.

To the same purpose he related an exemple, which saint Denis the Areopagite in
his eighth Epistle to Demophilus affirms that he had heard from the mouth of
saint Carpus the Bishop, to whom by reason of his cleanenes and sincerity of
heart God revealed many things; and it was this: the said saint Carpus
understanding for certain that an idolater had perverted a Christian and made
him forsake his faith, was so incensed against both, as that he instantly
besought God to take them away from the face of the earth, not being able to
endure that such wicked men should live upon it, since that they perverted the
way of God; and looking up toward heaven he saw therein Jesus Christ sitting
enuironned with innumerable Angels and saints, then looking down into the
earth as it were by the mouth of a well, he saw hell and its tourments, and in
the very brinke of the well were those two wicked men, whom he had cursed,
staggering and ready to fall, and trembling in pitiful manner, because those
hellish serpents sought to catch hold and pull them in. Carpus was told, that
he would do well to pray for them, that they might be freed from those
grievous pains, but he would not, yea he prayed unto God to let them fall into
that well, and lifting up his eyes again toward heaven, he saw the most
mer^ifull Jesus, who moved with compassion rose up and offered them his hand
that they might es^hape, sent his Angels also to help them, and truning to
Carpus said unto him: oh Carpus I am ready to suffer again for men's sake; see
whether it would like you to be for ever in this hell and live amongst those
serpents, deprived of the sight of God and the company of his Angels and
saints. He made use of such examples to practice himself and teach others the
spirit of Jesus Christ.

He did amorously and earnestly importune God in his prayers to draw unto him
all countries and nations, couerting them, and making them enter into the lap
of the Church, and to reduce the Jews and heretics to the holy Catholic
faith. This he did without eue^ desisting from that act of loueing God which we
spoke of.

The chief scope of his prayer for his neighbors, was that the will of God
might be fullfilled in them on earth as it is in heaven, and he took occasion
from all things to make that prayer. If he heard men say how the king for his
great power and justice was feared and reverenced, and that he enjoyed his
kingdom in peace, he presently turned to God and said: thou art allmighty and
just o Lord, let all fear thee, and reverence thee; and possess o Lord all
this thy kingdom in peace.

When he heard that a father for his goodness was loved by his sons, he
presently said unto God: o Father and fountain of all good, let all thy sons
love thee. When he understood how a gardener endeavored to make all his trees
yield fruit, he presently turned to the Creator of all, saying: let none of
thy creatures be lost, oh Lord, let them yield their fruit in their proper
season. When he heard of great wars and shedding of blood, he lifted up his
heart unto God, saying: your sons and my brethren, whom you command me so much
to love, behold o Father how they behave themselves; and to say in brief, all
the goods and evils of the world were unto him motives of prayer.

Sometimes he told me that he saw in God all whatsoeuet was in the world, as it
were, gathered into one point, without any discourse; the which it might be was
by some great light of contemplation, which he received in certain occasions,
whereby we may gather something of the excellence of his prayer, and how
elevated his soul was and like unto God, since that he had the whole world
abridged in his understanding, and with such particular light reduced to an
unity, that he might offer it unto God.

He desired much that his neighbors should never cease to pray unto God even
in their exterior works; because, as one well experienced, he knew the great
good that it contains, and he was wont to praise the Machabes for that virtue,
who in their greatest battles, as is related in their history, did at the
same time fight with their hands, and pray in their hearts.

He used another manner of praying worthy the learning and imitating, for
whenever he was to speak answer or ask any thing; he first fixed his mind
on God by mental prayer, imploring his divine assistance. To this purpose he
was wo^t to tell that which befell Nehemias with Artaxerzes, as is written in
the second Chapter of the second of Esdras; for this great Monarch asking of
Nehemias his cup bearer, what it was that he desired, the text says; that
before he began to speak he made his prayer unto the God of heaven, whereby he
obtained of the king all whatsoever he asked.

He was much devoted to the Pater noster because it was taught him by our
Savior, and he reaped much profit by it: in most of the Petitio^s he put in
those words. As in heaven so upon earth; as when he said: Hallowed be thy
name, he added: as in heaven, so on earth; for hereby he showed the desire that
he had of Gods glory; and all though many servants of God, to induce men to
good, and draw them to the service of God, do write letters and take in hand
great iourneyes, and do other things, yet Gregory instead of these, when he
desired to help his neighbors and relieve their necessities, had presently
recourse unto God by his prayers, knowing that all good was to proceed from
him; and by this means he wrought admirable effects; and upon this occasion he
would sometimes tell merit is far better negotiating with God then with Men.
But to those that asked him counsel by word or writing, he gave answer
according as he thought was necessary for their good and God his honor, to
whom he gave thanks, because he had personages in his Church that did also
assist their neighbors by such outward means.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER. Of his habitation or mansion in God.
I Have differred as much as I could possible, to write the manner how Gregory
did live in God, because I was allwaies in hope of a greater light from his
divine spirit, that I might be better able to declare a thing of such
importance. This manner was not by ecstasies or rapts, because his union seemed
allwaies unto me, immediate since that his will free form all other affections
tended very strongly only unto God; and this manner of union might be seen by
its great fruits that allwaies remained in him.

This mansion, I think cannot be otherwise termed better then a
tra^sformation into God, because the soul in this estate is wholly besides
herself, and wholly in God, according to that of the Apostle, I live, but now
not I, because Christ lives in me. And thus the matter is, for unto us that
have looked into his life and conversation, he allwaies seemed a pour-trait of
Christ, and therefore we called him, a man truly crucified into the world, for
he only regarded the spiritual life, of which when spiritual persons did
talk with him, he invited them to this transformation saying unto them those
words of S. John: God gave them power to be made sons of God to those that
believe in his name, who now are not borne of flesh and blood nor of the will
of man; but God himself; and I am certain that this transformation of Gregory
into God, was well liked of by all the spiritual men that conuersed with him.

In this transformation, which I call immediate union, there uses to be a
great spiritual joy which is called fruition; because those that are so
transformed, for a long time are rather in joy then pain, because they are
carried by God, without any labor of theirs, to that most happy state; and this
is that which is called the spiritual oil; there they are with God as it were
only passiuely, and I call it so because, allthough it be true that the soul
in that union be allwaies in actio^ yet not so much inseeking after as in
possessing, for she rather exercises the act of possessing and enjoying, then
the act of desiring.

I do not know whether Gregory had this as it were passive vnio^, from the
time that he went into the desert, for God did in such manner communicate
himself unto him, as that he every day desired more, and therefore did not so
much entertain himself in enjoying that which was given him, as with new
desires to see himself every day approach nearer unto God.

S. Denis the Areopagite says, that Hierotheus his Master had the state of
spiritual rest and fruition which we have spoken of and he puts it down
for the highest perfection that is in this life, and all the contemplatiues are
of the same opinion, and this is the only reason, why the surname of Divine was
given to Hierotheus* for this union makes the soul to be the same* with God
and very like the divine nature, the which does not exercise its operations
with pain and toil but joy. I have told upon diverse occasions this so common
opinion unto Gregory, fifteen years before his death; and though he yielded
also to it (for he knew it very well) yet he esteemed it was better for
himself to be in action, and allwaies loving God and his neighbor, laboring
therein both day and night. And therefore he embraced this estate the more
willingly, for he said that God had given him that exercise as being the best,
and that he was to endeavor with all his strength, not to leave it off for any
joy or fruition whatsoever; for he could not conceive, how in this life that
should be most perfect, which had least merit^a^d that enjoying is not of so
much merit as taking of pains is: but I will leave this doctrine for wise men
to determine, and will prosecute my intent.

Gregory his transformation into Christ, which I perceived in him, was an
ardent love and desire to ^ollow him in his life and imitate his labors and
Cross, for it is manifest that the most holy life of our Savior Jesus Christ
was a lively pattern for us all to imitate, in fullfilling the will of his
eternal father, and so he says: I came not to do my will, but my fathers:
and in another place: it be hooueth me to do the work of him that sent me,
while it is day.

It is also well known, that the life of our Savior Christ from his birth
till his death was a continual bearing of the cross of our sins, working
thereby our redemption so as all his life was a suffering of troubles; in these
therefore Gregory desired, and also did imitate Christ; wherefore in his life
there was but little fruition and joy, and much care and trouble, so as it
seems that this want of sensible joys may be esteemed a privilege and
particular gift of God, since that without these favors, his divine Majesty
bestowed upon him that which he is wont to give to others that have them, as
may be seen in the knowledge, wisdom fortitude, perseueance, and all the
other divine gifts where with he was endued. Hereby also it is manifest, that
God directed him in ways proper to men; for his divine Majesty does for the
most part give those joys to his friends in the beginning of their conversion,
when they begin to die to the world and live in God, then he brings them into
his cellar, to give them a taste: then he gives them some light and joy as a
pledge, or earnest of that which is in heaven, to make them walk on with
strength and perseuera^ce; but after they have profited and are grown strong,
he inuiteth them to the highest degree of charity, which is to suffer and die
for their beloved; we have examples of both in the holy Apostles: and whosoever
shall have read with attention that which is above written, will also come to
see, that this exercise of greatest charity, which makes one suffer and die for
his beloved, was the whole life of this holy man, for it was a thing well
known to us all that did converse with him, that this so vehement an exercise
of loving God with all his strength, was the cause of all his weaknesses,
pains and sicknesses, and he perceiving this, went on pining away joyfully for
his beloved. Upon this oceasion, relating sometimes unto me the great pains
which he had endured, he said unto me: the material martyrdom of whipps,
hooks of iron, fire and sword be it never so great, dureth but for a short
time: but besides these, God has in heaven spiritual martirs in a very high
degree. He did tell the lives of many saints worthy of great honor, that
confirm this verity; amongst others he told of Paph^utius the hermit, that as
he was led in chains for being a Christian, and those that led him, threatened
him with great torments unless he would forsake the faith o^ Christ, he laughing
at his torme^tours said unto them: we hermits use to endure these torments in
the desert. But because it is a thing most certain both to me and to others
that knew Gregory, that he did excel in spiritual martyrdom, I will not
speak more hereof considering the joy wherewith he received his death, when
without any fear he beheld it near at hand, yea with far more contentment
then wordly men feel in the midst of their pleasures, honors and pastimes,
saying with the Apostle, to me Christ is life and death again.

Gregory his delight therefore was to suffer for Christ, and his content and
glory was in the cross, saying with S. Paul: Far be it from me to glory in any
thing but in the cross of my Savior. Jesus Christ; and with the Prophet David
who seeing himself so enriched with the benefits and favors which God had
bestowed upon him in his last days, he began to consider it and to say: what
recompense shall I make unto God for all the favors that he has done me? and
fixing his eyes upon all whatsoever he had, he found no other recompense but
only to say: I will take his cup and call upon his name, as if he should say: I
will desire inwardly to drink of the cup of his Passion, the which I see and
know well by the spirit of Prophesy. This therefore was the spirit of Gregory,
in this way God did guide him, this is the doctrine which was taught him by our
Savior Christ, in whose pains and death he found such spiritual delight,
that he never desired any other, as is said; and he was wont to say, that
perfect spiritual men are displeased with those delights which beginners do
willingly embrace, for a man takes as a reproach to be offered a bunch of
grapes or an apple wherewith the child is much taken; he added moreover, that
this present life is no^ for joy and rest, but sorrow and trouble.

Finally this his refusing, even of spiritual delights, proceeded from a
perfect poverty of spirit which was given him by God, whereunto appertains, to
desire nothing but God for his own sake, wherein consists true charity, and
the top of Christian perfection; so as he that loves God most, is most
perfect, be it with those delights or no, for if the cobbler mending his shoes
should love God more then a contemplative man, he would be more perfect in
Christian life then he, notwithstanding the fruition that he has attained.

With this spirit, did Gregory chieflly attend to the increase and purity of
charity, desiring allwaies, in his life and labors to imitate our Savior
Christ, whom he allwaies looked upon as on a good pattern, by which he might
learn how he ought to labor, saying with David: my eyes are allwaies upon our
lord: and to this purpose he was wont wisely to use that sentence: the wise
man's eyes are in his head, meaning that the wise man has his eyes allwaies
upon Christ who is his head; for said he the soul touched with the love of
God, is like the mariners needle, which by reason that it is touched with a
loade-stone, allwaies inclines to the north; and that spiritual men ought to
have this maruailous property, as in what place or business soever they are, to
be allwaies inclined, and desire to have their eyes allwaies fixed on our
Savior Christ.

He took great contentment to see men do so; for once four men, very
spiritual, and great servants of God; being come to visit him and sitting with
him at the table, it so fell out, that they were all bareheaded: he looked
joyfully on them and said: God b^ praised; for that all we that sit a this
table, have our head bare. He spoke spiritually, and his meaning was, that they
were all spiritually looking upon Christ, who is our head, and at that time was
bare unto them all: and by reason of the tokens that we saw, I hold for
certain, that he saw the hearts of those that were present, for, as is said,
God has oftentimes done him that favor, and considering the virtue and good
spirit of those his guests, it may be thought that they were in that
disposition, as to have their eyes upon God. This holy man, as I was allwaies
of opinion, never lost sight of God, and therefore God never went out of sight
from him, according to to that of Job: God will never have his eyes off of the
just man, and by means of this sight, God allwaies preserved him in such
manner from falling into all the nets and snares whatsoever the enemy laid for
him, as that he passed through them freely and safely, as is showed.

THE XIX. CHAPTER. Of the effects of his prayer.
I have allwaies thought, that God has wrought stranges effects through his
prayers; and though he out of his humility never revealed any of those great
effects for he never told me any in that kind though I was so familiary with
him, yet I am certain; that he knew of wonderful things which God had done
by his prayers, of the which I will here relate for the greater glory of God,
some, which I came to know by other means,

In the year 1579. being at our Ladies of Remedies he was visited by a priest,
who was much troubled in mind, because he did not persevere in the service of
God, but fell into great in conueniences through such occasions as offered
themselves. Therefore he instantly besought him to pray for him, and to advise
him what he should do, for assuredly he would do it whatsoever it were,
though it were to go unto a montaine and be an hermit, since that his
salvation was not a business of small importance. Hereunto Gregory answered only
these words: you shall be an hermit in Mexico for this year. He
understanding it as it ought to be understood, endeavored to change his life,
and lived with much profit of his soul. This priest therefore walking through
he streets of Mexico (for he employed himself in works of charity toward
his neighbor) had an inward calling, without reflecting at that time on that
which the holy man had said unto him, yet his calling was conformable
thereunto, which was that he should observe inward recollection, and at the
same instant there was given him, through the divine mercy, such courage and
strength, as that he walked through all the streets and public places,
inwardly recollected and praying, in such sort, as that no business, hinderance
or noise was of force to divert him from that exercise, as if he had bin fifty
years exercised in prayer. He became a new Man, and so different from what he
was, as that at that very instant, he raised his thoughts from the earth, and
fixed them on heaven. He left off all complements and visits (for this it was
that did endamage him) and all his conversation and delight was to be
recollected in mind, and treating with God of his salvation. Then he began to
walk solitary, if charity did not otherwise require; the people were no more
hindrance to him, then if they had bin tres, or craggs of a montaine; he began
to use fastings, disciplines, haire-shirts and God exercised him with greater
temptations, then ever he had in all his life time before, some of them were
inward, others outward, and withal he gave him strength to defend himself, as
if he had bin an old beaten soldier or ancient hermit. He began also to live
in poverty, and, through Gregory his prayers, God framed in him the
heremiticall life so entirely and perfectly, as if he had spent many years in
the desert; and least there should be wanting unto him any of those things
that are wont to happen unto hermites, he was almost all that year tempted
visibly by the devils. The year exprired, he went to talk with Gregory who
was then in Guasteca; he gave him an account of his life, as he had done at
other times at our Ladies of Remedies, and haueing bin eight days in his
company, he said unto him; now the year is past wherein I was to be an hermit,
what must I do from hence forwards, he answered only these words: Love God
and your neighbor, and herewith they parted. The priest therefore taking his
journey toward Mexico and being come to an uninhabited place which is in the
way, began to think upon those words, and because he had studied the tract of
Charity, he thought he knew that already, and herewith he went on with little
mind to that exercise to which new as counseled, but, then remembering himself,
how much good Gregory his former advise had done him, he hegan to humble
himself, and imagine that those words might have some deeper mystery then
that which he understood; he determined to pray for the understanding of them,
and to beseech God to show unto him that which lay hidden under those words,
and not to have regard to his arrogance and pride; and presently he heard God
speak inwardly unto him very distinctly, saying: if thou desire to love God,
thou must strip thy self out of thy self and all whatsoever thou have, and be
dead to all worldly things. He offered himself with all his heart herunto,
that he might receive that favor from the Divine Majesty; presently found in
himself, that nakedness, which God did require, and withal was clothed and
bathed in the ointment of the love of God, which was so great that neither his
understanding was able to comprehend it, nor his heart to receive it, so as he
did even melt away into this great gift. Hereby the priest understood the depth
and perfection of Gregory his counsel, and the efficacy of his prayer. He
endeavored to cleanse his heart, that he might receive that favor, and made
firm purposes to follow the hand and will of God which way soever he was
pleased to lead him. This act of love dured for the space of seven hours, God
showed him the virtues and their beauty, and made him have a trial of them, as
it were even touching and possessing them. There remained with him, after this
favor, a great affection, which was such as that for six years space, he
continued in this same love, being almost allwaies in actual exercise of it,
and practicing those virtues which God had taught him; and even till this day,
which is now more then thirty years, it has bin his prop and staff in all
his tribulations and troubles, perseuering courageously in the way of God. And
he has received many other favors, which I will not here relate, because this
alone is sufficient to show, how pleasing this holy man his prayers were in the
sight of God, even whilst he lived in this exile.

A certain person entreating Gregory very earnestly to undertake to direct him
in the spiritual way, he answered him: go brother for Jesus Christ is your
Master, and he presently found the truth hereof in his soul, and perceived it
in his works, for he began to proceed with such difference in his spirit, as
there is, betwixt seeing, and being blind; afterward God gave him the
knowledge of his own being nothing, and of Jesus Christ his truth so clearly,
that he became another man, acknowledging that this great good had be^alne him
through Gregory his prayers. Since that time he has had many ecstasies and
rapts, whereby his soul has got much humility and strength.

A religious woman of great virtue and spirit, received an inward warning that
a great misfortune would befall her. She was much troubled hereat for the space
of eight months, fearing least that this misfortune were some offense of God,
and therefore she recommended herself to the prayers of all the servants of God.
This religious woman having communicated upon the feast of our Ladies Nativity,
had a particular inspiration whilst she was at her prayers, to entreat Gregory
Lopes, who was then in Santafe, to pray for her. She entreated a gentleman,
that came to visit her, and now is a religious Man, to go and desire him to
recommend her unto God. The holy man receiving the message, answered him: I
will do so, let her trust in God and fear nothing, for she shall not offend
him. Herewith she became as quiet in mind, as if she had bin told so by an
Angel from heaven; and so it fell out as Gregory had said, but this gentleman,
going to Santafe to carry the message, by the way went into the Convent of
saint Dominick of Mexico, to entreat a certain religious man of great sanctity
to pray for this religious woman his ghostly child. The day following the said
religious man being at his prayers, was rapt in spirit, and saw holy Gregory
kneeling in the presence of God and praying for her, and that his divine
Majesty accepted his prayers with much content; and told him that his servant
Gregory was very mindful of her in his prayers. The religious man told this
with great feeling and many tears; and said, that in that vision he came to
know Gregory, for that before he did not know him; the religious woman became
thenceforward much devoted to this holy man, who, at the day of his death,
rerequited her: for she, not knowing of it, had for the space of four days
together, a very special apprehension of God his goodness, and of how much she
was bound unto him, and withal a discovery of the worlds deceit; and she held
as undoubted, that she had received that favor from God by Gregory his means,
for th^n he was in heaven enjoying the sight of God.

There was a priest that was much addicted to this holy man, and followed
altogether his counsel and doctrine in his manner of praying. He having
already received some favors of God took such content in them as only to
enjoy them, he did not take any care to walk any farther in the spiritual
way; Gregory, seeing his manner of proceeding: recited that sentence of Isaias,
thou have found life in thy hands, therefore thou have not asked. Herewith God
did much illuminate him, that so he might walk with more poverty of spirit,
and cast himself into that infinite depth of God, without relying upon his own
ways, nor even upon those favors, wherewith at other times God had drawn him
on; for he endeavored to strip himself wholly, that he might be in more
readiness, upon all occasions, to accomplish the will of God and not to make any
stop in the spiritual way, profiting herewith both himself and others.

A young man very virtuous, and desirous, to do well, went about very much
disquieted in mind, for the space of four or five months, and the greatest
cause of his anguish was, because he did not know, what state of life to make
choice of for his own salvation. He acquainted herewith certain holy and
devout persons, desiring them to pray for him, and perceiving that none of
these means was sufficient to rid him of that unquietness, he remembered himself
of Gregory Lopes, and went to Santafe to visit him, and though he was a young
man otherwise bold enough, yet at the very sight of Gregory, his heart was to
sealed with fear and reverence, as that, allthough Gregory was of an humble
demeanor and in poor attire, he said that he had never seen in his life a
man, that had stricken into him such a reverence, both inwardly and outwardly,
and that it seemed unto him, that he saw in him the countenance of one more
then a man. He entreated him to beseech his divine Majesty to give him light,
that he might choose the estate, wherein he should do him most service; and
Gregory only saying unto him: trouble not your self, for I will recommend you
unto God, his spirit was quieted, and the said trouble never came to him
again, the which he attributed to the holy Man his prayer, and chose the
estate of Priesthood, and died with an esteem of virtue and sanctity; he
affirmed with an oath, that at other times he acquainted Gregory with sundry
temptations that he had, and allwaies returned with great satisfaction and
comfort.

Another person very devout unto Gregory, went unto the place where he was, and
the first night sustained many very grievous temptations, of which he told him
the next morning; and he answered: I did forget my self last night, it shall
not be so hereafter, and the nights following he found himself more at ease and
with more devotion: the which he did hold for certain, befell him through
Gregory his prayers.

THE XX. CHAPTER. Of the respect which he stroke into those that did look upon
him.
IT is a thing worthy of observation, that a poor man solitary and unknown,
clothed only in gray sack cloth, allwaies bareheaded, and in a manner an
outcast should stricke such a respect and reverence into those that looked
upon him, that allthough they were men used to wordly conversation, yet some
should not be able to speak a word unto him: truly virtue and sanctity ought
to be, honored and reverenced, even by those that do not follow it, because
that which is good does all ways seem well, and since that through our sins
it is so rare in the world, no marvel if it cause admiration and fear.

A certain Man of good account and very virtuous, came with a great desire to
see the holy man, and to talk with him about a business of importance, which
did trouble his mind, and made him allwaies Melancholy; and as soon as he
came into his presence, he was so troubled and tongue-tied, that he could not
speak a word; being in this trouble, and Gregory allwaies expecting when he
would declare his necessity unto him, he stood a long time silent, at length
the holy man lifted up his eyes, and for a while looked upon him (peradventure
he was praying for him) and afterward he freed him from that trouble,
answering his doubts and satisfying him in all that he would have asked, if he
had not become dumb; whereat he became more confounded and amassed, perceiving
that he had understood his mind and thoughts by the light of prayer, and going
forth he told this accident to another virtuous man that came with him, and
being asked what was the cause of that his trouble, he answered, it was the
beholding of such a venerable countenance, so great mortification, and so holy
a recollection of mind, and that he departed astonished because he had given such
a particular answer to all that he had in his mind, he not propounding his
business,

There came to see him a young man that was a student^, and before the holy man
spoke ever a word unto him, his mind was possessed with such a fear and
amasement, as that he presently purposed to change his life, and was
afterward a priest of a very retired and exemplar life, and came often to
confer with Gregory, in those five years that he lived.

A certain gentleman's man came unto him with a message, from his Master; and
as soon as he came into his presence, he was surprised with such a fear and
trouble, as that he could not speak; and going forth he said: It is one thing
to speak unto these men of God, and another to speak with men of the world; I
did not think that the sight of any man could have troubled me. Some days
after, coming again with the like message, and haueing delivered it unto me,
I asked him, if he would go in and deliver it himself unto Gregory; he
answered me: no sir, I pray do you tell him, for I dare not.

Another person came from far to visit him in this village of Santafe, and
hearing much commendations of his sanctity, he was afraid to come in his
presence; but being come to see him, he felt such inward joy, as that not being
able to co^ceale it, he told the holy man what had happened unto him, whereunto he
answered: give God thanks for it. This joy lasted two days to the great
profit of his soul, he said that to him it seemed that he, had seen an
Apostle, and that, in that occasion God had given him such a feeling, as that
he could not possibly express it; and he affirmed, that the second time that
he saw him, he found himself inwardly satisfied of his doubts, only by looking
upon him without asking him any thing, for, as is said, God had bestowed this
favor upon Gregory.

What I have here related is not the most admirable that is known of his
works and miraculous life; for it Vere to undertake a thing far above the
ordinary reach of man's wit, to think of finding the height of the gifts,
favors, and riches which God bestowed upon this his servant, whose life might
unto us be instead of a light and pattern to imitate, that so, if it be the
will of God, we might at length find out that place of everlasting peace and
quietness, which we seek after

Amen.

