THE LETTER OF THE FRENCH King, to the Parliament of Roan, concerning the death
of the Marshall D'Ancre.

Together with an Act of the said Parliament thereupon.

COR VNVM VIA VNA
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by H. L. for Nathanael Newbery; and are to be sold at his Shop
under St. Peter's in Cornehill, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1617.

COR VNVM VIA VNA

THE KINGS LETTER sent to the Parliament of Roan.
By the King.
OUR Trusty and Beloved: We doubt not, but that in the sequel of those
proceedings which have passed, since the death of the late King Our most
honored Lord, and Father, you have evidently observed, how Marshall D' Ancre
and his wife, abusing Our minority, and the power which of long time he
possessed with the Queen our most honored Lady and Mother, did practice to
usurp the whole authority of our State, to dispose absolutely of all
affairs, and to remove all means, from our coming to the knowledge or
understanding thereof; A disseigne which they so wrought and effected, that
hitherto We carried but only the bare Name, and title of a King: They
condemning it as a capital crime in any of our Officers or Subjects (when they
did visit us in particular) to entertain us with any serious discourse. Which
God of his infinite bounty giving Us the grace at last to discern, and
pointing out unto Us as it were with his omnipotent finger, the imminent peril
that hung over Our person, and State, through such an insatiable and irregular
ambition; We gave testimony at length of our apprehension in this point, and
of the singular desire We had, to take requisite and due order for the same:
Yet were We enforced in all our exterior actions, to disguise and cover that,
which inwardly in heart We determined and resolved upon, while it might please
the same our good GOD to open Us a fit way, and convenient opportunity, to
apply thereunto some preualent remedy. Upon these intentions, not many days
since, it fell out, that sundry persons, both of Our capital City of Paris, as
also others of diverse parts of Our Kingdom, taking occasion, of the said
Marshall D' Ancre his absence (who was gone into Normandy, with a
deliberation there to soiourne for some time) addressed themselves to the
Queen Our said Lady and Mother, and to such Ministers as the said Marshall and
his wife had established, (who under them, at their will and pleasure, should
carry and sway all proceedings within this State) and effectually laid open
their reasons to them, why it was most necessary and expedient, that We our
self should readily and seriously assume the sole Administration of our
weighty affairs; otherwise, that our Realm which now began to rise and
revolt in all parts by means of this want and defect, could not avoid an
absolute and lamentable subversion.

Whereof Marshall D' Ancre having been advertised, and returning with all
expedition, began to employ his power and policy, not only to stop the course
of these provident propositions and ouertures, as repugnant to his own ends,
but further he resolved to deprive Our self of all means to put them in
practice, by certain counsels and courses, which I think yet more fit to
conceal, than publish. All which being comne to Our perfect understanding and
notice, and considering that besides the danger of Our person, the mortal
hatred that almost all our good subjects and servants did bear toward the
usurped and insolent authority and government of these people, would in such
sort exasperate, and obdurate, the minds of men within Our kingdom, as it
would be in danger to grow to an unquenchable flame and combustion:

Moved I say, by these just, and most weighty considerations, and by the
heavenly instinct, that God upon this occasion put into Our heart: We resolved
to secure Our self of the person of the said Marshall D' Ancre, giving
express charge to Sieur de Vitry Captain of Our Guards, to apprehend and
arrest him within Our Castle of the Louure. The which Our pleasure he
intending to put in execution, the said Marshall (who according to his
accustomed manner, had many followers about him) himself with some other of
his company, made offer to resist: whereupon, certain bullets were discharged;
of which some light on the said Marshall, so as he remained dead upon the
place.

Afterward, We caused his wife to be arrested, and also his above mentioned
Ministers; having furthermore entreated the Queen Our said Lady and Mother,
to be content that from thenceforward, We might take the government of Our
State into Our own hands, and so labor to divert from it those extreamities
and miseries, whereinto it has been plunged, by the sinister counsels which
she formerly had made use of. The accomplishment of which business We hope,
God of his gracious goodness will the more readily grant Us, in that all our
intentions have no other aim or scope, but his glory, and the good of Our
subjects. Which We thought good to advertise you of, to the end you may make it
known through all your precincts; adding to these formerly specified, any
other reasons you shall think fit and convenient, for containing every man
within the bounds of obedience and duty; Taking vigilant care, that none may
rise, or mutine, within Our said territories, and that nothing may disturb the
peace, and quiet, which We desire to have maintained. But if there be any that
have Complaints, or Requests to make, let them be assured, that if they
repair to Us, by those mediations and ways, that subjects ought to use, when
they would petition to their King, they shall always find Us enclining to
whatsoever stands with reason, or justice.

This Action has here been so approved and allowed, that here is nothing but
applause, and every man's benediction upon Us for the same, because We attempted
it in so due and necessary a time: and We hope it will receive no less
approbation in other places. In the mean while, We have writ to all our
Lieutenants, and Generals of our Armies, to keep them still afoot, that if
occasion serve, We may employ them against those, that will not acknowledge Our
sovereign Authority. We will shortly dispatch unto you Letters of
instruction more at large.

Given at Paris, this xxiiii. of April. 1617. Signed: Lewis.
And underneath: Pottier.

The Act of the Court Parliament of Roan, heerevpon ensuing.
THE whole Court, and the several Houses thereof assembled, do most expressly
enjoin and command, conformably to the Kings most excellent Majesty his
will and pleasure, signified in his Letters bearing date the xxiiij. of this
Month; that those of the Garrisons, within the Castles of Pontdelarch, Caen,
and Quillebeuf, do presently make over those places into the hands of those
exempt, now deputed by his Majesty, to establish therein such order, as He has
appointed. And they have, and do prohibit all the Kings subjects, either by
themselves to work or to cause any other to labor in the fortifications of
the said places, or to bring in any victual or munition, upon the utmost pain
and peril of their lives; All the Judges, and Officers of the said places
being hereby enjoined to see this executed, and to advertise the said Court
of their proceeding herein. To which end, we have caused this present Act to
be sent unto them, by the Kings Attorney General, there to be published where
need shall require.

Given at Roan in the said Court of Parliament, the xxvj. of April. 1617.
Signed: De Bois levesque.

A further Advertisement.
KNow also good Reader, that it is credibly reported, that the dead corpse of
the Marshall D' Ancre has undergone the greatest Indignities and Shame, that
can be inflicted, or proceed from the fury of a vulgar multitude, provoked to
hatred by his Tyranny: viz. that being buried obscurely, befitting his
baseness, he was taken up again, and dragged through the streets of Paris
with his face on the ground, unto the gallows: where being disfigured and
dismembered in most shameful manner, he was as shamefully hanged, and his
privy members nayl'd thereunto. But that satisfied not their rage, until they
had taken down his miserable body, and divided it into many parts (burning
some) and dispersing them into diverse places; that so his shame, and their
indignation toward him, might be published into those parts that had felt his
tyrannous insolency in the time of his former greatness and potencie.

And withal, that his Wife being imprisoned, has had her hair shorn off
her head, for some probation and trial of her witchcraft: but the effects of
that are not yet certified.

FINIS.

