A PLEASANT COMMODIE, CALLED Look about you.

As it was lately played by the right honorable the Lord High Admiral his
servant

LONDON, Printed for William Ferbrand, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Crown near Guild Hall gate. 1600.

A pleasant Commodye called Look about you.
Enter Robert Hood a young Nobleman, a servant with him, with ryding wandes in
their hands, as if they had been new lighted. Robert. Go, walk the horses,
wait me on the hill,
This is the Hermits Cell, go out of sight:
My business with him must not be revealed,
To any mortal creature but himself.

Seru. I Will wait your honor in the cross highway. Exit.

Rob. Do so: Hermit devout and reverend,
If drousie age keep not thy stiffened joints,
On thy unrestful bed, or if the hours
Of holy Orizons detayne thee not,
Come forth.

Enter Skinke like an Hermit. Skin. Good morrow son, good morrow, and God
bless thee Huntington,
A brighter Gleame of true Nobility
Shines not in any youth more then in thee.
Thou shall be rich in honor, full of speed,
Thou shall win foes by fear, and friend, by meede.

Rob. Father, I come not now to know my fate,
Important business urges Princely Richard, Deliver letters.
In these terms to salute thy reverent age.
Read and be brief, I know some cause of trust,
Made him employ me for his messenger.

Skin. A cause of trust indeed true honored youth,
Princes had need in matters of import,
To make nice choice fair Earl, if I not err,
Thou art the Princes ward.

To. Father I am his ward, his Chamberlain and bedfellow.


Skin. Fair fall thee honorable Robert Hood,
Wend to Prince Richard, say though I am loath,
To use my skill in Coniuration:
Yet Skinke that poisoned red cheekt Rosamond,
Shall make appearaunce at the Parliament,
He shall be there by noone assure his Grace.

Rob. Good morrow Father, see you fail him not,
For though the villain did a horrible deed,
Yet has the young King Richard, and Earl John,
Sworn to defend him from his greatest foes.

Skin. Gods benizon be with thee noble Earl.


Rob. A dew good father, holla there, my horse? Exit.


Skin. Up, spur the kicking Jade, while I make speed
To Consure Sk^nke out of his Hermits weed;
Lie there religion keep thy M. grave,
And on the fair trust of these Princes word
To Court again Skinke: but before I go,
Let mischief take advise of villainy,
Why to the Hermit letters should be sent,
To poast Skinke to the Court incontinent:
Is there no trick in this? ha let me see?
Or do they know already I am he?
If they do so, faith westward then with Skinke:
But what an ass am I to be thus fond,
Here lies the Hermit whom I dying found
Some two months since, when I was howerly charged
With Hugh the Crier and with Constables,
I saw him in the ready way to heaven,
I helped him forward, it was a holy deed;
And there he lies some six foot in the ground,
Since when, and since, I kept me in his weeds.
O what a world of fools have filled my Cell;
For Fortunes, run-awaies, stolen goods; lost cattle,
Among the number, all the faction
That take the young Kings part against the old;
Come to my self to harken for my self,
So did the adverse party make enquire,
But either fall full of contrary desire:
The old Kings part would kill me being stained,
The young Kings keep me from their violence.
So then thou needst not fear, go boldly on,
Brave Hall, Prince Dicke, and my spruce hot spur John,
Here Is their safe conduct: O but for Rosamond!
A fig for Rosamond, to this hope I Will lean:
At a Queens bidding I did kill a queen.

Sound Trumpets, enter with a Harrald on the one side, Henry the second
Crowned, after him Lancaster, Chester, Sir Richard Faukenbridge: on the other
part, K. Henry the Son crowned, Herrald after him: after him Prince Rich.
John, Leyster, being set, enters santasticall Robert of Gloucester in a gown
girt: walks up and down. Old. K. Why does not Gloucester take his honored seat?


Glo. In faith my Liege Gloucester is in a land
Where neither suerty is to sit or stand.
I only do appear as I am summoned,
And will awaite without till I am called.

Yon. K. Why hear you Gloucester?


Glo. Henry I do hear you.


Yon. K. And why not King?


Glo. What Is he that sits so near you?


Rich. King too.


Glo. Two Kings? ha ha.


Ol. K. Gloucester sit we charge thee.


Glo. I will obey your charge, I will sit down,
But in this house, on no seat but the ground.

John. The seat's too good.


Glo. I know it brother John.


Jo. Thy brother?


Ol. K. Silence there.


Yon. K. Pass to the bills Sir Richard Faukenbridge.


Fau. My Lieges both, old Faukenbridge is proud
Of your right honored charge. He that worst may
Will strain his old eyes, God send peace this day.
A bill for the releasement of the Queen preferred,
By Henry the young King, Rich. the Prince, John Earl
Of Murton, Bohmine Earl of Leister and the commons:

Old K. Did you prefer this byll?


All. We did.


Chest. La^c. Ye did not well.


Glo. Why this is good, now shall we have the hell.
3. Bro Chester and Lanchaster you wrong the King.

Chest. La^. Our King we do not.


Y^n. K. Do not you seem crowned?


La^c. But whilst he lives we to none else are bound.


Ley. Is it not wrong think you, when all the world
Troubled with rumor of a captive Queen,
Imprisoned by her husband in a Realm,
Where her own son does wear a Diadem?
Is like an head of people mutinous.
Still murmuring at the s^^^^e done her and us?
Is It not more wrong when her mother zeal
Sounded through Europe. Affricke, Assia,
Tells in the hollow of news thirsting ears,
Queen Elinor lives in a dungion,
For pity and affection to (...) son:
But when the true cause, Cliffords daughters death
Shall be exposed to stranger nations:
What vollumes will be writ. what lybels spread?
And in each line our state dishonored.

Fauk. My Lord speaks to the purpose, mary it may be so,
Pray God it prove not so.

Ley. Hear me conclude, and there withal conclude,
It is an heinous and unheard of sin:
Queen Elinor daughter to Kingly France,
King Henry's wife and royal Henry's mother,
Is kept close prisoner for an act of Justice,
Committed on an odious Concubine,

Kin. Thou wrongst her Leister.


Le^. Leachers ever praise the cause of their confusion, she was vile


Fa^. She was ill spoken of it is true, true.


Glosr. Yonder sits one would do as much for you
Old fool, young Richard has a gift I know it,
And on your wife my sister would bestow it.
Here Is a good world men hate adulterous sin,
Count it a gulf, and yet they needs will in.

Lei. What answer for the Queen?


Lan. The King replies your words are foul slanderous forgeryes


John. His highness says not so.


L^n. His highness does,
Tells you its a shame for such wild youth,
To smother any impiety,
With show to chastise loose adultery.
Say Rosamond was Henry's Concubine,
Had never King a Concubine but he?
Did Rosamond begin the fires in France?
Made she the Northern borders reeke with flames?
Unpeopled she the towns of Picardy?
Left she the wives of England husbandles?
O no: she sinned I grant, so do we all,
She fell her self, desiring none should fall;
But Elinor whom you so much commend,
Has been the bellows of seditious fire,
Either through Iealious rage or mad desire;
Is It not a shame to think that she has armed
Four Sons right hands, against their fathers head,
And not the children of a low-priz'd wretch,
But one whom God on earth has deified?
See where he sits with sorrow in his eyes,
Three of his Sons and hers tutored by her,
Smiles whilst he weeps, and with a proud disdain,
Embrace blithe mirth, while his sad heart complain.

Fau. Ha laugh they? nay by the rood that is not well,
Now fie young Princes fie.

Hen. Peace doting fool.


John. Be silent ass.


Fau. With all my heart my Lords, my humble leave my Lords
Gods mother ass and fool for speaking truth,
It Is terrible, but fare ye well my Lords.

Rich. Nay stay good Faukenbridge, impute it rage,
That thus abuses your right reverend age,
My brothers are too hot.

Fau. Too hot indeed, fool, ass, for speaking truth? it is more than need.


Rich. Nay good Sir Richard at my kind entreat
For all the love I bear your noble house,
Let not your absence kindle further wrath,
Each side's at counsel now sit down I pray,
I Will quite it with the kindest love I may.

Glo. I to his wife.


Fau. Prince Richard I Will sit down,
But by the faith I owe fair Englands Crown,
Had you not been I would have left the place,
My service merits not so much disgrace.

Ric. Good Faukenbridge I thank thee. Go to their places.


Glo. And you will think of him, if you can step into his bower at Stepney.


Fau. Prince Richard's very kind, I know his kindenes,
He loves me, but he loves my Lady better,
No more, I Will watch him, I Will prevent his game,
Young Lad, it is ill to halt before the lame.

They break asunder. Papers this while being offered and subscribed between
either. Hen. I Will not subscribe to this indignity,
I Will not be called a King but be a King;
Allow me half the Realm, give me the North,
The Provinces that lie beyond the Seas,
Wales and the Isles that compass in the main.

Glo. Nay give him all and he will scant be pleased.


Rich. Brother you ask too much.


John. To much, too little, he shall have that and more, I swear he shall.
I will have Nottingham and Salisbury,
Stafford and Darby, and some other Earldom,
Or by S. John (whose blessed name I bear)
I Will make these places like a wilderness.
Is It not a plague, an horrible abuse,
A King, a King of England should be Father
To four such proper youths, as Hall, and Dicke,
My brother Geffrey and my proper self,
And yet not give his sons such maintenance,
As he consumes among his minions.

Rich. Be more respective John.


Io. Respective Richard, are you turned pure? a changing wether-cocke?
I say it is reason Henry should be King,
Thou Prince, I Duke, as Ieffry is a Duke.

Lan. What shall your Father do?


Jo. Live at his prayers, have a sufficient pention by the year,
Repent his sins because his end is near.

Glo. A gracious son, a very gracious son.


Kin. Will this content you? I that have sat still,
Amazed to see my sons deuoyde of shame;
To hear my subjects with rebellious tongues,
Wound the kind bosom of their Sovereign,
Can no more bear, but from a bleeding heart
Deliver all my love, for all your hate:
Will this content thee cruel Elinor?
Your savage mother, my uncivil Queen;
The Tygresse that has drunk the purple blood,
Of three times twenty thousand valiant men;
Washing her red chaps, in the weeping tears,
Of widows, virgins, nurses, sucking babes.
And lastly sorted with her damned consorts,
Entered alaborinth to murder love.
Will this content you? she shall be releast,
That she may next seize me she most enuyes.

Hen. Our mothers liberty is some content.


Kin. What else would Henry have?


Hen. The Kingdom.


Kin. Peruse this byll, draw near let us confer.


Joh. Hall be not answered but with Sovereignty,
For glorious is the sway of Majesty.

Kin. What would content you John?


Joh. Five Earledomes Sir.


Kin. What you son Richard?


Ric. Pardon gracious father, and th'furtheraunce for my vow of penance
For I have sworn to God and all his Saints,
These arms erected in rebellious brawles,
Against my Father and my Sovereign,
Shall fight the battles of the Lord of hoasts,
In wronged Judea and Palestina,
That shall be Richards penance for his pride,
His blood a satisfaction for his sin,
His patrimony men, munition,
And means to waft them into Siria.

Kin. Thou shall have thy desire Heroyicke Son,
As soon as other homebred brawles are done.

Lan. Why weeps old Faukenbridge?


Fau. I am almost blind, to hear sons cruel, and the fathers kind,
Now well a near that ere I lived to see,
Such patience and so much impiety.

Glo. Brother content thee this is but the first,
Worse is a brewing, and yet not the worst.

Le^. You shall not stand to this.


Hen. And why my Lord?


Ley. The lands of Moorton does belong to John.


Hen. What Is that to me, by Act of Parliament,
If they be mine confirmed, he must be pleased.

Ioh. Be pleased King puppet? have I stood for thee,
Even in the mouth of death? opened my arms
To sercle in seditious ugly shape?
Shook hands with duty, bad adieu to virtue,
Profaned all Majesty in heaven and earth;
Writ in black Carracters on my white brow,
The name of rebel John against his Father:
For thee, for thee, thou Otimie of honor,
Thou worm of Majesty thou froth, thou puble.
And must I now be pleased in pease to stand,
While statutes make thee owner of my land?

Glo. Good pastime good, now will the thieves fall out?


Joh O if I do, let me be never held
Royal King Henryes son pardon me father,
Pull down this rebel that has done thee wrong.
Dicke, come and leave his side, assail him Lords,
Let Us have no parley but with bills and swoordes.

Ki. Peace John, lay down thy arms, hear Henry speak,
He minds thee no such wrong.

Io. He were not best.


Hen. Why hayre-brain'd brother can ye brook no jest?
I do confirm you Earl of Nottingham.

Io. And Moorton too?


Hen. I and Moorton too.


Io. Why so, now once more I Will sit down by you.


Glo. Blow wind, the youngest of King Henry's stock,
Would fitly serve to make a weather-cocke.

Io. Gape earth, challenge thine own as Gloucester lies,
Pity such mucke is covered with the skies.

Fau. Be quiet good my Lords, the Kings command
You should be quiet, and it is very mere,
It Is most convenient, how say you Prince Richard?

Rich. It is indeed.


Fa. Why that is wisely said, you are a very kind indifferent man,
Mary a God and by my hollidame,
Were not I had a feeling in my head,
Of some suspicion twixt my wife and him,
I should affect him more then all the world.

Glo. Take heed old Richard, keep thee there mad lad,
My Sister's fair, and beauty may turn bad.

Enter Robert Hood a paper in his hand. Officer. Room there, make room for
young Huntington.


Fau. A gallant youth, a proper Gentleman.


Hen. Richard I have had wrong about his wardship.


Ric. You cannot right your self.


Jo. He can and shall.


Ric. Not with your help but honorable youth
Have ye performed the business I enioyn'd?

Rob. I have, and Skinke is come, here is his bill,


Hen. No matter for his bill let him come in.


Kin. Let him not enter, his infectious breath
Will poison the assembly.

Gl. Never doubt, there is more infectious breaths about your Throne,
Leyster is there, your envious Sons is there;
If them you can endure, no poison fear.

Kin Content thee Gloucester.


Glo. I must be content, when you that should mend all are patient,


Hen. Welcome good Skinke thou justly do complain,
Thou standst in dread of death for Rosamond,
Whom thou did poison at our dread command,
And the appointment of our gracious Mother;
See here my Fathers hand unto thy pardon.

Skin. I receive it graciously, wishing his soul sweet peace, in heaven for so
meritorious a work, for I fear me I have not his heart though his hand.


Kin. Be sure thou have not, murderous bloud-sucker,
To iealious envy executioner.

Hen. Besides thou suest to have some maintenance,
We have bethought us how we will reward thee,
Thou shall have Rowden Lordship.

Glost. Shall he so? will you reward your murderers with my lands


Hen. Your lands? it is our gift and he shall have it.


Glo. I Will give him seasure first with this and this. Strike him.


John. Lay hold on Gloucester.


Kin. Hold that murtherous Skinke.


Glo. Villains hands off, I am a Prince, a Peer,
And I have borne disgrace while I can bear.

Fau Knaves leave your rudenes, how now brother
Gloucester? nay be appeased, be patient brother.

Rich. Shift for thy self good Skinke, there is gold, away:
Here will be parts.

Skin. Swonds I Will make one and stay.


Joh. I prithee be gone since thus it fails out,
Take water, hence, away, thy life I doubt.

Ski. Well, farewell, get I once out of door,
Skinke never will put trust in warrants more. Exit.

Kin. Will Gloucester not be bridled?


Glo. Yes my Liege and sadled too, and ryd, and spurred, and rayn'd,
Such misery (in your Reign) falls your friends,
Let go my arms, you dunghyls let me speak.

Kin. Where Is that knave Skinke? I charge you see him stayed.


Fauk. The swift heel'd knave is fled, body a me here is rule,
Here Is work indeed.

Kin. Follow that Skinke, let privy search be made,
Let not one pass except he be well known,
Let poastes be every way sent speedily,
For ten miles compass round about the City.

Hen. Take Gloucester to you Liefetenant of the Tower,
Keep him aside till we confer a while,
Father you must subscribe to his committing.

Lan. Why must he Henry?


Ley. Mary for this cause, he has broke peace and violated laws.


Glo. So have you all done, rebels as you be.


Fau. Good words good brother, hear me gracious Lords,


Hen. I prithee Faukenbridge be patient,
Gloucester must of force answer this contempt.

Kin. I will not yield he shall unto the Tower,
Warden of th'Fleete take you the charge of Gloucester.

Hen. Why be it so, yet stay with him a while,
Till we take order for the company
That shall attend him, and resort to him.

Glo. Warden of the Fleet I see I am your charge,
Be friend me thus, least by their command,
I be prevented of what I intend.

Keep. Command me any service in my power.


Glo. I pray you call some nimble footed fellow,
To do a message for me to my sister.

Keep. Call in Redcap, he waits with a Tipstaffe, Exit one for him.
He stammers, but he is swift and trusly Sir.

Enter Redcap. Glo. No matter for his stammering, is this he?


Red. I Iam am Re Redcap s s sir.


Glo. Run Redcap to Stepney.


Red. I Will be at Stepney p p presently.


Glo. Nay stay, go to the Lady Faukenbridge my sister.


Red. The La La Lady Fau Fau Faukenbreech, I r r run sir.


Glo. But take thy errand, tell her I am prisoner,
Committed to the Fleet.

Red. I am g g glad of th th that, my fa fa father the p p porter sha shall ge
ge get a f f fee by you. Still runs.


Glo. Stand still a while, desire her to make means
Unto Prince Richard for my liberty,
At thy return (make speed) I will reward thee.

Red. I am g g gone si sir.


Rich. Commend me to her gentle Huntington,
Tell her in these affairs I Will stand her friend,
Her brother shall not long be prisoner:
Say I will visit her immediately.
Be gone sweet boy to Marian Faukenbridge,
Thou look like love persuade her to be loving.

To. So far as honor will I will persuade,
I Will lay loves battery to her modest ears,
Second my mild assault, you may chance win,
Fare parley at the least, may hap pass in. Exit.

Hen Here take your charge, let no man speak with him,
Except our self, our brethren, or Earl Leicester.

Fau. Not I my Lord, may not I speak with him?


Hen. Yes Faukenbridge thou shall.


Jo. And why? he is his wives brother.


Fau. Earl John, although I be, I am true unto the State, and so is he.


Glo. What, shall I have no servant of my own?


Hen. No but the household servants of the Fleet.


Glo. I thank you kinsman King, your father knows,
Gloucester may boldly give a base slave blows.

Fau. O but not here, it was not well done here.


Kin. Farewell good Gloucester, you shall hear from us.


Glo. Even what your Sons will suffer you to send;
Is It not a misery to see you stand,
That some time was, the Monarch of this land,
Entreating traitors for a subjects freedom?

Lei. Let him not speak, away with him to prison.


Glo. Here Is like to be a well stayed common wealth,
Where in proud Leister, and licentious John,
Are pillars for the King to lean upon.

Io. We Will hear your railing Lecture in the Fleet.


Hen. On our displeasure see he speak no more.


Glo. On thy displeasure, well ye have me here;
O that I were within my Fort of Bungye
Whose walls are washed with the clear streams of Aueney
Then would not Gloucester pass a halfe-penny,
For all these rebels, and their poor King too.
Laughst thou King Henry? thou knows my words are true,
God help thee good old man, adieu adieu.

Io. That Castle shall be mine, where stands it Faukenbridge


Fau. Far from your reach sure, under Feckhill ridge,
Five hundred men (England has few such wight)
Keeps it for Glosters use both day and night:
But you may easily win it, wantons words
Quickly can master men, tongues out brawle swords.

Io. Ye are an Idyot.


Rich. I prithee John forbear.


Joh. What shall old winter with his frosty iestes,
Cross flowery pleasure?

Fau. I and nip you too, God mary mother I would tickle you
Were there no more in place but I and you.

Kin. Sease these contentions, forward to the Tower,
Release Queen Elinor, and leave me there
Your prisoner I am sure, if ye had power,
There Is nothing lets you but the Commons fear:
Keep your State Lords, we will by water go,
Making the fresh Thames, salt with tears of woe.

Hen. And we will by land through the City ride,
Making the people tremble at our pride. Exeunt with Trumpets two ways.

Enter Skinkesolus Skin. Black Heath quoth he, and I were King of all Kent,
I would give it for a commodity of Apron-strings, to
Be in my cottage again. Princes warrants, mary Skinke
Finds them as sure as an obligation sealed with butter.
At Kings Bridge I durst not enter a boat, through
London the stones were fiery, I have had a good
Cool way through the fields, and in the high way
To Ratcliffe stands a heater: Mile-end's covered with
Who goes there. It Is for me sure; O Kent, O Kent,
I would give my part of all Christendom to feel
Thee as I see thee. If I go forward I am stayed,
If I go backward, there is a roge in a red cap, he is run
From S. Iohnes after me: I were best stay here,
Least if he come with hue and cry, he stop me yonder,
I would slip the collar for fear of the halter;
But here comes my runner, and if he run for me,
His race dies, he is as sure dead, as if a Parliament
Of Devils had decreed it.

Enter Redcap. Red. Ste Ste Stepney chi church yonder, but I have forgot
The La La Lady Fau Fau Fau plague on her,
I mu must b back to the Fle Fle Fleet to kn kn know it.
The la the la la Lady Fau, plague on it; G Gloucester
Will gone near to st stab me, fo for forgetting
My errand, he is such a ma ma mad Lord, the
La Lady Fau Fau Fau.

Skin. Help me devise, upon my life this fool is sent
From Gloucester to his sister Marian.

Redc. Im must nee needs go back, the La Lady
Fau Fau Fau.

Skin. God speed good fellow.


Red. Go go god sp sp speed you sir.


Skin. Why run'st thou from me?


Red. Ma mary sir, I have lo lost a La Ladies name, and I am running ba back
to se se seek it.


Skin. What Lady? I prithee stay.


Red. Why the la Lady Fau Fau Fau.


Skin. Faukenbridge?


Red. I the s s same, f f farewell, I th th thank you ha heartily


Skin. If thou would speak with her she is in Kent,
I serve her, what is thy business with my Lady?

Red. I sh sh should do an errand to her f f from my Lord
Of Gloucester, but a a and she be in k Kent, I Will s send it by you.

Skin. Where is my Lord?


Red. Mary p p prisoner in the Fl Fleet, a a and w would have her speak to P
Prince R Richard for his re re release.


Skin. I have much business, hold there is thy fare by water, my Lady lies this
night.


Red. Wh wh where I pray?


Skin. At Grauesend at the Angel.


Red. It Is deuillish co co cold going by water.


Skin. Why there is my cloak and hat to keep thee warm,
Thy cap and Ierkin will serve me to ride in
By the way, thou have wind and ty de, take Oars.
My Lady will reward thee royally.

Red G God a mercy, f fa faith and euerth thou co co come to the Fl Fl Fleet,
I Will give the tu tu turning of the ke key f for n no nothing.


Skin. Hye thee, to morrow morning at Graues-end I Will wash thy stammering
throat with a mug of ale merrily.


Red. God be w with you till s so soon; what call you the Lady? O now I re
remember the La Lady Fa Faukenbridge at what s sign?


Skin. At the Angel.


Red. A Angel, the la la Lady fa fa Fau kenbridge, Fa Fau Faukenbridge.


Skin. Farewell and be hanged good stammering ninny, I think I have set your
Redcaps heels a running, would your Pyanet chattering humor could as sa safely
se set me fr from the searchers walks. Yonder comes some one, hem: Skink to
your tricks this tytty tytty, a the tongue I believe will fail me.


Enter Constable and Watch. Con. Come make up to this fellow, let the other go,
he seems a gentleman, what are you sir?


Skin. Would I had kept my own suit, if the countenance carry it away.


Con. Stand sir, what are you?


Skin. The po po Porters Son of the FFl Fleet, going to Stepney about
business to the La La Lady Fa Fa Faukenbridge.


Con. Well bring him thither, some two or three of ye honest neyghbors, and so
back to the Fleet, we'll show our selves dilligent above other Officers.


Skin. Wh wh why le le let me run I am Re Redcap.


Con. Well, sure you shall now run no faster then I lead you, hear ye
neighbor Simmes, I leave my staff with ye, be vigilent I pray you, search
the suspicious houses at the towns end, this Skink's a trouncer; come, will
you be gone sir?


Skin. Yes sir, and the devil go with you and them,
Well, yet have hope mad ha heart, co co come your way.

Exeunt. Enters Robin hood and Block. Blo. Sweet nobility in reuersion,
Block by the commission of his head, Coniures you and withal binds you, by
all the tricks that pages pass in time of Parliament, as swearing to the
pantable, crowning with Custords, paper whiffes to the sleepers noses, cutting
of tagges, stealing of torches, cum multis aliis tell Block, what Block you
have cast in the way of my Ladies content.


To. Block by the antiqiuity of your ancestrie, I have given your Lady not so
much as the least cause of dislike, if she be despleased at any news I bring,
it is more then I must blab.


Blo. Zounds these pages be so proud, they care not for an old Seruingman,
you are a ward and so, an Earl, and no more: you disquiet our house that is the
most: and I may be even with thee that is the least.


Enter the Lady Faukenbridge. La. What Block, what Block I say what do you
there?


Bloc. Making the young Lord merry Maddame,


La. Go attend ye gate, see if you can let in more grief thereat,


Blo Zounds and grief come in there, and I see him once I Will Conjure his
gaberdine.


La. will you be gone sir?


Blo. Hem, these women, these women, and she be not in love either with Prince
Richard or this lad, let blocks head be made a chopping block. Exit Block.


Rob. Fair Madam, what replye you to my suit,
The prince excepts smiles, welcomes, loving looks,

La. The Prince, if he give heed to Marrians suit,
Must hear heart-sigh's, see sorrow in my eyes,
And find cold welcome to calamities,

Rob. And why for gods sake?


La. Even for Glosters sake,


Rob. why by mine honor, and Prince Richards faith,
Your brother Gloucester shall have liberty,
Upon condition you release a prisoner
That you have long held in captiuitye.

La. I have no prisoner,


To. Yes a world of eyes, your beuty in a willing bondage ties


La. Go to, you are disposed to jest my Lord,


Rob. In earnest I must be an earnest suter
To you for love, yet you must be my tuter.

La. Are you in love?


Rob. I dearly love Prince Richard.


La. Then do you love the loueliest man alive.
The Princeliest person of King Henry's sons,

Rob. I like this well.


La. he is virtuous in his mind his body fair,
His deeds are Just, his speeches debonaire,

Rob. Better and better still.


La. In deed he is what no body can deny.
All lovely, beauty all, all Majesty.

Rob. I Will tell his excelence what you report,
No doubt he will be very thankful, for it,

La. Nay hear you young Lord? Gods pity stay.


Rob. What have you more in Richards praise to say?


La. I have said to much if you misconster me.
Duty bids praise him, not unchastity.

Rob. Unchastity holy heavens forfend it,
That he or I, or you should once intend it,

Enter Block and Richard. Blo. They are there sir, close at it, I leave you
sir, the more Room the less company.


Ric Drink that, farewell,


Blo. If that sir Richard comes, this ties, this binds,
O gold, thy power conuerteth servants minds. Exit.

Rich. How now fair Maddam who has angered you?


La. Grief at my brothers duraunce angers me.


Rich. I had thought my Ward young Huntington had vexed you


La. who he? alas good Gentleman he wronged me not.
No matter for all this, I Will tell your tale.

A noise within, Enter Skinke, Block, Constable. Bls. Sir there comes no more
of you in with him then the Constable. Zounds hears a beadroll of Bills at
the gate indeed, back ye base


La. Now sir what is the matter?


Blo. Marry hears a stammerer taken clipping the Kings English, and the
Constable and his watch has brought him to you to be examined.


Consta. No Madam we are commanded by the King to watch, and meeting this
fellow at Mile-end, he tells us, he is the Porters son of the Fleet, that the
Earl of Gloucester sent him to you.


Skin. If forsooth h he desire you to speak to the p Prince for him.


La. O I conceive thee, bid him blithly fare,
Bear him this Ring in token of my care.

Skin. If I be rid of this evil Angel that haunts me, many rings, much
Fleet will Skinke come unto.


Con. Madam, if you know this fellow we'll discharge him.


Bloc. Madam, and you be wise, trust your honest neighbors here, let them
bring this ca ca ca ca to the Fleet, and s see your ring delivered.


Skin. A plague upon you for a damned roge,
The Porter of the Fleet will surely know me.

La. Good neighbors bring this honest fellow thither,
There Is for his pains a crown if he say true,
And for your labor there is as much for you.

Skin. Why Ma Ma Madam, I am Re Re Redcap the Porters son.


La. Thou have no wrong in this, farewell good fellow.


Skin. Best speaking to Prince Richard? no I Will try
And face out Redcap if the slave were by.

La. Make them drink Block.


Blo. Come to the Buttery bar, stitty stitty stammerer, come honest Constable,
hey the watch of our town, we'll drink trylill I says.


As they go out, enters Sir Richard Faukenbridge stealing forward, Prince and
Lady talking. Rob. Lupus in fabula my Noble Lord,
See the old fox Sir Richard Faukenbridge.

Rich. We'll fit him well enough, second us Robin.


La. I Will fit you well enough for all your hope, Fau. beckens to Block.


Fau. Leave quaffing sir, listen to their talk.


Bloc. O while you live beware, two are sooner seen then one: besides, bear a
brain Master, if Block should be now spide, my Madam would not trust this
sconce neither in time nor tide.


Fau. Well leave me, now it buds; see see, they kiss.


Bloc. Adieu good old sinner, you may recover it with a fallet of parsley, and
the herb patience, if not sir you know the worst, it is but even this.


Rich. Madam, what you desire I not deny,
But promise Glosters life and liberty,
I beg but love.

Fau. When does she give her alms?


La. Fair honorable Prince.


Fau. Nay then they speed.


La. My soul has your deserts in good esteem.


Fau. Witness these goodly times that grace my head.


La. But were you the sole Monarch of the earth,
Your power were insufficient to invade,
My never yielding heart of chastity.

Fauk. Say thou so Mall, I promise thee for this,
I Will owe thy cherry lips an old man's kiss;
Look how my Cockerill droopes, it is no matter,
I like it best when women will not flatter.

Rich. Nay but sweet Lady.


Rob. Nay but gracious Lord, do not so much forget your Princely worth,
As to attempt virtue to unchastity.

Fau. O noble youth!


Rob. Let not the Ladies dead grief for her brother,
Give life to shameless and detested sin.

Fau. Sweet child.


To. Consider that she is of high decent.


Fau. Most virtuous Earl.


Rob. Wife to the noblest Knight that ever breathed.


Fau. Now blessing on thee blessed Huntington.


Rob. And would you then first stain your Princely stock,
Wrong beauty, virtue, honor, chastitye,
And blemmish Faukenbridges vntaynted arms?

Fau. By adding horns unto our Falcones head,
Well thought on noble youth, it was well put in.

La. Besides my gracious Lord.


Fa. Tickle him Mall, plague him on that side for his hot desire.


La. howeuer secretly great Princes sin,


Fau. Oh now the spring she will do it sercretly.


La. The King of all hearts will have all syns known.


Fa. Ah then she yields not.


Ric. Lady here is my hand, I did but try your honorable faith


Fau. He did but try her, would she have bin tried
It had groan hard on this and on this side.

Rich. And since I see your virtue so confirmed,
as vice can have no entrance in your heart,
I vow in sight of heaven never again,
To move like question but for love,

Fau. My heart is eased, hold Block take up my cloak.


Blo. And your cap to sir.


Ric. Sir Richard?


Fau. What sweet Prince welcome in faith,
I see youth quickly get's the starte of age;
But welcome welcome and young Huntington.
Sweet Robyn hude, honors best flowring bloome,
Welcome to Faukenbridge with all my heart,
How cheares my love, how fares my Marrian, ha?
Be merry chucke, and Prince Richard welcome,
Let it go Mall I know thy greuances.
Away away, tut let it pass sweet girl,
We needs must have his help about the Earl.

La. Let it not be delayed dear Faukenbridge.


Rich. Sir Richard, first make suit unto my father,
I Will follow you to Court and second you,

Fau. Follow to Court, ha? then I smell a rat,
Its probable he will have about again,
Long seige makes entrance to the strongest fort,
It must not be I must not leave him here,
Prince Richard, if you love my brothers good,
Lets ride back to the Court, I Will wait on you,

Rich. He Is Ielious, but I must observe the time,
We'll ride unto the Court, I Will leave my boy
Till we return, are you agreed to this?

Fau. Oh I he is an honorable youth,
Vertuuos and modest, Huntingtons right heir,
His father Gilbert was the smoothst faced Lord
That ere bare Arms in England or in France,

Rich. Solicitie Robin, Lady give good ear,
And of your brothers freedom never fear,

Fau. Marrian farewell, where is Block? open the gate,
Come Prince God send us to prove fortunate? Exeunt.

La. why do you stay sir?


Rob. Madam as a Lidger to solicit for your absent love


La. Walk in the Garden I will follow you.
I faith I faith you are a noble wagge.

Rob. An honorable wag, and wagish Earl.
Even what you will sweet Lady I must bear,
Hoping of patience, profit will ensue.
That you will bear the Prince as I bear you.

La. Well said well said, I Will have these toys amended,
Go, will you walk into the Garden sir,

Rob. But will you promise me to bring no maids,
To set upon my little manship there?
You threatened whipping, and I am in fear,

La. Upon my word I Will bring none but my self,


Rob. You see I am weapned, do not I beseech you,
I Will stab them come there twenty ere they breech me. Exit.

La. This youth and Richard, think me easily won,
But Marrian rather will embrace,
The bony carcass of dismaying death,
Than prove unchaste to Noble Faukenbridge,
Richard's king Henry's son, is light,
Wanton and loves not humble modesty,
Which makes me (much contrary to my thoughts)
Flatter his humor for my brothers safetye,
But I protest I Will dwell among the dead,
Ere I pollute my sacred nuptial bed. Exit.

Enter Gloucester in his gown, calling Glo. Porter what Porter where is this
drowsy ass?


Enter Porter, Por. Who calls? my Lord of Gloucester all alone?


Glo. Alone and have your wisdoms company,
Pray where is the stammering chatterer your son?
He Is ever running but he makes small haste,
I Will bring his lyther legs in better frame,
And if he serve me thus a another time. Knock within.
Hark sir your clients knock, and't be your pie,
Let him vouchsafe to chatter us some news.
Tell him we dance attendance in our chamber. Exit porter.
This John and Henry are so full of hate,
That they will have my head by some device,
Gloucester has plotted means for an escape,
And if it fadge, why so; if not, then well,
The way to heaven is death, this life's a hell.

Enter Porter and Skink. Port. Why should the Watchmen come along with thee?

Skin. There Is such a que question for yon s same r rogue Skink p plague keep
far enough from him, that a an honest f fellow ca cannot w w walk the
streets.


Port. Well sir dispatch your business with the Earl,
He Is angry at your stay I tell ye that. Exit.

Skin. God's Blood what a frown this Gloucester castes at me,
I hope he means to lend me no more cuffes,
Such as he paid me at the Parliament.

Glo. What mutter you, what tidings from my sister?

Ski. Co commendations and s she has s sent ye this r ring.

Glo. Hold there is two Angels, shut the chamber door,
You must about some business for me straight;
Come nearer man,

Skin. I fear I am to near,

Glo. Have thou no tidings for my liberty?

Skin. No b but ye sh shall he hear f from her p p presently.

Glo. And p presently sir off with your coat.
Nay quick, uncase, I am bold to borrow it,
I Will leave my gown, change is no robbery.
Stutterer it is so, near flinch, ye cannot pass,
Cry, and by heaven I Will cut thy cowards throat,
Quickly cashyre your self, you see me stay,

Skin. N n nay, b b but wh wh what m mean ye?

Glo. To escape I hope, sir with your privilege,
How now, who is this, my fine familliar Skinke?
Queen Beldams minnion,

Skin. Zounds you see it is I.

Glo. Time sorts not now to know these mysteries.
How thou camst by this ring, or stol'st this coat,
They are mine now in possession, for which kindenes
If I escape I Will get thee Liberty,
Or fire the fleet about the Wardens ears,
Mum budgit not a word as thou love thy life,

Skin. I mum mum fair, pray God may chance it,
My Lord, but that my state is desperate,
I Would see your eyes out ear I would be cheated.

Glo. Walk like an Earl villain some are coming.

Enter John and Porter. Io. Where is this Gloucester?

Glo. Y y yonder he walks. Fa fa father, I let me out.

Port. Why whether must you now?


Glo. To Ie Jericho I th think, it is such a h h humorous Earl.


Port. Well sir wilt please you hasten home again.


Glo. I I Will be h hear in a trice; b but p pray have ca care of th this
madcap, if he g give us the s s slip, s s some of us a are like to m make a sl
sl slyppery occupation on it.


This while John walks and stalks by Skinke, never a word between them. Port.
Look to your business sir let me alone.


Glo. Alone? never trust me if I trouble thee.


Io. Mad Gloucester mute, all mirth turned to despair?
Why now you see what it is to cross a King,
Deal against Princes of the Royal blood,
You Will snarle and rail, but now your tongue is bedry'd,
Come caper hay, set all at six and seven,
What musest thou with thought of hell or heaven?

Skin. Of neither John I muse at my disgrace,
That I am thus kept prisoner in this place.

Io. O sir, a number are here prisoners,
My Cosen Moorton whom I came to visit,
But he good man is at his morrow mass,
But I that neither care to say nor sing,
Come to seek that preaching hate and prayer,
And while they mumble up their Orisons,
We'll play a game at bowls, what say thou Gloucester?

Skin. I care not if I do,


Joh. You do not care, Let old men care for graves, we for our sportes,
Off with your gown, there hes my hatt and Cloak,
The bowls there quickly, he?

Skin. No my gown stirs not, it keeps sorrow warm,
And she, and I am not to be deuorced,

Enter Porter with bowls. Jo. Yes there is an axe must part your head and you,
And with your head, sorrow will leave your heart.
But come shall I begin? a pound a game,

Skin. More pounds and we thus heavy? well begin.


Ioh. Rub rub rub rub.


Skin. Amen God send it short enough, and me
A safe running with them clothes from thee.

Ioh. Play Robin, run run run.


Skin. Far enough and well, fly one foot more,
Would I were half so far without the door.

Enter Porter. Ioh. Now Porter what is the news?


Por. Your Coossen Moorton humbly craves,
Leaving your game, you would come visit him,

Io. Bowl Gloucester I Will come presently.
So near mad Robin? then have after you,

Skin. Would I were gone, make after as you may,


Io. Well sir it is yours, one all, throw but the Jack
While I go talk with Moorton: I Will not stay,
Keep Cloak and hat in pawn I Will hold out play,

Skin. I would be sorry John but you should stay,
Until my bias run another way,
Now pass, and hey pass, Skink unto your tricks,
It Is but a chance at hazard: there lies Gloucester,
and hear stands Skinke, now John play thou thy part,
And if I escape I Will love thee with my heart.
So porter let me forth.

Enter Porter. Po. God bless your grace, ye spoke with the L. Moorton.


Skin. I have and must about his business to the Court.
It greeues me to break my sport with Gloucester,
The melancholy Earl is comfortless,

Po. I would your grace would comfort him from hence,
The Fleet is weary of his company, Redcap knocks.

Skin. Drink that, some knockes, I prithee let me cut,
His head shall off ere long, never make doubt. Exeunt.

Enter John at the other door. Jo. Now madcap thou winstall; where art thou
Robyn?
Uncased: nay then he means to play in earnest.
But whers my Cloak, my rapier, and my hatt?
I hold my birthright to a beggars scrip,
The basterd is escaped in my clothes.
It Is well, he left me his to walk the streets,
I Will fire the City but I Will find him out,
Perchance he hides himself to try my spleen,
I Will to his chamber, Gloucester? hallo Gloucester? Ex^^

Enter Porter and Redcap. Por. I wonder how thou camst so strangly changed?
It Is not an hour since thou wents from hence,

Red. By my Ch Ch Christendom I ha have not b b been h here this three
nights, a p p plage of him, that made me such a ch chaunting, and s sent me
such a Ia Ia Iaunt, blud I was st stayed for Skinke, that ill fa fa faced rogue.


Port. I pray God there be no practice in this change.
Now I remember these are Skinkes clothes,
That he wore last day, at the Parliament,

Knock, Enter at another door, John in Glosters gown. Io. Porter? you Porter?


Por. Do you not hear them knock, you must stay sir,


Io. Blood I could eat these rogues.


Red. Wh wh what raw, it is a very ha^sh mo morsel,
Ne next your he heart

Io. A plague upon your Iaunts, what porter slave?


Red. I have been at g grauesend sir.


Ioh. What Is that to me?


Red. And at Ca Ca Canterbury.


Io. And at the gallows: zounds this frets my soul.


Red. But I c could not f find your s s sister the La Lady Fau Faukenbridge.


Jo. You stammering slave hence, chat among your Dawes,
Come ye to mad me? while the rogue your father.

Enter Porter. Red. My f fa father.


Io. Porter? you damned slave.


Port. Is It Midsomer do you begin to rave?


Ioh. Hark how the traitor flouts me to my teeth.
I would entreat your knaueship let me forth,
For fear I dash your branes out with the keys,
What is become of Gloucester and my garments?

Por. Alas in your apparel Glosters gone,
I let him out, even now I am undone,

Joh. It was your practice, and to keep me back
You sent Jack Daw your son with ca ca ca,
To tell a sleueles tale: lay hold on him,
To Newgate with him and you tut atut,
Run red cap and trudge about,
Or bid your fathers portership farewell. Exeunt with Porter.

Red. He hears a go good Ie Ie Jest by the L Lord to mo mock an ape withal:
my fa fa father has brought his ho ho hoges to a fa fa fair m m m^^ket. Po po
porter quoth you? p po porter that will for me, and I po po porter it, let them
po po post me to heaven in this qua quarter. But I must s s seek this Gl Gl
Gloucester and Sk Sk Skinke that co cony catching ra ra rascal, a pa pa plauge co
co confound him, Re re redcap must ru run he cannot tell when whether. Exit


Sound Trumpets, Enter Henry the younger, one one hand of him Queen Elinor, on
the other Leycester. Hen. Mother and ^^ycester add not oil to fire.
Wrath's kindled with a word, and cannot hear
The number less persuasions you infort,

Quce. O but my son thy father favors him.
Richard that vile abortiue changling brat,
And Faukenbridge, are fallen at Henry's feet.
They woo for him, but entreat my son
Gloucester may dye for this that he has done,

Leic. If Gloucester live thou will be overthrown,


Quee. If Gloucester live thy mother dies in moan,


Ley. If Gloucester live Leyster will fly the realm,


Quee. If Gloucester live thy kingdome's but a dream,


Hen. Have I not sworn by that eternal arm
That puts just vengance sword in Monarcks hands,
Gloucester shall die for his presumption?
What needs more coniuration gracious Mother?
And honorable Leyster mark my words.
I have a Bedrole of some threescore Lords,
Of Glosters faction,

Quee. Nay of Henry's faction.
Of thy false fathers faction, speak the truth,
He is the head of factions; were he down:
Peace, plenty, glory will impale thy crown.

Ley. I there is the But; whose hart-white if we hit,
The game is our's. Well we may rage and roue,
At Gloucester, Lancaster, Chester, Faukenbridge,
But he is the vpshot.

Quee Yet begin with Gloucester.


Hen. The destenies run to the book of Fates,
And read in neuer-changing Characters
Robert of Glosters end he dies to day,
So fate, so heaven, so does King Henry say.

Quee. Emperially resoul'd. Trumpets far off,


Le^c. The old King comes,


Quee. Then comes Luxurious lust,
The King of Concubines, the King that scorns
The undefiled, chaste and numptiall bed,
The King that has his Queen Imprisoned.
For my sake scorn him, son call him not father,
Give him the style of a competitor,

Hen. Pride seize upon my heart, wrath fill mine eyes,
Sit lawful majesty upon my front
Duty fly from me, pity be exild,
Senses forget that I am Henry's child,

Quee I kiss thee, and I bless thee, for this thought.


Enter King, Lancaster, Richard, Faukenbridge. Kin. O Lancaster bid Henry yield
some reason
Why he desires so much the death of Gloucester,

Hen. I hear thee Henry, and I thus reply.
I do desire the death of Basterd Gloucester.
For that he spends the Treasure of the Crown.
I do desire the death of basterd Gloucester,
For that he does desire to pull me down.
Or were this false (I purpose to be plain)
He loves thee, and for that I him disdain.

Hen. Therein thou show a hate corrupted mind,
To him the more unjust, to me unkind,

Quee He loves you as his father loved his mother.


Kin. Fie, fie upon thee hateful Elinor.
I thought thou had been long since scarlet did,

Hen. She is and therefore cannot change her color.


Rich. You are to strickt, Earl Glosters fault Merrits not death,


Fau. By th'rood the Prince says true.
Here is a statute from the Confessor,

Hen. The Confessor was but a simple fool.
Away with books my word shall be a law,
England her breath shall from this bosom draw,
Gloucester shall die,

Ley. Let Gloucester dye the death.


Lan. Leyster he shall not, he shall have law, dispight of him and thee.


Hen. What law, will you be Traitors? what is the law?


Ric. His right hands loss, and that is such a loss,
As England may lament, all Christians weep.
That hand has bin aduanst against the Moors,
Driven out the Sarasins from Gads and Cicile,
Fought fifteen Battles under Christ's red cross,
And is it not (think you) a greeuious loss,
That for a slave (and for no other harm)
It should be sundred from his Princely Arm?

Fau. More for example Noble Lancaster, but it is great pity,
To to great a pity.

He. I Will have his hand and head.


Ri. Thou shall have mine the^.


Que. Well said stubberne Dicke, Jack would not serve me so,
Were the boy here:

Ric. Both John and I have served your will too long;
Mother repent your cruelty and wrong:
Gloucester you know is full of mirth and glee,
And never else did your grace injury.

Q^. Gloucester shall dye.


He. Fetch him here I Will see him dead.


Ric. He that sturs for him shall lay down his head.


Fau. O quiet good my Lords, patience I pray,
I think he comes unsent for by my fay.

Enter John in Glosters gown. Ric. What meanst thou Gloucester?


He. Who brought Gloucester hither?


Io. Let Gloucester hang and them that
There lies his case, a mischief on his carcass.

Qu. My dear son Jacke?


Jo. Your dear son Jack an apes, your mo^key, your babone, your ass, your
gull.


Ley. What ails Earl John?


Jo. Hence further from my sight,
My fiery thoughts and wrath have work in hand;
Le curse ye blacker then the Leuarnian Lake,
If you stand wondering at my sorrow thus;
I am with child, big, hugely swollen with rage,
Who Will play the Midwife, and my throbs aswage?

Kin I will my Son.


Hen. I will high hearted brother.


Io. You will, and you, tut, tut all you are nothing,
Twill out, twill out, my self my self can ease:
You chafe, you swell, ye are commanding King,
My father is your footestoole when he please,
Your word's a law, these Lords dare never speak,
Gloucester must dye, your enemies must fall.

Hen. What means our brother?


Ioh. He means that thou art mad she frantic, Leyster foolish
I the babe, these grind us, bite us, vex us, charge,
And discharge, Gloucester, O Gloucester!

Que. Where is Gloucester son?


Hen. Where is Glo. brother?


Kin. I hope he be escaped.


Io. O I could tear my hair, and falling thus upon the
Solid earth, dig into Glosters grave, so he were dead
And gone into the depth of under worlds.
Or get seditiou^ hundredth thousand hands,
And like Briareus, battle with the Stars,
To pull him down from heaven if he were there,

Fau. Look to Earl John the Gentleman is mad.


I^. O who would not be mad at this disgrace?
Gloucester the fox is fled, there lies his case,
He cousned me of mine, the porter helped him,

Hen. The porter shall be hanged let us part and seek him,
Gloucester shall dye all Europe shall not save him.

Jo. He is wise, too wise for us, yet I Will go with you,
To get more fools into my company.

Quee. This is your fathers plot, revenge it son.


Hen. Father by heaven if this were your advice,
Your head or heart shall pay the bitter price,
Come mother, Brother, Leyster, lets away,

Jo. I, I Will be one, in hope to meet the basterd,
And then no more my self will be his headsman. Exeunt.

Kin. Richard and Faukenbridge follow the search,
You may prevent mischaunce by meeting Gloucester,
If ye find Skinke see that you apprehend him,
I hear there is a wizard at black heath,
Let some enquire of him where Skinke remaynes,
Although I trust not to those fallacies,
Yet now and then such men prove Soothsayers.
Will you be gone?

Fau. Withal my heart, withal my heart my Lord,
Come Princly Richard, we are ever yoked.
Pray God there be no mystery in this,

Rich. Be not suspicious where there is no cause,


Fau. Nay nothing, nothing, I am but in jest. Exeunt.


Kin. Call in a Purseuant.


Lan. Hears one my Leidge,


Kin. There is a Porter likely to be hanged,
For letting Gloucester escape, sir attend,
You shall have a repreiue to bring him us,
These boys are to to stubborn Lancaster,
But it is their mothers fault, if thus she move me,
I Will have her head though all the world reprove me. Exeuntt.

Enter Robin Hood and Lady Fankenbridge. La. Do not deny me gentle Huntington.


Rob. My Lord will miss me.


La. Tut let me excuse thee.


Rob. Turn woman, O it is intolerable!
Except you promise me to play the Page:
Do that, try one night, and you will laugh for ever,
To hear the Orizons that Lovers use;
Their ceremonious sighs, their idle oaths,
To hear how you are praised and prayed unto.
For you are Richards Saint, they talk of Mary
The blessed Virgin, but upon his beads
He only prays to Marian Faukenbridge.

La. The more his error, but will you agree
To be the Lady Faukenbridge one day?

Rob. When is it?


La. On Monday.


Rob. Wherefore is it?


La. Nay then you do me wrong with inquisition.
And yet I care not greatly if I tell thee.
Thou see my husband full of jealousy;
Prince Richard in his suit importunate,
My brother Gloucester threatened by young Henry;
To clear these doubts, I will in some disguise,
Go to black Heath unto the holy Hermit,
Whose wisdom in foretelling things to come,
Will let me see the issue of my cares.
If destinyes ordain me happiness,
I Will chase these mistes of sorrow from my heart,
With the bright Sun of mirth: if fate agree,
It, and my friends, must suffer misery,
Yet I Will be merry too, till mischief come.
only I long to know the worst of ill.

Rob. I Will once put on a scarlet countenance.


La. Be wary least ye be discovered Robyn.


Rob. Best paint me then, be sure I shall not blush.


Enter Block bleeding, Gloucester with him. Blo. Beat an Officer, Red cap I Will
have ye talked withal,
Beat Sir Richards Porter? help Madam, help,

Glo. Peace you damned rogue.


La. Brother I pray you forbear.


Glo. Zwonds a hundredth at my heales almost,
And yet the villain stands on complaiment.

Bloc. Abots one you, is it you?


Glo. Will you to the door you fool? and bar the gate,
Hold there is an angel for your broaken pate;
If any knock let them not in in haste.

Bloc. Well I Will do as I see cause, blood thou art dear to me, but here is a
sovereign plaster for the sore: gold heals wounds, gold eases hearts:
what can a man have more? Exit.


La. Dear brother, tell us how you made escape?


Glo. You see I am hear, but if you would know how:
I cannot escape and tell the manner too,
By this I know your house is compassed
With hel-hound search.

La. Brother I Will furnish you with beard and hair, and Garments like my
husband, how like you that? Exit. Lady


Glo. Well, when I have them: quickly then dispatch^s blood turn gray beard
and hair?
Robyn conceal, this dyeteth my mind,
Mirth is the object of my humorous spleen,
Thou high commanding fury! further device,
Jests are conceated, I long to see their birth,
What come ye sister? Robyn a thieves hand,
But prithee where had thou this beard and hair?

La. Prince Richard wore them hither in a mask,


Glo. Say thou me so, faith love the Princely youth,
Tut you must taste stolen pleasure now and than,

Rob. But if she steal and Ielious eyes epsy:
She will be sure condemnd of Burglary,

Glo. Ha crake? can your low stumps venture so deep
Into affections stream? go to you wanton.
What want we now? my nightcap, O it is hear,
So now no Gloucester, but old Faukenbridge,
Hark, the search knockes, i will let them in my self;
Welcome good fellow; ha, what is it you lack?

Enter Redcap with another. Red. Ma master Co constable, se se search you th
that way, a and you ho honest man th that way. I Will ru run th this way m my own
se self. They dispearse themselves.


Glo. What search you for? what is it you would have?


Enter Block. Blo. Madam, what shall I do to these browne-bill fellows? some
run into the wine seller, some here, some there.


Glo. Let them alone, let them search their filles.


Block. I Will look to their fingers for all that.


Glo. Do so good Block, be careful honest Block.


B. Sir stammerer and your wa watch, you are pa past in faith. Exit


Gl. Will you not speak knaves, tell me who you seek?


Red. Ma mary sit we s seek a va va vacabond, a fu fugatiue, my La Ladies own
b brother; but and he were the po po Popes own b brother, I would ssearch f f
for him; for I have a p poor fatherr ready to be ha ha hanged f f for him.


Glo. O it is for Gloucester! mary search a gods name,
Seek peace, will he break prison too?
It Is pity he should live, nay I defye him.
Come look about, search every little corner,
My self will lead the way, pray you come,
Seek, seek, and spare not, though it be labor lost:
He comes not under my roof, hear ye wife,
He comes not hither, take it for a warning.

Red. You sp sp speak like an honest ge ge Gentleman, re re rest you me me
merry, co co come my f f friends, I be believe h h he r ran by the g g garden w
wall toward the wa water side. Exeunt running.


Glo. This fellow is of the humor I would choose my wife,
Few words and many paces, a word and a way, and so
Must I: Sister adieu, pray you for me, I Will do the like for you.
Robin farewell, commend me to the Prince.

La. Can ye not stay here safe?


Glo. No, I Will not trust the changing humors of old Faukenbridge,
Adieu young Earl, Sister lets kiss and part;
Tush, near mourn, I have a merry heart. Exit.

La. Farewell all comfort.


To. What weeping Lady?
Then I perceive you have forgot Blacke-heath.

La. No, there I Will learn both of his life and death.


To. Till Monday Madam I must take my leave.


La. You will not miss then:


Rob. Nay, if Robin fail ye, let him have never favor of fair Lady.


La. Mean while I Will spend my time in prayers and tears,
That Gloucester may escape these threatened fears. Exit.

Enter Skinke like Prince John. Skin. Thus iets my noble Skinke along the
streets,
To whom each bonnet vailes, and all knees bend;
And yet my noble humor is too light,
By the six shillings* here are two cracked groates
To helter skelter, at some vawting house.
But who comes yonder? ha, old Faukenbridge?
Has a braue-chaine, were John and he good friends,
That chain were mine, and should unto Black Heath
I Will venture, it is but trial, luck may fall.
Good morrow good sir Richard Faukenbridge.

Fau. Good morrow my sweet Prince, hearty good morrow,
This greeting well becomes us, marry does it;
Better iwis then strife and Iangling.
Now can I love ye, will ye to the Shiriffes?
Your brother Richard has been there this hour.

Skin. Yes I am plodding forward as you do;
What cost your chain? it is passing strongly wrought,
I would my Golde-smith had a pattern of it.

Fau. It Is at your graces service, show it him.


Skin. Then dare ye trust me?


Fau. Who the Princely John?
My Sovereigns son, why what a question's that?
I Will leave you, ye may know I dare trust you.

Ski I Will bring't ye to the Shiriffes, excuse my absence.


Fau. I will my noble Lord, adieu sweet Prince. Exit.


Skin. Why so, this breakfast was well fed upon,
When Skinkes devises on Black heath do fail,
This and such cheates, would set me under sail.
I Will to the water side, would it were later,
For still I am afraid to meet Prince John.
Enter Gloucester like Fauken bridge. But what a mischief meant Faukenbridge
To come again so soon? that way he went,
And now comes peaking; upon my life
The buzzard has me in suspitition,
But whatsoever chance, I Will filch a share.

Glo. Yonder Is Prince John I hope he cannot know me,
There Is naught but Gloucester Gloucester in their mouths;
I am half strangled with the Garlic breath,
Of rascals that exclaimes as I pass by,
Gloucester is fled, once taken he must dye.
But I Will to John, how does my gracious Lord?
What tattles rumor now? what news of Gloucester?

Skin. What news could I hear since you left me last?
Were you not here even now? lent me your chain,
I think you dote.

Glo. Sweet Prince, age, age forgets, my brothers chain? a pretty accident,
I Will haue't and be but in the spite of John*

Skin. There Is more, and more, I Will geld it ear it go. He breaks the chain.
This same shall keep me in some sauerne merry,
Til nights black hand curtain this to clear sky.

Fau. My sweet Prince, I have some cause to use my chain,
Another time (when ere your Lordship please)
It Is at your service, o mary God it is.

Skin. Here palsy, take your chain, stoop and be hanged,
Yet the fish nibled, when she might not swallow;
Gout I have curtall'd what I could not borrow. Exit.

Glo. He Is gone away in frets, would he might meet
My brother Faukenbridge in this mad mood,
There would be rare ado; Why this fits me,
My brain flows with fresh wit and policy.
But Gloucester look about, who have we yonder?
Another John Prince, Richard and the Shiriffe?
Upon my life, the slave that had the chain,
Was Skinke, escapt the Fleet by some mad slight,
Well, farewell he, better and better still,
These seek form, yet I will have my will.

Jo. Shiriffe, in any case be diligent.
Whose yonder, Faukenbridge?

Glo. How now sweet chucke, how fares my lovely Prince?


Io. What carest thou? or well, or ill, we crave no help of thee.


Glo. Gods mother do you scorn me?


Io. Gout, what then?


Rich. Fie, leave these idle braules, I prithee John
Lets follow that we are inioyn'd unto.

Glo. I mary Prince, if now you slip the time,
Gloucester will slip away; tut though he hate me
I have done service, I have found him out.

Ric. A shame confound thee for thy treachery,
Inconstant dotard, tymerous old ass,
That shakes with cowardice not with years.

Glo. Go, I have found him, I have winded him.


Io. O let me hug thee gentle Faukenbridge,
Forgive my often ill using of thine age,
I Will call thee Father, i will be penitent,
Bring me where Gloucester is I Will be thy slave,
All that is mine, thou in reward shall have.

Glo. Soft, not too hasty, I would not be seen in it,
Mary a god my wife would chide me dead,
If Gloucester by my means should loose his head.
Princely Richard at this corner make your stand:
And for I know you love my sister well,
Know I am Gloucester and not Faukenbridge.

Ric. Heaven prosper thee sweet Prince in thy escape.


Glo. Shiriffe, make this your quarter, make good guard.
John, stay you here, this way he means to turn,
By Thomas I lack a sword, body a me.

Io. What would thou with a sword old Faukenbridge?


Glo. O sir to make show in his defense,
For I have left him yonder at a house
A friends of mine, an honest Citizen.

Io. We Will fetch him thence.


Glo. Nay then you iniure me, stay till he come; he is in a russet cloak
And must attend me like a Seruingman.

Io Hold there is my sword, and with my sword my heart,
Bring him for Godsake, and for thy desert,
My brother King and mother Queen shall love thee.

Glo. Mark me good Prince, yonder away we come,
I go before and Gloucester follows me;
Let not the Shiriffe nor Richard meddle with us,
Begin you first, seize Gloucester and arrest him;
I Will draw and lay about me here and here,
Be heedfull that your watchmen hurt me not,

Io I Will hang him that does hurt thee, prithee away,
I love thee, but thou kilst me with delay.

Glo. Well keep close watch, i will bring him presently.


Io. Away then quickly.


Gl. Gloucester, close master Shiriffe, Prince Richard,


Ri. Gloste radieu.


Glo. I trust you.


Rich. By my Knighthood I Will prove true. Exit Gloucester.


Ioh. Revenge, I Will build a Temple to your name;
And the first offering shall be Glosters head,
Thy Alters shall be sprinkled with the blood,
Whose wanton current his mad humor fed;
He was a rymer and a Ridler,
A scoffer at my mother, praised my father,
I Will fit him now foral, escape and all.

Ric. Take heed spite burst not in his proper gall.


Enter Faukenbridge and Block. Jo. How now, what way took Faukenbridge I
wonder?
That is not Gloucester sure that attends on him.

Fau He came not at the Shiriffes by the morrow mass,
I sought the Goldsmithes row and found him not;
Sir, you are sure he sent not home my chain?

Blo. Who should send your chain sir?


Fau. The Prince, Prince John I lent it him to day.


Io. What Is this they talk?


Blo. By my truth Sir, and ye lent it him, I think you may go look it: for
one of the Drawers of the Salutation told me even now, that he had took up a
chamber there till evening, and then he will away to Kent.


Fau. Body of me, he means to spend my chain,
Come Block I Will to him.

Job. Hear you Faukenbridge?


Fau. Why what a knave art thou? younders Prince John.


Bl. Then the Drawer's a knave, he told me Prince John was at the Salutation.


Jo. Where Is Gloucester Faukenbridge?


Fau. Sweet Prince I know not.


Joh. Come, jest not with me, tell me where he is?


Fau I never saw him since the Parliament.


Io. Impudent liar, did thou not even now
Say thou woldst fetch him? had thou not my sword?

Fau. Were thou a King, I will not bear the lie,
Thy sword? no boy, thou see this sword is mine.

Blo. My Master a liar? Zounds were thou a potentate,


Fau. I scorn to wear thy arms vntutred child,
I fetch thee Gloucester? shameless did I see thee
Since as I went this morning to the Siriffes,
Thou borrowedst my gold chain?

Io. Thy chain?


Fau. I hope thou will not cheat me princkocks John.


Io. I Will cheat thee of thy life if thou charge me
With any chain.

Fau. Come, let him come I pray, I Will whip ye boy, I Will teach you to out face.


Blo. Come, come, come, but one at once, ye dasterds come


Rich. Keep the Kings peace, I see you are both deceau'd,
He that was last hear, was not Faukenbridge.

Fau. They slander me, who says that I was hear?


Ric. We do believe ye sir; nor do you think
My brother John deceived you of a chain.

Fau. He did, I did deliver it with this hand.


Joh. I Will dye upon the slanderer,


Fau. Let the boy come.


Blo. I, let him come, let him come.


Ric. Fellow, thou spakst even now, as if prince John
Had been at some old Tavern in the town.

Blo. I sir, I came up now, but from the Salutation,
And a drawer that does not use to lie, told me
Prince John has been there all this after noone.

Ioh. The Devil in my likeness then is there.


Fau. The Devil in thy likeness or thy self,
Had my gold chain.

Ioh. Thou art the Devil, for thou
Had my good sword, all these can witness it.

Fau. Gods Mother thou bely'st me.


Jo. Give me the lie?


Rich. Nay calm this fury, lets down to the Tavern,
Or one, or both, these counterfeites are there.

Fau. I know him well enough that had my chain,
And there be two John's, if I find one there,
Ber Lady, I will lay him fast.

Rich. It is this Skinke that mockes us I believe.


Joh. Alas poor Skink it is the Devil Gloucester;
Who if I be so happy once to find,
I Will give contentment, to his troubled mind.

Rcih. I hope he is far enough, and free enough:
Yet these conseytes I know delight his soul.

Fau. Follow me Block, follow me honest Block.


Blo. Much follow you, I have another piece of work in hand; I hear say
Redcaps father shall be hanged this after noone, I Will see him slip a string
though I give my service the slip; beside my Lady bad me hear his examination
at his death: I Will get a good place, and pen it word for word, and as I like it,
set out a moornefull Dittie to the tune of Labandalashot, or row well ye
Mariners, or somewhat as my muse shall me inuoke. Exit.


Enter Gloucester like Faukenbridge with a Purseuant, Gloucester having a paper in
his hand, the Purseuant bare. Glo. A charytable deed, God bless the King,
He shall be then repreeued.

Pur. I sir, some day or two, till the young King and Prince John change it,
especially if the good Earl be not found which God forbid.


Glo. What house is this that we are stepped into to read this warrant in?


Pur. A Tavern sir, the Salutation,


Glo. A Tavern? then I will turn prodigal,
Call for a pint of Sack good fellow.

Pur. Drawer?


Dra. Anan sir.


Glo. A pint of thy best Sack my pretty youth.


Dra. God bless your worship sir, ye shall have the best in London sir.


Gl. What know thou me? know thou old Faukenbridge?
I am no Tavern hunter I can tell thee.

Draw. But my Master has taken many a fair pound of your man Block; he was
here to day sir, and filled two bottles of nippitate sack.


Glo. Well, fill us of your nippitate sir.
This is well chaunest, but here ye boy?
Bring Sugar in white paper, not in brown;
For in white paper I have here a trick,
Shall make the Purseuant first swound, then sick.
Thou honest fellow what is thy name?

Pur. My name is Winterborne sir.


Glo. What countryman I prithee?


Pur. Barkeshire and please ye.


Gl. How long have thou bin sworn a messenger?


Pur. But yesterday and please your worship,
This is the First employment I have had.

Enter Drawer with wine and Sugar. Glo. A good beginning, here have too thee
fellow;
Thou art my fellow now thou seruest the King,
Nay take Sugar too, Gods Lady dear,
I put it in my pocket, but it is here:
Drink a good draught I prithee Winterborne.

He drinks and falls over the stool. Dra. O Lord Sir Richard, the man, the
man.


Glo. What a forgetful beast am I? peace boy,
It is his fashion ever when he drinks.
Fellow he has the falling sickness,
Run fetch two cushions to raise up his head,
And bring a little Key to open his teeth. Exit Drawer.
Purseuant, your warrant and your box,
These must with me, the shape of Faukenbridge
Will hold no longer water here about.
Gloucester will be a proteus every hour,
That Elinor and Leyster, Henry, John,
And all that rabble of hate loving curres,
May minister me more mirth to play upon.

Enter Drawer. Dra. Here Is a key sir, and one of our folk to help.


Glo. No matter for a key, help him but in,
And lay him by the fire a little while,
He Will wake immediately, but be heart sick,
There Is money for a candle and thy wine,
I Will go but up unto your Aldermans,
And come down presently to comfort him. Exeunt

Within Ski. Drawer? what Drawer? with a vengeance Dra.


Within Dra, Speak in the Crown there.


Enter Skinke like Prince John. Skin. They be come, the devil crown ye one
by one,
Skinke though art betraide, that master Faukenbridge
Missing some of his chain, has got thee dogged.
Drawer? what Drawer?

Dra. Anan, anan sir.


Ski. Was not sir Richard Faukenbridge below?


Dra. Yes and please ye.


Skin. It does not please me well, knows he that I am here?


Dra. No I protest.


Ski. Come hither sir, I have little money,
But there is some few linkes of a chain of gold:
Upon your honesty knows not sir Richard,
That I am here?

Dra. No by my holydam.


Skin. Who Is that was with him?


Dra. Why a Purseuant.


Skin. Where is sir Richard?


Dra. At the Aldermans.


Skin. A Purseuant and at the Aldermans.
What Pyg, or Goose, or Capon have you killed,
Withing your Kitchen new?

Dra. A pyg new stickt.


Skin. Fetch me a sawcer of the blood, quick run; Exit.
I Will sit the Purseuant, and Alderman,
And Faukenbridge, if Skinke have any wit.
Well Gloucester, I did never love thee yet,
But thou art the maddest Lord that ere I met,
If I escape this, and meet thee once again,
Curse Skinke, if he dye penny in thy det.

Enter Drawer. Dra. O my Lord the house is full of holberts, and a great many
Gentlemen ask for the room where Prince John is?


Skin. Lend me thy Aprone, run and fetch a pot from the next room.
Betrayed, swounds betrayed, by gout, by palsy, by dropsy;
O brave boy, excellent blood: up, take my cloak
And my hat to thy share, when I come from Kent, i will pay
Thee like a King.

Dra. I thank you my Lord. Exit.


Enter John, Richard. Faukenbridge, Shiriffes and Officers. Ski. Now fortune
help or never: they come, and ye were a Prince as ye say ye are, ye would
be ashamed to abuse a poor servant thus, but and if you were not of the blood
Royal, I Would break the neck of ye down the stayres, so would I, I Would teach
you to hurt prentises.


Ri. Who hurt thee fellow?


Skin. Prince devil or his dam, Prince John they call him.


Joh. Gloucester I hope.


Ri. I doubt not but it is Skinke.


Io. Where is he?


Skin. Up them stayres, take heed of him.
He Is in the Crown.

Fau. Alas poor fellow, he has crowned thee shrewdly.


Jo. In recompense, if it be him I seek,
I Will give thee his whole head to tread upon.
Follow me brother, come old Faukenbridge,
Keep the stayres Shiriffes, you see it waxes dark,
Take heed he slip not by you. Exeunt

Ski. Hang your selves, this darkness shall convey me out, of doors
I Will swim the Thames, but I Will attain Black Heath,
London farewell, curse John, rave Faukenbridge,
Skinke scapes you all by twy lights priuyledge.

Within. Where is he? lights, bring lights, drag out that boy.


Enter all with the boy. Io. This is my cloak, my hat, my rapier,
And either it was Skinke or Gloucester.

Dra. I know not who it was sir, he said he was Prince John, he took away my
aprone and a pottle pot with him, and al to bloudied his head and face.


Fau. We met him, by S. Anthony, we met him.


Io. The fire of S. Anthony confound
This changing counterfeit whatsoever he be.

Rich. It makes me laugh at envious greedines,
Who feeds upon her own hearts bitterness.

Ioh. Sir you that were borne to cry anan,
What other copesmates have you in the house?

Draw. Sir, my Masters guess be none of my copesmates,


Jo. Well your guess, can ye guess who they be?


Draw. Marry here is a purseuant, that this Gentleman sir
Richard Faukenbridge left sick even now.

Fau. Marry of God did I, thou lying knave?


Dra. I am a poor boy sir, your worship may say your pleasure, our maids have
had a foul hand with him, you said he would be sick: so he is with a witness.


Ioh. Look about Faukenbridge, here is work for you,
You have some evil Angel in your shape,
Go sir, bring us forth that Purseuant?

Enter two leading the Purseuant sick. Rich. Gloucester, thou will be too too
venterous,
Thou do delight in those odd humors so,
That much I fear they will be thy overthrow. aside.

Pur. O O O not too fast; O I am sick, O very sick.


Io. What picture of the pestilence is this?


Purs. A poor man sir, a poor man sir: down I pray ye, I pray let me sit
down. A sir Richard, sir Richard, a good sir Richard: what have I deserved to
be thus dealt with all at your worships hands? a ha, ah, ah.


Fau. At my hands knave? at my hands paltry knave?


Dra. And I should be brought to my book oath sir:


Within. What Ieffrey?


Dra. Anan, anan.


Ioh. A plague upon your Ieffring, is your name Ieffrey?


Dra. I and't please you sir.


Rich. Why gentle Ieffrey then stay you awhile,
What can you say, if you come to your book?

Dra. If I be posed upon a book sir, though I be a poor prentise, I must
speak the truth, and nothing but the truth sir.


Jo. And what is your truth sir?


Pur. O, O my heart.


Dra. Mary sir this Knight, this man of worship.


Fau. Well, what of me? what did my worship do?


Dra. Mary ye came into the Bell, our room next the Bar, with this honest man
as I take it.


Fau. As thou take it?


Pur. O sir it is too true, too true, too true O Lord.


Dra. And there he called for a pint of Sack, as good Sack
(I Will be posed upon all the books that ever opened and shut) as any is in all
Christendom.

Fau. Body of me, I come and call for Sack?


Pur. O ye did, ye did, ye did, O O.


Ioh. Well forward sir.


Ric. Gloucester has done this jest.


Dra. And you called then for Sugar sir, as good Sugar and as wholesome, as ever
came in any cup of Sack: you drunk to this man, and you do well God be
thanked, but he no sooner drunk:


Pur. But I, but I, but I, O my head, O my heart.


Rich. I cannot choose but smile at these conseites.


Io. I am mad, and yet I must laugh at Faukenbridge:
Brother, look how sir Richard acts his rage?

Fau. I came? I call? the man is like to dye,
Practice by th'emafse, practice by the marry God,
John loves me not, Prince Richard loves my wife,
I shall be charged here, for a poysned knave.
Practice by th'Lord, practice I see it clear.

Pur. And more Sir Richard, O Lord O Sir Richard,


Fa. What more? what have thou more? what practice more?


Pur. O my box, my box, with the Kings arms, O my box,
O my box, it cost me, O Lord every penny O, my box,

Rcih. And what of your box sir.


Dra. Mary sir it is lost, and it is well known my Master keeps no thieves in his
house, O there was none but you and he.


Fau. O then belike thou think I had his box,


Pur. O sir Richard I will not, O Lord I will not charge you for all the world,
but, but, but for the warrant the old King signd to repreeue the Porter of the
fleet, O God, O God!


Ioh. The Porter of the Fleet, the old king signd,


Pur. I my good Lord, oh, oh,


Io. Is he repreiued then?


Pur. No my Lord, O sir Richard took it from me with his own hand, O.


Fau. Heeres a device to bring me in contempt
With the old King, that I ever loved,
Princes and Shiriffe, you can witness with me,
That I have bin with you, this after noone,
Only with you, with no body but you,
And now a fellow whom the King would save,
By a repreiue, this fellow says is hanged,

Io. If thou had done it, I Would have justified it,
But Richard I conceit this jest already,
This mad mate Skinke, this honest merry knave,
Meeting this Purseuant, and hearing tell
He had a warrant to repreeue a slave,
Whom we would hang: stole it away from him.
This is sure the Jest, upon my life it is,

Pur. O but my warrant, how shall I do? O,


Ric. But look about you, hot braind brother John,
And I believe you will find it otherwise,
Gloucester has got the warrant in disguise,
And saved the fellow you so feign would hang.

Io. No, no, how say you M. Shiriffe, is he not hanged?


Shi. My Lord, the gibbet was set up by noone
In the old Bailey, and I charged my men,
If I return not, though it were by Toarch light,
To see him executed ere they come.

Jo. I am greedy to hear news.


Fau. Robbed of my chain, out-fac'd I had a sword,
Accused of poisoning, cousonage, seeking blood?
Not to be borne: it is intolerable.

Rich. Sir Richard, I prithee have some patience.


Fau. I Will to Blacke-heath, talk not of patience,
It is intolerable, not to be borne.

Io. It is intolerable not to be borne,
A warrant brother, Faukenbridge a warrant?

Fau. I saw no warrant, I defy you all.


Jo. A slave, a Purseuant, one winter borne.


Fau. I care not for thee that winter borne.


Pur. O it is I sir, that is my warrant.


Io. Is It you? you rogue, you drunkerd; year cheated,
And we are cheated of the prisoner,
Out dog, dog.

Pur. O o o o my Lord. Exit and Drawer.


Shi. Have patience and we will have a privy search.


Ioh. Go hang ye block-heads, get ye from my sight,
O would I were a Basiliske, to kill
These gleare eyed villains.

Shir. Come away let us leave him, Exeunt Shiriffes and Officers.
We have a warrant let him do his worst.

Fau. I Will to Blacke-heath, I Will to the holy Hermit,
There shall I know not only these deceivers,
But how my wife plays fast and loose with Richard.
Ha, I shall fit them, I Will tickle them,
I Will do it, I Will hence, I Will to the Heath amain, Exit.

Ioh. There shall I know, where this damned Gloucester is,
I Will have the Devils roused to find that Devil,
Or else I Will conjure the old Coniurer.
I Will to Blacke-heath, and there with friends conspire,
But I Will have Glosters head my hearts desire.

Rich. Would mad Earl Robyn saw these humouristes.
Twol'd feed him fat with Laughter; O twold sit him,
Where ever he is, I know the bate consaite
Is better to him than his daintiest food,
Well, and it fits me well, now I have time,
To coort my Lady Faukenbridge at leisure,
Love I emplore thy aid fair Cipria,
Thou sea-borne mother at affections ring,
Shine brightly in thy sphere, that at my star,
My plannet thou of all lights most beauteous,
Be thou to my desires Auspitious. Exit.

Enter Robin Hood in the Lady Faukenbridges gown, night attire on his head.
Rob. O for this Lady, was never poor Gentleman troubled with Gentlewoman as I
am with my self, my Lady Faukenbridge has fitted me a turn, here I am
visited with sleeuelesse errands and with asking for this thing Madam and that
thing Madam, that they make me almost mad in earnest, whoop here is another
Client.


Enter a Seruingman. Ser. Here Is my Lady Rawfords Page attends to speak with
your Ladyship.


Rob. I pray ye bid her Lordships Page come into my
Ladyship: well Robin Hood, part with these pettycoates,
And cast these loose devices from thy back,
I Will nere go more untrust, never be kercheft.
Never have this ado, with what do you lack?

Enter Page. Page Madam my Lady greets your honor kindly,
And sends you the first grapes of her young vine.

Rob I am much indepted to her honor, there is an angel for you to drink; set
them up till after supper. Humphery, pray look about for Block. Humphery?
trust me I think the fool be lost.


Pa. No forsooth, Madam he is upon the green Jesting with a stammerer, one
Redcap.


Rob. It is a lewd fellow, pray bid him come in youth, I Will give him his
welcome at the door: commend me to your Lady, I pray ye heartily. Exit Page

Humphrey, I marvel where sir Richard is so late? truly, truly he does not
as beseemes a gentleman of his calling, pray let some go forth to meet him
on the green, and send in that blockehead Block. Exit Humphrey.


Enter Redcap and Block after him. Bloc. Will ye tell tales ye ass, will ye?


Red. I Will te te tell your La La Lady or I would to g God we were ha hanged
else, as my fa father should have bin.


Rob. Now what is the matter there I pray you? what company have you there a
gods name? where spend you the day I pray?


Bloc. Why where you gave me leave, at the gallows I was, no farther.


Red. A a and you be his La Lady, you are the La Lady Fau Faukenbridge, the
Earl of glo Glosters sister.


Rob. I am so fellow.


Red. Y y your man b b Block here, does no nothing but f f floute m me, a and
cr cries r run Re Redcap ad s s see your f f father ha ha hanged. I sh shall g
go near to m make m murder and he v use it.


Rob. Well firra, leave your mocking you were best, I Will bob your beetle head and
if you mock him.


Blo. He Is run Redcap.


Red. La la law ma Madam.


Rob. Away ye saucy fool, go wait within.


Blo. Run Redcap, run Redcap. Exit.


Rob. Art thou the Porters son, that was condemned about my brother Gloucester?


Red. I g g God be with ye, I am the p p Porters son, I m must r run to s s
seek your b br brother.


Rob. Well, drink that fellow, if thou find my brother be not too violent,
and I Will reward thee.


Red. I th th thank ye h heartily, and I had not bin cousoned with Sk Skinke, I
had no nee need of these ia iaunts, for Gl Gloucester was s safe enough.


Enter Block and the Porter with his cloak muffled. Blo. Ah farewell Redcap.


Red, Fa fare we well and be ha hang. Exit.


Rob. You Will never leave your knavery, whose there more?


Blo. One Madam that has commendations to you from your brother.


Rob. Come thou from Gloucester? thou art welcome friend


Blo. O it is one of the kindest Ladies (though she will now and then have about
with Block) that ever breathed and she had been in her mood now, Redcap would
have made her such sp sp sport as't a pa pa past.


Rob. Will you make sport and see who knockes again?


Bl. Our gates are like an Anuile, from four to ten, nothing but knicke a
knock upon it. Exit.


Rob. Will you be gone sir? honest friend I am glad
My brother Gloucester got thy liberty,
Whose flight was cause of thy captivity:
Nor shall there be in us such negligence,
Though thou have lost thy Office and thy house,
But we will see thee better far provided,
Than when thou were porter in the Fleet.

Enter Block. Blo. Madam your old friend Prince Richard,
All alone, making moan, fetching many a grievous groan.

Rob. Prince Richard come so late? lights to his chamber,
Sir, in any case say I am sick.

Blo. Very sick, sick and like to dye: I Will sing it and you will.


To. Away ye knave, tell him, in the morning
I Will humbly wait upon his excellence.

Blo. That Is all his desire to have ye lowly and humble, and it is a courteous
thing in a Lady. Exit.


To. Hence, or else i will set you hence: go in good friend.
Come Lady Faukenbridge, it is time to come,
Robin can hold out no longer I see,
Hot wooers will be tempters presently. Exit

Enter Skinke like a Hermit. Ski. Now holy Skinke in thy religious weed,
Look out for purchase, or thy wonted clyants:
Warrents quoth you, I was fairly warrented,
Young Robin Hood the Earl of Huntington,
Shall never fetch me more unto his Prince.
Enter Lady Faukenbridge in Merchants wives attire. But pauca verba Skinke, a
prize, a prize,
By th'mas a pretty girl, close Hermit close,
Ore-heare if thou can, what she desires,
For so my cunning and my credit spreads.

La. See how affection arms my feeble strength,
To this so desperate iourneying all alone,
While Robin Hood young Earl of Huntington,
Plays Lady Faukenbridge for me at home.

Ski. What mystery is this? the Lady Faukenbridge,
It Is she, sweet fortune thou have sent her well,
I will entice this morcell to my Cell:
Her husband's iealious, I will give him cause,
As he believes, I hope it shall succeed;
Nay swounds it shall, she is mine in scorn of speed.

La. By this broad beaten path, it should appear,
The holy Hermits Cave cannot be far,
And if I err not, this is he himself.

Ski. What honored tongue enquereth for the Hermit?


La. What honored tongue?


Ski. I Lady Faukenbridge,
I know ye, and I know for what you come.
For Gloucester and your husbands jealousy.

La. O thou, whose eye of contemplation,
Looks through the windows of the highest heavens,
Resolve thy Hand-maide, where Earl Gloucester lives:
And whether he shall live, and escape the hate,
Of proud young Henry and his brother John?

Ski. I Will have you first in, I Will tell you more anon.
Madam, they say bushes have ears and eyes,
And these are matters of great secrecy:
And you will vouchsafe enter my holy Cell,
There what you long to know, i will quickly tell.

Enter John and Faukenbridge. La. Stay here are strangers.


Ski. A plague upon them, come they in the nicke,
To hinder Raynald of his Foxes trick?

Jo. Good day old Hermit.


Fau. So to you fair Dame.


Io. By Elinors gray eye she is fair indeed;
Sweet heart come ye for holy benizons?
Hermit have thou good custom with such Cliants?
I cannot blame your feats, your iugling tricks,
Plague iuggle you.

La. Why curse ye sacred worth?


Fau. Ill done in sooth my Lord, very ill done,
Wrong holiness: a very pretty woman.
Mock gravity; by the mass a cherry lip,
A it is not well done, deride a holy Hermit?

Ioh. I have it in my purse shall make amends.


Ski. His purse and yours, shall make me some amends,
For hindering me this morning from the Lady;
For scaring me at Tavern yesternight,
For having back your chain, I Will fit you both.

Io. Hermit, a word.


Fau. A word with you fair mistress.


Io. Where lie your devils that tell all your news?
Would you would trouble them for half an hour,
To know what is become of traitor Gloucester,
That in my clothes brake prison in the Fleet?

Ski. No, it was Skinke.


Jo. Come old fool ye dote.


Ski. But hear me.


Fau. Hear him Prince.


Io. Swounds who hears you? I Will make your Lady graft ye for this work: but to
your tale sir.


Ski. Know thrice honored Prince, that Skinke did cosen
Redcap of his clothes.
Gloucester did cousen Skinke, and so escapt.

Jo. Well done Faukenbridge?


Fau. My Lord, he tells you true.


Jo. You find it on her lips: but forward sir.


Ski. It Was Skinke in Glosters gown, whom you did visit,
That played at bowls and after stole your cloths,
While you went into the Lord Moortons chamber.

Io. This sauors of some truth,


Fau. It Is very like,


Joh. Well Faukenbridge by heaven I Will tell your wife,


Fau. She Will much believe you: you will come?
Tell me of my wife: this evening fail me not.
My wife quoth you: I Will send my wife from home,
Do, tell my wife prince John, by my dear mother,
I love her too too well to like another.

La. It seems so fox, O what a world is this,
There most sin raynes where least suspicion is,

Fau. You Will come.


La. I will not fail, I warrant you,


Jo. Hermit is all this true,


Ski. Himself deliver not so much before ye sleep,
Root me from out the borders of this Realm.

Jo. Well by your leave sir Richard Faukenbridge,
Hence free from fear, you will melt you will melt old man,

Fau. Nay take her to you, she is a shrow I warrant,
I Will to the holy Hermit, and inquire,
About my chain your sword, the Purseuant
And other matters that I have to ask.

Ski. Your welcome good sir Richard,


Io. Nay do not stand on terms, I am fire, all life,
Nor never tell me that I have a wife.
I do not mean to marry, ye think so,
But to be merry, you the manner know.
And you will have me, have me, point a meeting,
I Will be your true love, you shall be my sweeting,
If you deny to promise, this is plain
I Will have my will ear you get home again.

La. most gracious Lord.


Io. Tut tell not me of grace I like no goodness but a beauteous face.
Be therefore brief, give me your hand and swear,
Or I Will away with you into the heath,
Neither shall Faukenbridge nor Hermit help,
And what I do I Will answer well enough.

La. Why, then my Lord.


Jo. Nay do not stand on then,
But tell me when my Lord shall have you Lady,
Its presently, i will venture for a baby.

La. This night at stepney by my summer house,
There is a tavern which I sometime use,
When we from London come a gossoping,
It is the Hind,

Io. Give me thy pretty hand.
Thou Wilt meet me at the Hind, I Will by thy Roe,

La. One word's enough,


Ioh. Suffice then be it so,


La. I Will fit my old adulterer and your grace,
I Will send the Princess thither in my place.

Fa. Prince John, Prince John the Hermit teles me wonders.
He says it was Skinke that escaped us at the Tavern,
Sk nke had my chain: nay sure that Skinke did all.

Skin. I say go but to yonder corner,
And ere the Sun be half an hour higher,
There will the thief attempt a robery,

Io. Who Skinke?


Fau. Will Skinke?


Ski. I Skinke upon my word.


Fau. Shall we go seize upon him good Prince John?


Io. Nay we will have him that is no question.
And yet not hurt the honest rogue.
he will help us well in quest of changeing Gloucester,
Hermit farewell, Lady keep your hour.

Fau. Adeiu old Hermit: soon in th'euening Less,


La. I Will meet you both, and meet with both of you.
Father what answer do you give to me?

Ski. Lady start down I must into my cell,
Where I am curing of a man late hurt,
He dressed, I must unto my Orizons,
In half an hour al will be dispatched,
And then I will attend your Ladyship.

La. At your best leisure father, O the life
That this thrice reverend Hermit leads here.
How far remote from mortal vanities,
Baits to the soul, enticements to the eye?
How far is he unlike my lustful Lord?
Who being given himself to be unchaste,
Think all men like himself, in their effects,
And iniures me, that never had a thought,
To wrong the sacred rytes of spotless faith.

Enter Skinke with a patch on his face, and a Faulconers lure in his hand. Ski.
Hermit farewell, i will pay ye or speak with ye next time I see ye. Sweet mouse
the Hermit bids you stay here, he will visit you anon. Now John and
Faukenbridge, I Will match ye, and I do not say Skinke's a wretch, a wren, a
worm, when I have trickt them, Madam I will trim you. Commodity is to be
preferred before pleasure. About profit Skink, for crowns for crowns, that
make the kingly thoughts.


La. I am assured that man's some murderer, Exit.
Good Father Hermit speak and comfort me,
Are ye at prayers good old man? I pray ye speak,
What Is here a beard? a counterfeited hair?
The Hermits ports? garments and his beads?
Jesus defend me I will fly this den,
It Is some thieves cave, no haunt for holy men.
What if the murderer, (as I ges him one)
Set on my husband, tush Prince John and he
Are able to defend them noble selves,
How ear, I will not tarry, I Will away,
Least unto theft and rape, I prove apray. Exit.

Enter Skinke Solus. Skin. Younder they are I Will fit them, here is my ground:
Wa ha how, wa ha how, wa ha how?

Enters Faukenbridge. Fau. I warrant ye my Lord some man's distressed.


Ioh. Why man it is a Faulconer.


Fa. Mary of me good fellow, I did think thou had bin robbed.


Ski. Robbed, sir no, he that comes to rob me shall have a hard match on it, yet
two good fellows had like to bin robbed by one tall thief, had not I stepped in:
abots on him, I lost a hawk by him, and yet I cared not to send another after
him, so I could find the thief; and here about he is. I know he is squatted.


Fau. Say thou me so? we will find him by S. Mary.
An honest fellow, a good common wealths man.

Io. There are caves heereabout good fellow, are there not?


Ski. Yes sir, tread the ground sir, and you shall hear their hollownes, this
way sir this way.


Io. Help Faukenbridge.


Fau. O help me good prince John.


Skin. I Will help you both, deliver sir deliver, Swounds linger not: Prince John
put up your pursse, or i will throw ponniards down upon your pate. Quickly,
when? I am Skink that escaped ye yesternight, and fled the Fleet in your cloak,
carrying me clean out of wind and rain. I broke the bonds and linkes that
fettered your chain amity, this cheat is mine: Farewell I cannot stay, sweet
Prince, old Knight, I thank ye for this pray.


Fau. Gods mary mother, here is a jest indeed,
We came to take, a thief takes us:
Where are ye good my Lord?

Jo. No matter where, I think I was fore-spoken at ye teate,
This damned rogue served me thus? Gloucester and he
Upon my life conclude in villainy.
He was not wont to plot these stratagems,
Lend me your hand a little, come away,
Let Us to the Cell again, perchance the Hermit
Is Skinke, and thief, and Hermit al in one.

Fau. Mary a God then ten to one its so,
Well thought on Princely John,
He had my chain, no doubt he had your sword.

Ioh. If there be now no Hermit at the Cel,
I Will swear by all the Saints its none but he. Exeunt.

Enter Gloucester in the Hermits gown, putting on the beard. Glo. This accident
has hit thy humor Gloucester,
From purseuant i will turn a Hermit now.
Sure he that keeps this Cell is a counterfeit,
Else what does he here with false hair and beard?
Well how so ear it be, I Will seem to be
The holy Hermit: for such fame there is,
Of one accounted reverend on this heath.

Enter Skinke. Ski. I Will feign unto my cell, to my fair Lady,
But John and Faukenbridge are at my heels.
And some od mate is got into my gown,
And walks devoutly like my counterfeite,
I cannot stay to question with you now,
I have another gown, and all things fit,
These guests once rid, new mate? I Will bum, I Will mark you.

Gl. What Is he a gods name? he is quickly gone,
I am for him, were he Robin-good fellow,
Whose yonder the Prince John and Faukenbridge?
I think they haunt me like my genii,
One good the other ill, by th'mas they prye
And look upon me but suspitiously.

Io. This is not Skinke, the Hermit is not Skinke:
He is a learned reverend holy man.

Fau. He is he is a very godly man.
I warrant ye, he is at his book at's prayers,
We should have took you, by my hollydam
Even for a very thief.

Glo. Now God forfend such noblemen as you should guess me so,
I never gave such cause for ought I know.

Ioh. Yet thou did tell us Skinke should do a roberye,
Appointed us the place, and there we found him,

Fau. And he felt us, for he has robbed us both.


Glo. He Is a lewd fellow, but he shall be taken.


Io. I had rather here of Gloucester then of him.


Glo Gloucester did cheat him, of the same gold chain,
That deceived Sir Richard Faukenbridge.
He got your sword Prince John: twa's he that saude
The porter, and beguiled the Purseuant,

Ioh. A vengaunce on him.


Glo. Do not curse good Prince, he is bad enough, twere better pray for him.


Jo. I Will kill thee, and thou bid me pray for him.
I Will fell woods, and ring thee round with fire,
Make thee an offering unto fierce revenge,
If thou have but a thought to pray for him.

Glo. I am bound to pray for all men, chefely christians.


Ioh. Ha ha, for christians, think thou he is one?
For men: have thou opinion he is a man?
He that changes himself to sundry shapes,
Is he a christian? can he be a man?
O, Irreligious thoughts,

Glo. Why worthy Prince I saw him christened, dept into the font


Io. Then nine times like the northen laplanders,
He backward circled the sacred Font,
And nine times backward said his Orisons,
As often cursed the glorious host of heaven,
As many times inuocke the fiends of hell,
And so turned witch, for Gloucester is a witch.

Glo. Have patient Gentle Prince, he shall appear,
Before your Kingly father speedily.

Io. Shall he indeed? sweet comfort kiss thy cheek,
Peace circle in thy aged honored head,
When he is taken: Hermit I protest
I Will build thee up a chapel and a shrine:
I Will have thee worshipped, as a man divine,
Assure he shall come, and Skinke shall come.

Glo. I that same Skinke, I prithee send that Skinke,


Joh. Send both, and both as prisoners crimminate
Shall forfeite their last lives to Englands state,
Which way will Faukenbridge?

Fau. Over the water, and so with all speed I may to Stepney


Io. I must to Stepney too, and revile, and be blithe,
Old wink at my mirth, t'may make amends,
So thou, and I, and our friends, may be friends,

Fau. Withal my heart, withal my heart Prince,
Old Faukenbridge will wait upon your grace,
Be good to Gloucester for my Marrians sake,
And me and mine you shall your servants make,

Glo. Of that anon my pleasure being served,
Gloucester shall have what Gloucester has deserved.

Fau. Why, that is well said, adieu good honest Hermit, Exit.


Io. Hermit farewell, if I had my desire,
I Will make the world thy wondrous deeds admire, Exit.

Glo. Still good, still passing good, Gloucester is still
Henryes true hate, foe to John's froward will.
No more of that for them in better time,
If this same Hermit be an honest man,
He will protect me by this simple life,
If not I care not, I Will be ever Gloucester,
Make him my foot stole if he be a slave,
For Baseness over worth can have no power.
Robin be think thee, thou art come from Kings.
Then scorn to be slave to underlings,
Look well about thee Lad and thou shall see,
Them burst in envy that would iniure thee.
Hermit I Will meet you in your Hermits gown,
Honest, I Will love you: worse, I Will knock you down. Exit.
Enter Prince Richard with music. Kind friends, we have troubled Lady
Faukenbridge,
And either she is not willing to be seen,
Or else not well: or with our boldness grieved,
To ease these I have brought you to this window,
Knowing your are in music excellent,
I have pend a ditty here: and I desire
You would sing it for her love and my content,

Musi. With all my heart my Lord.


Enter Robin Hood like the Lady. Rob. Your excellence forgets your Princely
worth,
If I may humbly crave it at your hands,
Let me desire this music be dismissed.

Ric. For bear I pray and with draw your selves.
Be not offended gracious Marrian, Exeunt Music.
Under the upper heaven, nine goodly spheres,
Turn with a motion ever musical,
In Palaces of Kings, meliodious sound
Offer pleasures to there sovereigns ears.
In Temples, milk white clothed queristors,
Sing sacred Anthemes bowing to the shrine,
And in the feelds whole quires of winged clerks,
Salutes the morning bright and Christaline,
Then blame not me, you are my heaven, my Queen,
My saint, my comfort, brighter then the morn,
To you all music, and all praise is due.
For your delight you for delight was borne,
The world would have no mirth, no joy, no day,
If from the world your beauty were away.

Rob. Fie on loves blasphemy and forgery,
To call that in, that's only misery,
I that am wedded to suspicious age,
Solicited by your lascivious youth,
I that have one poor comfort living,
Gloucester my brother, my hie hearted brother,
He flies for fear, least he should faint and fall
Into the hands of hate tirannicall.

Ric. What would you I should do?


Rob. I would full feign, my brother Gloucester had his peace again.


Ric. Shall love be my reward if I do bring
A certain token of his good estate.
And after pacyfie my brothers wrath?
Say you will love, we will be fortunate,

Rob. I will.


Rich. No more, I vow to dye unblessed
If I perform not this inposed quest,
But one word Madam pray can you tell,
Where Huntington my ward is?

Rob. I was bold to send young Robin Hood your noble ward
Upon some business of import for me.

Ri. I am glad he is imployde in your affairs,
Farewell kind fair, let one cloudy frown
Shadow the bright sun of thy beauties light.
Be confident in this, i will find thy brother,
Raise power but we will have peace, only perform
Your gracious promise at my back return.

Rob. Well, here is my hand, Prince Richard that same night
Which secondeth the day of your return,
I Will be your bedfellow, and from that hour
Forswear the loathed bed of Faukenbridge:
Be speedy therefore, as you hope to speed.

Ric. O that I were as large winged as the wind,
Then should you see my expeditious will:
My most desire, adieu, guess by my haste,
Of your sweet promise the delicious taste. Exit.

Rob. Why so: I am rid of him by this devise,
He would else have tired me with his sighs and songs,
Enter Block. But now I shall have ease, here comes the Saint,
To whom such suit was made.

Bl. My Lady Gentlewoman is even here in her priuitye walk, Madam here is the
Merchants wife was here yesterday would speak with ye; O I was somewhat
bold to bring her in.


To. Well leave us sir; you are welcome gentlewoman.


Blo. These women have no liberality in the world in them,
I never let in man to my Lady, but I am rewarded.

Rob. Please ye to walk sir? wherefore mumble ye?


La. Robin what news? how have thou done this night?


To. My Ladyship has done my part, my task,
Line all alone for lack of company,
I might have had Prince Richard,

La. Was he here?


Rob. He went away but now; I have bin loved and wood too simply,
God rid me of the woman once again,
I Will not be tempted so for all the world,
Come, will you to your chamber and uncase?

La. Nay keep my habit yet a little while,
Old Faukenbridge is almost at the gate,
I met him at Black heath just at the Hermits,
And taking me to be a Merchants wife,
Fell mightily in love, gave me his ring,
Made me protest that I would meet him here.
I told him of his Lady, O tut quoth he,
I Will shake her up, i will pack her out of sight,
He comes kind Robin Hood, hold up the jest.

Enter Sir Rich. Faukenbridge and Block. Fau. Gods mary knave, how long has
she bin here?


Blo. Sir she came but even in before you.


Fa. A cunning queen, a very cunning queen,
Go to your business Block, i will meet with her.

Blo. Ah old Muttonmounger I believe here is work toward. Exit.


Fau. Do not believe her Mall, do not believe her:
I only spoke a word or two in jest,
But would not for the world have bin so mad,
Do not believe her Mall, do not believe her:

Rob. What should I not believe? what do you mean?


La. Why good Sir Richard, let me speak with you,
Alas will you undo me? will you shame me?
Is this your promise? came I here for this?
To be a laughing stock unto your Lady

Rob. How now Sir Richard, what is the matter there?


Fa. I Will talk with you anon, come hither woman?
Did not tell my wife what match we made:?

La. I tell your wife? think ye I am such a beast?
Now God forgive ye, I am quite undone.

Fau. Peace duck, peace ducke, I warrant al is well.


Rob. What Is the matter? I pray ye sir Richard tell me?


Fau. Mary Mall thus, about some twelve months since,
Your brother Gloucester, that mad prodigal,
Caused me to pass my word unto her husband,
For some two thousand pound: or more perchance,
No matter what it is, you shall not know,
Nay ye shall never ask to know.

Rob. And what of this?


Fau. Mary the man's decade,
And I believe a little thing would please her;
A very little thing, a thing of nothing.
Go in good Mall, and leave us two alone,
I Will deal with ye as simply as I can.

La. Fox look about ye, ye are caught in faith.


Rob. Deal with her simply, o ho; what kind of dealing?
Can ye not deal with her and I be by?

Fau. Mary a God, what are ye jealous?
Ye teach me what to do: in, get you in.
O I have heard Prince Richard was your guest,
How dealt you than? In get you in I say,
Must I take care about your brothers debts,
And you stand crossing me, in, or i will send you in. Exit Robin.
Ha sir, you will be master, you will wear the yellow,
You Will be an ouer-seer: mary shall ye.

La. Ye are too cursed (me thinks sir) to your Lady;


Fau. Ah wench content thee, I must bear her hard,
Else she will be prining into my dalliances:
I am an old man sweet girl I must be merry,
All steel, al spright, keep in health by change,
Men may be wanton, wowen must not range.

La. You have given good counsel sir, i will repent me,
Here Is your ring, i will only love my husband.

Fau. I mean not so, I think to day thou toldes me
Thy husband was an unthrift, and a bankrout,
And he be so, tut thou have favor store,
Let the knave beg, beauty cannot be poor.

La Indeed my husband is a bankrout,
Of faith, of love, of shame, of chastity,
Dotes upon other women more then me.

Fau. Ha do he so? then give him tit for tat,
Have one so young and fair, and loves another,
He Is worthy to be coockolded by the mass.
What is he old or young?

La. About your age.


Fa. An old knave and cannot be content with such a peate,
Come to my closet girl, make much of me,
We'll appoint a meeting place some twice a weak,
And i will maintain thee like a Lady, ha?

La. O but you will forget me presently,
When you look well upon your Ladies beauty.

Fau. Who upon her? why she is a very dowdy,
A dishclout, a foul Iipsie unto thee,
Come to my closset less, there take thy earnest
Of love, of pleasure and good maintenance.

La. I am very fearful.


Fau. Come fool never fear I am Lord heat, who shall disturb as then?
Nay come, or by the rood I Will make you come,

La. Help Madam Faukenbridge for gods sake.


Enter Robin Hood and Block. Fau. How now, what meanst?


La. Help Gentle Madam help,


Rob. How now what aylst thou?


Bloc. Nay and't be a woman, nere fear my master Madam


La. Why speakst thou not, what aylst thou?


Fau. Why nothing, by the rood nothing she ayls.


La. O Madam this vile man would have abused me,
And forcst me to his closset,

Rob, Ah old cole, now look about, you are caught,


La. Call in your fellows block,


Fa. Do not thou knave,


La, Do or I Will crack your crown,


Blo. Nay I Will do it, I know she means to shame you. Exit.


Fau. Why Mall will thou believe this paultrie woman?
Huswife I Will have you whipped for slaundring me.

To. What Leacher, no she is an honest woman,
Her husband's well known, all the household knows.

Blo. Here Is some now, to tell all the town your mind,


La. Before ye all I must sure complain,
You see this wicked man, and ye all know
How often he has been Jealous of my life,
Suspecting falsehood being false himself;

Blo. O master, O master,


Fau. She slanders me, she is a cousoning queen,
Fetch me the Constable, I Will have her punished,

La. The Constable for me fie, fie upon ye.
Madam do you know this ring?

Rob. It is sir Richards.


Blo. O I, that is my masters too sure.


Fau. I mary, I did lend it to the false drab
To fetch some money for that bankrout knave
Her husband, that lies prisoner in the Fleet.

La. My husband bankrout? my husband in the Fleet prisoner?
No, no, he is as good a man as you.

Rob. I that he is, and can spend pound for pound
With thee in faith, were richer then thou art,
I know the gentleman.

La. Nay Madam he is hard by, there must be Reuelles at the Hind to night;
Your copesmate there, Prince John.

Rob. There Is a hot youth.


Bl. O, afierce Gentleman.


La. He was fierce as you, but I have matched him,
The Princess shall be there in my attire.

Fau. A plaguey crafty queen, mary a God
I see Prince John, coorted as well as I,
And since he shall be mocked as well as I,
Its some contentment.

Bl. Mass he droopes, fellow Humphrey, he is almost taken,
Look about ye old Richard?

Fau. Hence knaves, get in a little, prithee Mall
Let thou and I and she, shut up this matter.

Rob. Away sirs, get in.


Bl. Come, come let us go, he will be baited now, farewell old Richard. Exit


Rob. Now sir, what say you now?


Fa. Mary sweet Mall I say I met this woman, likt her, loved her,
For she is worthy love I promise thee;
I say I coorted her: tut make no braule
Twixt thou and I, we will have amends for all.

To. Had I done such a trick, what then? what then?


Fau. Ah prithee Mall, tut bear with men.


Rob. I, we must bear with you; you will be excused,
When women undeserved are abused.

Fau. Nay do not weep, pardon me gentle Lady,
I know thee virtuous, and I do protest,
Never to have an evil thought of thee.

Rob. I, I, ye swear, who is that that will believe ye?


Fau. Now by my holy dam and honest faith,
This Gentlewoman shall witness what I swea e.
Sweet Ducke a little help me?

La. Trust him Madam.


Fau. I will be kind, credulous, constant ever,
Do what thou will, i will be suspicious never.

To. For which I thank noble Faukenbridge.


Fau. Body of me who is this? young Huntington?


La. And I your Lady whom you coorted last,
Ye looked about you ill, fox we have caught ye,
I met ye at Black heath, and ye were hot.

Fau. I knew thee Mall, now by my sword I knew thee,
I winkt at all, I laughed at every jest.

Rob. I, he did wink, the blind man had an eye.


Fa. Peace Robin, thou't once be a man as I.


La. Well, I must bear it all.


Fa. Come, and ye bear, its but your office, come forget sweet Mall.


La. I do forgive it and forget it sir.


Fa. Why that is well said, that is done like a good girl:
Ha sir, ha you matched me pretty Earl?

Rob. I have, ye see sir I must unto Black heath,
In quest of Richard, whom I sent to seek
Earl Gloucester out, I know he is at the Hermits;
Lend me your Coach; I Will shift me as I ride,
Farewell sir Richard. Exit.

Fau. Farewell Englands pride, by the mattins Mall it is a pretty child;
Shall we go meet John? shall we go mock the Prince?

La. We will.


Fa. O then we shall have sport anon,
Never wear yellow Mall, it was but a trick,
Old Faukenbridge will still be a mad Dicke. Exeunt.

Enter Redcap and Gloucester. Red. Do ye s s say fa fa father Hermit, th that Gl
Gloucester is about this Heath?


Glo. He is upon this Heath Son look about it,
Run but the compass, thou shall find him out,

Red. R r run? i will r run the co compass of all k Kent but I Will f find him out,
my f f father (where ere he lays his head) dare ne never co come home I know,
t t till he be fo fo found.


Gl. Well thou shall find him, know thou who is a hunting?


Red. M m mary it is the Earls of La La Lancaster and Le Leyster. Fa fa farewell
f father, and I find Skink or Glo Gloucester, I Will g g give thee the pr prise of a
penny p p pudding for thy p pains.


Glo. Adieu good friend: this is sure the fellow
I sent on message from the Parliament.
The Porters son, he is still in quest of me,
And Skinke that cousoned him of his red cap.
Enter Richard like a Serving man. But look about thee Gloucester, who comes
yonder?
O a plain seruingman, and yet perhaps his bags are lyn'd,
And my pursse now grows thin: if he have any I must share with him.
Enter Skinke like a Hermit. And who is on yond side? O it is my Hermit,
Has got his other suit since I went forth.

Ski. God's Blood yonder is company, i will back again,
Else I would be with you counterfeite,
I Will leave the rogue till opportunity,
But never eat till I have quit my wrong. Exit

Ric. I saw two men attend like holy Hermits,
One's slipped away, the other at his beads,
Now Richard for the love of Marian,
Make thy inquiry where mad Gloucester lives.
If England or the verge of Scotland hold him,
I Will seek him thus disguised: if he be past
To any foreign part; i will follow him.
Love thou art Lord of hearts, thy laws are sweet,
In every troubled way, thou guidst our feet.
Lovers inioyn'd to pass the dangerous Sea
Of big swollen sorrow, in the Bark affection;
The winds and waves of woe need never fear,
While Love, the helm does like a Pylate steare.

Glo. Here Is some lover come, a mischief on him,
I know not how to answer these mad fools,
But i will be brief, i will mar the Hermits tale;
Off gown, hold Buckler, slice it bilbowe blade.

Ric. What Is this? what should this mean? old man, good friend


Glo. Young fool deliver else see your end.


Ric. I thought thou had been holy and a Hermit.


Glo. What ere you thought, your pursse? come quickly sir?
Cast that upon the ground, and then confer.

Ric. There it is.


Glo. Falls it so heavy? then my heart is light.


Ric. Thou't have a heavy heart before thou touch it,
Theft shrinde in holy weeds? stand to it you are best.

Glo. And if I do not, seeing such a pray,
Let this be to me a disaster day.

Ric. Art thou content to breath? Fight and part once or twice


Glo. With all my heart, take half thy money and we will friendly part.


Ric. I will not cherish theft.


Glo. Then I defye thee. Fight again and breath,


Ric. Alas for pity, that so stout a man,
So reverend in aspect, should take this course.

Glo. This is no common man with whom I fight,
And if he be, he is of wondrours spright,
Shall we part stakes?

Ric. Fellow take the pursse upon condition thou will follow me*


Glo. What wait on you? wear a turned Livery?
Whose man's your master? If I be your man,
My man's man's office will be excellent:
There lies your pursse again, win it and wear it. Fight.

Enter Robin Hood, they breath, offer again. Rob. Clashing of weapons at my
welcome hither?
Bickring upon Blacke-heath, well said old man,
I Will take thy side, the younger has the odds.
Stay, end your quarrel, or I promise ye
I Will take the old man's part.

Ric. You were not wont young Huntington, still on Richards side


Rob. Pardon gracious Prince I knew ye not.


Gl. Prince Richard: then lie envy at his foot,
Pardon thy cosen Gloucester, valiant Lord,
I knew no common force confronted mine,
O heaven I had the like conseite of thine.

Ric. I tell thee Robin Gloucester thou art met,
Bringing such comfort unto Richards heart.
As in the foil of war when dust and sweat,
The thirst of weak, and the Suns fiery heat,
Have seazd upon the soul of valiaunce,
And he must faint except he be refresht.
To me thou comst as if to him should come,
A perry from the North, whose frostie breath
Might fan him coolness in that doubt of death.
With me then meets, as he a spring might meet,
Cooling the earth under his toil partcht feet,
Whose crystal moisture in his Helmit taine,
Comforts his spyrits, makes him strong again.

Glo. Prince, in short terms if you have brought me comfort
Know if I had my pardon in this hand
That smit base Skinke in open Parliament,
I would not come to Court, till the high feast
Of your proud brothers birth day be expyred,
For as the o^^e King as he made a vow
At his unlucky Coronation,
Must wait upon the boy and fill his cup,
And all the Pieres must kneel while Henry kneeles
Unto his cradle; he shall hang me up,
Ear I commit that vile Idolatry.
But when the feast is past if you will befrend me,
I Will come and brave my proud foes to their teeth,

Ric. Come Robin, and if my brothers grace deny,
I Will take thy part, them and their threats defye,

Glo. Gramercy Princly Dicke,


Rob. I have some power, I can raise two thousand Soldiers in an hour,


Glo. Gramercy Robin, gramercy little wag,
Prince Richard, pray let Huntington
Carry my sister Faukenbridge this ring,

Ric. I Will carry it my self, but I had rather
Had thy kind company, thou might have moved
Thy Sister, whom I long have vainly loved,

Glo. I like her that she shunes temptation
Prince Richard, but I bear with doting lovers,
I should not take it well, that you urge me
To such an office: but I bear with you,
Love's blind and mad, hie to her boldly, try her;
But if I know she yield, faith I Will defy her.

Ric. I like thy honorable resolution,
Gloucester I pray thee pardon my entreat,

Glo. its men's custom; part part Gentle Prince,
Farewell good Robin this gold I will borrow,
Meet you at stepney pay you all to morrow,

Rob. A dew Gloucester,


Gl. Farewell, be short; you gone, I hope to have a little sport


Ric: Take heed mad Cuz. Exeunt.


Glo. Tut tell not me of heed,
He that is too wray never has good speed.
Hollowing within, Enter Lanc. with a broken staff in his hand. Whose this old
Lancaster my honored friend?

Lan. These knaves have served me well, left me alone,
I have hunted fairly, lost my purse, my chain,
My Jewels, and bin bangd by a bold knave,
Clad in a Hermits gown like an old man,
O what a world is this?

Glo. Its ill my Lord.


Lan. He Is come again, O knave it is the worse for thee,
Keep from me, be content with that thou have,
And see thou fly this heath, for if I take thee,
I Will make thee to all thieves aspectacle,
Had my staff held, thou had not escaped me so,
But come not near me, follow not thou art best,
Holla, Earl Leyster, holla Huntsman hoe?

Glo. Upon my life, old Lancaster a Hunting,
Has met my fellow Hermit, could I meet him,
I Would play rob thief, at least part stakes with him.

Skin. Zounds he is yonder alone,
Enter Redcap with a cudgel. Skinke now revenge thy self on yonder slave.
Znayles still prevented? this same Redcap rogue
Runs like hob-goblin up and down the heath.

Red. Wh wh wh whope He Hermit, ye ha ha ma ma made
Re Redcap run a fine co co compass, ha have you not?

Ski. I made thee run?


Glo. Younders my evil Angel, were redcap gone, Gloucester would conjure him.


Red. Ie Ie Jesus bl bless me, whop to to two Hermits? I Will ca ca caperclaw to
to tone of ye, for mo mo mocking me, and I d d do not ha ha hang me: wh wh
which is the fa fa false k k k knave? for I am s s sure the old He He Hermit
woe would never mo mock an honest man.


Glo. he is the counterfeit he mocked thee fellow.
I did not see thee in my life before,
He wears my garments, and has coussoned me,

Red. Have you co co cousoned the he Hermit and m made
Redcap run to no pu pu purpose?

Ski. No he is counterfeit I will tell no lies,
As sure as Skinke deceived thee of thy clothes,
Sent thee to Kent, gave thee thy fare by water,
So sure he is false, and I the perfet Hermit,

Glo. This villain is a coniurer I doubt,
Were he the devil yet I would not budge,

Red. Si si sir, you are the co countefeite, O this is the tr tr true He
Hermit, sta sta stand still g good man at that, i will bu bumbast you in faith, i will
make you g give the old m m man his gown.

Offers to strike, Gloucester trippes up his heels, shifts Skinke into his place.
G g gods lid are ye go good at that? i will cu cudgel ye f f for this tr tr
trick.


Ski. It was not I it was he that cast thee down,


Red. You li li li lie you ra ra rascal you, I le left ye st standing he hear.


Ski. Zounds hold you stammerer, or I Will cut your stumps.


Gl. He Is for me he is weapon'd, I like that.


Red. O here is a to to rogue in ca ca carnat, help, mu murder murder.


Enter Lancaster and Huntsmen at one door, Leyster and Huntsmen at another.
Lan. Lay hold upon that theeuish counterfeit,


Ley. Why hears another Hermit Lancaster:


Glo. I am the Hermit sir, that wretched man
Does many a robbery in my disguise:

Skin. Its he that robs, he slanders me, he lies.


Lan. Which set on thee?


Red. Th this f f fellow has a s s sword and a buckler.


Lan. Search him; this is the thief, o hears my purse,
My chain, my Jewels: oh thou wicked wretch,
How dare thou under show of holiness,
Commit such actions of impiety?
Bind him, I Will have him made a public scorn.

Ski. Lay hold upon that other hermit.
He is a counterfeit as well as I,
He stole those clothes from me, for I am Skinke,
Search him, I know him not, he is some slave.

Glo. Thou lie base varlet.


Re. O g God he has a sword too, S Skink are you ca caught?


Lan. Villain thou shall with me unto the Court.


Ley. And this with me, this is the traitor Gloucester.


Glo. Thou lie proud Leyster I am no traitor.


Re. G gloucester? O b brave, now m my father sh shall be f free


Lan. Earl Gloucester I am sorry thou art taken.


Glo. I am not taken yet, nor will I yield
To any hear but noble Lancaster,
Let Skinke be Leysters prisoner I Will be thine.

Ley, Thou shall be mine.


Gl. First through a crimson sluice, I Will send thy hated soul to those black
fiendes
That long have houered gaping for their part,
When tyrant life should leave thy traitor heart.
Come Lancaster keep Skinke i will go with thee,
Let loose the mad knave, for I praise his shifts,
He shall not starte away, i will be his guide,
And with proud looks outface young Henry's pride.

Ley. Look to them Lancaster upon thy life.


Red. Well i will r r run and get a p pardon of the K K KKing, Gl Gloucester and
Skinke ta ta taken? O b b brave, r r r run re Re Red ca cap a and ca ca carry
the first n n news to co co court.


Ley. Lancaster i will help to guarde them to the Court.


Lan. Do as you please.


Glo. Leyster do not come near me, for if thou do, thou shall buy it dearly.


Ley. I Will have thy hand for this.


Glo. Not for thy heart.


Ski. Brave Earl, had Skinke known thou had been the Noble Gloucester (whose
mad tricks have made me love thee) I would have died Black heath red with
the blood of millions, ere we would have been taken; but what remedy, we are
fast and must answer it like Gentlemen, like Soldiers, like resolutes.


Gl. I ye are a gallant, come old Lancaster,
For thy sake will I go; or else by heaven
I Would send some dozen of these slaves to hell. Exeunt.

Enter Prince Richard, Robert Hoode and Lady Faukenbridge. La, Your travail
and your comfortable news,
This Ring, the certain sign you met with him,
Binds me in duetyous love unto your grace:
But on my knees I fall, and humbly crave,
Importune that no more, you nere can have.

Ric. Nay then ye wrong me Lady Faukenbridge,
Did you not join your fair white hand?
Swore that ye would forswear your husbands bed,
If I could but find out Gloucester?

La. I swear so?


Ric. By heaven


Rob. Take heed, its a high oath my Lord.


Ric. What meanst thou Huntington?


To. To save your soul, I do not love to have my friends forsworn,
She never promised that you urge her with.

Ric. Go to, provoke me not.


Rob. I tell you true, it was I in her attire that promised you,
She was gone unto the wizard at Black heath,
And there had suitors more then a good many.

Ric. Was I deluded then?


La. No not deluded, but hindered from desire unchaste and rude:
O let me woo ye with the tongue of ruth,
Dewing your Princely hand with pitties tears,
That you would leave this most unlawful suit,
If ere we live till Faukenbridge be dead,
(As God defend his death I should desire)
Then if your highness daine so base a match,
And holy laws admit a marriage,
Considering our affinity in blood,
I will become your Handmayde not your harlot.
That shame shall never dwell upon my brow.

Rob. I faith my Lord she is honorably resolved,
For shame no more, importune her no more.

Ri. Marian I see thy virtue, and commend it,
I know my error seeking thy dishonor,
But the respectlesse, reasonles command
Of my inflamed love, bids me still try,
And trample under foot all pietye.
Yet for I will not seem too impyous,
Too inconsiderate of thy seeming grief,
Vouchsafe to be my Mistress: use me kindly,
And I protest i will strive with all my power,
That lust himself may in his heat devour.

La. You are my servant then.


Ric. Thanks sacred Mistress.


To. What am I?


La. You are my fellow Robert.


Enter Faukenbridge in his hose and dublet. Fau. What Prince Richard? noble
Huntington?
Welcome, in faith welcome, by the morrow Mass
You are come as fitly as my heart can wish:
Prince John this night will be a Reueller,
He has invited me and Marian.
Gods mary mother go along with us,
Its but hard by, close by, at our town Tavern.

Ric. Your Tavern?


Fau. O I I I it is his own made match,
I Will make you laugh, i will make you laugh in faith;
Come, come, he is ready, O come, come away.

La. But where is the Princess?


Fa. He Is ready too, Block Bl. my man, must be her waiting man,
Nay will ye go? for gods sake let us go.

Ri. Is the jest so? nay then let us away.


Rob. O twill allay his heat, make dead his fire.


Fau. Ye bob'd me first, ye first gave me my hyre,
But come a gods name, Prince John stays for us. Exeunt.

Rob. This is the word, ever at spend-thriftes feasts,
They are guld themselves, and scoft at by their guests. Exit.

Enter John. Ioh. Buffild and scoft, Skinke, Gloucester, women, fools, and boys
abuse me?
I Will be revenged,

Ric. Revenged, and why good child?
Old Faukenbridge has had a worser basting.

Fa. I, they have banded from chase to chase;
I have been their tennis ball, since I did coort,

Ric. Come John, take hand with virtuous Isabell,
And lets unto the Court like loving friends,
Our Kingly brothers birth days feastiuall,
Is forthwith to be kept, thither we will hye,
And grace with pomp that great solemnity.

Jo. Whether ye will, I care not where I go:
If grief will grace it, i will adorn the show.

Fa. Come Madam, we must thither we are bound.


La. I am loath to see the Court, Gloucester being from thence,
Or kneel to him that gave us this offense.

Fa. Body of me peace woman. I prithee peace.


Enter Redcap. Red. Go go god ye, go god s speed ye,


Ioh. Whether run you sir knave?


Red. R r run ye sir knave? why I r run to my La Lady Fa Faukenbridge, to te te
tell her Sk Skinke and Gl Gloucester is t taken, and are gg one to the CC Court
with L Lord Leyster, and L Lord la la Lancaster.


Io. Is Gloucester taken? thither will I fly
Upon wraths wings, not quiet til he dye. Exit with Princess

Rich. Is Gloucester taken?


Red: I he is ta taken I wa warrant ye with a wi witness,


Ric. Then will I to Court, and either set him free, or dye the death,
Follow me Faukenbridge, fear not fair Madam:
You said you had the Porter in your house,
Some of your servants bring him, on my life
One hair shall not be taken from his head,
Nor he, nor you, nor Gloucester injured.

Fa. Come Mall, and Richard say the word nere fear.


To. Madam, we have twenty thousand at our call,
The most, young Henry dares, is but to braule.

La: Pray God it prove so.


Ric: Follow Huntington: sir Rich. do not fail to send the Porter.


Fa: Block, bring the Porter of the Fleet to Court.


Bl. I will sir.


Red: The p p Porter of the fl fl Fleet to Court? what p p porter of the fl fl
Fleet?


Blo. What Redcap, run redcap, will thou see thy father?


Red. My fa father? I that I w would s see my f father, and there be a p porter
in your ho house, its my f fa^^^r.


Bl. Follow me Redcap then. Exit.


Red. And you were two to twenty b Blocks, i would f f follow ye s so I would, and
r run to the co co court too, and k kneel before the k k King f f for his pa
pardon.


Block within. Come away Redcap, run Redcap.


Red. I I I r r run as f f fast as I I ca ca can run I wa warrant ye.


Enter a Sinet, first two Herraldos, after them Leyster with a Scepter,
Lancaster with a Crown Imperial on a cushion: After them Henry the elder
bareheaded, bearing a sword and a Globe: after him young Henry Crowned: Elinor
the mother Queen Crowned: young Queen Crowned. Henry the elder places his
Son, the two Queens on either hand, himself at his feet, Leyster and
Lancaster below him. Hen. Herrald, fetch Lancaster and Leyster Coronets,
Suffer no Marquess, Earl, nor Countess enter,
Except their temples circled are in gold,
He delivers Coronets to Leyster and Lancaster. Show them our vize-roys: by our
will controld
As at a cornation, every Peer
Appears in all his pomp, so at this feast
Held for our birthright, let them be adorned.
Let Gloucester be brought in, crowned like an Earl, Exit
This day we'll have no parley of his death,
But talk of Iouisanes and gleefull mirth.
Let Skinke come in, give him a Barons seat,
High is his spirrit, his deserts are great.

Kin. You wrong the honor of Nobility,
To place a robber in a Barons stead,

Quee. Its well ye term him not a murderer.


Kin. Had I mistearmed him?


Quee. I that had you Henry.
He did a piece of Justice at my Bidding.

Kin. Who made you a Justice?


Hen. I that had the power.


Kin. You had none then.


Enter Gloucester and Skinke. Ley. Yes he was crowned before.


Hen. Why does not Gloucester wear a Coronet?


Glo. Because his Sovereign does not wear a Crown.


Hen. By heaven put on thy Coronet, or that heaven
Which now with a clear, lends us this light,
Shall not be courtain'd with the veil of night,
Ear on thy head I clap a burning Crown,
Of red hot Iron that shall sear thy brains.

Ri. Good Gloucester Crown thee with thy Coronet.


Lan. Do gentle Earl.


Skin. Swounds do, would I had one.


Qu. Do not I prithee keep thy proud heart still.


Glo. I Will wear it but to cross thy froward will.


Hen. Sit down and take thy place.


Glo. Its the low earth.
To her I must, from her I had my breath.

Hen. We are pleased thou shall sit there, Skinke take thy place among my
nobles.


Enter John and Jsabell with Coronets. Ski. Thanks to King Henry's grace.


Io. John Earl of Morton and of Notingham,
With Isabell his Countess, bow themselves
Before their brother Henry's Royal Throane.

Hen. Assend your seats live in our daily love.


Enter Richard, and Robert with Coronts. Ric. Richard the Prince of England,
with his Ward
The noble Robert Hood, Earl Huntington,
Present their service to your Majesty.

Hen. You Are welcome too, though little be your love.


Enter Faukenbridge with his Lady, she a Coronet Fa. Old Richard Faukenbridge,
Knight of the cross,
Lord of the Cinque ports, with his noble wife
Dame Marrian Countess of west Hereford,
Offer their duties at this Royal meeting.

Hen. Sit down, thou art a newter, she a foe,
Thy love we doubt her heart too well we know.
What suitors are without, let them come in.

Glo. And have no Justice where contempt is King.


Hen. Mad man I give no ear to thy loose words.


Jo. O sir you are welcome, you have your old seat.


Glo. Though thou sit hier yet my heart's as great.


Que. Great heart we will make you lesser by the head.


Glo. Ill comes not ever to the threatened.


Enter Block and Redcap. Hen. What are you two?


Red. M ma mary and't please you I am re re Redcap.


Hen. And what is your mate?


Blo. A poor Porter sir.


Ioh. The Porter of the fleet that was condemned.


Blo. No truly sir I was Porter last, when I left
The door open at the Tavern.

Io. O is it you sir?


Ley. And what would you two have?


Red. I co co come to re re re qui quier the young K K King of his go goo
goodness, since Glo Gloucester is t taken, that he woe woe would let my fa fa father
have his pa pa pardon.


Hen. Sir your father has his pardon signed,
Go to the office it shall be delivered.

Red. And shall he be p p Porter a ga gain?


Hen. I that he shall, but let him be advised
Heareafter, how lets out prisoners,

Red. I wa warrant ye my Lord.


Hen. What have thou more to say?


Red. Marry I woe would have Skinke pu punished for co co Cunnicatching me.


Ley, Is that your business?


Red. I by my t t troth is it.


Hen. Then get away.


Glo. Against Skinke (poor knave)
Thou gets no right this day.

Blo. O but run back Redcap for the Purseuant.


Red. O I Lord s sir, I have another s suit for the p p Purseuant, that has l l
lost his b b box, and his wa wa warrant.


Hen. What means the fellow?


Red. Why the pu pu Purseuant sir and the po po Porter.


Glo. The box that I had from him, there it is.


Fau. Mary a me, and I was chargd with it.
Had you it brother Gloucester? Gods good mercy,

Hen. And what have you to say?


Bl. Nothing sir but God bless you, you are a goodly company, except sir
William or my Lady will command me any more service.


Fau. A way you prating knave, hence varlet, hence. Exit.


Ley. Put forth them fellows there.


Red. A f fo fore I go go I b b be s s seech you let Sk Skinke and gl Gloucester
be lo lo looked too, for they have p p played the k k knaves to to to b b bad.


Hen. Take hence that stuttering fellow, shut them forth.


Red. Nay I Will ru ru run, faith you shall not n n need to b b b bid him ta ta
take m me away, for re re Redcap will r ru run rarely. Exit.


Hen. The sundry misdemeanors late committed,
As theftes and shifts in other men's disguise,
We now must (knave Skinke) freely tell thy faults.

Skin. Sweet King by these two terrors to mine enemies, that lend light to my
bodies darkness: Cauilero Skinke being beleagerd with an host of leaden heels,
armed in ring Irish: cheated my hammerer of his Red cap and Coat; was
surprised, brought to the fleet as a person suspected, past current, till
Gloucester stripped me from my counterfeit, clad my back in silk and my heart in
sorrow, and so left me to the mercy of my mother wit: how Prince John releast
me, he knows: how I got Faukenbridges chain, I know: but how he will get it
again, I know not.


Fau. Where is it sir, tell me where it is?


Glo. I got it from him, and I got John's sword,


Joh. I would twere to the hilts up in thy heart.


Ric. O be more charitable brother John.


Ley. My Leidge, you need not by perticulars
Examine what the world knows too plain,
If you will pardon Skinke, his life is saved,
If not, he is convicted by the Law.
For Gloucester: as you worthyly resoul'd,
First take his hand, and afterward his head.

Hen. Skinke thou have life, our pardon and our love.


Ski. And your forgiveness for my robbery?


Io. Tut never trouble me with such a toy.
Thou hindrest me from hearing of my joy.

Hen. Bring forth a block, wine, water and towell,
Knives, and a Surgion to bind up the veins,
Of Glosters arm: when his right hand is off,
His hand that struck Skinke at the Parliament:

Sk. I shall bear his blows to my grave my Lord.


Kin. Son Henry see thy fathers palzie hands,
Joined like two supplyants, pressing to thy thrown?
Look how the furrows of his aged cheek,
Filled with the reuolets of wet eyde moan,
Begs mercy for Earl Gloucester? weigh his gilt,
Why for a slave, should Royal blood be spilt?

Ski. You wrong mine honor: Skink may be revenged,


Hen. Father I do commend your humble course.
But quite dislike the project of your suit,
Good words in an ill cause makes the fact worse,
Of blood or Baseness, Justice will dispute,
The greater man the greater his transgression,
Where strength wrongs weakness, it is meare oppression,

La. O but King Henry hear a sister speak,
Gloucester was wronged, his lands were given away,
They are not Justly said. Just laws to break,
That keep their own right, with what power they may,
Think then thy Royal self began the wrong,
In giving Skinke what did to him belong.

Quee. Hear me Son Henry, while thou art a King,
Give, take, prison, thy subjects are thy slaves,
Life, need, thrones proud hearts in dungions fling.
Grace men to day, to morrow give them graves.
A King must be like Fortune; ever turning,
The world his football, all her glory spurning.

Glo. Still your old counsel Beldam policy,
You Are a fit Tutresse in a Monarchy.

Rich. Mother you are unjust, savage, too cruel,
Unlike a woman: gentleness guides their sex,
But you to furyes fire ad more fuel,
The vexed spirit, will you delight to vex?
O God when I consaite what you have done,
I am a shamed to be estem'd your son.

Jo. Base Richard I disdain to call thee brother,
Take thou a traitors part in our disgrace?
For Gloucester, will thou wrong our sacred mother?
I scorn thee and defy thee to thy face.
O that we were in field, then should thou try,

Rob. How fast Earl John would from Prince Richard fly
Thou meet a Lion in feeld? poor mouse,
All thy Carreers are in a Brothell house.

Ioh. Zounds boy.


Ric. Now man:


Ley. Richard you wrong Prince John.


Ric. Leyster tweare Good you proou'd his Champion.


Jo. Hasten the execution Royal Lord,
Let deeds make answer for their worthless words.

Glo. I know if I respected hand or head,
I am encompassed with a world of friends,
And could from fury be delivered.
But then my freedom hazards many lives.
Henry perform the utmost of thy hate,
Let thy hard hearted mother have her will,
Give Frantic John no longer cause to prate,
I am prepared for the worst of ill,
You see my knees kiss the could pauements face,
They are not bent to Henry nor his friends,
But to all you whose blood fled to your hearts,
Shows your true sorrow in your ashye cheeks:
To you I bend my knees, you I entreat,
To smile on Glosters Resolution.
Who ever loves me will not shed a tear,
Nor breath a sigh, nor show a cloudy frown,
Look Henry, hears my hand, I lay it down,
And swear as I have Knighthood heer't shall lie,
Till thou have used all thy tyranny.

La. Has no man heart to speak?


Glo. Let all that love me keep silence, or by heaven I Will hate them dying.


Quee. Harry off with his hand, then with his head.


Fau. By the red rood I cannot choose but weep.
Come love or hate my tears I cannot keep.

Que. When comes this lingering executioner?


Joh. An executioner: an executioner:


Hen. Call none till we have drunk: father fill wine,
To day your Office is to bear our cupp.

Ric. I Will fill it Henry. K. kneel down.


He. Dick you are too mean, so bow unto your sovereign,


Gl. Kneel to his child? O hell! O tortor! (Gloucester learn:
Who would love life, to see this huge dishonor?

Hen. Saturn kneeled to his Son the God was feign
To call young Jove his ages Sovereign.
Take now your seat again and wear your Crown;
Now shines Henry like the Middayes Son,
Through his Horizon, darting all his beams,
Blinding with his bright splendour every eye,
That stares against his face of Majesty.
The Commets, whose malicious gleames
Threatened the ruin of our Royalty,
Stands at our mercy, yet our wrath denies
All favor, but extreme extreamityes.
Gloucester, have to thy sorrow chafe thy arm
That I may see thy blood (I longed for often)
Gush from thy veins, and stain this Palace roof.

Io. Twould exceed gilding.


Quee. I as gold does Oaker.


Glo. Its well ye count my blood so precious.


Hen. Leyster reach Gloucester wine.


Ley. I reach it him?


Hen. Proud Earl i will spurn thee, quickly go and bear it


Glo. I Will count it poison if his hand come near it.


Hen. Give it him Leyster upon our displeasure.


Glo. Thus Gloucester takes it, thus again he flings it,
In scorn of him that sent it, and of him that brought it.

Ski. O brave spirit*


La. Bravely resolved brother, I honor thee.


Quee. Hark how his sister joys in his abuse?
Will thou endure it Hall?

Fau. Peace good Marian.


Hen. Avoid there every under Officer.
Leave but us, our Pieres and Ladies here.
Richard you love Earl Gloucester look about
If you can spy one in this company,
That has not done as great a sin as Gloucester;
Choose him, let him be the executioner.

Ric. Thou have done worse then, like rebellie us head,
Have armed ten thousand hands against his life
That loved thee so, as thou were made a King,
Being his child, now he is thy underling.
I have done worse: thrice I drew my sword,
In three set battles for thy false defense.
John has done worse, he still has took thy part,
All of us three have smitte our fathers heart;
Which made proud Leyster bold to strike his face,
To his eternal shame, and our disgrace.

Hen. Silence, I see thou leanst to find none fit.
I am sure, nor Lancaster nor Huntington,
Nor Faukenbridge, will lay a hand on him.
Mother, wife, brother, lets descend the Throane
Where Henry is the Monarch of the West,
Has set amongst his Princes dignified.
Father take you the place, see Justice.

Kin. Its iniust Justice I must tell thee Son.


Hen. Mother hold you the Basin, you the Towell,
I know your French hearts thirst for English blood;
John, take the Mallet, I will hold the knife,
And when I bid thee smite, strike for thy life:
Make a mark Surgion, Gloucester now prepare thee.

Glo. Tut, I am ready, to thy worst I dare thee.


Hen. Then have I done my worst, thrice honored Earl,
I do embrace thee in affections arms.

Quee. What means thou Henry? O what means my Son?


Hen. I mean no longer to be lullaby'd,
In your seditious arms.

Hen. wife. Mordieu Henry.


Hen: Mordieu nor devil, little tit of France,
I know your heart leapes, at our hearts mischaunce,

Jo. Swounds Henry thou art mad:


Hen. I have bin mad; what stampst thou John? know thou not who I am?
Come stamp the devil out, sucked from thy Dam.

Que. I Will curse thee Henry.


Hen. Your best be quiet, least where we find you, to the Tower we bear you,
For being abroad, England has cause to fear ye.

Kin. I am struck dombe with wonder.


Glo. I amazed, imagine that I see a vizion.


Hen. Gloucester, I give thee first this Skinke, this slave,
Its in thy power, his life to spill or save,

Skin. He Is a noble gentleman, I do not doubt his usage.


Hen. Stand not thus wondering, Princes kneel all down,
And cast your Coronets before his Crown.
Down stubborn Queen, kneel to your wronged King,
Down Mammet; Leyster i will cut of thy legs,
If thou delay thy duty: when proud John?

Io. Nay if all kneel, of force I must be one.


Fau. Now by my holydom a virtuous deed.


Hen. Father you see your most rebellious son,
Stricken with horror of his horred guilt,
Requesting sentence fitting his desert,
O tread upon his head, that trod your heart.
I do deliver up all dignity,
Crown, Scepter, sword unto your Majesty.

Kin. My heart surfets with joy in hearing this.
And dear Son i will bless thee with a kiss.

Hen. I will not rise, I will not leave this ground,
Till all these voices joined in one sound:
Cry, God save Henry second of that name,
Let his friends live, his foes see death with shame.

All. God save Henry second of that name,
Let his friends live, his foes see death with shame.

Hen. Amen, Amen, Amen.


Joh. Hark mother hark?
My brother is already turned Clarke.

Quee. He is a recreant, I am mad with rage.


Hen. Be angry at your envy gracious mother,
Learn patience and true humility
Of your worst tuter'd Son, for I am he.
Send hence that Frenchwoman, give her her dowry,
Let her not speak, to trouble my mild soul,
Which of this world has taken her last leave:
And by her power, will my proud flesh control.
Off with these silks, my garments shall be gray,
My shirt hard hair, my bed the ashey dust,
My pillow but a lump of hardened clay:
For clay I am, and unto clay I must,
O I beseech ye let me go alone,
To live, where my loose life I may bemone.

Kin. Son?


Quee. Son?


Ric. Brother?


Io. Brother?


Hen. Let none call me their Son, I am no man's brother,
My kindred is in heaven, I know no other,
Farewell, farewell, the world is yours, pray take it,
I Will leave vexation, and with joy forsake it. Exit.

La. Wondrous conversion.


Fau. Admirable good: now by my holydam Mall passing good.


Ric. H'ath sir'd my soul I will to Palestine,
And pay my vows before the Sepulcher,
Among the multitude of misbeliefe.
I Will show my self the Soldier of Christ,
Spend blood, sweat tears, for satisfaction
Of many many sins which I lament:
And never think to have them pardoned,
Till I have part of Sirria conquered.

Glo. He makes me wonder, and inflames my spirits,
With an exceeding zeal to Portingale,
Which Kingdom the vnchristned Sarisons,
The black faced Affricans, and tawny Moors,
Have got unjustly in possession:
Whence I will fire them with the help of heaven.

Ski. Skinke will scotrch them brave Gloucester
Make Carbonadoes of their Bacon fletches;
Deserve to be counted valiant by his valor,
And Ryuo will he cry, and Castile too,
And wonders in the land of Civil do.

Rob. O that I were a man to see these fights,
To spend my blood amongst these worthy Knights.

Fa. Mary aye me, were I a boy again,
I Would either to Jerusalem or Spain.

Ioh. Faith I Will keep England, mother you and I
Will live, for all this fight and foolery.

Kin. Peace to us all, let us all for peace give praise,
Unlooked for peace, unlooked for happy days.
Love Henry's birth day, he has bin newborn,
I am new crowned, new settled in my seat.
Lets' all to the Chapel, there give thanks and praise,
Beseeching grace from Heavens eternal Throne,
That England never know more Prince then one. Exeunt

FJNIS. NOLI ALTVM SAPERE


