VICESIMO OCTAVO Ianuarij, 1611. Nono Regni Regis IACOBI.
Present, The Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of Stationers.

FOrasmuch as this Company out of their zeal to the advancement of Learning,
and at the request of the Right worshipful Sir THOMAS BODLEY Knight, Founder
of the present public Library of the University of Oxeford, being ready to
manifest their willing desires to a work of so great piety, and benefit to
the general state of the Realm, did by their Indenture under their common
Seal, dated the twelfth day of December, In the eighth year of his Majesty's
reign of England, France and Ireland, and the four and fourtieth year of his
Reign of Scotland, For them, and their successors, grant and confirm unto
the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Oxeford, and to
their successors for ever, That of all Books, after that, from time to time to
be Printed, in the said Company of Stationers, being new Books and Copies
never Printed before, or though formerly Printed, yet newly augmented or
enlarged, there should be freely given one perfect Book of every such Book
(in quiers) of the first Impression thereof, toward the furnishing and
increase of the said Library; NOW therefore to the intent the said Grant may
take due effect in the orderly performance and execution thereof, And that so
good and godly a work and purpose may not be disappointed or defeated by any
means, IT IS ordained by this Company, That all and every Printer and
Printers, that from time to time hereafter, shall either for him, or themselves,
or for any other, Print or cause to be Printed any new Book or Copy never
Printed before, or although formerly Printed, yet newly augmented or enlarged,
shall within Ten days next after the finishing of the first Impression
thereof, and the putting of the same to Sale, bring and deliver to the younger
Warden of the said Company of Stationers for the time being, one perfect Book
thereof, to be delivered over by the same Warden to the recited use, to the
hands of such person or persons, as shall be appointed by the said
Chancellor, Masters and Scholars for the time being, to receive the same.

AND it is also ordained, That every Printer, that at any time or times
hereafter shall make default in performance hereof, shall for every such
default forfeit and pay to the use of this Company, treble the value of every
Book, that he shall leave vndeliuered, contrary to this Ordinance; Out of the
which forfeiture, upon the leuying and payment thereof, There shall be provided
for the use of the said Library, that Book, for the not delivery whereof, the
said forfeiture shall be had and paid.

AND to the intent all Printers and others of this Company whom it shall
concern, may take notice of this Ordinance, And that any of them shall not
pretend ignorance thereof, IT IS ordained, that once in every year at some
general Assembly and meeting of the said Company upon some of their usual
Quarter days, or some other time in the year at their discretion, this
present Ordinance shall be publicly read in their Hall, as other their
Ordinances are accustomed to be read there.

John Norton, Master. Wardens.
Richard Field Humfrey Lownes
John Harison. Robert Barker. Thomas Man. Thom. Dawson. Edward White. Humfrey
Hooper. Simon Waterson. William Leake. John Standish. Thomas Adams. John
Harison. Ri. Collins, Clerk of the Company.


Having lately been entreated, as well by the said Sir THOMAS BODLEY Knight,
as by the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the foresaid Company of
Stationers, to take some special notice of this their public Act and Grant,
and (in regard of our being of his Majesty's high Commission in Ecclesiastical
causes) to testify under our hands with what allowance and good liking, we
have thought it meet to be received: we do not only as of merit commend it
to posterity, for a singular token of the fervent zeal of that Company to the
furtherance of good Learning, and for an exemplarie Gift and Grant to the
Scholars and Students of the University of Oxeford: But withal, we do
promise by subscribing unto it, That if at any time hereafter occasion shall
require, that we should help to maintain the due and perpetual execution of
the same, we will be ready to perform it, as far as either of our selves
through our present authority, or by any whatsoever our further endeavors, it
may be fitly procured.

G: Cant. Io: London. R: Cou. and Lich. Jo: Roffens. John Benet. John Boys.
George Montaigne. Thomas Ridley. Char: Fotherby. Robert Abbott. Tho: Edwards.
Henry Hickman. G: Newman. Martin Fotherby. John Dix. John Spenser. John
Layfield. William Ferrand. Richard Moket.



