TWO SOVEREIGN SALVES FOR THE SOVLES Sickness: Delivered Jn CERTAIN SERMONS
at Hurst-Church in the COUNTY of Berkes, near READING. BY ROBERT LOVELL, then
Minister and Preacher of Gods word in the same Parish.

ROMANS 6.12. Let not Sin Reign in your mortal bodies.

PROVERBS. 22.8. They that Sow unto Iniquity, shall Reap Affliction.

Peccatum est Fons et Mali, et Morbs, et Mortis.

Aretius in John 5.14. Ex sanitate Animae fit sanitas Corporis.

Arist. Metaphisic. lib. 7. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Nathanael Newbery, and
are to be sold at the sign of the Star under St. Peter's Church in
Cornehill, and in Pope's Head Ally. 1621.

TO MY MVCH REVERENCED AND TRVELY RESPECTED Friend, Master ISAACH HORN, Pastor
and Preacher of Gods sacred Word at ELLSFIELD in Hampeshire, To him Grace and
Peace be Multiplied.
REVEREND SIR,
AS J was in the midst of this Preaching-businesse, it fortuned that a Letter
of yours long since written unto me, came to my hands, wherein I perceived
your desire of seeing somewhat on this ensuing Text. And I sorrowed much that
it came no sooner, that I might have satisfied your desire, and showed my duty
to him to whom I owe my self in so great a measure as I cannot express: for
when mine own father forsook me, who took me in? When he received me again
to favor, who reconciled us? When he would have bound me to a Trade; who
dissuaded him? When he would not hear of my going to the University; who
prevailed with him but you? so that to speak the truth,

Tu Herus, Tu Patronus, Tu Pater esses. Yea, without Excess of speech, or
Suspicion of flattery, Plutarch. de vita Alex.
I may truly say of you as Alexander did of Aristotle; Hic mihi Principium
viuendi dedit, Iste autem Been viuendi rationem tradidit. For who in the
Country gave me either Countenance or Maintenauce in my course of
Schollership, but you? I speak Truly, I bless God Humbly, I thank you
Heartily, It was You, and none but You that did it. But Quid retribuam? Like
for Like? I cannot, for your Favors are beyond my Deserts, and your Deserts
are above the reach of my Requital. Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I
have, give I unto you; to wit, Duty for Love; Love and Respect for your loving
me when I was neither Loved nor Respected. In token of which I send these
unpolished papers, but how? not to Direct you, but that you should Correct them.

My Schoole-exercises have been often corrected by you, and now I refuse not
that my Church-seruices be censured with your Deleatur For I am of that Fathers
mind, which in all his works and writings did not only desire Pium Lectorem,
Au^. proae. nium. Lib. 3. de Trinitae.
fed etiam Liberum Correctorem. I therefore choose that I might be Blamed of
you by your friendly smitings, rather then Balmed of Carping Momus, and
Scourging Zoilus, with their Precious (or rather Pernicious) Balmes, which ever
yet were found of the Ingenious, nay Religious, to be rather Hurtful then
Helpefull to their Heads and Hearts. And further I crave that if you meet with
any, Qui vel non Intelligendo Reprehendunt, Aug. contra Faustam. lib. 22. cap.
34.
vel Reprehendendo non intelligunt, that you would be as silent with such as
may be: say little to them, and less of them, lest in your prayers, you will
beg with me, That they might be either of a more sound Judgment, or sober and
Sanctified Affection.

I confess it to be a shrewd adventure to traffic with one poor talent in
Public, whilst I behold richer graces buried in Silence. But judging it
better to Husband a Little to the Common good, rather then to hoard up Much in
Sullen Niggardize, I send it into the world. It is but a young plant, yet young
plants thrive, if the Sun warm them with it is beams. Cast then your eye of
acceptance on these weak beginnings and you shall hearten me in my
proceedings. Which hoping, I commend again to your kind acceptance, and your
self with it, to the blessing of our gracious God, and do rest with all due
reverence,

From my Study at Saint Michaels in Crooked Lane, Land. 25. of Nou. 1620. Your
poor Scholar in all Christian services to be commanded, ROBERT LOVELL.

To the Courteous READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHereas the common excuse for the Press is Ouer-pressing Importunity; I will
not press thee to believe that of me, but I will ingenuously acknowledge that
my special apology for my presumption in this kind is Opportunity, lest I
might seem unthankful unto him to whom I so much owe my self.

Look thou on the Thing without regarding the Person, on the Matter without
respecting the Man, and I doubt not but that it may profit thee. Which if it
does; Homeromastix was Homers Scourge, of whom all Railers and malicious
Carpers are called Zoili. Plutarch.
pleasure me then but so much as to shield me what thou may from that
Zoilus or Homeromastix whom I know will rather Except against it, then Accept
of it. Yet I must tell thee truly, that I suspect not the biting of any Curre,
but the Cubbe of that Fox which does dispraise the Grapes which he cannot
reach: For no such enemy to Art as Idi^tisme.

But if thou, who art Judicious, do hap to find ought in it which is worthy
of Reproof; Blame me then, but Blase me not, That is Charity; or if thou
find ought in it worthy of Praise, Bless him that made me the Instrument of
his glory herein; That is Piety. And thus doing, thou shall surely set me
with cheerfulness to a further benefitting of Gods Church, which that I may I
crave thy prayers for me, and assure thee of mine for thee, and so I rest,

From my Study at Saint Michaels in Crooked Lane, Land. 25. of Nou. 1620. Thy
servant in Jesus Christ, ROBERT LOVELL.

The Doctrines, with other special notes herein contained.
Page 3. Page 6. The means to have victory over sin. Page 9. The runges by
which Sin gets into its Throne. Page 12. Page 14. Page 21. Page 22. Page 27.
Wherein is noted the difference of Gods punishing the godly and the wicked.
Page 28. Page 31.
TWO SOVEREIGN SALVES For the SOVLES SICKNESS.
JOHN 5.14. Behold, thou art made whole, Sin no more: lest a worse thing come
unto thee.


AS the faithful Physician of the body, Chemnisius Harmon. cuang. lib. 2. page
160. in 4^^
having cured his Patient, if at any time after he can meet with him, will
admonish him to take heed of such diet as may hurt him, for fear of a
Relapse, (which commonly proves worse then the former disease:) So Christ
Jesus, that good Physician of the soul, meeting in the Temple, the man which
he had healed of a long and loathsome disease, does admonish him to be more
careful in time to come then formerly he had been, for fear Lest a
worsething, etc.

And as Christ then met with That man in his person: so does he now meet with
us in his Word; Therein showing us, 1. Our misery. 2. His mercy. Our misery,
in that we are sick in body, sick in soul, and sinful in both. His mercis,
Ne quod per gratiam accepimus peccando a^mu^e.
in that being thus sick, thus sinful, he does notwithstanding vouchsafe to
heal us, and healing us does admonish us also to take heed That we sin no
more, lest, etc.

Sensus verbovior.
The words for plainness sake may be thus explained: Thou art whole, that is.
Though through sin thou wast sick, by reason of wickedness thou wast weak,
Thou art whole.
by means of thine iniquities thou could not look up, much less leap into
the poole of Bethesda and now thou art MADE whole, Made whole.
not of thine own merit, nor by the strength of thine own power, Therefore

Sin no more.
Sin no more, that is, Draw no more so often of it, Drink no more so deep of
it. Rush no more so violently into it, Walk no more so inordinately in it.
Wallow not any more so filthily in it, Let Satan no more triumph over thee by
opp^ting and enthralling thy soul, Let sin no more lead thee without
orposition and manly resistance, Let it not any more reign in thee, Obey not
the lusts of it, Give not thy members any more as weapons to sight for it, but
oppose it, resist it, and manfully fight against it.

Lest a worse thing come unto thee.
Lest a worse thing come unto thee, that is, Some thing worse then that. First,
a worse damage to thy body, or which is worse then it, perhaps damnation to
thy soul. Lest continuing obstinate thou be of the number of them that are
numbered to the sword, that be bowed down to the slaughter, that cry, and be
not answered, that speak and be not leard, for if thou art; My father will
whet h^^ glittering sword, and sharpen his poisoned arrows, with the one
whereof he will eat thy flesh, and with the other drink up thy blood, take
hold of judgment and executing vengeance, yea, and wounding thy hairy scalpe,
if thou go on in thy wickedness. Therefore Break up thy fallow ground, Sow
no more among thorres, be circumcised unto the Lord, and be no more
stiff-necked. Yea, sin thus no more, lest. etc.

The words now in a more orderly handling, Diuisio.
do without rushing fall asunder into two parts, 1. An admonition or
iniunction. 2. The Reasons thereof. Sin no more.
The Reasons are drawn. A priore, a Front, or, a consideratione collacati
beneficy, from a benefit received. Thou art made whole The other reason is
drawn; A Posteriore, a Tergo, or, Terribili comminatione From an heavy threat
of Gods vengeance, which is, Lest a worse, etc.

But here me thinks I miss a word, not yet spoken off in my division, which
because it stands as a Porter at the gate, or as an Usher to prepare for my
ensuing discourse; I cannot let it pass unsaluted: Behold.
the word is, (...), Ecce, Behold. A word me thinks resembling that Chain
which Poets feign to be tied to the tongue of Mercury, and fastened to the
ears of the people, which Drew his Auditors.

It is a Preparatiue word, a Peaceable word, a word of Demonstration, Zachar.
3.8.
a word of Admiration, Isay 7.14.
a word of Attention, Psalm. 133.1.
a word of Precation, John 1.38.
a word of Exultation and Expectation, John 1.29.
a word used in matters of Wonder, either of wonderful Gladness, Luke 2.10.
or wonderful Sadness Luke 1.20.
. It has ever been the Porter opening to, or the Usher preparing for, matter
of great moment and importance; as may be seen in these places. Psalm. 77.5.
Psalm. 33.1. Psalm. 134.1. Luke 19.8. John 1.29. Romans 11.22.

And I find it to have a double office; the first Outward, the second Inward.
1. Outwardly to prepare the ears, which be the first gates, by which Christ
enters in to come at the heart. 2. Inwardly to prepare. 1. The Understanding.
2. The Will.



The Understanding to know, the Will, to acknowledge and submit it self unto
that which is worthy to be beheld. And such a Behold is this; for Behold, a man
was sick 38. years. Verse. 5. Yea, Verse 5.
Behold him so sick as that he was not able at the stirring of the Poole, to
step in as soon as others. ver. 7. Yet Behold, this man at one word of
Christ's; He arose, took up his bed and walked, Verse 8. was made whole. Ecce,
for who would but diligently mark, who could but both aspectiuely and
inspectiuely Behold such a thing as this? yea, look on it not a squint or
glauncingly, but with both eyes, to view it; yea, to view it with the eyes of
the body, and to note it with the eyes of the mind; All which is all one with
the word Consider 1 Samuel 12.24 Psalm. 50 22.
to which the Holy Christ powerfully adds another word, which is See, Behold
and See I Lam. 1 12.
, as if he had said, Intenta animi cogitatione, says St. August Auga^ Spirit^
and Litera. cap. 38.
. Look well upon it, consider it with an inward, eager, earnest, and serious
consideration Which word, what can it in this place more naturally afford,
then this? That Gods works, whether of Mercyor Judgment, whether on our
selves or others, ought not to be Slighted but to be Marked, to be Noted, yea,
duly and diligently to be considered off. Which point, because it arises but
from one word, we will end it with two or three at the utmost, and then come to
the other words of my Text.

We see it daily between man and man, that the not minding of a good turn,
the slacknesse in acknowledging thereof, and the not endeavoring to requite it,
makes the giver cold in continuance of his former favors: how much more shall
God do likewise? If he daily power out his benefits upon us, if he continually
heals our sickness, yea, and mercifully forgiueth our sins, and yet we
will not Behold consider and attend it, what hope is there of continuance of
them? surely little or none: For God cannot endure that his blessings be
swallowed in the grave and gulf of forgetfulness, but the more we have from
him, the more he craves from us, Unto which if his benefits bind us not, if his
mercies allure us not, if the cords of his love draw us not, he will cease
beholding us, he will no more consider our miseries, nor attend our cries.

We must therefore have both our ears of attention, and hearts of retention,
to hear, consider, ponder and meditate on his mercies; Filling our mouths
with his praise; sounding out his honor and glory all the day long, as well in
Exultation for him, as he has done in Exaltation of us. So did David even
provoke all the people to hear what God had done for him; Come (says he) and
hearken all ye people that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done
for my soul Psalm. 66.5.16.
. Again, when the Shepherds had found the words of the Angel true, and seen
the Babe laid in the cratch, they hid it not, they kept it not secret, but they
published it Luke 2.17.
says the Text: and so must we do likewise, and that both in respect of God,
our selves, and others.

First, God, whose glory, praise and honor, is much set forth thereby. our
selves, who thereby shall notably declare our faith. That we believe the works
of God. I believed (says David) and therefore did I speak Psalm. 116.10*
Nam vbi cunque est vera fides, ibi lingua sonat confessionem propter gloriam
Dei and salutem occlesiae Strigelius in Loc.
; For, wheresoever true faith is, there the tongue cannot be but as a trumpet
to sound out a sound confession, to the glory of God and salvation of his
chosen. Thirdly, brethren and companions sakes. Peter being converted must
strengthen his brethren Luke 22.32.
: and we being partakers either of mercy or judgment, of righteousness or
peace, must not slight it, but mark, Behold, observe, and attend to it, as
being a thing whereby God may be honored, our selves comforted, and others
edified.

Which being so, let this instruct Parents of Children, to register and record
Gods works of judgment; and meruaslousnesse in mercy, either toward
themselves or others: that so ye may be able out of your good treasure of the
one and other, to comfort and encourage them in goodness, or to fright and
fear them in committing evil. Fathers, 1 Paren^.
Behold and attend you the love that God had to Abraham and his Seed, to
Joshua and his House, to Hester and her Maids, because the one did command his
Sons, Genesis 18.19.
the other his Household, Josh. 24.15.
the third her Maids, H^ster 4.16.
To serve the Lord, to heepe his laws. To fast. And learn you by this to draw
conclusions either of instruction, imitation, or consolation to your selue^ and
them. Again, you Masters of Families, 2 Masters.
Behold and attend you the judgments of God on the wicked. His perfect hatred
against Balthazar for drunkenness, Dan. 5.25.
against Zimri and Cosby for Adultery, Number. 25, 8.
against Ananias and Saphira for lying and dissembling Acts 5.5.
and by such examples terrify your beastly Drunkards, affright your filthy
Adulterers, dismay your accustomed Liars, that so no such evils may happen to
you and yours, as have done to them and theirs; but being yet whole, Behold,
have a care, heed to it, that ye sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
you. And so I paste from this word of Admiration, to our Saviors Iniunction
which is, Sin no more. Pars prima. Sin no more.


What? sin no more? Will Christ have this man a Catheran, a Celestine, a
Donatist, a Perfectist? Will he have absolute obedience to the whole law? Or,
total immunitie from all sin? No, we leave such opinions to blind heathen,
to Pithagoras, and Zeno, who held that no string or root of vices at all, may
be remaining in men through the exercise of virtue Jeromad^tr^. T^^g^mad
c^se^ponum.
or we refer them to seduced Heretics, old Nouatus and Pelagius. (or to
newfound Petrus Brusius, a Frenchman, of the Province of Narbone and Henricus
his Scholar,) who in Augutines time helo that just men may possibly fulfill
the Law; and that the works of holy men are absolutely just Aug. l. Hare^.
Har. 38. et 88. (...) de bona se^ lib 2. cap. 5.
. And in Bernards time (says a Reverend Bishop,) maintained that it was not
impossible for a just man to be quite without sin in this life. G^ (...). of
Exceter ^es^lanca. Tom. 1 page 125. Col. 1. in fol.
No, we do not so understand it, for we are taught of God; that if we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us 1 Ioh.
1.8.
. And therefore Christ in bidding this man to sin no more; Non exigit ab omni
peccato vt immunis, sed comparatio sit superioris vitae Calvin. in loc.
: does not require him to be free from all sin, but he speaks in comparison
of his former life, which Christ knew without doubt to be evil, and that in an
high degree. So that this disswasion I take to be as much as if Christ had said
in more words, thus. Thou have formerly obeyed sin, now withstand it; Thou
wast wont to yield to it, now strive against it; Thou formerly made a Pastime
of it, now let it be a Burden unto thee; Thou wast wont to Delight in it, now
Lament it; Thou formerly did let it reign in thee, suffering it to play
Rex, and to establish its sovereignty; its Edicts, its Laws, its published
Proclamations exacted service from thee, but now reign thou over it; quench
it, subdue it, and so shall thou be safe: Which being the meaning, I mean
hence to infer. That though Sin has Residencie in us, yet it should not
Reign over us Tametsi peccatum in nobis Residet, tamen absurdum est vt ad
exer^end^m eius regnum vig^at. Calumus in Romans 6.12. and Augan Text. tract. 41.
.

Such is the taint of Sin, as that we have it Hereditarie from our first
Parents, being derived unto us for Adams fact. 1. By just imputation. 2. For
want of original justice in our generation. 3. Because of the deprauation and
corrupt disposition of our natures.
Yea, we have it Dwelling in us, forcibly crossing the motions of the spirit,
haleing and pulling us unto sin; but if we Dwell not in it, if we let it not
reign in our mortal bodies, Romans 6.12.
Sponte exequendo quod Peccatum imperat Calvin. in loc.
, readily obeying whatsoever sin commands, we need not fear its
Residencie. Per Baptismum enim tollitur, non vt Non sit, sed ne Imputetur Aug.
de Nuptijs. cap. 25.
: For by Baptism it is taken away, but how? not So taken away as that it is
not in them after Baptism, but So, as that it is not accounted unto them as
sin, to whom all sin is forgiven. And there are good reasons why Sin
should not have this dominion.

Baptism, in which being Baptized into Christ, we have put on Christ Gal. 3.27.
. Proclaiming him to be our King, and vowing our selves to be his Subjects, and
how can we then for fear or shame let sin reign in us? The Spirit having
Deified us by Baptism (says Nazianzine Nazian. de bap. orat. 6.
) that is, by Holiness made us Partakers of the Godly nature, says Saint
Peter 2 Pet. 1.4.
; yea, being by It delivered out of Prison, discharged from the debt we owed,
It having delivered us also from Death, regenerated the Soul, gorgeously
arrayed it, and made passage for the Kingdom of heaven, (says Basil, Basil.
(...). ad P^p^.
) how shall we then suffer sin to reign?

Sin is a Tyrant yea such a Tyrant as thrusts himself by force and fraud
into our best hold^, so to shoulder our the right owners; which who will (if he
know him) entertain in his house, much less let reign in his heart? Sin
indeed is a Tyrant, yea, a Consuming, Exacting, Insatiable, and Holding Tyrant.
For being dead in it, we are holden (says the Apostle) (...) Romans 7.6.
De^eneb^ntur.
, that is, forcibly holden, Holden in a miserable slavery and bondage, both of
the power of the law, of the rigor of the law, and of the curse of the law.
Sin like a Tyrant ouerturneth all laws and constitutions, it makes its own
will its law, which when we have entertained and obeyed, and suffered to
reign, what slavery is like ours? Surely none. No, not the Israelites
oppression in Egypt, nor their unmerciful entreatie in Babylon; not the bloody
persecution of Antiochus, nor the Turks Gallie slavery; not the Popes fire,
nor Papists Gunpowder; not the Spaniards Inquisition, nor Amsterdam Brownists
mercilessenes are not to be compared unto it. I remember a pretty question of
the Orators, and it is this: Cicero Tarad. 5
An ille liber sit, cui mulier imperat* cui leges imponat? Whether he be a free
man, whom a woman may command, and unto whose laws he must be obedient? And he
answers: Istum non solum seruum, sed nequissimum seruum; That such an one is
not only a Servant, but a Slave, yea, an unhappy bondslaue; Etiamsian
amplissima familia natus sit, though he be both borne and bred and brought up
in never so ample, never so honorable a family. I speak it not to approve
the Orators speech, I condem^e it rather, but it will serve to infer that the
same may be s^ld of sin. For if any personal vice does but obtain its
rege^cie, what will it not make us to do? Poscit, et dandum est; Vocat, et
veniendum; Eijcit, et abcundum; Minatur, et extimescendum: It craves, and we
must give; it calls, and we must come: it casts us out, and we must be gone; it
threatens, and we (...) f^are. Nay, and if this were all it were well, but it
is not; ^f (...) by as tyranny, it makes the fruit of the womb, which is a
Blessing, to be a Curse, it makes God of a tender Father, to be a terrible
Judge; it makes Christ which is a cornerstone to support, to be a stone of
offense to slumble at; yea, it makes the Gospel which is of it self glad
tidings, to be unto us heavy news, even the savor of Death unto Death: oh
therefore let it not reign in us, but rather let us deal with Sin as with a
Tyrant, and that on this wise. 1. Take away its weapons. 2. Banish its friends.
3. Prevent its policies. 4. Never offer conditions of peace with it, for if we
do, it will quickly encroach and get the chair of estate, and sit in our
souls as King. Therefore let it not Reign, etc.

sins wages: when it has made us to take pains, what will be our pay? Surely
in this life a galeing and wounded Conscience, which shall continually suggest
unto us our sins committed, Gods law violated, his Majesty offended, and
punishment deserved. This Worm shall gnaw, this Scourge shall whip us in this
life.

Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum. I^menal. sat. 13
Yea, the Tormentor shall shake an hidden whippe in the soul of the Tormented.
Nay, neither is this all, but Death shall also play its part, for That indeed
is sins proper pay, as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 6.23. saying, The wages of
sin is death. Mors vt debitum soluitur peccanti; vti Militi stipendium suum
ex pacto Aretius in Romans 6.23.
Death is the Sinners due, and shall be as surely paid him, as the Soldier
has his press money, and the Servant his covenant penny. Therefore let not
sin reign, etc.

My application of which point shall be none other but this: Therefore to
reign over sin.

Which if we will do, we must as warlike-kings fight lustily and with a good
courage, fearing none but God, and yielding to nothing but godliness, which
has the promise of this life and that which is to come: Both which if we will
do, we must follow the counsel of the Apostle, who wills us, To take the
whole armor of God, that we may be able to withstand the assaults of the
Devil, Ephesians. 6.11.
and to Resist in the evil day, and to stand fast v. 13.


Know this, oh thou Christian man whatsoever thou art, that living here thou
live in a Millitary world 1 Cor. 7.31.
and in a Church Millitant 1 Timothy 2.15.
.

Thou must therefore be a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.3.
and the course of thy life must be a fight 1 Timothy 1.18.
, thou must expect the opposition of enemies Luke 1.71.
, and annoyance with assaults 1 Pet. 2.11.
: And therefore like a good Soldier thou must fight manfully, that thou may
reign Regally.

But before thou entrest combat with thy foes, Put on thine armor, be every
way, and in every thing well instructed, as Mr, Calvin expounds it. Quo
signisicat debere omni ex part instructor esse ne quod nobis desit.
But what Armor must thou put on? Not Ionathans Bow; nor Sampsons Iaw bone:
not David's Sling; nor Peter's Sword: not Shamgars Goade, nor Saules Spear: For
we wrestle not against flesh and blood etc. But against Principalities and
powers, against worldly Governors, and Princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses, and things which are in high places
Ephesians. 6.13.
. Eo ergo plus nobis est negoty and molestia Calum in Loc
: And therefore so much the more business and trouble. If then thou will be a
Conqueror, follow that Captains counsel that bids thee put on (...),
Universe;ain armaturam Dei: The Armor of God. So called, because it was made of
God. I am. 1.17. Prescribed by God. Psalm. 119 98. Given of God. 1 Cor. 14.
Agreeable to God. Heb. 13.21. Made in heaven. Prescribed in his Word. Given by
his Spirit. Agreeable to his Will: Therefore the Armor of God. The pieces of
which Armor are these. 1. The Girdle of Verity. 2. The Breast Plate of
Righteousness. 3. The Shoes of Peace. 4. The Shield of Faith. 5. The Helmet of
Hope. 6 The Sword of the Spirit Ephesians. 6.14.15.16.
.


Yea, girt thee with the Girdle of Verity. Have in thee, 1 The Girdle of
Verity.
1. Truth of Judgment; Whereby, through illumination of the Spirit, and
information of the word of God, 2. Truth of Heart, David) Loves truth in the
inward affections Psalm. 51.6.
3. Have in thee truth of speech, whereby thy mouth and thy mind, thy heart
tongue, that are so closely tied by natures bond, may not be unknit, or
unloosed by the Devil, which is a liar, but rather Speak thou the Truth unto
thy neighbor. 4 Have in thee, Truth of action, whereby thou approuest thy
self plain, faithful and honest in all thy dealings and doings both with God
and Man, this done,


Then cover thy self with the Breast Plate of Righteousness; whereby the
vital parts of thy soul, 2 The Breastplate of Righteousness.
to wit, A good conscience, sanctification, and a godly life, may be preserved
and kept from being mortally wounded, or downright killed. Thus covered,
slack not to shoe thy feet with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, 3
The Shoes of Peace.
by which greaues and leg-harnesse, being preserved from the Briars and
Thorns, Stones and Sticks that are in thy way, that is, Afflictions and
persecutions, tentations and trialls in thy profession and practice of
Christianity* thou may march valiantly, fight lustily, and overcome both
quickly and comfortably. Thus Shod,

4 The Shield of Faith.
Thou must have a great car, yea, (...). A care above all things else, that thou
shield thee with the shield of Faith; whereby thou may keep both thy Head
and thy Heart, from the handy-gripe, blows and stripes, foyles and pushes of
thine own corruptions, which are within thee as also Quench the fiery darts of
the Devil: Which having maliciously poisoned, he shootes at thee a far off
also, with which if thou art wounded, thou shall be so inflamed, enraged, and
in such a burning pain, as that if the shield of faith quench it not, cool it
not, assuage it not, by believing the promises of God, and applying the blood
of Christ to thy soul, it cannot be but that thou should be vexed in thy
Bones Psalm. 6.2.
, sore vexed in thy Soul Verse 3.
, faint in thy mourning Verse 6.
, and be consumed with Grief Job 3.3. and. 6.2.
; therefore specially shield thee with That, for it is the chief Balm, and
most medicinable Oil of thy soul, which being applied to that faculty which
is enflamed with Satan's poisoned dart, asswageth the heat, drives out the
poison, dispelleth the inward anguish thereof, pacifieth and quieteth it, and
so cures the wounds thereof: Yea, and makes them so sound, as that thou shall
be able at last to say with Job, Yea though he slay me, yet will I put my
trust in him Job 13.15.
. But being thus shielded.

5 The Helmet of hope.
Thou must have also the Helmet of Hope, or Salvation (...) Salutaris. Call. in
loc.
, with which thy head, nay heart and soul being covered, kept and fenced, thou
shall not fear thine adversaries, but meet them in the Gappe, boldly
confronting them, and manfully confounding them.

Lastly thou must not be without thy Sword girt unto thy Thigh, with which
lively, powerful, sharp, piercing, dividing, 6 The Sword of the Spirit.
discerning Heb. 4.14.
weapon, thou shall both defend thy self, and foil thy foe; provided always,
that thou have Knowledge and Wisdom; Knowledge, to Understand what is Gods
good will and pleasure; and Wisdom, to Apply it. And now because without
being armed with the Power of Gods might, thou art but like little David with
Sanls Helmet of Brass, Brigandine and Sword. 1 Samuel 17.38. therefore I would
advise thee to take to thee, Prayer and all manner of Supplication in the
Spirit Ephesians. 6.18.
, which will help thee well to weild and use thy aforenamed Armor: Which
being thus put on, thou need not fear either Sins Domination or
Damnation: For Sin with it is Author the Devil, is of that cowardly spirit,
as that being Resisted it will fly Iam. 4.7.
. By which Flight, thou shall have Freedom, both from his and it is Tyrannical
Regiment; no sin shall have dominion over thee, but thou shall as Lord and
King have dominion over it; yea, thou shall Sin no more (as hereto fore thou
have sinned.)

Yet such is the subtilty of sinnes-Author the Devil, that if we take not
great heed, and continual ^^re, it will by little and little steal into our
hearts, and so inthronize it self into our souls, as that we shall not be
able (without the fatherly and favorable assistance of the Almighty to reign
over it. Wherefore I hold it wisdom for every Christian, carefully to mark
sins footsteps, whereby it climbeth into our hearts and makes it is Throne
in our Souls, (for, Nemo Repent fit Pessimus sed Paulatim descendit Bern. de
gradibus Humilitat.
: No man is on the sudden desperately evil, but descends by little and
little;) yea, Canker-like it creeps by degrees, which the Psalmograph makes
three in number, that is, Walking, Standing, Sitting Psalm. 1.1.
, but the Ancients, four, to wit, 1. Cogitatio. 2. Propofitum. 3. Actio. 4.
Obduratio Iarob de valen. in Psa. 91.5, 6, 7
:
Thought, Purpose, Performance, and Continuance. By Thoughts, sin causes us
to stumble; Purposes it makes us to Fall; By Performance it causes us to Lie
Prostrate; Continuance it makes us Obdurate; Which is it is full pitch, Noone
tide, For now the sinner has eaten shame, Ibid.
and drunk after it; and therefore that Sin might have both it is Residencie
and Regencie, he will not stick to commit it. 1. Every whit. 2. Every where.
3. And ever;
or if you will. 1. All. 2. At all Places. 3. At all Times Stonham in Psalm.
1.1. page 16. in 4to.
.
These are the rungs, by which Sin gets it is throne in our inner man; In
which when it is a while established, see how it proclaims it self King, and
plays Rex. 1. By Ignorance, which Blinds; 2. By Unbelief, which
Displeases; 3. By Custom, which Hardneth; 4. By Security, 1 Ignorance.
which Presumes.
By Ignorance the Gentiles were Strangers to the Life of God Ephesians. 4.18.
, and the Romans were delivered into a Reprobate mind Romans 1.28.
; yea, this the Apostle does put first in that Catalogue of causes: They
Regarded not to Know God, says he, and why? Sponte nesciunt, vt Liberius
peccent, says Aquinas Aquin 2 2 quest. 76. art^. 4.
: They were wilfully ignorant, that they might sin the more freely; yea, and
whence is it that our common people have gotten such boldness in sinning? is
it not for the most part by reason of the Ignorance that is in them? Surely
yes: for who now so bold as Blind Bayard? who so sinful as the Rude multitude?
whose Cogitations being darkened, and hearts hardened, being past feeling, and
given over to Wantonness, do work all Uncleanness with Greediness Ephesians.
4.18.19.
. And therefore no marvel though Sin Reign in them.

But again see how unbelief draws on to sins Regencie. 2 Unbelief.
If the Devil can but blind this Eye of Faith, but prick this Foot, lame
this Hand; then he knows that he shall quickly make us, Eye all sin, Go
unto all iniquity, and Reach after all wickedness: That indeed is it that
draws Gods wrath, hasteneth Gods judgments, depriueth us of Gods promises,
and nullifieth his covenants. Faiths Necessuie Heb. 11.6.
implies vnbeliefes Indignity, makes it worthy of none other King then sin,
to whose Laws they must yield, and to whose Lusts they must obey; for it is
their King, and therefore it will Reign.

But let us see how Custom preuailes for sins Domination; 3 Custom.
surely much every way. In familiaritatem grauissima adducit, says Seneca
Seneca de Tranquilitate vitae.
; Custom makes heavy things light: It makes Cammels seem Gnats; and Beams
but Moates. The sinner accustomed to sin is then in his Element, when he is
committing heinous and hiddeous crimes, gross and grievous iniquities. And it
is a Rule in Philosophy; That no element is heavy so long as it is in its own
Sphere. Et Peccata quamuis Magna et Horrenda, cum in Consuetudine venerint, aut
Parua aut nulla crediderunt, says Saint Augustine Aug. Encheridion. cap. 17.
: And Sin though horrid, and horrible, when men are Accustomed unto it, seem
but small, nay none at All; yea, Sin that press and sincke down some to
hell, men accustomed therewith, will go away as nimbly with it, as ever
Sampson did with the Gates, Posts and Bars of Azzah Judges 16.3.
, without complaint of any heaft at all: and that makes it reign.

Lastly, Security has an hand to help sin in its Regencie: 4 Security.
This Ease-full sleep in sin (which the Greek Poets call (...), Deaths
brother, or if you will, a dead sleep,) this I say settles sin in its throne,
yea, and brings him that is possessed therewith To sit in his seat, as the
Psalmist has it Psalm. 1.1.
, id est, secure et pertenaciter perseuerare in delictis, et omnem Pietatem et
Religionem habere pro Ludibrio Mollerus in loc.
: that is, securely and obstinately to persevere and continue in omission of
good duties, making a mock of all piety and religion. This (...), spiritus
soporis, Spirit of slumber, or as Piscator translateth it Romans 11.8. Pisc. in
Loc.
, Dead sleep or senseless stumber possessing us, does make us to think, Who
is the Lord? or what can he do? yea, and to say also; We have made a Covenant
with Death, and an Agreement with Hell, Though a Scourge run over, and pass
through, yet it shall not come at us Isay. 28.15.
. Yea, and this indeed has been it, which has brought us in such subjection
unto sins Dominion. This has made us now, like the Romans of old, even to
sin, and to Favor such as do it Romans 1.32.
; both by Counselling and Countenancing, by Commanding and Commending, by
Provocation and Silence, by Familiarity and Defense. Oh this has brought us
to Ripeness of sin, and then what can we look for but the hook of Gods
judgments to cut us down and pluck us off? Therefore let us all stand in Awe
Psalm. 4.^.
: Suspect our own corruptions, and be careful in every action to shun and
avoid the offense and displeasing of God, then though sin has Residencie in
us in Infirmity, yet it shall not Reign over us with grosle Enormitie: Be we
therefore admonished by Christ, which here bids us sin no More.

I should now descend to the Reasons, but me thinks I cannot let pass without
observation that which is implied in this (...), Ne amplius, No more: and that
is this, That he had sinned before, and so was sick; yea, take the Text in its
Totum without Division, and you shall see it wholly implied, yea, the Learned
have concluded, That it was the Scope and Drift of Christ's Conference with this
man in the Temple, to show him the first efficient cause of his sickness Hugh
Card. Ludolphus de Saxonia. Chemnitius. (...) L^ss^. Caluinus. Aretius.
Marloratus. Maldonatus. in locum.
, which was none other but sin; so that the Inference is plain, to wit, That
sickness, For, sin does follow sickness In sin, or that Weakness of
Body does proceed from Wickedness of Soul.

This is the Real and Radical Fons et mali, et morbi, et mortis. Aretius in
Loc. Prima et principua causa Calamitatum. Strigelius. in Psalm. 107 Omnis
Poena, Peccatum habet Antecedens. Aretu Problem. lrc. 162. p. 489.
cause of all bodily sicknesses. For as the Naturalist said: Ex sanitate Anima
sit sanitas Corporis Arist^meta-Ph^sic. lib. 7.
; That the Souls soundness was the bodies safety; so Deuines hold, That if
the soul had not sinned, the Body had not smarted. That Pernicious Parent has
begotten this dangerous and deadly offspring; yea, from this Root and impure
Seminary has sprung all our woeful Misery, taking from us Paradise, and
making us Pilgrims; bereauing us of Immortality and putting on us Mortality;
dispossessing us of Gladness and exposing us to Sadness: and this does the
Scripture every where testify. Fools are afflicted (says David,) Why?
Because of their offenses. Psalm. 107.17.
And Ezechiel prophesying of Isreal's Destruction and fearful Ruin, lays
down this as the maine cause, even Her Iniquity, yea, so says the Text; For
this Ruin is for their Iniquity Ezec. 7.19.
. Again, I will swite thee (says God to Jacob.) yea, I will make thee sick
in smiting thee, and in making thee Desolate; and why? Because of thy sins
Micha. 6.13.
. And Ecclesiasticus saying is not to be buried in silence, who says: That he
that finneth before his maker, shall fall into the hands of the Physician
Ecclus 38.16.
, and so did this man without doubt: For me thinks it could no otherwise be,
but that he who was sick 38. years, should (with that woman, Mark 5.25.26.
sick of the bloody Issue 12. years) suffer many things of the Physicians. Of
all which painful effects of Sin, we may make plentiful use to bring us
unto Sanctity. As,

Abhor Sin above all things. By Nature we hate every thing that Hurts us,
how much more should we Abhor Sin that wounds us so sorely as it does?
Her way (like the way of a Strumpet) leads down to Death and her footsteps
take hold of Hell Prou. 5.5.
. Yea, says Saint Bernard, Via Peccati Ingredientes Contaminat; Progredientes
obstinat; Egredientes exterminat Bern. in Senten
. Sin in the first Entrance thereinto Defiles; in the Progress Hardens;
at its Going out Destroys. If I might with patience follow an Ancient Beda
lib. exhortat. 4. etc. 5.
, in Sins description, I think it would (if any thing would) make us to
abhor it.

He terms it a Monster, yea, and not only so, but also A monstrous Witch;
which says he, In tot Monstra te transformat in quot Peccata te alterat;
causes thee to accept the resemblance of so many Beasts, as it makes thee to
attempt sins. For example; let it bring thee to fleshly pleasure, It will
change thee into an Hog, an Horse, a Siren, a Sparrow: Or let it leave thee
to Sloth; then it will metamorphize thee into an Ostridge, an Elephant, a
Cammell, a Dragon, an Ass: Or let it possess thee with Covetousness, and
then no Harpie shall be compared unto thee, though insatiable in Coneting,
swift in Pursuing, hard in Holding: Or let Cruelty take hold of thee, and then
no Hiena, no Wolf, no Viper, shall be able to match thee. Oh monstrum
miserabile! Oh miserable monster, oh bewitched Sinner, who art so Taken (as
they say) with such a Witch as makes thee so foul in Nature, so monstrous in
Mortality, so damnable in Divinity! Sin, it will not only make thee (...),
Impium and improbum, void of holiness and honesty for a time, but it will
change thee into (...), Insignem Nebulonem John 9.16. Aretius in Loc.
, a notable, notorious, a palpable, apparent, gross and gricuous sinner: yea,
into one whose Eyes shall be full of Adultery; whose Ears shall be open to
all vain delights; whose Tongue shall be swollen with Deceit; whose Lips
shall be boulstred with the Poison of Aspes; whose Throat shall be an open
Sepulcher; whose Hands shall be full of Briberie; whose Belly a timpany of
Gluttony; whose Back shall be laden with Idleness; and whose Feet shall be
swift (enought though) to shed blood. Lo then, Sin being such a thing as
will make thee such an one, who will not abhor It above all things? Yea
indeed, let us not love that which causes God to loath us, let us not swill
down that which makes God to swell against us, making us sick because of
sin, and Weak by reason of Wickedness: but rather as I have said already,
let us Abhor it.

Does Sin cause sickness? Then let this teach us to commiserate and pity
men in their sinful estates, as well as in their sickly. In visiting the
sick, Ah my Brother, and alas my Sister, are the usual strains, but coming
to our sinful souls and seeing them sick with sin, even unto Death, we
cannot mourn, nor pity them, nay rather we rejoice and sing. Which may I not
with Solomon, call A mad mirth Eccles. 2.2.
? Surely yes. For who would censure more charitablie of that man, who when he
is called to the house of mourning, wherein his Dearest friend lies
languishing, he in stead of Mourning, laugheth, rejoices and danceth for joy?
And what shall we think of such as are Dying with sin; yea, Dead in sin:
Deadly Drunk, Deadly Covetous, whom when we epsy, we laugh at them? But let
all such Reioycers take heed, and Repent of this their pitteous Mirth, lest
they partake of that woe which our Savior has denounced, saying, We be unto
them which now laugh, Luke 6.25.
for they shall weep and houle z.

Wickedness cause Weakness? Then let this teach us to acknowledge without
murmuring, that all the judgments which seize on us, are just and righteous
altogether. Two peerless patterns hereof we have in sacred Write, the first
whereof is the Widow of Sareptah, whose Son falling sick, yea, even sick
unto Death; so that (as the Text says) There was no Breath in him 1 Kin.
17.17.18.
, She murmures not, she repines not, she reuiles not the man of God, but rather
disprayseth her self, imputes her Childs sickness and death unto her self,
saying: Art thou come to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son?
Which had been as much as if she had said: Oh man of God, I humbly acknowledge
that it were just with God if he did call my sins to remembrance, and for
punishment of them did take away my Son, I had no cause to murmr, but
rather to mourn, because my sin is so great as to deserve this, yea, and
many more heavy punishments then this. Lo, she is not like Vespatian, who
being sick and out of hope of life, threw the Curtains aside, spreading his
hands, and complaining against his Gods, Se Immerenti sibi vitam eripi
Sac^onius in v^. Vesp. cap. 10
; That they took away his life without any fault or failing on his part: No,
no, she does not behave her self any whit frowardly, but humbly acknowledges
that her sins have deserved it. The like we may read of in the book of
Nehemiah: How the Levites laid open the sins of the whole land, Condemning
themselves, and Commending the Lord. Confessing his kindness unto Them, and
their Unkindness unto Him. Yea, surely (say they) Thou art just in all that is
come upon us: Thou have dealt truly, but we have done wickedly Neh. 9.33.
. And thus it behooves us to do likewise, even in all our Troubles and
Afflictions that befall us in this life, therewith to be content, and willingly
to subject our selves unto Gods will, patiently waiting his leisure, and so
doing let us not doubt but that at the last the Lord will come, yea, and
recompense his seeming slacknesse with plenty of joy and glory, and honor and
immortality.

sickness comes for sin yet let us not uncharitably conclude (though God
may know it to be true,) That every one that we see grieuouslie sick, is a
Grievous sinner: or, That he or his friends have deserved such a sickness, or
such a plague, or such a punishment: No let us leave this to the Jews, or put
it off to the Barbarians. The first whereof would needs uncharitably censure
The man that was borne blind, and would not be persuaded but That either He,
or his Parents had sinned, John 9.2.
that is, had extraordinarily sinned above others. Again, the Barbarians did
no less unto Paul, on whose hand because a Viper hung Acts 18.4.5.
, it could not be but that This man must be some Murderer, who though he had
escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance would not suffer him to Live, said they. A note
which I have heard some of our Pure-spirited Illuminates too often and odiously
sing, yea and I have heard them too, like Jobs Miserable Comforters and
merciless friends, say both of, and unto their afflicted brethren; That God
had forgotten them for their Iniquities Job 11.6.
, and That their wickedness is Great, and their Iniquity Innumerable Job 22.5.
. But what art thou that Iudgest another man's servant? or Who has known the
mind of God at any time? Can thou tell whether the affliction which thy
brother suffers, be a Probation or a Punishment? Know thou the end of Gods
doings? It may be his sickness is for the same end that Jobs afflictions were,
even to Try him, that he may come forth like the Gold Job 23.10.
: therefore spare thy speech, save thy breath, look to thy self and be more
Charitable toward him. Is he now in his fiery trial, in the furnace of
affliction? Hodie Mihi, Cras Tibi, this is his portion to day, it may be thy
pittance to morrow. He it may be is in the furnace of Love, when thou shall be
in the oven of Wrath, therefore Thou that stand take heed lest that thou
fall 1 Cor. 10.12.
, and thou that now censurest thine afflicted brother, beware lest the same, if
not worse things, come unto thee. Lest therefore thy soul pay the price of thy
tongue, be not so hasty nor harsh against thy Brother in his heaviness, but
rather mourn with him, pray for him, That God (according to his promise) Would
not lay upon him more then he is able to bear, and in so doing thou shall show
thy self, wise, honest, charitable and Christian-like.

Grapes from Thorns? for Water from the Rock? for Oil from Stones? for
Sweetness from Bitterness? or for Comfort from Sin? Yet behold, and see,
admire, and be thankful to the God of might and Father of Mercy, that does
thus bring good out of evil, and that thus:

He makes Nocumenta to be Documenta, even his Lashings to be Lessenings: In
Consideration whereof Saint Gregory did thank God that he was Sick; for,
says he, Detrimenta Corporis, were Incrementa Virtutis, my bodies Pain, was
my souls Gain, my Bed of sickness was my school and Doctorall Chair of
learning and discipline. Likewise it is reported of Nazianzine that he took
that comfort of his sickness, that in the midst thereof he said: Morbe
crucier et Gaudeo, non quia Crucior, sed vt Alys Patientiaesim Magister: That
is, I am grievously grieved and I rejoice, not that I am grieved, but that in
the midst thereof, I behave my self so, as that I may be a Pattern of
patience to others: yea, and surely some such have I (to my unspeakable
comfort) visited, whose sickness has been so seasoned with holy and
sanctified speeches, that they have often prevented me, and in stead of receiving
comfort from my mouth, they have given me comfort to my soul: And their
sickness like Lazarus his sleep Ioh. 11.11.
, have not been unto Death, but for the Glory of God Verse 4.
. For in it their Tongues have been as the Tongues of the learned, touched
with a Coal from the Altar; their mouths have spoken powerful, pleasant and
profitable things, yea, and in it we have perceived such a measure of grace in
them, as in those who have had their souls wayned from the world, their flesh
mortified, their spirits consecrated to God, and themselves rapt up unto the
third heavens: Oh what comfort is here for the Sick, though as Sick as
Sinful!

is Sin the cause of Sickness? how should this press forward men of place
and authority, in Church and Commonwealth, to set themselves to the
suppressing of sin? Surely much every way. 1 Ministers.
It should make us Ministers to be even (...), fily Tonituri, Sons of Thunder
Mark 3.17.
, rattling from heaven the terrible judgments of God against sinners; yea, we
should be heard above, and be seen beneath, we should outface sin,
out-preach it, out-liue it, suffering our light so to shine in the faces of
worldlings, as that it might dazzle them, whom it cannot guide, for Then and
never till Then, Cum Imperio docetur, quod prius agitur quam dicatur Greg. in
Job.
: Then (says Saint Gregory) shall we with Authority speak what we do, when we
do what we speak: And that done, by us, will be but to little purpose, lest
you also that are authorized among the Commons, vnsheath your swords, and bend
your bows, 2 Magistrates.
to cut down and shoot at those rebellious wickednesses which be so
prejudicial to our peace, and such a bane to our health here, and happiness
hereafter. The sins that cause these things are innumerable; Sins of
infirmity and sins of enormitie, sins secret and sins open* and public;
yea, and those capital, crying ones too. For the suppressing of which if you
do not the sooner and soarer lay too your hand, it is to be feared that the
hand of God will ere long be upon you and yours, us and ours, Visiting our
Transgressions with the Rod, and our Iniquities with strokes Psalm. 89.32.
. The Crying sins that we cry unto you for suppressing (among many) are
specially three. First, Swearing. Secondly, Sabboth-breaking. Thirdly,
Drunkenness. Which for want of Magistrates, who Phineas-like are
Bold-countenanced, they grow so bold as to step into high places, and among
high persons, yea, and canker-like they spread further and further in the body
of our state, so that if those members which are already infected, be not
either cured by Gods Ministers, or cut off by our lawful Magistrates, it is to
be feared that they will grow desperate and past hope of any cures of which
behold a shrewd sign, Swearing is now but the Gentleman's Grace of speech, the
Pages Complement, the Seruing-mans Sword, the Trades-mans broaker, and the
Country-mans Yea, and Nay, Sabboth-breaking, why that is but the Cities day of
Dalliance and Delight, Pride and Gluttouie; and the Country-mans Leisure-day,
wherein if they should not Recreate themselves in Dancing, Dicing, Drinking,
and such like Deuillish pastimes, they would think themselves much wronged.
Drunkenness, Why? that is but Goodfellowship, and Merry meeting, a Passing
away the time to Laugh and be fat. But why should these things be suffered by
you, seeing that the Laws of God and man, yea, laws temporal and
ecclesiastical, have so holily and wholesomely provided a remedy? Your place
requires That ye be men of Courage; fearing God, dealing truly with all men
Exodus 18.21.
, and therefore I beseech you see to your Calling, and as you tender the health
of our Country, the long biding, and well-being of our Church, set an edge on
your swords, sharpen your arrows, bend your bows, and good luck have you in
the execution of Justice on such as thus notoriously offend, even of pride and
malicious wickedness; The day be yours, the honor be Gods, and the good be
unto us and ours, from this time forward unto the worlds end. And so much of
the Admonition or Iniunction, Sin no more. Now to the Reasons, and that first
of the first of them, drawn as I told you A Priore, or a Collocato Beneficio,
from a good turn bestowed; in these words: Thou art Whole, Therefore sin no
more. Wherein are to be considered. 1. A work wrought, Thou art whole, Pars
secunda. Ratio Prima.
a work of Health. 2. The Worker, closely implied in that participle (...),
Pars prima, prime rationis.
thou art MADE whole. Of thesein their order, and first of the work. Thou art
whole, Therefore sin no more.

Benefits (says our Proverb) are Binders. Et ownes Immemorem Beneficy oderunt
(says the Orator Cicero de Offic. lib. 2.
,) And All even the Heathen) hate unthankful persons, much more Christians,
and most of all this man, who was so long sick, and so low brought as that
he could not Step into the Poole Verse 7.
, he being so miraculously healed of such an inueterat disease, yea, and that
at such a time as he, nor any of the Jews would have thought off, even On the
Sabbath Verse 10.
. What less sacrifice can he offer? what better service can he perform, then
that which the Physician both of soul and body does require? and that is,
because he is made whole, he should Sin no more. Hence I infer this
Conclusion: That our deliverance from any yoke of Bondage, either of Sin, or
Sins Consequence, (which is Sickness, Misery, and Trouble) should be a
strong bond binding Us to the service of God, Thou art whole, Therefore Sin
no more.

The Scripture is plentiful in the proof of this; Zacharias sings it, and
the Apostles say it: That being delivered, etc. We should serve him in
Holiness and Righteousness Luke 1.74.75
. That being freed from Sin, we should be made the servants of Righteousness
Romans 6.18.
. That being bought with a Price, we should glorify God 1 Cor. 6.20.
. That the Grace of God having appeared, it should teach us to deny Ungodliness,
etc Tit. 2.11, 12.
. Yea, it is the Cord and Cart-rope wherewith and whereby God would both draw and
bind his people to obedience: It is the string that he harpes upon seven
times, yea the burden of his song, almost in every place, or at lest in every
book of Moses, saying: I have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and
redeemed thee out of the house of Servants, etc. Therefore, thou shall have
none other Gods but me Exodus 20.2.3. Deuteronomy. 5.6.7.
Therefore ye shall keep my Commandments Leuit. 22.18.31.16.13.
. Therefore shall ye eat the Passover unto the Lord your God Deuteronomy.
4.37.40.7.8.11. Deuteronomy. 16.1, 2, Reason.
, yea, and Therefore should this man Sin no more, because He is made whole.

And reason good. For who (says the Apostle) planteth* Vineyard and eats not
the fruit thereof 1 Cor. 9.7.
? and why should God, plant and place us in a fruitful Canaan? why should he
help and heal us in sickness and distress, if after all this we shall Sin
yet more, and more, in stead of Sinning no more?

This meets with that inbred, of ours which takes such liberty to it self of
sinning, because God is merciful, as it is wonderful to behold.

True it is That Grace has abounded, what? Shall we therefore continue in
Sin? It Is as true, That we also are healed, what shall we therefore sin?
shall we make no better use of Gods mercies? God forbid.

Know thou oh Christian whatsoever thou art, That Grace does not give the
reins to Licentiousness of Life, but rather It is the streightest bridle to
hold us from all sin. David makes it the End of Gods mercy, Not to be secure,
but rather to fear Psalm. 130.4.
: and the Apostle in all those praises of Gods mercies toward man makes no
such use, neither gives any color of dispensation to sin, but rather does
much condemn the Libertines and Epicures, which draw such Satanicall
conclusions out of such Sanctified premises. But I hasten to speak of the
worker, or Author of this work, implied in this Participle, Pars secunda,
primae rationis.
(...). MADE whole.

It is worth our observation, that Christ does not here say (...), or (...).
Sanus es, Thou art whole. Ex Tui gratia, or Ex Tui potentia, out of thine own
merit or power; but he says, (...), Sanus Factus es, thou art MADE whole. De
re facta loquitur Hugo Cardin. in Locum.
, he speaks of the cure done On him, not By him. For if he could have lept
into the Poole, or have had any to put him in at the Troubling of the Waters,
he had never staid for Christ's coming: But now that this man's Weakness and
Gods Power, his Misery and Gods Mercy, might at once be manifested, Christ
tells the man that he was MADE whole. That when God does work any thing either
In, Upon, or By us, we ought not to attribute it to our selves, but unto God
only.

If it be demanded, Whence comes our Help? David will tell us, That it
comes from the Lord, which has made heaven and earth Psalm 121.2.
. Again, Are Kings saved by the Multitude of an Host Psalm. 33.16.
? why then did not that Multitude of the Midianites, who lay like Grasshoppers
upon the earth, and whose Cammels were numberless Judge. 7.12.
? why did not they save themselves and destroy Israel? Thirdly, Are mighty men
delivered by their much strength Psalm. 33.16.
? why then did not Goliath, that Uncircumcised Philistim, who came to David with
A Sword, a Spear and a Shield 1 Samuel.17.4^.
, to overcome him that had only A staff in his hand, five smooth stones, and
a Sling Verse 40.
? In a word, Are Horses Helps? Why then did not Pharaoh with his 600. Chosen
Chariots, and All the Chariots of Egypt, overcome, overtake, and overthrow
Israel Exodus 14. a v. 7. ad 28.
? Why? even because The Lord was their Help, and their Shield, says David
Psalm. 33.20.
: In Admiration whereof one both pithily, and pectorally says; Oh beatos qui
ab hoc solo Opitulatore pendent, and ad hanc Anchoram salutis in Rebus aduersis
Vera fiducia confugiunt Strigelius in Psalm 121. p. 479 in 8
: Oh happy are they that hang on his help, and that take hold on him, as the
Anchor of their hope in all their storms of adversity and affliction* But on
the contrary, Oh miseros quorum res exiguo filo pendent, and tantum Praesidijs
humanis quae sunt Euripo mobiliora Strigelius vbi supra.
. Oh unhappy and miserable creatures are they that hang by such small threads,
and that only trust on humane helps, which are more inconstant then the River
Euripus, that ebbes and flows seven times a day. No, No, Sperent Alij in
Brachium carnis, praesument in suis Viribus Musculus in Psalm. 33.16.20.
: Let others make flesh their Arm, and boast of their great strength, yet let
us put our trust in the Name of the Lord, who only is able to make us whole.

By Him only had Israel help against the Philistines 1 Samuel 7.10.
. By Him alone had David strength against that Goliath 1 Samuel 17.50.
. By Him only had the Shunamites son Life 1 King. 4.36.
, and by Him and His Christ was this man made Whole John 5.14.


That in Wars, Weapons should be used; That in Hunger, Meat should be
prepared; That in Sickness, Physic should be administered, who denies? but
if the Lord fight not, if the Lord feed not; if the Lord bless not the
means, we shall be Slain all the sort of us: we shall be Hungary still, yea,
and Languish even unto death: For so does Master Calvin excellently note;
saying; Donec Calestis medicus opem nobis fert, Nos non tantum intus fouemus
multos morbos sed etiam mortes Cabin Psalm. 130.3.
, that is, Till that heavenly Physician does bring health, we do not only
cherish in us many diseases, but bring on our selves many deaths.

Death Temporal, Death Spiritual, Death Eternal; By the first whereof we
shall be deprived of life, by the second, disioyned from grace, by the third,
separated from glory. Will we then be Cured, will we be Made whole, then let us
look up unto God, believe in God, and depend on him, for he only it is that
makes us to dwell in safety.

And good reason is there why we should so do, Selves, or respect God. Our
weakness or His power. The one is such as that we cannot Add one Cubite to
our Stature Mat. 6.27.
, one Minute to our Days; one Moment to our Lives; yea, such as that being
Fallen we cannot Rise; being Weak we cannot Strengthen our selves; being Sick
we cannot be Healed, yea, such as Sowing Much shall reap but Little; Eating
much shall not have Enough, Drinking much shall not be Filled; Clothing our
selves cannot be Warmed, and Earning much Wages, shall but put it in a broken
Bag Haggai. 1.6.
, except the Lord puts to his hand, except the Lord adds a blessing.

Yea, That in the might of His power we are made Strong Ephesians. 6.10.
; That through Christ, We are strengthened Romans 8.37.
, That Corroboration is an hearoe of Grace that comes from Above I am. 1.17.
, That Establishment comes from His free spirit Psalm. 51.12.
: any of all which if we attribute unto our selves, we Rob God of his
honor; If therefore we have attained unto, either safety of body or salvation
of soul, if we are healed of the soarenesse of the one, or eased of the
sorrowfulness of the other, let the praise and glory be Gods, who only makes
us whole.

This is the use hereof; That when we hear that nothing is, or can be done,
but by the might of Gods power, That then we make it, vt Machina ad Destruendam
omnem Altitudinem; Gladius ad Consiciendam omnem Superbiam Calvin. in Phiip.
2.13.
, even an engine to overthrow all high exaltings, and a Sword to cut down,
wast, and consume all Pride that is in us. Yea, let it serve as an Axe to hew
down, and a Saw to cut off that high exaltings of theirs who boast and say:
We have killed, or we have made alive, We have Saved, or we have Destroyed:

No, no, It is not We, but it is God that works, either IN us, or BY us, FOR
us, or AGAINST us. Therefore know thou oh thou mighty man whatsoever thou art,
that whatsoever thou have done, thou are but the Axe and Saw of the most
mighty: Now says the Prophet, Shall the Axe boast it self against him that
heweth with it? Or shall the Saw exalt it self against him that month it
Isay. 10.15.
? No; Nec in vllo gloriandu^^ est, quia Nostrum nihil est Cyprianus in epi^t.
ad Cornelium.
: Neither ought we to boast in any thing, because nothing is our own. For
tell me, is the Praise of writing well the glory of the Pen? Or is the Praise
of speaking well the glory of the Tongue? Or is the Praise of doing-well the
glory of the Hand? No verily, it is God that wills, that works, that does
according to his good will and pleasure Philip. 2.13.
. And whosoever shall give it to any other, let him be branded with the name of
a Robber, and a Thief; and of this so jealous is the Lord, as that he will
give it To none other Exodus 20.
. And therefore says the holy Ghost; Left Israel should vaunt it self
against God and say, MINE hand has saved me Judge. 7.2.
, the Lord would not suffer Gideon to go forth with any more then Three
hundred men of Israel v. 6.8.
, against two and thirty thousands of the Midianites, and they put them to
flight v. 22.
. And remember how hainously the Lord took it at Nabuchadnezzars hands, that
he should so proudly vaunt and say: That HE had built an house by the Might of
his power, and for the Honor of His Majesty Dan. 4.27.
. And no less reproach was it unto Christ, that Pilate should say: That HE had
power to Crucifir him, and HE had power to Loose him John 19.10.
. Might not a man say of his Exaltation, as Ambrose said of Caines Desperation
Amb. in Genesis 4.13.
? Mentiris Pilate, thou lie Pilate: Surely yes, for as Christ has it in the
ensueing words, He could have no power at all against him, except it were given
him from Above John 11.19.
: Imperium Malorum a Deo sit, The wicked must know That there is no Power but
of God Romans 3.1.
, which though it be given them, Tamen nihil iuris habent in Sanctis nisi
Permissione Diuina, yet they have no right, no power over Gods Son, or
Saints, or Servants, but what is given of him Aretius in John 19.11.
: therefore as Saint Bernard sweetly advises: Let man thankfully receive what
God gives, and leave that which he reserues, lest by usurping that which is
denied, he deserve to lose that which is granted. Health and happiness is now
Ours, let Honor and Praise be His. Through sin we were all sick, but by
the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus we are made whole. Therefore let us all
remember our Recovery with no less thanks and praise to God then did the
faithful of old, who being freed from the oppression of Idolatrous Tyrants
cried and said: Not unto Us O Lord, not unto Us, but unto Thy name be the
praise Psalm. 115.1.
, for though We have sinned, yet Thou have Made us whole: and let this suffice
for the first reason.

Secundum mem. Partis primae Ratio secunda.
The second follows. Lest a worse thing come unto thee, drawn (as I have
already said) A Posteriori, or a Tergo, or A Terribili Comminatione: From an
heavy threat of Gods vengeance. Lest a worse thing come, etc.

In the former Reason Mercy and Peace met together, that by them this man
might be reduced from sin, now Righteousness and Truth do kiss each other,
that he might be induced to Sanctity; precedent mercy was Christ first cord
to draw this man from sin: but if this will not serve, then behold his
subsequent justice which shall be as a Cable to bind him; yea, A worse thing
shall come unto him.

Sin (as you have already heard) is a sickness: Now in every sickness by
how much a Relaps is more perilous then the first disease (by reason that
Strength is spent, and Nature made more weak,) by so much is the Relaps into
sin more dangerous, then the first sinning, because thereby the strength of
grace is weakened, and the stock of goodness decayed, yea, in such an one as
continues in his sin without remorse, without sorrow or shame after that he
has been mercifully admonished, and justly punished, In Him see how the
sparks of goodness lies a dying, behold how the Floods of iniquity over
whelmes him, mark his soar assaults, either to Presumption or Desperation,
and little strength has he (God wot) to Resist either; so that how can it be
but That a worse thing, etc.

It is well observed by a witty Preacher of our times Adams Black Devil. p.
73.
, That Impenitencie for the Former part of our life, does bespeake Impudency
in the Latter end, and by often prostitution of our Hearts unto uncleanness we
get an Whores forehead Ier. 3.3.
, that cannot blush, so that A worse thing cannot but come unto us.

Diuisio secundae rationis
But let us see the particulars of this second reason also.

And they are likewise two in number, to wit.

Lest,(...). worse,(...).
Prima pars secunde rationis.
The first does not here, as in other places, imply any uncertainty,
likelihood, chance, or fortune: for mark the Text, which says not (...), Imo
nisi: Lest Perhaps, Perchance or Peradventure, Luke 3.5.
but it says (...), vt Ne: Lest assuredly it come to pass, as being a
Judgment proceeding from the father of lights, with whom there is no
variableness nor shadow of change; Whence I conclude: That Punishment shall
certainly follow sin, or, That Sin and Punishments are inseparable Companions.

If the one will go before, the other shall follow after; Sow unto Iniquity,
no marvel though the Harvest come, though their sins ripen, and that they
Reap Affliction Prouer. 22.8.
; yea, so inseparable are they, that the Hebrew-ists call them by one and the
same name; for where the Text says; Sin lies at the door Genesis 4.7.
; and again, My sin is greater then I can bear Verse 13.
; and a third time; Your sin shall find you out: Numb. 32.23 Psalm. 140.11.
There both Montanus Bib. Heb. in Genesis 4.13. Punitio vt fera^.
, Iunius and Tremelius Paenam peccati Metonymia.
, do render it Punishment: whence they have inferred as I have done, That
sin and punishment are inseparable companions, even Brothers and Sisters, nay
Mother and Daughter, yea Cause and effect, Entitie of Non Ens Nec simpliciter
Nihil, nec pura et simple^ priuatio, sicu^ mors est-priuatio vitae etc sed
Defectus et Distructio rei posittuae etc. Buchanus Loc. com. Loc. 15. Quaest.
7. p. 167
, something of Nothing, Affliction of Infection: yea, the Sun and its Light;
Fire and its Heat; Water and its Moisture, nay, I will go a strain higher;
and that is, God and his Justice may as well be separated as Sin and Desert
of Punishment. Of which if you would know the Reasons, they are these:

First, to clear his Judgment and Justice, that we should know him to be no
Respecter of persons, but to hate sin, whenever; wheresoever, and in
whomsoever he finds it. Secondly, Children their portion here, that he might
receive them hereafter.
sin must be punished yet thy punishment (that art of God) shall be but as
the Stripes of a Father, or Smitings of a Friend, even gentle and easy.
Judgment thou must have, because (as thou have heard) it stands with his
Justice, but be not dismayed with any fear, for in consideration of the end of
his judging thee, thou may have comfort, which is none other says the
Apostle, But that thou may not be condemned with the world 1 Cor. 11.31.32.
In Trouble, in Affliction, in Anguish, in Pain, in Losses, and in Crosses,
why art thou so cast down oh my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within
me? Did thou ever see, hear or read of any of Gods Saints that were put in
his Furnace which came not out again? yea, look on those Saints that were
Racked, and Mocked; Bound, and Imprisoned; Stoned and Hewn asunder, Tempted,
and slain with the sword; That were Destitute, Afflicted, and tormented Heb.
11. a 33. ad 40.
; see if they obtained not the promises, and why then should thou fear?
Thou art perhaps afflicted, why? What son is it whom the Father Chastises
not Heb. 12.7.
? It may be thou complainest that thou have, shameless, mocking, and profane
Children, why so had Abraham an Ishmael Genesis 16.15.
, Noah a Cham Genesis 9.21.
, Isaac an Esau Genesis 25.25
: or it may be That cruel witnesses have risen up against thee, and asked the
things thou knew not, or, they have rewarded thee evil for good, to have
spoiled thy soul; why, so had David Psalm. 35.11.12
: yea, and all the Worthies that ever were in the world have drunk of this Cup
of affliction, yet fear not, for they now Certainly have, what thou shall
assuredly possess, even The Cup of Refection, for they were punished here, to
be received hereafter, and so shall thou be if thou will go and Sin no more.

Is Sin and Punishment inseparable? Then tremble at this all ye ungodly. For
what? Shall the Righteous be recompensed on the Earth? how much more the Wicked
and sinful Prou. 11.31.
? Will he do this to the Green tree? What shall be done to the Dry? Luke
23.31.
Will he begin to plague the City, where his Name is called upon, and shall
you go free? says Jeremy Ier. 25.29.
. No, If judgment begin at Us, says Saint Peter 1 Pet. 4.17.18.
, then Horrendam Vltionem ijs instare, quorum nunc potior videtur conditio,
says Mr. Calvin Calvin Loc.
, they that obey not the Gospel and yet seem prosperous, shall then be found
in their condition most pittious. This is granted, That the Lord does try the
Righteous in his Furnace, but the wicked, and such as love Iniquity does his
soul hate, yea, and on Them will he rain Snares, Fire, and Brimstone, Storm
and Tempest, This shall be their portion to drink Psalm. 11.5.6.7
. Indeed he lifts up his hands to strike the Faithful, but he will crush
his Adversaries with a Scepter of Iron, and break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel Psalm. 2.9.
. He will judge the Just for his sins in this life, but he will wound the
Hairy scalpe of such an one as goes on still in his wickedness Psalm. 68.21.
. His little Finger shall be heavier on the Reprobate, then his Loins on his
own People: Therefore I say, tremble at this all ye wicked, which walk
inordinately, and yet say, Tush, God sees not, or, Tush, God cares not for it
Psalm. 10.12.
, or, Tush, no harm shall happen unto us v. 14.
.

You Ignorant men and women, whose cry is; That it was never so bad a world as
since there was so much Preaching, and you whose howling is after the Oynions
of Egypt, the Mass of Rome, the Pax of old, the Crucifixe, the Durges and
Latin Prayers: Ye that praise the plenty in time of Popery, you that say,
That you felt no evil when ye offered Cakes to the Queen of Heaven. Oh King
of Heaven, forgive your ingratitude. What was it then a merry world when there
was Money and no Men? Was it a merry world when the Crucifixe was kissed and
Christ was Crucified anew? Was it a merry world when Ignorance rid on
horseback and Knowledge went on foot? Mourn, oh mourn ye for your
Ingratitude, and pray the Lord that your eyes may be opened to see your error,
and your hearts may be enlarged to give God the praise due unto his name, for
that his Punishments have not been as our sins, infinite, unmeasurable,
unsupportable. Again, tremble at this all ye Drunkards, whose cry is like the
former, saying: What though some Good-fellowes die with the Cup and Pipe at
their mouths? What though others are stabbed in their Drunkenness; yet tush,
no such harm shall happen unto us. But oh ye foolish, how long will ye love
foolishness? And ye beasts, how long will ye love beastliness? Tell me, Is
not Gods seat in heaven? Is not his hand stretched out still? Is not his Anger
as hot, and the fire of his indignation as fiery and fierce against sinners as
ever it was? Surely yes. And why then should you yet heal your souls soars
with the salve of Security? Oh do no more so foolishly. for this sin (yea
and all other) like its Author the Devil is but a Liar: Mentitur Peccatum vt
fallat; Vitam pollicetur vt perimat, says Saint Cyprian Cyprianus l^b 1.
epist. 8.
. It lies, that it may deceive, it promises life that it might inflict Death.
Therefore let the bitterness of Punishment, make us all distaste the
sweetness of Sin. This Viper Sin, does indeed like that Viperous Serpent
yield a tickling delight to all our outward senses; but as soon as the
infected blood comes to the heart, presently the body is in danger of death:
yea, and so is our soul too if we do not the sooner see to it, and the more
vigilantly watch over it. Vbi Peccatum; ibi Procella Ci^rys. hom. 5. ad Populum
Antioch.
. Where sin Reigns, there the wrath of God will tempestuously beat on us;
Say sin therefore what it will, believe thou the word of God which says The
wages of sin is Death Romans 6.23.
, believe thou the well experienced in godliness which says. Dulce Peccatum,
Amara Mors Author incognitus.
, that no other fruit is to be plucked from that Forbidden tree; then pale,
black, ghastly, and ghostly Death. Hoc agitur, Haec patitur, this is committed,
that shall certainly be imposed. Adam and Eve have eaten of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and have died the death Genesis 2.17.
, And his posterity that shall sin, yea, securely sin without fear of
Judgment past or to come, may certainly expect and assuredly look for worse
things to happen to him.

And so much for the Certainty of the Punishment.

Secunda pars Secundae rationis
Now follows the Extreamitie. A worse thing.

The subject that I am to speak of is Sickness still, and therefore blame me
not if I follow the Physicians as well in their Proportion as in their Potion,
in their Quantity as in their Quality.

Physicians if they meet with a body hard to work upon, they double their
Dosses, and use more violent means: So will the Lord deal with sinners, when
he finds them obstinate. If Pestilence that walks in darkness will not
affright them; then let them look for Plagues destroying at Noonday Psalm 91.6.
. If eight and thirty years sickness will not admonish this man, then let him
look for a longer, or more loathsome disease. A worse thing.

Where it is worth our noting, that he speaks not of a positive punishment,
saying, (...), Malum, Euil^ shall happen unto him, No, nor yet (...), which
Beza Beza annotat. in Mat. 12.45.
says is somewhat more, but (...); Aliquid deterius quam prius Syrus graec. in
loc.
; A thing far worse then the former, some hopeless, helpelesse, remediless
thing. All which lessoneth us thus much: That God will bring greater and
heavier plagues on men when they will not profit by lesser. The Scriptures are
full these menaced, and manifested, threatened and executed judgments. Egypt
and Israel, the one Foes the other Friends, the one Slaves the other Servants,
the one Bastards the other Sons, will make plain the point in hand.

If an Army of Flies, of Frogs, and of Lice (even Gods little finger) cannot
make Pharaoh relent, nor Egypt repent Exodus 8.6.16 19.24.
, behold how he lays his Loins on him and them, even Greater plagues, as
Moraine on beasts, cap. 9.3. Scabbes breaking out on Man and Beast. Verse 10.
Horrible thunder and lightning which smote Man and Beast, Herb and Tree, Verse
23.25. Yea, Grasshoppers in all quarters. cap. 10 13. Black darkness in the
land of Egypt three days, Verse 22. Nay which is yet worst of all, All the
first borne of Pharaoh, that sat on the Throne, Unto the firstborn of the
Captive that was in Prison, ( cap. 12.29) shall be smitten; yea drowned and
overthrown in the midst of the Sea. Cap. 14 26.27.28. So fiery is Gods wrath,
so fierce is his displeasure, that our sins increasing, shall increase his
punishments, and make him full of rage. Yea, and this will he do, not only to
Egypt, but also to Israel, if it will not be moved by little judgments, by
small plagues to sin no more. Yea, if Isreal's slaughter of every man his
Brother, every man his Neighbor, every man his Companion, to the number of
3000 Exodus 32.27.28.
. if this will not cause them To sin no more, why then beheld what God will
do: He will cause fire to consume them, to the utmost of their Host. Numb.
11.1. He will send an Exceeding great plague. Verse 33. Fiery Serpents shall
sting them that they die. Numb. 21.6. They shall fly before the men of A^.
Joshua 7 4. And they shall be sold into the hands of the Philistims. Judge.
10.7. Yea, and if these things will not make them to cease sinning, behold, how
that God neither will cease punishing, but Worse things shall happen.

Even the Fire of Gods Wrath shall be kindled, burning to the bottom of hell,
consuming the earth with it is increase, setting on fire the foundations of the
Mountains, spending plagues upon them, bestowing his Arrows burring them with
hunger* and consuming them with heat, and with bitter destruction Deuteronomy.
32.22.23.24.25.26.
. Nay yet Worse things then these shall happen; Even the spirit of slumber,
Eyes that they see not, and Ears that they hear not to this day Esaias 6.9.
. Oh fearful and intolerable punishment, yet such as God does impose on us
for two maine reasons. 1 In regard of his own honor. 2 In respect of our
security.


For the first, if God should not increase his punishments according to the
increasing of our sins, why the wicked would think that there were no God,
or that that God had no power, or if he had power, yet that they could overcome
it with their stubbornness; but take heed of this and know, Nullas tam
atroces, and saeuas esse paenas, quibus non aliquid addere possit Dominus Call.
in Text.
, That there are no punishments so great yet laid upon the wicked, but that
the Lord, Jehovah, is able to make yet much greater. Do mortal Monarchs and
earthly Kings stand so much upon their honor, as to gather mighty forces
against a Rebel, whom they cannot subdue by a few: And shall the Immortal
God, and King of Heaven, give over his arms until his rebels be brought in?
Surely no, for be we what we will be or can be in greatness, yet If we walk
stubbornely against him, then will he walk, stubbornely against us, and smite
us even seven times more for our sins, etc Leuit. 26.21. ad 29.30.
. So that all men may see and say too; That as Verily as there is a Reward for
the righteous, so doubtlessely there is a God that Judges the earth Psalm.
58.11.
. So that we shall not need to ask that question of old: Where is that God
of Judgment Mal. 2.17.
? For he shall come on us suddenly, and smite us severely if we will yet Sin
more and more.

But weigh the second reason of this point; and that is, Lest men should be too
secure, who because sentence is deferred, and not executed speedily, therefore
men's hearts are fully set to do evil Eccles. 8.11.
, Which God seeing, and patiently abiding for a while, does at last rouse up
himself like a Roaring Lion, bestirre himself like an Angry Elephant, does
whet his sword like a Valiant Captain, and sharpeneth his Arrows like a
Bloody Archer, as if he would never cease until he had eaten his prey; as if
he would never be still till he had revenged himself to the full; as if he
would never give over smiting his enemies upon the Cheeke-bone, until his
sword had eaten their flesh, and his Arrows had been drunk with their blood.
Lo thus does the Lion roar, and who will not be afraid Amos 3.8.
? thus does he punish fearfully where men do live sensually and sinfully, and
who then will not stand in Awe and sin not? But now let us apply this point.
Does God impose greater plagues where lesser will not profit? A little plague,
a little fire, a little frost, a little drought, a little enundation. On take
heed and fear lest these former punishments, prove forerunners of further
judgments. It Is worth our noting, that when Christ fore-tolde those many evils
that should come on Jerusalem for their contempt of the Gospel, and refusing of
grace offered unto them, he adds; The end is not yet: All these are but the
beginning of Sorrows Mat. 24.6.8.
. As if he had said, They shall be more in number, and greater in weight. If
the Cutting off the Lap of our garments will not warn us, let us take heed
that he does not strip us quite naked. Si nihil Ferulis proficiat erga nos
Deus, etc. Calvin.
. If God cannot work on us with his Ferula, with his Palmer, with his smaller
strokes and easier smitings: by sending Barrenness of ground; Blastings of
Corn; Unseasonable Weather; ouer-flowing of Waters; and almost the death of
our Renowned, Learned, Religious, Zealous, Peaceable and Godly King; If such
scourges I say, if such scourges of his hand, which are evident marks of his
wrath, and the very print of his foote-steppes, whereby we may trace him
coming out against us to destruction: what can we look for, but a sudden, a
fearful and inevitable plague to fall on us?

It is well known (and would God it might be everlastingly remembered) that God
did shake his rod over us not long since, by the Bishop of Rome, whose
Canonized Saints (more devil then Saint-like) did threaten us with a Terrible
blow Gunpowder plot. ann. 1605.
.

This was Gods Ferula to flicke us, but for all this let us not be so secure;
for as Saint Chrysostom said of the Emperors wrath, which was assuaged
toward the City of Antioch, so I say of Gods wrath that now seems to be
assuaged toward our land: If we reform not our Corruptions and sins, though
this cloud be ouer-past, we shall see and suffer worse things: for I have
ever been more afraid of our own security, then of the Emperors wrath
Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad populum Antiochiae.
: And reason good, for that may be exterpated by force of arms, but this
cannot be expiated and appeased, but by true repentance for sin, and turning
to God: Which let us all speedily perform, Lest a worse thing happen.

Know we therefore, whosoever we are that lie thus secure in our sins, know
we for Certain that these are but the Physicians Prescripts, which if we will
not accept of, we must endure his Potions. If these Ingrediences which are
mild and gentle, will not work with us, then must we look for sharper
Corrasiues. If we will yet neglect his Word, be we sure to feel his Sword; If
we yet will sin against the Light of the Gospel, let us thank our selves, if
we possess the place of Darkness; If we will not profit by Precedent
Judgments, we must assuredly expect Succeeding Punishments. For certainly
Worse things shall come unto us.

Does God impose Great plagues where Less will not profit? Hence learn ye
Demi gods, I mean you Magistrates and men in Authority, to be followers of God
as dear Children: Deal with sinners as you have God himself for an example;
when Lenity will not make your people to relinquish their corruptions, see
then what Severity will do, after kind stroakings, let there be stiff
strikings. Sin had need not only to be beaten, but also to be buffeted.

It is long enough, if not too long that you have withheld the drawing of the
sword of Justice against such notorious sinners as have reigned in your houses,
towns, and villages. Well and worthily did you indeed to bind those
Beare-like and beastly Drunkards and Sabboth-Breakers, to the good behavior,
who would outface all goodness and commit all evil (and that By Booke^) I
beseech you now be not weary of well-doing, but as you have begun, so continue.
God is certainly yet much dishonored among us, in this place, by our Cardings
and Kittleings, by our Dancings and Daliances, by our servants Idleness, and
Childrens Vanities, which they use on Gods holy day, and therefore I pray you
in Christ's stead, let your hands be against such in a heavier manner then
formerly they have been; there are penal statues and laws by which me thinks
you might a little more suppress these crying sins, and outrageous sinners
that even in this place reign among us.

The Devils Chapel is here (me thinks) too near Gods Church, I mean the
Tap-house to the Temple. Whereby it falls out sometimes, that their noisome
pestilence, or pestilent noise do either out-sound us, or else cast some of us
into such a sounne, as that we either cannot tell, or at least care not, what
is preached, read, or prayed for. Lay too therefore, oh lay too your hands for
correction of these things, and doubt not but that at the last you shall find
the same effect in men's minds by your corrections, as God does by His: Namely,
That they shall open their ears Job 33.16.
, and make them both Tractable and Teachable.

As therefore you expect the auoydance of Punishment, avoid you, discountenance
you, discomfort you, by sharp corrections, such friends, families, yea
familiars and strangers, as will not break off their sinful course, for
which God will send worse things, if we thus wretchedly shall grow from worse
to worse; but far be it from us my brethren so to do, nay rather let us grow
better and better, seeing God has so mercifully healed so many hurts, seeing
he has salued so many running soars, seeing he has delivered us from so many
inevitable dangers both of body and soul, what can we do less then glorify
him in body and in soul, sinning no more so haynously, so heavily, so
wickedly, so wretchedly for fear lest worse things happen unto us? From which
sins and punishments, the Lord deliver us all for his dear Son our Savior
Jesus Christ his sake, Amen, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

