A DIALOGVE between Custom and Verity concerning the use and abuse of Dancing
and Minstrelsie.

Romans 13.12.13.14. The night is past, and the day is at hand, let us therefore
cast away the works of Darkness, and let us put on the armor of light, so
that we walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness neither in
chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and enuyng: but put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.

Imprinted at London at the long Shop adjoining unto Saint Mildreds Church in
the Pultrie by John Allde.

To the godly and faithful Ministers of Christ and Prechers of the Gospel.
Master Robert Crovvley and Master Thomas Brasbridge, grace and peace from God
the Father through Christ Jesus our Lord be multiplied.
THe benefits which God has mercyfully powered upon us (most vile and wretched
sinners) are multitude innumerable, in value inestimable, so that the slender
capacity of our weak wits is not able thoroughly to comprehend them. Much
less the feeble voice of our stambring tongs woorthyly to declare them. Among
which manyfolde and rich graces: this is to be reconed of gretest price, that
he has blessed us with the comfortable wrood and glad tidings of our eternal
salvation, freely purchased unto us by his welbelooued son and our only
saueour Christ Jesus, and has by the princely authority of his worthy
Minister our most gracious Queen brought in again, established, and these
three and twenty years continued the same (God grant that long it may abide,
flourish and fructify among us for all which his unspeakable blessings, he
requires nothing of us but that we cheerfully take the cup of salvation, and
give hearty thanks unto our loouing Lord, and yield dutiful obedience unto the
divine precepts of our gracious God. But alas who truly performs these: Is
he a grateful receiver, which co^temp^uously rejects such a bounteful gift?
Does he perform loyal obedience, which stubburnly rebelleth against his
Lords lawful commandment? Is not the comfortable message of our happy
reconciliation unto God only by Christ Jesus, despitefully conte^ned of many?
Do not ye most part rebelliously in deed resist the perfect law of the Lord?
And how then can we be laid dutifully to render unto our heavenly father that
which in respect of his great bountefulnes he may rightly challenge? As truly
as the Lord lives: unthankful ingratitude is abbomination unto the Lord, and
stubburn rebellion as the sin of withcraft. Why then do we not daily and
hourly even every moment tremble and quake for fear lest his heavy vengeance
and terrible wrath fall upon us disobedient children, for these and the like
sins which we have ungodly committed But the holy Scriptur^e contain a
large volume, and the whole law consists of many precepts, so that perfectly
to draw forth and in lively colors to express ye manifolds and grievous
offenses which we most wickedly have committed against the testimonies of the
highest, does require a longer discourse then I purpose to prefix or set
before this short treatise Yet that we may partly behold ye evil favored
deformities and filthy stains yt abound even among them yt account them selves
most handsome and beawtiful. let us look as it were by a glimpse into the
clear mirror of the p^^re word of the Lord. The almighty Iehoua spoke unto
his servant Moses and gave him this commandment to deliver unto the children
of Israel. Keep ye my Saboths, Exo. 31 14.
for it is a sign between me and you in your generations that ye may know
that I the Lord do sanctify you. Ye shall therefore keep the Saboth, for it
is holy unto you. He that defiles it shall dye the death. etc.

Here are two forcible reasons added to the commandment, to move the people
of Israel diligently to observe the Saboth. First for that it is a sure sign
of their sanctification that they being defiled by the loathsome flithynes of
sin, are sanctified by the Lord and made pleasant in his sight. Secondaryly
for that they which pollute the holy Saboth shall suerly dye. These ought to be
sufficient to cause men to keep holy the Saboth day, either for profit, in
respect of all worldly things incomparable: or for death, not withstanding all
man's devises inevitable But wherein consists the right use of the Saboth? and
what is it truly to keep holy the Saboth day? If we will (as we ought) use and
observe it according to that exquisit order which the Lord has prescribed in
his Sacred word: we must not do ye thing that pleases our selves: we must
not speak our own words: 56. 2.
we must not do after our own imagination, neither seek our own will* 58. 13.
we must keep our selves that we do no evil in the Lords holy day. But it is
not enough to eschew evil: but we must also do good. Therefore in halowing the
Lords day of rest, we must hold greatly of the things that pleases the Lord,
and keep his covenant, Esaias. 56
we must stick to the Lord to serve him and to love his name, to be his
servants to fulfill his covenant, to give him ye honor. Now if this straight
line be laid to our crooked lives, and this just rule to our unruly behaueour:
oh how far out of square shall we be found? For when do we more practice our
vain pleasures: When do we more after our own wicked immagination? When do
we more seek our own froward will? When do we more speak our own filthy and
corrupt words? When do we exercise more evil then on the Lords day? As for
other days every man in his vocation (if he have any natural care to maintain
him self and his family) will apply his worldly business, he will not let a
char. But the holy Saboth is so vnholyly spent, as if it were consecrated to
the abominable idol of fleshly pleasure, rather then to the true service of
the almighty God: for if there be any match made for the trial of any mastrie,
or meeting for meriment (as they term it) either between town and town, or
neighbor and neighbor, or if there be any keeping ales, either for ye
maintenance of the Church, or for some that are fallen into decay. When must
these be tried or done but upon the Saboth day? If any go about with a pewter
or rather pilfering game (because by offering a show of profit, it privily
robs men) when must it be played but upon the Sabbath day? And who more to
be blamed for this then such Justices under whose license they do it? is this
ye way for Magistrates to show them selves men fearing God, to give men
licenses wheby they may rebelliously break Gods commandments them selves,
^xod. 18.21. Chro. 19.7.
and be wicked instruments to cause others to do the same? Let such know that
the Lord shall justly lay to their charge, that their hands have been cheef in
this trespass.

Moreover whereas many Minstrels live idlye most part of the week when they
should woork, do not they by wicked abuse of their instruments provoke the
people to unhallow the Lords holy day, by deuelish dancing the Nurce of much
naughtines, and do not to to many of all degrees with tooth and nail endeavor
to uphold this Idol of wanton pleasure, which provoke Gods indignation? The
youth do service unto it with their bodies, they commit filthy fornication
with it, being before married unto their husband and head Christ Jesus in
Baptism. The elder sort offer sacrifice unto this Idol, so^e wheat, some
malt, some Barley, ome other victuals, some money, and by these means show
them selves shameless Bands to maintain their Children and servants in this
spiritual whoordome, being by duty bound to bring them up as Chaste Virgins,
and undefiled members of Christ. The ancients or Officers (some of them) are
present at this Idol service and by their presence (it may be also by their
words promising them aid, and by their deeds giving them some maintenance)
encourage these Idolaters to continue and go forward in their abominable
service, being appointed of God (to whom they shall yield and account) for the
punishment of them that do evil. Romans 13. 1. ^e^t. 2. Number. 27. Psalm 119 Psalm.
5.5
for the suppressing of vice, which should have the spirit, and pray with
David. O turn away mine eyes lest they behold vanity, and quicken thou me in
thy way. In such places where GOD by good Magistrates has quite thrown down
this Idol, ^sal. 119. ^sal. 5. ver 5
sharply reproved the Idolaters, and justly banished thamnuz (I mean vain
minstrilles) The women mourn and lament for him, so that of all sorts to to
many conspire to maintain this wanton and fleshly Idolatry. ^zech. 8.14
The like might be said of diners other abuses, which reign among us, whereby
the Lords Saboth is greatly profaned, but for brevity sake omit them. Now as
we defile the holy Saboth by doing that which we ought not to do: so we
commit the same offense by leaving undone ye which we should do. For we should
hold greatly of ye thing that pleases the Lord. but few regard it, few
profess it, few name it. We should fulfill his Covenant and keep it, but few
do it, few know it, few read it. we should stick to the Lord to serve him, but
who performs his service? who acknowledges it? nay who fleeeth not from it?
who yields not him self as a bondslaue to obey sin? We should love his
name, but is it not of the greater part contemned, spited, and hated in the
faithful Christians? We should give him the honor, but how shamefully do we
dishonor him by drawing sin together as it were with Cart ropes? Far of
then are we from rightly observing the Saboth day. And shall not the
consideration of our great disobedience in transgressing this divine law for
every one of us to say with David. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 20.6. Psalm. 7.5.
I saw the transgressors and was grieved because they kept not thy word, fear
is come upon me for the wicked, that forsake thy law. For if that man of God,
the holy Prophet was so touched with greef, and stricken with such a fear for
the wickedness of other: how much more ought we to be grieved at the very heart,
and to be astonished for fear of Gods just iudgemens, which hang over our heads,
and are ready to fall upon us (but that his endless mercy as yet strives with
his justice) for our own manifold and grievous transgressions, Ezech. 20.21
even of this precept? For the Lord has threatened to pour out his wrathful
indignation upon such as polute his Saboth. Iere. 17:27.
If we will not be obedient unto him to hallowe it: then shall he set fire upon
the gates of our Cities and towns and it shall burn up our houses and no man
shall be able to quench it. These and far more grievous threats uttered by him
that is able to bring them to pass, should be fearful and terrible unto our
guilty consciences, and should perforce drive us to remove (as much as in us
lies) all occasions which the subtle enemies of our salvation do offer to
break this commandment of the Lord Neither is it sufficient to have regard
of our selves only, but we are bound by the rule of Christian charity to seek
one an others wealth, the which has been as a spur to prick me forward to
attempt this means to reclaim some if it maybe, from the shameful abusing of
the Saboth, which is done by heathnish dancing and vain Minstrelsie.

But it may peradventure be thought an unadvised enterprise and needless
woork, for me to attempt the publishing of any thing in print touching this
argument seeing other before have both taken in hand, and prosecuted the same.
Unadvised: because I may seem to forget that they have diligently labored
heerin. Needles: for that the matter is already thoroughly handled, as in other
la^guages so especially in our moth^r tung for the use and benefit of the
vulgar sort. To this I answer, that I am neither forgetful of other men's
painful trauail heerin: neither yet does their dilligent discoursing heerof
cause me to leave o^ this mine attempt as a thing needless. Nay it did rather
encourage me, and stir me forward to take this little pains that I have
bestowed heerin for the infectious contagion of sin in general, and this
special kind of poysonable plague of ye deuilish abuse of daunsing and
disordered minstrelsie, has infected as it were ye whole Realm, and run in a
manner over all the body, almost from top to toe in times past: but there has
been a most souereign medicine prescribed, composed of diverse manners of
herbs of great virtue, gathered out of sundry gardens. I mean many good and
grave s^ntences collected out of the word of God, and writings of learned men
both Christian and heathnish, being united and knit together of such singular
operation that it purges the infected, and preserves the whole and serves
for all complexions, if they will receive it. This has been with great
diligence and labor by diverse godly Preachers in their Sermons, and some in
writing, applied unto the infected, and infinite numbers the spirit of God
woorking inwardly together with the outward application heerof, have been clean
purged from this noisome disease, and many well amended, though it stick so deep
in the bones of many that it will hardly out of the flesh. I considering with my
self the great commodity ye redoundeth to the Church of God generaly, and as
it were sensibly feeling the health that has been restored to many by these
means, was encouraged to minister this medisine (according to that small skill
wherewith God in mercy has endued me) as occation was offered, in teachi^g. But
seeing many stomachs so quesie that they could not brook and digest it, many
also so full with surfeting by excess of worldly plesures and fleshly
delights, that they would not at all receie it: I studied with my self in what
sort I might deal, that they might accept it At the last remembering that some
delight in prose and some in verses: I addressed my self to comprehend this
argument in vearses (though not pleasant to the ears of such as delight in
vanity: yet I hope (by Gods woorking) profitable to the hearts of such as
rejoice in Verity that thereby some might taste how good and wholesome this
medicine is, and if may be that one kind of meat diversely dished, may provoke
diverse men's appetites to taste of it, and one bit may (...) another, so that
they may feed well of the same. Now that if may be certainly known, that I
minister the same that they do: I have referred the readers to the same
gardines and borders, from whence they gathered the several herbs whereof this
compound is made, so that not the substance: but the manner of dressing of it
is altered. And if this may be a mean to ad, though it be but one, to the
number of them which by their diligent labor have been restored: I have my
desire, and the perfect recovery of one disordered person being reclaimed from
the unchristian profaning of the Sabbath by the wicked practices before
mentioned: shall rejoice me more, then all the scoffing taunts of curious
brains shall make me sorry, for my plain and simple handling heerof, the which
is done partly of set purpose for the capacity of the ignorant, that they
might reap the more profit to their better instruction. And I dout not but
either the grave sentences of heathenish men will move some even for shame lest
they should be worse then heathens, or the godly sayings of christians will
persuade them, or the divine majesty of ye testimonies of Gods word
constrain them to renounce these vain delights of the flesh, and delight them
selves in the holy exersises of faithful christians.

But that it may take the better effect: I have thought good (in some respect)
to follow the godly practice of ye Apostle Saint Paul, Gal. 2.2.
who after he had certain years preached the gospel among the gentiles: went
up to Jerusalem and declared to them that were cheef of ye Apostles that gospel
which he had preached among the Gentiles, lest by any means he should run or
had run in vain, not that the Apostle douted of the doctrine which he had
taught, or that the certentie of faith depends upon the concent of men: but
that he had a brotherly love toward the babes in Christ, which had scarcely
tasted of sound doctrine, that his painful preaching might be more profitable
unto the^, he sought to take away the stumbling block which the deceivers and
false teachers had cast in their way to hinder their edificatio^, namely that
the doctrine which he taught was contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles. This
was a great temptation to ye weak consciences of yung christians, to hear that
the chief doctors and principal pyllars of the Church did disagre, and
dissent in doctrine, Paul therefore by conferring with the Apostles, and thereby
making it manifest that their doctrine was all one, and that it was a deuilishe
lie which was bruted abroad by the seducers touching the contrariety of his
doctrine with Peter's and the other Apostles: takes away that let whereby
Satan craftily went about to stay the the free course of the gospel.

For when this was apparaunt his former labors perished not as fruteles, and
he might go forward with the more fruit. In like manner deals this subtle
serpte^ in this cause I have in hand, for he would bear the simple folk in
hand, that this heathnish dancing and vain piping has not been gainsaid but
of late, and that by yung heads; which have little learning, and that such,
which for age are more grave, and for knowledge are of more sound judgment do
either hold with, or at the least not against the same: and so would keep them
in practice still. Therefore to redress this mischeef, and to prove that the
Devil heerin speaks of him self being the father of lies and that that which
has been already taught either by preaching or writing, or hereafter shall be
touching these abuses may become more profitable to the ignorant people: I
thought good to dedicate this my simple labor unto you (good Master Crowley
and Master Brasbridge) of whom the one for his old age being found in the
way of righteousness, is to be honored as a reverend Father: the other in
respect of that which he has done toward me, is of me to be reverenced as a
liberal Master, and both for your singular knowledge to be heard of all men,
as learned Masters in Israel. For I dout not but many, when they shall see
your learned consents hereunto, will embrace that which heertofore they have
rejected without due consideration or diligent examination of the matter.
Especally it shall confirm many of your native contrie men, which are by Gods
mercyful gifts reclaimed from those fleshly vanities, when they shall perceive
that you (the godly fame of whose effectual faith sounds among us) approve
that which they have received of their own pastors. I therefore not douting of
the matter (for I certainly know that such abuses are not tollorable, nor yet
fearing the proof of it, for I am thoroughly persuaded that it is sufficient
for such which are not contentious* but only that it might be more profitable
to our country where these abuses are overmuch used) crave your godly consents
here unto, and desire to publish it under the protection of your names, who are
well known to be careful furtherers of all godlynes. Which God grant (if it be
his will) that ye may long be to the great advancement of his glory, the
singular profit of his Church, and the continual quiet and comfort of your
own consciences.

Yours to command in the Lord, Thomas Louell.

To the Readers of this tretise, Robert Crowley wishes the direction of Gods
spirit.
YOu have here (deer Christians) the labors of Thomas Louell (a faithful
minister of Chrste, and disposer of Gods secrets) vveerin he has shevved
himself godly, painful, and learned. Godly, in seeking to set forth Gods
glory, in suppressing (yea rather rooting out) of vice, and aduauncing of
virtue: in laboring to reduce the Saboth or days of rest, to their right use:
in striving to stop the course of vvanton youth in Christians* in discharging
the office of a good Pastor, not only in ministering of spiritual food to the
sheep of his own fold: but also in vvriting, which may be profitable to the
whole flock that Christ has bought with so dear a price. Painful he has
shevved himself, in that he has done this in a dialogue or talk betvveen
two, vvherin is objected, and fully answered whatsoever the fleshly
minded is or can be able to object against that which he takes in hand to
teach. Yea, and further, he has done it in (vearse, vvheri^ is much more
difficulty then in prose) that thereby the careless minds of vvanton persons,
might be moved to read or hear, that which otherwise they would never
regard. Learned he has shevved him self in that he has confuted all
objections, and confirmed his own assertions, by sufficient authority of
holy scriptures, and also by the judgment, both of ecclesiastical and
profane vvriters, yea, and by the laws and constitutions made in general
counsels, and in our own parliaments also. Receive thankfully therefore
these (our brothers) labors so godly, so painful, and so learned. Embrace
verity, we he not married to custom: but to Christ. He never said, I am
custom: But thus he has said. I am the way, the truth, and the life. Let us
therefore walk in him: that when our journey shall be ended: we may enter
with him into that endless rest, vvherof the rest of the seventh day is a
figure. And live with him in that endless life that he has prepared for us,
which God for his mercy sake grant us all to do. Amen.

Yours in Christ Robert Crowley.

A Dialogue between Custom and verity concerning Dancing and Minstrelsie.
Custom. When I behold ye discord great
bout things of sundry kind:
one thing above ye rest there is
that runs often in my mind.
Some friend therefore I seek to find,
to him the same to show:
And it discust betwixt us two,
the truth thereof to know.
Ah friend, well met for one I wished,
a matter to dissolve:
Whereof I greatly stand in dout,
and often in mind reuolue

Verity. If my small skill in any wise,
to you may profit bring:
In honest cause it shall not want,
therefore declare the thing.

Custom. But first your name I do demand,
and that the truth be told:
Even as you think herein and that,
you nothing do with hold.

Verity. In truth my name is Verity,
the truth therefore I tell:
And hate all lies and flattery,
though few do like me well:

Custom. For to discourse my cause you are,
the cheefst that could be found:
For Custom I, and you the truth,
thereof shall search the ground.
The knot that I would have untied
is in the great dissent:
Of men conscerning dancing, which
hear in have right judgment.

Verity. Your cause is hard to be discust,
and truth therein to tell:
Gets many foes of all degrees,
Dancing they like so well.
Yet since that truth is great, and does
prevail in spite of all:
Confirm thy cause, if thou have ought,
confute the same I shall.

Custom. In this conflict and battle fearce,
in front shall Scripture be:
As Armor strongst that thou therewith,
dismayed, the rest may flee.
Sam. 6 26
That princely Prophet David eke,
and king of Israel:
Did leap and dance before the Arc,
as sacred Scriptures tell.

Verity, That noble king and man of God,
before the Arc did spring:
With dancing leapes, with all his heart
but for no worldly thing.
But praisd the Lord, which had him set,
on royal seat as King:
And eke because the mighty Ark,
they back again did bring.
And Micol, which this humble king, Sam. 6 2

did rashly scoff and scorn:
Had this reward, that of her womb,
no Child at all was born.

Custom. When David Victor did return, Sam. 18.

and great Goliath killed:
With songs the women and with dance,
did meet him in the feeld.

Verity. They sung and daunst and music made,
not for their fleshly lust:
But for to see that Giant quaild,
and lie now dead in dust.
Which did before blaspheme their God,
and sore their hearts afright:
But ah alas in these our days,
in this dance few delight.

Custom. Exodus 15.20
Miriam Aarons sister, and
the women daunced and ioyd:
When Jews did paue the sea as land
and nothing them annoyed.

Verity. The cause of mirth, as was before,
for that the Lord did save:
His own, and did his foes all drown,
with waters surging wave

Custom. Likewise when Iephtha Captain stout,
with triumph home did fleet:
His daughter sole, with Timbrell shril,
and daunces him did meet.
Also when Judith had cut of
proud Holofernes head:
Judge. 11.34
The women daunced, and in that dance,
she all the women led.

Verity. In breef to these, as to the rest,
Judith. 15.^.13.
this only I reply:
To Jews a common use it was,
to joy at victory.
^uk. 13.25.
Because with music, dance and song,
they praysd the high Gods name:
Ougt be no cloak for filthy rimes,
or wanton daunces shame.

Custom. But what to that Saint Luke to us,
does show in Gospel plain:
When the lost Child and prodigal
returned home again?
His parents made great mellodie,
glad daunsing eke was heard:
I deem therefore that men may mirth
and pleasant dance regard.

Verity. Ah, where is the parent that does dance,
or mirth for his cause make:
To see his son leave his lewd life,
and wicked ways forsake?
Our custom is clean contrary,
we laugh and merry be;
To see them wanton, proud, unchaste,
and live in lechery.
And practice that which does us make,
to stinck before the Lord:
For which, except we do repent,
we shall be clean abhord.

Custom. The word of God you wrest a wry,
to make your cause seem right:
From it I flee, and for defense,
will run to reasons might.

Verity. Gods Gospel and his worthy word,
I neither wrest nor wring:
But as the text will teach all those,
that will attend reading.
Turn to the books, weigh well ye words
where these recorded be:
That I the truth hearin have told,
most plainly shall thou see.
The^ dancing dames delight falls down
in Gods word has no stay:
Now let us hear what reasons reach,
too save the same can say.

Custom. First reason says that daunces neat,
cause many men to catch,
A faithful wife, with whom too live,
if they can wisely watch.

Verity. A woorser way who can devise,
an honest Spouse to choose:
Then at such foolish fantasies,
where lewd life they do use?
Gods book bid'th man use other means
Pro. 31.30
if wife he mind to wed:
That she have better qualities,
then traces fine to tread.
The Virgins virtues let him vieu,
if viewed he do mind: Tob. 4.12.

In honest sort let him demand,
chaste marriage may them bind.
Her Parents paths eke let him prye,
what life they long have led:
What law they love, and how they have,
their tender babes up bred.
Let parents in this case consent,
so better may they thrive:
A wary way he ought to woork,
which does begin to wiue.
What godly properties should prove.
her fit to be thy mate:
Of sacred scriptures counsel learn,
This cause they do debate.
Where one by dancing does obtain,
a spouse that may him make:
Twenty do make deer friends their foes
while wives they rashly take.
For making one, and that by chance,
let many not be mard:
Let men therefore those honest means,
in wedding, wives regard.

Custom. Again, while they do tread their trace,
and lightly leap about:
They from their minds vain fancies and
evil thoughts do banish out.

Verity. While Silla they do seem to shun,
in Charibd they do fall:
While thoughts they flee, evil deeds they do
to still to sin are thrall.
But he that sin by sin does seek,
out of his mind to thrust:
Walks not the way he ought to tread,
if that in God he trust.
If foolish fancies thou shall find,
thy soul sore to assault:
Psalm. 11^.^. ^^t. ^. ^^ Psalm. 3.8
And if that subtel Satan shall,
himself in thee exalt.
Salve of the sacred Scriptures seek,
which put such foes to flight:
Use godly games and modest mirth,
and that in seemly sight.
So shall these hellish sins so fearce,
no hold in thy heart have:
And solace eke thou may thy self,
if honest mirth thou crave.

Custom. Our youthful race how shall we run,
will lusty Lads reply:
On Saboths, Feasts and holy days,
if you lay dancing by?
Shall we sit dumpish, dum, and still,
All day like stones in street? Exodus 31.15

With tripping toys, and footing fine,
we will each other meet.

Verity. Six days of seven the Lord has left,
our worldly woorks to plye:
And on the seventh from them to cease,
and only to him hye.
On this day if we leave the Lord,
and sin do exercise:
What may we plead to claim a place,
or part in Paradise?
The Master will his Servant mark,
the Father will his Child:
In transitory trade, that they
of them be not beguilde,
But how they serve the Lord of Lords,
his Saboths to observe:
And laws to learn, they pas not though
their souls for ever sterue.
If Master, man, Parent or Child,
the dredful doom do mind:
To seek and serve the Lord make haste,
while here thou may him find.

Custom. A goodly sight it seems to me,
and pleasant to the eye:
To see yung men and maidens dance,
each other tracing by.
At tune of Tabret, pipe or harp,
or Rebecks merry note:
They trip on toe, and turn it trim,
and shout with shrilling throat.
Psalm. 119. Par. ^. v. 5 p. 7. v. 5 p. 20^ v. 6.
This race while ietting round they run,
with iumps and comely grace:
They merry make them selves, and all
the people in that place.

Verity. What godly eye can it delight,
what pleasure in it dwell:
Which is the line that leads to vice,
and hedlong unto hell.
While men with maids in wanton
unseemly often do turn:
Their hearts blind Cupid often does cause dance,
with Venus games to burn.
Thus flames of love incensed are,
the effect is yet behind:
Which to obtain, by secret means,
they show each others mind.
If that his mate do seem to like,
the game that he would have:
He trips her toe and clicks her cheek,
to show what he does crave.
Such jests they used, and iumps unchaste
that make immodest mean:
Such filthy words, that they may seem,
chaste hearts to ravish clean.
While many fondly view this fact,
before which lived chaste:
Return corrupt, and unto sin,
with great desire haste.
So dancing whereof you do deem,
much pleasure to arise:
Does purchase pain and many plunge,
Into great miseries.

Custom. Though such effects for lack of heed,
and wit to some do chance:
The sober, wise, and wary take,
no harm at all by dance.
So preaching and the sacraments,
of things by chance which come:
If you esteem you must reject:
for death they are to some.

Verity. Admit there may a man be found,
so fenced with virtues force,
(Like phoenix rare, and swan so black)
whom dancing cannot worse.
For silie souls where is your care,
which Satan cannot shun:
while one does stand shall number fall
and eke with Satan run?
Of things that chance how often they chance
men judgment ought to take:
And things whereof evil often do come,
they ought clean to forsake
Some things there are, yt which to keep
the Lord commanded straight:
And unto man's salvation,
are counted of great weight.
Of this sort are the sacraments,
and preaching of gods word:
For wanton dancing does appear,
no precept of the Lord.
Concerning things indifferent,
(while they do good) them use:
But if much sin of them do spring,
then should we them refuse.

Custom. Though often dancing some mislike,
sometime use it they may:
At whitsontide for churches wealth,
else youth will nothing pay.

Verity. (...) 119. p 8. 4. 2 74. 75
Sin may at no time well be used,
we ought abhor it ay:
And chiefly at that feast we ought,
no silthie sport to play.
^ 30
For then we celebrate the time,
when holy ghost was sent:
That we wit good might be inflamde,
and vices might be brent.
When we the flesh should mortify, Ephesians. 5.6 Col. 3.6

shall we put sin in ure?
For this abuse, the wrath of God
to feel we may be sure.
And though the Lord will have an house,
where people may frequent:
By evil that it maintaind should be,
is far from his intent.
But what to God we consecrate,
must godly be always:
Men ought provide by honest means,
that Church do not decay.
And they which will no penny pay,
if dancing be denayd:
To dance, and not for Temples sake,
to give they may be said.
I think if dancing quite were done,
that many servants might
If so they weuld, give more to Church,
yet be in better plight.
At that feast men may merry be,
in sober honest wise:
But ought to flee such heathnish sportes,
whereof much evil does rise.

Custom. Christmas is a merry time,
good mirth therefore to make:
yung men and maids together may,
their legs in daunces shake.
We se it with some gentlemen,
a common use to be:
At that time to pruide to have,
some pleasant minstrelsie.

Verity. ^uke. 2.10.^.
The time of Christ's nativity,
to christians is a joy:
^. Cor. 15.55. ^eb. 2.14.15 ^. John. 3.8.
For that he came to save us lost,
our enmies to destroy.
To loose us out of satan's bands,
from syn to make us fre.
That syn we should no more obey,
^om. 6.24 Tit. 211.12
but serve him holily.
Then filthy dancing is no mirth,
for children of the light:
Such fleshly lusts frequented are
of children of the night.
In time of sinful darkness and
of antichristian mass:
To. 1^.12.13 4^
This vice as many other more,
highly esteemed was.
^. These. 5.5 ^^^, 8.
But night is past, the day is come,
Salvation draws near:
As Children of the light, lets walk
so long as we are here.
And that our time we have evil spent, 1. Pet. 4.2.

Sufficient let it be:
Like wantons, drunkards, gluttons, and
in lusts, Idolatry.
If men of countenance and wealth,
have play at Cards and Dice:
And heathnish dancing in their house,
and eke a sea of vice.
(As some men have) they show them selves
contemnors of Gods word:
Because they practice that which is
forbidden by the Lord.
For which contempt, the Lord their joy, ^m. 8.10.

To heuines shall turn:
Their mirth to mourning cheer, if him
To serve they will not learn.
But where as they have cards and dies
for all that come to play:
And minstrels for the dancing dames,
and youths that go so gay.
If they some larned men would have,
to teach their ghestes what gain:
They have by Christ his birth and death
and take them selves some pain.
To hear the same: Christyde aright,
then should these men observe:
And while they feed the body, not
suffer the soul to sterue.
But (ah alas) this seems to men,
agreeuous charge to be:
Then to procure by whom we may,
the light from darkness see.
To further their salvation,
what so men do bestow:
They count a charge, but nothing deer,
for that which brings woe.
Like unto Esops cock God grant,
we may not fools remain:
Before the peerlesse pearl of price,
Still to prefer the grain.

Custom. So^e think when weddinges feast is kept
where many men do meet:
That youthful years in pleasant dance,
may nimbly move their feet.

Verity. That feast is sign that man has chosen
1. Cor. 7.2
a wife, so to live chaste:
To unchaste and adulterous life,
vain dauncers other haste.
For this estate of marriage, men
should praise and thank the Lord:
Those fleshly wicked woorkers of them
ought clean to be abhord.
When man and wife do firmly join,
and faithful promise make:
Oh let not us like faithless whoores,
our husband Christ forsake.

Custom. If dance with sin be so replete,
and virtues shine do dim:
Men's wits of late are very quick,
and they in knowledge swim.
For dancing has been long in use,
mong men of learned skill:
They found no fault but thought it well,
why then count you it il?

Verity, Gods gifts, they are not tide to time,
nor any age of men:
He powers them forth when he thinks good
both how, to whom and when. Job. 32.7

Long custom ought to be no rule, Ma. 5.21. Ier. 6.1^

thereby our lives to frame:
Except it be the way of truth,
then may we use the same.
By multitude your argument,
if you do mind to prove:
Both God and godlynes always,
the smaller sort do love.
Noe and his family were few,
saved in pinetree Ark:
When all the world beside for sin,
were drowned with waters dark.
When just Lot and his daughters two,
were saved from firye slame:
The Sodomits and many were,
consumed with the same.
Elyas seemd alone to be,
sin then did so abound:
And to be short, in number few,
the Godly have been found.
The way that leads to life is straight,
and few therein do trace:
Broad is the way that leads to hell,
there many run their race.
^^c. 1.4. ^ech. 20.
Our Fathers steps and multitude
to follow we denay:
^xod. 23.2. ^su. 24.25.
Where they from law of God have erd,
Else follow them we may.
Though so^e which seem Clerks of great skill,
and others to excel:
with dau^cing hold against Gods word,
they may not bear the bell.
Though other all one far surpass,
yet being but a man:
If from right way he tread a wry,
we may not follow than.
Respect of persons set aparte,
and judge with upright mind:
Whose proof on word of God is ground,
and thereto do incline.
The Scribe and the proud Pharise,
was thought a learned wight:
And Christ unlearned, yet in deed
Christ had the truth and light.
Philosophers were counted wise,
and Paul a fool was thought:
Yet Paul said truth, and taught them Christ
which has us deerly bought.
Let not the lofty countenance
of men, whom many praise:
Nor noble birth, nor worldly wealth,
dasle thine eyes always.
Let word of God the tuchstone be,
and not the face of men:
To try who has in this discourse,
the truth set down with pen.
If that the noble Berreans, Acts. 17.11

or such like now did live:
They rightly would discuss this cause,
and best to truth would give,
If by right rule of Gods good word,
this cause might squared be:
Such trifling daunces clean abhord,
then shortly should we see.

Custom. Though this thy part thou have well proou'd,
that it does firmly stand:
From dancing yet I will not yield,
nor give thee upper hand.
Though all my proof thou have disproou'd
and I no proof can bring:
This shift I have, say what thou will,
I will believe nothing.

Verity. Since thou art froward and selfwild,
against truth and reason bent:
To talk with them whom reason rules
a while is mine intent.
God has with reason you endued,
let reason yield to right:
With equal balance weigh this cause,
and in the truth delight.
Of sundry sorts of dance we read,
and eke whereof it sprung:
But we will talk of that which does,
to this discourse belong.
plato. lib. 3. de legibus,
There is a dance called Choria,
which joy does testify:
An other called Pyrricha,
which warlike feats does try.
For men in armor gestures made,
and leapt, that so they might:
When need required, be more prompt,
for public weal to fight,
An other instituted was,
for only pleasures sake:
Which fleshly, foolish is and vain, Solinu

this dance should no man make.
Some from Sibilles priests affirm,
this dancing first did spring:
Some from the Preests of Mars, and some
from Hiero Sicil king.
Some say from Ethniks old it came, Polid. Viirgil. de inuen ^^tam. lib. 2.
cap Rodolph Gualtet^ in Mar. 51. ca. 6. Chrisost. mat. hor

but Chrisostom does tell:
How that this dance did first proceed,
from Satan Prince of hell.
Theffects cannot be good, that from
such causes do proceed.
Therefore I wish all godly men,
of this to take great heed.
All kind of dance is not misliked,
but men should use it well:
By gift of God in joints of man,
Agillitie does dwell.
In comely manner if he move,
apt measures if they trace?
With mean, in time, without offense,
it is a seemly grace.
As songs, so daunces may be used,
to praise Gdds holy name:
So David daunst and many mo,
and we may do the same. Psalm. 148

For as almighty God has made,
all things his praise to tell:
So chiefly man, who over the rest,
on earth as king does dwell.
For mortal man with reasons might,
high things to comprehend:
God has endued, that his good Lord
to know he should attend.
What he in inward heart does know,
and constantly believe:
Other to tell a tung he has,
but God the praise to give.
As tung and voice, so members all,
Gods worthy praise to sound:
In sundry sort created were,
^sal. 15^.
as is in Scripture found.
The Princely Prophet does provoke,
with sound of Trumpet shrill:
With pleasant lute and warbling harp,
and pipe that plaieth not il.
With Cimbals loud, and dancing swift,
By all means that we can:
Our gracious God to magnify,
before the face of man.
But in this dance this must we note,
that men should dance alone:
And eke the women by them selves,
thus separate each one.
When David dau^ced, no women dau^ced,
with him, as scriptures tell:
No men did dance with Miriam
if thou do mark it well.
When Iephthas daughter did with dau^ce,
her Father meet in haste:
She was alone, she did not dance,
with men, as read thou may.
Then men with men must dance, and eke
the female kind aparte:
If dancing they will use aright,
to praise God in their heart.

Custom. But some reply what fool would dau^ce,
if that when dance is done:
He may not have at Ladies lips,
that which in dance he won.

Verity. By this their minds they utter plain,
what they in dancing seek:
To feed their fancy and their lust,
not God in mind to keep.
Such dancing where both men and maids,
together trace and turn:
Stirs up the flesh to Venus games,
cause men with lust to burn.
If we the living God do fear,
and dread his laws to break:
What so might move us unto evil,
we should ne do nor speak.
So if the causes we cut of,
theffect we take away:
In holy life our loouing Lord,
then better serve we may.
Lest I alone with dance do fight
this battle should be thought:
Out of the woorks of worthy men,
lets see what may be brought.
^^le. 9.4.5
Sirach that sage in chapter ninth,
this counsel does thee give:
In company with dancing dame,
see that thou do not live.
Gaze not upon her beauty brave,
hear not her mermaides noise:
Lest thou be snared, and lest that she
inchaunt thee with her voice.
Bishops (says Augustine) were wont,
vain daunces to reprove:
But they are now so far from it,
^ in psalm
that they to dance do love.
Better (he says) on Saboth rest,
it were all day to ditch:
Then on that day to be defilde
ad frain cresermo.
with dancing as with pitch.
Dancing is a flattering devil,
(says he) a pleasant sin:
A poison sweet destroying them,
that take delight therein.
O would that men their sin could see,
how dance does them defile:
Though prict in pride and garnisht gay,
and they like wantons smile.
And Chrisostom that golden mouth,
for so his name may spell:
Where he of Jacobs wedding writes Chrisost. in genesis Hom. 56. et Hom. 48.

this does he plainly tell.
Weddings thou heardst, but there thou might
no wanton dancing hear:
Which daunces diabolical,
he plainly calls there.
The Bride and eke the Bridegroom is
with dance (says he) beguilde:
And the whole house and family Idem in Math. 14.

therewith also defilde.
And writing of Herodias,
her daughters dancing nice:
Before the king which to her gave,
John Baptists head of price
He faith that many now a days,
whom Christians men do judge:
Not half their kingdom for to give,
nor others head do grudge.
But their own souls most deer of all,
they give to be destroyed:
While by their deuilish dancing they
are daily sore annoyd.
Yea where that wanton dancing is
erected, he does say:
The Devil him self does dance with them
in that ungodly play.
I wish that dauncers then would way
the Author of their sport:
Which is the devil, and that he does
in dance with them resort.
Let them that dancing do defend,
whose cause they plead, regard
For they are proctours for the devil,
and he will them reward
Such as maintain this in their house
Cap. 53.
consider what a gest
They entertain: the devil him self,
with whom is little rest.
The counsel of Laodicen
says, Christians may not use
Vain daunces, when they weddings make,
the ought on God to muse.
That Pastures pure to such vain sport,
should not give their consent:
Tempore Theodorici Regis.
No not in being present there,
but should them selves absent.
Also the Counsel Ilerdense,
enacted a decree:
That at the time of wedding, there
no dancing used should be. Eras^ R^^^ lib. (...) cont^ ^mun^ Cap.

What mind so sad, so stable and
so constant, and so well:
In order, that the wanton dance,
the sound that pipers yel,
The swinging arms, and feminine
singing would not infect:
And mollyfy, and overcome,
except men these reject?
Lodouicus Viues says, Etud^ lieris tian^ cap. 1^

voluptuousnes and dance:
The kingdom of blind Cupid, and
of Venus do advance. Ma^l. matu^^

They that any care have had,
of honest gravity:
Have filthy dancing clean condemnd, Bullit Math.

in maids especially.
Unshamefast dancing is the root,
of filthy wantonness: Gualt^ ^at (...) Hom. ^

And dancing unto us did come,
from gentiles heathnishnes.
Dancing the cheifest mischeef is, Ca^. in in his 8 seta. v. Cap. 2^^

in it there is unchaste
Behaueour, to whordome it
intiseth men to haste.
The fondest of all other things
is dancing, not unlike: Cornel Agripp^

To maidens, save on instruments
to this men use to strike.
So that if vanity did not,
commend such vanity:
More ridiculous then dance
no sight should seem to be.
For if a man remove him self
from place where they do skip:
And stop his ears from sound of pipe,
and see them only leap.
He would suppose them to be mad,
like men not well in wit:
To see them leap toward heaven, and eke
the ground thump with their feet.
Plead for this play the best they can,
a wanton play it is:
5. 19.
And wantonness who so does use,
of heavenly joys shall miss.
Justinian this law did make,
^nian, dice, de fe^^in se^^e fest.
we will not have men give:
Them selves unto voluptuousnes,
wherefore for men to live.
Lawful it shall not be, in feast
days, any dance to use:
Whether for pleasure or for lust,
but they shall it refuse.
Salust does say in his story,
although an Ethnic he:
Sempronia was taught to sing,
and dance more passingly
Then does an honest matron seem,
and there he does them call:
The instruments and snares whereby
men unto royal fall.
Cicero would no honest man, Lib. 3. de. offi^^s.

in common place to dance:
Although he thereby might attain,
to great inheritance,
Gabin a dauncer-pinned fine,
accused was to be:
To muren as a fault was laid,
in Asia daunced he.
In solitude or modest feast,
no man with sober head:
Except parhaps he frantic be,
will trifling daunces tread.
Both Christians and heathnish men.
I many mo might cite:
Let these suffice, in wanton dance
that men should not delight.
If Sirach neither Augustine,
Chrisostom, nor Council,
Nor Salust nor yet Cicero,
nor such as I the tell.
Can thee withdraw from deuillish dau^ce
in few words then attend:
That thou may learn of wanton dau^ce
^at. 14.6
what sometime was the end.
Herod with wanton wenches grace
bewitched, did rashly swear:
And vowed a vow unseemly for
a king in royal cheer.
Half of his kingdom he did grant,
if she the same would crave:
But she intised by mother, chose
John Baptists head to have.
And sin to sin the king did ad,
for dancing damsels sake?
By killing John most cruelly,
whose head the wench did take.
The like to others may be fall,
in dauncers which delight:
Beware betimes, prevent this evil,
of dancing flee the sight.
Since cruel murder does proceed,
and filthy whoordome spring:
And many euilles of dancing come,
lets leave that deuilish thing.
Gal. 5.24.
For if of Christ we Christians be,
and with his spirit lead:
The flesh we ougth to crucyfy,
and unto sin be dead.
For if that raging lusts do rule,
and in us mortal reign:
Though pleasant hear a while it seem,
it will be to our pain.
Vain pleasures of the world do pass,
but their reward is sure: Luke 16 2^

Which is the second death, in hell
for ever to endure.

Custom, Since dancing is so dangerous,
and of sin such a sinck:
Of minstrells, which do cause the same,
I would hear what you think.

Verity. Music mislike I not at all,
musicions may play:
In time and measure if it be,
against them nothing I say.
But minstrelles which go commonly,
about from town to town:
Whereon their calling for to build,
have but a sandy ground.
With us the law of man does not,
their kind of life maintain:
In sacred scripture does thereof
no proof at all remain.
If neither law of man nor God,
does minstrels life uphold:
That it is built on sandy ground,
to say I may be bold.

Custom. A thing is quickly said, but not
so soon by reason proved
Prove that you say, and then I grant
minstrels should be removed.

Verity. Anno Eli^abeth. 14.
They are accounted vagarant roges,
by act of Parliament:
(What reason why they should not then
like Roges to Iaile be sent
The Roges do lead an idle life,
most minstrels do the same:
The Roges do beg from house to house,
most minstrels use that game.
Though clenly they do cloak the same,
under pretense of sport:
Yet cunningly they money crave,
all men can this report.
In other points as well as these,
I might them both compare:
Wherein they rightly do agree,
but that I do them spare.
Except they do belong to men,
which are of high degree:
As in that act by words set down,
expressly we may see.
To such I think, but few of these
vain Pipers do pertain:
To men so grave a shame it were,
fond Fiddlers to maintain.
A great disgrace it were to them,
their cloth abroad to send:
Upon the backs of them which do,
their life so lewdly spend.
And as for those that shrouded are,
under the cloth of men:
Which have not license so to do,
I may set down with pen.
Their cloth cannat exempt them from,
the note of rogish name:
Which term is not of my devise,
the act does give the same.
Therefore if they do think this name,
to sharp and hard to be:
Upon the Statutemakers let
the blame light, not on me.

Custom. The laws of this our Realm, I see,
the minstrels use deny:
Whether the word of God forbid
the same, I pray you try.

Verity. The word of God will not allow
men, any trade to use: Ephe

But that which good and honest is,
the evil we must refuse.
Most minstrels by ungodly means,
there maintenance obtain:
What evil, a penny to possess,
to do will they refrain?
Their instruments if you respect,
they use them to intise.
Wild youth, old age (which should be grave)
oftimes to practice vice.
Thereby they call yung men and maids,
together on an heap:
In wanton and lascivious dance,
unchristianly to leap.
On Saboth days, which God co^mau^ds
us holyly to keep:
To hear, and read, and search his word,
his honor for to seek.
(...). 5^.1.
Even then do we dishonor him,
then do we our own will:
Then most we practice wicked woorks,
which God forbids still.
The minstrels with their Mermaides sound,
do so bewitch lewd youth:
That they prefer the deuilish dance,
before the wholesome truth.
From minstrels which do cause such evil
to Church they will not come:
To learn the Catachisme, of true
Religion the some.
But out of Church at Tabrets sound,
both old and yung have run:
In haste, before the reading of
Gods word has quite been done.
This to be true I dare affirm,
for I them not ^ do know:
Why minstrels then should be denayd,
Good cause there is I trow.
Their singing if you do regard,
it is to be abhord:
It is against the sacred word,
and Scripture of the Lord.
As fountain at one place (says James)
both water salt and sweet: Ia. 3.10, 11

Does not send forth (for natures course
denies that to be meet).
So godly blessing to proceed,
and deuilish blasphemy:
Out of one mouth in no wise ought,
this sin does God deny.
But this do minstrels clean forget,
some Godly songs they have:
Some wicked Ballads and unmeet,
as companies do crave.
For filthies they have filthy songs,
for bands lascivious times:
For honest good, for sober grave.
songs, so they watch their times.
Among the loouers of the truth,
Ditties of truth they sing:
Among the Papists, such as of
their godless legend spring.
And as with mouth they thus apply,
them selves to every kind
Of men, to do the same by deeds,
they be not far behind.
With modest men they modest be,
with sober they be grave:
With lewd and naughty company
they also play the knave.
For he that cannot give and jest,
ungodly scof and trump:
Is thought unmeet to play with pipe,
on Tabret or to thump.
The minstrels do with instruments,
with longs or else wish jest:
Maintain them selves, but as they use,
of these naught is the best.
Since then the mean is naught whereby,
they do their lives maintain:
The word of God does not allow,
that such use should remain.

Custom. Though thou thy saying have confirmd,
and minstrels use do seem:
Against the word of God to be,
yet many men do deem
That by their godly songs there does,
much porfit often arise:
For some by them instructed are,
how to be godly wise.
And so^e from that which minstrels sing,
a great deal more will bear:
Then when of godly Preachers they
a learned sermon hear.
Therefore if you do still deny
the singing, I may say:
You are an enemy to that,
which teaches the right way.
But all men ought that to esteem,
with might and main uphold:
Which teaches good, therefore I think,
to sing they may be bold.

Verity. Where one by minstrels godly songs
does learn an honest race:
To run, ten times so many learn
to practice sin a pace.
Be wicked songs which they do use,
for such they practice more:
And we are apter unto sin,
then unto virtues lore.
Again what office to instruct
have they? not publicly
In Church, they are not of the word
called to the ministry.
Ne do they use the order of
private instruction:
Where by all men each other teach
Christ's true religion.
For that is freely to be done,
without respect of gain:
But gain remove, and to instruct
the minstrels take no pain.
Since public office they have none,
instruction to use:
And private order, as it should
be they seem to refuse.
And seeing many more by them
are hurt, then taught aright:
Directly I conclude in them
men should not so delight.
If I should grant that many be
thereby instructed well:
Yet that they should still practice it,
^ark. 1.24 d 5. 7
I may it thus refel.
The devils confessed that they knew,
Jesus the holy one:
Of God to be, and of the same,
high God to be the son.
The deuiles said true heerin, and some
heerby might have been taught:
To know both God the Father, and
the son which has us bought.
The maid possessed with the spright,
of divination:
Said, Paul and other taught the way,
of man's salvation. Act. 16.17

And that they were the servants of
the most high God abooue:
And so they were, this many might,
have moved the truth to love.
Yet Christ the devils to silence put,
and cast them out of man:
And would not suffer them to speak,
what they did know him than.
Paul cast the spright out of the maid,
and took it grievously:
That she (though true it was indeed)
of them did testify.
The learned yield this reason, why
Christ and his Servant Paul
Cast out the devil because he sought
heerby no good at all.
But craftyly he went about,
by telling truth to get:
Credit with men, the better to
ensnare them in his net.
And this persuade them, if he could,
that there agreement was:
Between the devils and living God. 1. Cor. 10

which cannot come to pass. ^or. 6.14.^.

And being once in credit, he
might all the evil, he could
Devise, perform men to destroy,
and never be controlde.
The Lord the mischeefs did prevent,
which after might ensue:
By Satan's sleights, whereby in fine
to men great profit grew.
For that they were delivered
from Satan's subtle wile:
Whereby under pretense of good,
he sought them to beguile.
The devil the same is now, as then,
his purpose is all one:
In minstrels singing godly songs,
he long about has gone.
Thereby such credit he has got,
that now say what he will:
Though handy wicked blasphemous,
the same he may say still.
For wanton and lasciuiouse rimes,
are cloked under mirth:
And blasphemies go vncontrolde,
though they be Satan's breath.
And why? forsooth because these men,
some Godly songs do sing:
All must be good nothing refused,
that from the devil does spring.
Thus Satan by permission,
his purpose has obtaind:
Because so long vncasten out,
in men he has remaind.
These mischeefs therefore to redress,
the course of them to stay:
Is satan to cast out of men,
this is the ready way.
The Lord for this, this mean has left,
the preachers with the word:
Must sharply Sathanists rebuke,
the Magistrates with sword,
If these together joined be,
the devil for fear will quake:
And out of men run to the Swine,
and haste to hellish lake.
The cause why men remain possessed,
as yet with this foul sin:
Is men to execute their charge,
strain curtu^e to begin.
The yunger post it to the old,
the old with custom drowned:
For virtue vice, for mirth do take
often Satan's deadly sound.
The minister, that magistrates
should first begin, do look:
The magistrates, by ministers
that Satan first be struck.
But nether strike So Satan has
his pleasure and his will:
His whistle does deceive the birds,
and them for ever kill.
But ministers and magistrates,
that such sins should remove:
Ezech. 3.18 and 33.6 Heb. 13.17
And too neglect, for these men's blood
shall give account abooue
To God, whom custom, multitude
Nor yet the face of man:
May mittigate, but they for this
shall feel his anger than.
If this could sinck into our heads,
and take root in our heart:
It would constrain us, wittingly
not from Gods law to start.
But (O^* men's ears are dull to hear,
their hearts more hard then stone:
Nothing can pearce their loathsome lives
to cause them to bemone.
God make us fleshly hearts (not woorks
of flesh to put in ure)
And therein print his holy laws,
for ever to endure.
If all things you do bear in mimde,
which I rehearsed have:
I think you will, to prove my cause,
no farther reason crave.

Custom. Thy proof is firm, no more I crave,
but yet I meruail much:
That learned men in former times,
against minstrels brought no such.

Verity. When learned wights in time of old,
blamde dauncers fond delight:
Heerof which are the cause against
vain minstrells they did write.
By name therefore again to thee,
I will not them rehearse:
This may suffice a godly mind
therefore I end my verse.

Custom. God grant I Custom leave my course,
and may be called to grace:
To yield to truth* and not cause men
to live in sinful race.
That I by length of time, and long
continuance of ill:
May not persuade the simple sort,
The same to practice still
But that I which in time began,
may yield to him that was
Before all time, is and shall be,
when all things else shall pass.

Verity. Me, for that which is said and proved,
let no man rashly spite:
Not against right use, but the abuse
of things has been my fight.
God grant his spirit may quicken us,
good fruit our trees may bring:
We may not fall in firye lake,
where does no mercy spring.
God grant our noble Queen may reign
long time with happy days:
To purge out clean all popish dregs,
to godliness great stays.
That godly magistrates may strike,
and good laws straightly use:
That deuilish sin they sharply scourge,
that men may vice refuse.
And that both Prince and magistrates,
and Subjects by Gods grace:
After this life may rest in heaven,
all Christians dwelling place.

FINIS.

