The Printer t(...) Reader.
Hearing that many are desirous to see the London ministers petition, and
fea^^^g least some corruptions might be spread, in sundry written copies: I
thought it m^^te to prevent the one, and to remove the other, by giuinge the^ a
true and faithful copy thereof in print, hoping that none will be offended by
p^^^ting it, seeing that ^o thing was meant by the first penning of it, neither
is, by the present publishinge of the same, but that which is good and
duetifull.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIE^^^E.
The humble Petition of two and Twenty Preachers, in London and the sub^rbs
thereof.
VVouchsafe (most gracious Sovereign) a favorable and pitiful ear, unto the
humble petition, of many your distressed subjects. Preachers of the gospel,
now called upon in your Majesty's name, to approve by subscription and
practice, five several books, with certain Ceremonies therein prescribed. If
any thing were commanded us by your Majesty, which we might do, without
offense to the highest Majesty, there is not a man among us, that would not
willingly obey the same, though it were to the loss of all he has, yea, of
his very life. But being persuaded* that the said ceremonies, and many things
else in those books, are repugnant to the word of God, we most humbly beseech
your Highness: to spare our consciences in the same, especially seeing hitherto,
neither our exceptions (a view whereof we have to show) have bin answered, nor
any one sufficient reason given, according to your Majesty's proclamation, to
prove the lawfulnes of the things imposed, we have heard and do believe, that
your Majesty has often said, that if any can show the things required to be
unlawful, your Highness will not have them urged. And except we be able, by the
evidence of holy scripture, to prove the same, we will presently yield to
conformity required. In the mean time, it might please your Majesty in your
princly wisdom to consider, that howsoever these things have not heretofore,
bin by authority removed, yet have they never had quiet possession in this
Church under the gospel, since the first abolishyng of popery, that our late
gracious Queen of famous memory, at the humble suite of the Commo^s in
Parliament, sygnified her express will and pleasure, yet upon record. That no
preacher or Minister, should be impeached, or otherwise molested or troubled,
for the rites and Ceremonies in question, that the common Judgment, of almost
all the painful and resiant ministers of the land, is against them: that they
have bin long disvsed in many places, and generally distasted, with the people
of better ^cate, as has appeared in many parliaments of former times, and also
in this last. In regard whereof, we humbly beseech your Highness, to take this
burden from our consciences, and to vouchsaue the continuance of our ministry,
at the least, until the ignorant and scandolous Ministers be removed,
non-residentes reformed, and all the Churches of this kingdom, be provided of
able, godly, and resident preachers, that popery and Atheism get not the head
among us, to the ruin of this famous Church and common wealth. And this we
verily hope, your Majesty will not deny us, the rather for that we are the
servants of your God, Preachers of that faith, whereof your Highness is both
professor, and defendor: we have always syncerely, favored and to our power
furthered, your just and lawful claim unto this kingdom: we are adversaries
to them, that are adversaries to your soul and body, supremacy, Crown, and
Kingdoms. We have bin brought up, and taken degrees in the universities: we
are many of us become greay headed in the service of God, and of his Church,
having preached the gospel, some of us ten years, some twenty, some thyrty,
and some more, and diverse of us in this Cittye adventured our lives by
preachinge, in the time of the late infection: neither are we so few, as is
pretended: to say nothing of our brethren, which yield with much grief and
sorrow of heart: we have wives and children, kinsfolks and friend depending on
us, who are all undone, if we be displaced. God forbid, that ever it should be
said or written, in succeeding ages* that in the days of so religyous, and
learned a King, so many learned and paynfull pastors and preachers, were cast
out, as unsavory salt: and that for refusing such a subscription, as in no age
of the Church, was ever urged, and is more then the law of the land requires,
and for not vsinge such ceremonies, as are prof^table to none, Prince or
subject, and (to speak the least) have bin and continue, to be polluted with
Idolatry: and in the mean time, so many dumb Ministers, so many scandolous
Ministers and non-resydents (the shame and bane of the Church of God) keept in,
and that so many learned, godly, and (many of them) aged men, were exposed to
such reproach and misery, as nether the dumb and scandolous ministers with
theirs of late, nor Monks, Friars and Nuns, in former times have bine. Oh
that your Majesty did know, the reproach that is already fallen upon us, yea
upon the gospel which we have preached, the insulting of Papists and profane
persons, the discouraging of young students, the pitiful cries of many
thowsandes most faithful subjects throughout the land, and cheifely in your
Highness chamber, and famous City of London. If your Majesty did but hear and
see, these woeful effects, your royal and compassionate heart (we are
persuaded) would not be able to endure the same. But your Majesty is, as an
Angel of God, to discern more than is meet for us to speak. And therefore
forbeareyng to proceed further herein, we humbly cast our selves, at your
Majesty's feet, for the continuance of our ministrye, to the glory of God: and
salvation of his people, thorough Jesus Christ, whom we daily beseech to bless
your Majesty, and posterity forever.


