By the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the Company of Ship-wrights.
Whereas the remissness of former Governors in executing the ordinances
established for the well government of the Corporation, and their forbearance
to leauy the fines imposed for breach of orders, according to his Majesty's
charge, and the ordinances thereupon made, makes many persons, especially of
the better sort, insolent in their carriage and remiss in their duties: and
notwithstanding that we who are now Governors, with a joint consent are in hand
to redress those grieuances which themselves complained of, and that many of
them are eyewitnesses what good entrance we have already made, in reforming of
many disorders, and particularly for relief of the poor, and restraining the
abuse of keeping exorbitant numbers of servants, yet many do still persist in
their obstinacy, supposing and reporting that our pains and present industry
is but a blaze which will soon vanish.

But we think it fit to let all men know, that for so much as a course is now
settled by order of law for discharge and payment of the Companies debts, which
did heretofore hinder and distract all good proceedings, we do intend by Gods
assistance (according to our duty and oath) to go on in the effectual settling
of his Majesty's charge and ordinances within the river of Thames and Medway,
and in reforming of all abuses and disorders contrary thereunto. And because
the common workmen are wholly freed from payment of the Companies debts, and are
never henceforth to be charged or burdened with any more taxes or other
impositions besides the ordinary duties of quarterage, admittance,
presentiments, and fines for breach of orders (according as is usual among all
other Companies:) we are to let them know, that from henceforth a more stricter
account shall be taken of their irregular courses then has been heretofore,
and that we will proceed in managing the trust committed to us without
partiality or sparing of any person whatsoever; and therefore we do hereby
signify unto them and all others whom it concerns, that whosoever from the
first day of May next coming, shall offend in the wilful breach of any
ordinance of the Company, shall be sure to be censured and his fine levied,
without any favor or conniuence; and hereof it is that we would have every one
to take notice, for which purpose this order is printed and appointed to be set
up in every man's Yard, that no man may pretend ignorance, especially in these
six points following.

1. That whosoever has formerly bound or enrolled his Apprentice at London or
elsewhere, and brings not his Indenture to the Clerk of the Company to be
registered according to his Majesty's charge betwixt this and the first day of
May next coming, shall be sure to pay his fine.

2. That whosoever from the sixth of January last (at which time it was ordered
and public notice given) has retained or shall hereafter keep or retain above
the number of two Apprentices, limited in the ordinance for that purpose, shall
pay his fine of 5 l. without any further favor.

3. That whosoever comes not to the Hall or place of meeting, upon the first or
second warning or summons by the Beadle or Officer of the Company, shall be
sent for by a messenger, and pay his fine and the messengers fees before he be
discharged of his arrest.

4. That whosoever binds his Apprentise any where else then at the Hall, shall
pay his fine of 40 s^ without favor.

5. That whosoever goes to Sea, and comes not first to the Hall to have his
sufficiency approved and to register his name according to the ordinance in
that behalf, shall be fined accordingly.

6. That whatsoever Yard keeper or other shall set any stranger to work,
contrary to the ordinance in that behalf, or shall employ or continue in work
any person whatsoever or his servant that is refractory to the Company, after
warning given, shall pay the fine limited for that offense.

For the better keeping of good order, it is thought fit, that whosoever shall
be from henceforth made free of the Company, shall take out a copy of his
freedom under seal, without showing whereof no man to set him aworke.

Also, that whosoever from henceforth shall take any servant, shall have a
warrant under seal, limiting how many apprentises he shall keep, and his
apprentises names to be endorsed upon the warrant, to the end we may be sure to
keep all men within compass.

We desire the second Assistants, and every man else that hears of any
stranger set to work, or any one that keeps above the number he ought to
keep, or of any man that works for himself and has not served his time, or
marries before his time be expired, or of any other abuse or disorder fit to be
redressed, to give notice to the Beadle or Officer of the Company, who for
that purpose is appointed once every fortnight to go through all the Yards in
the River.

Lastly, if any persons of the Company do find themselves agrieued in any
thing, let them come in an orderly fashion and present their grieuances in
writing, and they shall expect we will be ready to do them all the right and
justice that can be reasonably required.

God save the King.

