LVCANS PHARSALIA: OR THE CIVIL WARS OF ROME, between POMPEY the great, and
JULIUS CAESAR.

The whole ten Books, Englished by THOMAS MAY, Esquire.

The second Edition, corrected, and the Annotations enlarged by the Author.

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes, for Thomas Jones, and are to be sold at his
shop in St. Dunstanes Churchyard. 1631.

THis dying Figure that rare Lucan shows,
Whose lofty genius great Apollo chose
When Roman liberty oppr^st should die,
To sing her sad, and solemn obsequy
In stately numbers, high, as Rome was great;
And not so much to years indebted yet,
As thou, famed Maro, when thy infant verse
The Gnats low funeral did first rehearse.
Thy favour^d Muse did find a different fate:
Thou gott'st Augustus love, he Nero's hate;
But it was an act more great, and high to move
A Princes envy, then a Princes love.
Heu Nero crudelis, nullaque inuisior umbra*
Debuit hoc saltem non licuisse tibi.
Martial LVCAN'S Pharsalia: OR THE CIVIL Wars of Rome, between POMPEY the
great, and JULIUS CAESAR. The whole ten Books. Englished by Thomas May.
Esquire.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Jones. Anno 1631.



TO THE RIGHT Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of Devonshire. etc.
MY LORD,
THe great subject of this stately Poem, together with the worth of the noble
Author, have enboldned me to present the Translation (how meanly soever I have
performed it) to your Honorable hand. I cannot but presume that the high, and
rich conceits of Lucan from your deep judgment shall find their proper, and
due approbation, and my defects, from your noble candor, an easy, and gentle
censure. The matter of this Work is a true History adorned and heightened with
Poetical raptures, which do not adulterate, nor corrupt the truth, but give it
a more sweet and pleasant relish. The History of it, is the greatest of
Histories, the affairs of Rome, whose transcendent greatness will admit no
comparison with other States either before, or after it; Rome was then at that
great height, in which S. Augustine wished to have seen it, which after Ages
almost with adoration have admired, and do rather conjecture then fully
comprehend. The blood of her valiant citizens, and the conquests, and triumphs
of so many ages had raised her now to that unhappy height, in which she could
neither retain her freedom without great troubles, nor fall into a Monarchy
but most heavy and distasteful. In one the greatness of private Citizens
excluded moderation: in the other the vast strength, and forces of the Prince
gave him too absolute and undetermined a power. The vices of Rome did at this
time not only grow up to their power, but overthrow it. Luxury and Pride, the
wicked daughters of so noble a Mother as the Roman Virtue, began to consume
that which brought them forth. These were the seeds of that faction, which rent
the State, and brought in violently a change of government. The two heads of
this great division (if we may term Pompey the head of a faction, and not
rather the true servant of the public State) were Pompey the great, and Julius
Caesar, men of greater eminence then the former ages had seen any, whose
prosperous atchiuements in foreign wars had too far enabled them to ruin that
state, which before they served. The Author of it was a noble Roman, rich in
his mind as his large fortunes, of whose happy conceits, and high raptures I
forbear to dispute, or any way anticipate your Lordships judgment. To whose
noble censure I refer both the Author, and my poor endeavors, and shall ever
rest.

Your Lordships to command, THO. MAY.

THE LIFE OF MARCUS ANNAEVS LVCANVS.
MARCUS Annaeus Lucanus was by nation a Spaniard, and borne at Cordubu. His
fathers name was Marcus Annaeus Mela, son to Lucius Annaeus Seneca the
orator, and brother to Julius Gallio, and Lucius Seneca the Philosopher,
Nero's Tutor. The two elder Brothers employed at Rome in state affairs
(especially Seneca) arrived at the height both of dignity, and renown. They
were both Senators, and by their worthy endeavors deserved not only to be
powerful in their own times, but famous to all posterity. Marcus Mela the
youngest brother content with that title, which his birth gave him, a Roman
knight, and preferring the sweetness of a country life before the glorious
trouble of a court employment, lived at home at his native Corduba; he married
Caia Acilia the daughter of Acilius Lucanus the Orator, on whom he begat
Marcus Annaeus Lucanus surnamed of his grandfather by the mothers side. Annaeus
Mela, though but a Roman Knight, was (says Tacitus) a great man, and he
begat Lucan, no small addition to his greatness; a great testimony of Lucan's
worth from so judicious an author as Cornelius Tacitus. He was borne at
Corduba, the third of the Nones of November in the second Consulship of Caius
Caesar Germanicus with Lucius Caesianus. When he was eight months old, his
father brought him to Rome, to season his infancy (so soon as it might be
capable) with the choicest education in learning, and manners. At which time
(if we may credit fame, and as was before reported of Plato) Bees swarmed about
the childs cradle, and pressed in clusters toward his mouth. A happy presage*
(as the learned interpreted it) of his future wit, and admired eloquence. His
Tutors, and Schoolemasters were the most eminent, and famous men of those
times, Rhemnius Palaemon the Grammarian, and Flavius Virginius the Rhetorician.
By whose careful instructions, as by his own diligence, and admirable
facility of natural wit, he arrived in a short time to an high perfection as
well in the Greek, as Roman language. Of all his schoolefellowes he most used
the friendship of Salcius Bassus, and Anlus Persius the Satyrist, He married
Polla Argentaria the daughter of Pollius Argentarius, a Noble, Rich, and
learned Lady. Brought to the Court by his Uncle Seneca, he grew suddenly into
great favor with Nero the Emperor. He was made Quaestor before the usual
time, and admitted into the College of Augurs. But what virtue could long be
safe in such a Court? the jealous tyrant being not able to brook another man's
praises; who amongst all his other crueltyes, was most severe in depressing the
fame of deserving Men. Nero therefore envying the Wit, and excellent Poetry of
Lucan, suppressed his works, and forbad him any more to recite Verses. Which
indignity of all other most hard to be endured (as witty Martial.

Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit.) Discontenting Lucan, drew him into
Pisoes conspiracy. The conspiracy detected, Lucan by Nero was commanded to die,
but liberty given him to choose his death. Who after a full feast, bad the
Physicians cut his veins; and when he perceived through loss of blood his
hands, and feet to wax cold, and the vital spirits forsaking the outward
parts of his body, with a mind, and look undaunted he recited these Veries
of his own in the third book of his Pharialia. Scinditur auulsus, nec sicut
vulnere sanguis
Emicuit lextus, ruptis cadit ^n^ique venis;
Discursusque animae diversa in membra meantis
Interceptus aquis; nullius vita perempti
Est tanta dimissa via.
But others say he did not repeat these Verses, but those in the ninth Book,
Sanguis erant lachrymae: quaecunque foramina novit
Humor, ab his largus manat cruor: ora redundant,
Et patulae nares: sudor rubet: omnia plenis
Membra fluunt venis: totum est pro vulnere corpus.
These were his last words. He dyed the day before the Calends of May, in the
seven and twentyeth year of his age, Nerva Syllanus, and Vestinius Atticus
being Consuls. He was buried at Rome in his own most fair, and sumpteous
Gardens.

To my chosen Friend, The learned Translator of LVAN, THOMAS MAY, Esquire.
WHen, Rome, I read thee in thy mighty pair,
And see both climing up the slippery staire
Of Fortunes wheel by Lucan driven about,
And the world in it, I begin to doubt,
At every line some pin thereof should slack
At least, if not the general Engine cra^ke.
But when again I vtew the parts so peiz'd,
And those in number so, and measure raised,
As neither Pompey's popularity,
Caesar's ambitions, Cato's liberty,
Calm Brutus tenor start; but all along
Keep due proportion in the ample song,
It makes me ravished with just wonder cry
What Muse, or rather God of harmony
T^ught Lucan these true moodes! replies my sense
What gods but those of arts, and eloquece?
Phoebus, and Hermes? They whose tongue, or pen
Are still the interpreters twixt gods, and men!
But who has them interpreted, and brought
Lucans whole frame unto us, and so wrought,
As not the smallest joint, or gentlest word
In the great mass, or machine there is stirred?
The self same Genius! so the work will say.
The Sun translated, or the Son of May.
Your true friend to Judgment and Choice BEN. IONSON.

Upon this vnaequall'd work, and the Author.
ROme had been still my wonder: I had known
Lucan, in no expression but his own:
And had, as yet coniectur'd it, a wrong,
To have praised Caesar in another tongue.
To bring forth One, that could but understand,
I thought a pride too great, for any Land,
Yea, for Romes self. Who would be posde to tell
How great she was, when she could write so well.
Tell truth was nearer brought by thee: till I
Found Lucan Languag'd, like my infancy.
Till Rome was met in England in that State
That was, at once, her greatness, and her fate;
So all to us discovered, that naught's hid
Which either she could speak, or Caesar did.
Beyond which, nothing can be done by thee,
Though thou had more of Lucan, then we see
Revealed in this: wherein there is so much
Of miracle, that I, durst doubt him, such
As thou have rendered him But that I know
It Is cross to be thy friend, and Lucans foe,
Whom thou have made so much thy self, that we
May almost strive about his Pedigree,
Since Rome has nothing left, to prove him heart
But the foul instance of his Murderers.
So neatly have thou robbed her of his name,
That she can only reskew't with a shame,
Which may she do; whilst Nations reckon thee,
Lucan in all, except Romes infancy.
I. VAVGHAN.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The first Book.
The Argument of the first Book.
The fatal causes of this war are shown,
Enraged Caesar passes Rubicon,
Invades Arim'num, where to him from Rome
Curio, and both the banished Tribunes come
With new incitements to these civil Wars.
Caesar's Oration to his Soldiers,
Bold Laelius protestation, which by all
The rest confirmed makes the General
Draw out from every part of France at once
His now dispersed, and wintring Legions,
Rome's fear; great Pompey with the Senate, flies;
Heaven, air, and earth are filled with prodigies.
The Prophets thence, and learned Augures show
The wrath of Heaven, and Romes ensuing woe.
Wars more then civil on Aemathian plains
We sing: rage licensed; where great Rome disdaines
In her own bowels her victory us swords;
Where kindred hoasts encounter, all accords
Of Empire broke: where armed to impious war
The strength of all the shaken world from far
Is met; known Ensigns Ensigns do defy,
Piles ( a) against Piles, against Eagles Eagles fly.
What fury, Countrymen, what madness could
Moove you to feast your fo^s with Roman blood?
And choose such wars, as could no triumphs yield,
Whilst yet proud Babylon un or quer'd held
The boasting trophaes of a Roman host,
And vnrevenged wandered Crassus (b) Ghost?
Alas, what Seas, what Lands might you have taken,
With that bloods loss, which civil hands have drawn?
Yours had been Titans rising, yours his set,
The Kingdoms scorched in Meridian heat,
And those, where winter, which no spring can ease,
With lasting cold does glaze the S^ythian seas;
The Seres yours, the wild Araxis too,
And those that see Niles spring, if any do,
Then against thy self, if war so wicked, Rome,
Thou love, when all the world is overcome,
Turn back thy hand: thou did not want a Foe.
But now that walls of half fallen houses so
Hang in Italian Towns, vast stones we see
Of ruined walls, whole houses empty be,
And ancient Towns are not inhabited;
That vntill'd Italy's with weeds orespread,
And the neglected Plowes want laboring hands,
Not thou fierce Pyrrhus, nor the Punicke Bands
This waste have made; no sword could reach so far,
Deep pierce the wounds received in civil war.
But if no other way to Neroes reign
The ^ates could find, if gods their Crowns obtain,
At such dear rates, and Heaven could not obey
Her Jove, but after the stern Giants fray;
Now we complain not, gods, mischief and war
Pleasing to us; since so rewarded, are;
Let dire Pharsalia groan with armed Hoasts,
And glut with blood the Carthaginian Ghosts:
With these let Munda's (c) fatal Battle go,
Mutina's (d) Siedge, Perusias (e) famine too:
To these add Actiums (f) bloody Navall fight,
And near Sicilia (g) Sextus slavish Fleet.
Yet much owes Rome to civil ^nmity
For making thee our Prince; when thou the sky
Though late, shall clime, and cha^gethine earthly reign,
Heaven, as much graced, with joy shall entertain,
And welcome thee, whether thou would put on
Jove's Crown, or ride in Phoebus burning Throne,
(Earth will not fear the change) thence may thou shine
Down on thy World; to thee all power divine
Will yield, and Nature to thy choice will give
What god to be, or where in Heaven to live.
But near the Northern Bea^e oh do not reign,
Nor cross the point of the Meridian,
From whence obliquely thou should Rome behold,
If all thy weight one part of Heaven should hold,
The Honored load would bow heavens Axletree;
Hold thou the middle of the poysed Sky:
Let all the air between transparent be,
And no dark Cloud twixt us, and Caesar fly.
Then let Mankind forget all war and strife,
And every Nation love a peaceful life.
Let peace through all the world in this blessed state
Once more shut war like Ianus Iron gate.
Oh be my god: If thou this breast inspire,
Phoebus from Cirrhaes shades I Will not desire,
Nor Nysa's Bacchus, Caesar can infuse
Virtue enough into a Roman muse.
The cause of these great actions I Will declare,
And open a mighty work, what drew to war,
Our furious People and the World beside;
Fates envious course, continuance still denied:
To mighty States, who greatest falls still fear,
And Rome not able her own weight to bear.
So when the knot of Nature is dissolu'de,
And the worlds Ages in one hour inuolu'd
In their old Chaos, Seas with Skies shall join,
And Stars with Stars confounded loose their shine:
The Earth no longer shall extend her shore
To keep the Ocean out: the Moon no more
Follow the Sun, but scorning her old way
Cross him, and claim the guidance of the day.
The falling worlds now iarring frame no peace,
No league shall hold; great things themselves oppress,
The gods this bound to groaning states have set;
But to no Foreign arms would Fortune yet
Lend her own envy ore great Rome, that awes
Both Land and Sea; she is her own ruins cause
Subjected jointly to three ( b) Lords; how ill
Prove shared rules accords, and fatal, still?
Ambition blinded Lords, what is the happiness
To mix your powers, and jointly the earth possess?
Whilst Land the Sea, and Air the Land shall bound,
Whilst laboring Titan runs his glorious round,
And through twelve heavenly signs night follows day,
No faith keep those, that kingdoms jointly sway;
Rule brooks no sharers; do not this believe
In foreign states, Rome can examples give.
A brothers blood did our first walls distaine;
Nor was the spacious earth and watery maine
This mischiefs price: a refuge for thieves fled.
A little house this brothers hatred bred.
This iarring concord lasted for a space
Dissembled twixt the two: for Crassus was
The wars sole let, like that small neck of land,
That in the middst of two great Seas doos stand,
And will not let them join; that taken away,
Straight the Ioni^n meets the Aegaean Sea:
So when war parting Crass^^ sadly slain
With Roman blood did Asian Charan stain,
That Parthian loss to homebred rage gave reins;
More then you think you did fierce Parthians
That day: our civil war your conquest wrought,
And now Romes Empire by the sword is sought:
That State, that mistress ore the World did reign,
Ruled Land and Sea, yet could not two contain.
For Iulia's (t) death, whom cruel Fates before
Had slain, the pledge of their alliance bore
Down to her grave; if Fate had spar'de her life,
Her furious husband, and stern fathers strife
She had compos'de, and made their armed hands
Let fall their swords, and join in friendships bands:
As once the Sabin women enterposde,
Their sires and husbands bloody iarres composde,
Thy death, fair Iulia, breaks off all accords,
And gives them leave again to draw their swords:
On both sides powerful aemusation bears
On their ambitious spirits; great Pompey fears
That his pi^aticke Laurel should give place
To conquerde France, and Caesar's deeds deface
His ancient triumphs; fortunes constant grace
Makes him impatient of a second place;
Nor now can Caesar a superior brook,
Nor Pompey brook a peer; who justlier took
Up arms, great Judges differ, heaven approoues
The conquering cause; the conquerde Cato loves
Nor were they aequall, one in years was grown,
And long accustomde to a peaceful gown
Had now forgot the Soldier: Fame he bought
By bounty to the people: and much sought
For popular praise: his Theaters loud shout
Was his delight; new strength he sought not out,
Relying on his ancient fortunes fame,
And stood the shadow of a glorious name.
As an old lofty Oak, that heretofore
Great Conquerors spoils, and sacred Trophies bore,
Stands firm by his own weight, his root now dead,
And through the air his naked boughs does spread,
And with his trunk, not leaves, a shadow makes:
He, though each blast of Eastern wind him shakes,
And round about well rooted Trees do grow,
Is only honored; but in Ceasar now
Remains not only a great Generals name,
But restless valor, and in wa^re a shame
Not to be Conquer^ur; fierce, not curbed at all,
Ready to fight, where hope, or anger call,
His forward Sword; confident of success,
And hold the favor of the gods to press:
Orethrowing all that his ambition stay,
And loves that ruin should enforce his way;
As lightning by the wind f^rc'd from a cloud
Breaks through the wounded air with thunder loud,
Disturbes the D^y, the people terrifyes,
And by a light oblique dazels our eyes,
Not Jove's own Temple spares it; when no force,
No bar an hinder his prevailing course,
Great wa^e, as fo^rth it fallyes and roures,
It makes and gathers his dispersed fires.
These causes m^ou'd the Che^fes, and such as are
In might^ st^tes the common seeds of war
For since our C^ests the conquered world has filled
Too full, and virtue did to riches yield,
Since spoils, and warrelike rapine taught us riot,
Excess in Plate, in buildings reigns; he dye^
Of formertimes we sco^n; that soft attire.
That Women were ashamed of, Men desire.
Strength-breeding poverty is fled, and naught
But wealth from all the spoiled world is sought,
The banc of States; those Lands increased they hold
In the hands of unknown Tenants, which of old
Caemillus plow share wounded, and the hands
Of the ancient Curii tilled; the state now stands,
Not as of old, when men from avarice free
Could live in peace, and wished but liberty.
Hence quarrels grow, what poverty esteemed
A vild offense: now is greatest honor deemed,
By Sword our Countries power in curb to hold:
Might measures ^ight: Laws and decrees are sold,
Consuls and Tribunes iarres all right suppress,
Fasces are bought, the peoples suffrages
Corruptly sought, and given; hence bloody iarres
Often stain elections in the field of Ma^s:
So griping Usury grows, so faith is l^st,
And civil war, as gainefull, sought by most.
By this time Caesar the cold Alps orepast,
In his great thoughts the future war had cast,
And now to Rubicon's small current come,
He dreams the Image of affrighted Rome
With countenance sad through dusky night appeares^
On her towre-bearing head her hoary hairs,
Hung down all torn, her arms were naked when she
T^us sighing speaks; oh whither carry ye,
My Ensigns Soldiers: If you come as friends,
As Roman Citizens, your march here ends ( k)
A sudden fear straight chilles the general veins,
His haire's with horror raised, faintness detaines
His steps upon the bank; then thus he pra^^s:
Thou, Jove, whose eye these City walls surueyes
From thy Tarpeian hill: You Dei^ies,
Of Troy, and Romulus hid mysteries,
Thou Latian Jove worshipped on the Alban mount,
You Vestall fires, and Rome, whom I account
My greatest God, bless this attempt; not thee,
Do I invade: Conqueror by land and sea
Thy Caesar comes, thy Soldier still: Be he
He in the fault, that caused this enmity
Then brooking no delay, the stream showre-swell'd
He marches ore; so in a ^ibyan field
A Lion viewing his stern foe at hand,
Till he collect his ire does doubtful stand:
But straight when his Tails swindge has made him ho^,
And raised his shaggy M^ne, from his wide throat
He roaves; then if a Mauritanian Spear,
Or Shaft have pierced his side, void of all fear,
Reg^rdlesse of that wound he rushes on.
Gently along flows ruddy Rubicon
From a small Spring, when Summer's in her pride,
And gliding through the valley dooes divide
Gallia from Italy, now Winter lent
Him strength, and Cynthia her full horns had spent
In showers to raise his fl^od, and melted snow
The moist East Wind made down the Alps to flow.
The Horsemen first are placed against the stream,
To take the waters fury: under them
The Foot men sheltered, found a passage ore
More calm, the current being broke before
But now when Caesar had overcome the flood,
And Italy's forbidden ground had trod,
He^e Peace, and broken Laws I leave, quoth he,
F^rewell all Leagues: Fortune I Will follow thee
No more we will trust: War shall determine all:
This said, by Night the active General
Swifter then Parthian back-shot shaft, or stone
From Balearieke Slinger, marches on
T'invade Ariminum; when every star
Fled from the approaching Sun but Luc^fer,
And that day dawned, that first these broiles should see,
Either the moist Southwindes, or Heavens decree
With pitchy Clouds darkened the fatal day;
When now the Soldiers by command made stay
I^th Market place, shrill trumpets flourisht round,
And the h^^rse Horns wicked alarums sound.
With this sad noise the Peoples rest was broke,
The young men rose, and from the temples took
Their Arms, now such as long peace had marr'de.
And their old bucklers now of leather's bar'de:
Their blunted Piles not of a long time used,
And Swords with th'eatings of black rust abused.
The Roman Colors, and known Eagles then,
An Caesar in the amidst high m^uted seen,
The townesmens trembling joints for horror faint,
And to themselves they make this sad complaint:
Oh ill built City too too near the Gaul,
Oh sadly situated place; when all
The world have peace, we are the spoil of war,
And first that are inua^ed: happier far
Might we have lived in farthest North, or East,
Or wandering tents of Scythia, then possessed
The edge of Italy. This town of ours
First felt the furious Gauls, and Cymbrian powers,
Hither the Libyans first, and Germans come,
This is wa^^es way, when Fortune threatens Rome.
Thus silently they mourn, and durst not lend
Their grief a word, nor tears in public spend.
As Birds by winters raging cold are still'de,
And the mid-ocean dooes no murmur yield
But when bright day dissolved the dampes of night,
The Fates new firebrands bring, and stir to fight
Caesar's yet doubting mind, leaving no pause
To shame, but fortune finds him out a cause
Of arms, and labors to make just his war.
The factious Tribunes by the Senate are
Against their sacred privilege exil'de,
And by the Graechi's (l) factious names revil'de.
These now to Caesar came, and brought along
With them bold Curio's (m) mercenary tongue:
That tongue, that once the Peoples, boldly stood
Against armed great ones for the public good.
He when he saw the General musing, said,
While this my voice, Caesar, thy cause could aid,
We did prorogue, though against the Senate's will,
Thy government, while Oratoryes skill
Could turn the wavering Peoples hearts to thee.
But since by wars rough hand Laws silenced be;
We are exiled, and gladly it sustain,
To be endeniz'd by thy Sword again,
Whilst their yet strengthlesse side is only scarr'de,
Use no delay: delay hurts men prepar'de,
A greater price on equal danger here
Is set; in Gallia's war alone ten year,
Thou have consumed: but here, one field well fought,
Rome has the world to thy subjection brought,
Now thy return from France with victory
No pompous triumph waits: no Bays for thee,
Shall deck the Capitol; ba^e enuy's hands
Keep back thy due: conquest of warrelike Lands,
Is made a crime in thee, and Pompey's pride
Excludes thy rule: nor can thou now divide
The world; the world thou may possess alone.
This speech gave fire to Caesar too too prone
Before to war; so peoples showtes raise more
A fierce Olimpicke Steed striving before
To force the Lists, and break the opposing bars,
Straight to the Standard all his Soldiers
Caesar assembling, 'middst their murmuring noise
Commands a silence with his hand and voice,
Fellows in Arms, that have endured with me,
A thousand storms in ten years victory,
Have our spent bloods in northern Climes deseru'de
This, all our wounds, so many winters seru'de
Under the Alps? not more provision Rome
Would make for war, if Hanniball had come
Over the Alps: Cohorts they reinforce,
Forests are felled for Shipping; all the force
Of Land and Sea is armed against Caesar now.
What more (had we been vanquished) would they do?
If the fierce Gauls our flying backs pursu'de,
That dare now wrong us; when our wars conclude
Successefully, and friendly Gods us call?
Let the long peace-infeebled General
His gowns, and new raised Soldiers bring along;
Vain names the Catoes, and Marcellus tongue.
Must he with Foreign, and bought clients be
Glutted with still continuing sovereignty?
Can he triumphant Charriots mount before
The Year's appointed, (^) and let go no more
Honors ( o) vsurp't? why should I now complain
Of the laws breach, and famine ( p) made for gain?
The affrighted forum (q) with armed men beset,
Drawn swords enuironing the Judgment seat,
When against all law, Milo for murder try'de
Pompey's proud Colors closed on every side?
Now lest his age, though tired, a private state
Should end, by impious civil war his hate
He seeks to glut, scorning but to excel
His Master Sylla's guilt: as Tigers fell,
Whom their fierce Damme with slaughtred Cattels blood
Was wont to nourish in the Hyrcanian wood,
Nere loose their fury: so thou Pompey used
To lick the blood that Sylla's swords effus'd
Retain'st thy former thirst; never again
Grow those laws pure, that blood did once distaine.
When will thou end thy too long tyranny,
Where bound thy ( r) guilt? in this at least to thee
A pattern let thy Master Sylla be
To leave off such usurped soueraignety.
After the Pirates, and tir'de Ponticke King,
Whose war to end scarce Poisons ( s) help could bring
Must Caesar's fall Pompey's last triumph make,
Because commanded I did not forsake
My conquering Army? but if I be barred
My labors me^de, let these have the reward
Of their long service; let these Soldiers all
Triumph, though under any General,
Where shall their bloudlesse age after the War
Find rest? what lands shall my old Soldiers share?
Where shall they plow? where shall their City stand?
Are Pirates, (t) Pompey, worthier of Land?
March on victorious colors, march away,
The strength that we have made, we must employ.
He gives the strongest all things, that denies
His due; nor want we ayding Deities,
Nor spoil those arms do seek, nor Sovereignty:
But to free Rome, though bent to slavery.
Thus spoke he: the yet doubting Soldiers
Uncertain murmurs raise: though fierce with wars
Long use, their household gods their minds began move,
And piety: but straight the swords dire love
And fear of Caesar turnde them back again.
Lalius the first Files leading did obtain:
For saving of a Roman Soldier
Oake-crownd, and freed from duties of the war.
If I may speak, Romes greatest General,
Thy Soldiers thoughts, quoth he; It grieves us all,
That such long patience kept thee from so just
A war: or did thou not thine army trust?
While life-bloud keeps this breathing body warm,
While brandisht Darts fly from this agile arm,
Will thou weak gowns, and Senates reign endure?
In civil war is Conquest so impure?
Lead us through Libyas gulfes, cold Seythian land,
Lead us ore thirsty Affrickes scorched sand.
This arm the conquerde world behind to leave
Has plowde the British Oceans curled wave,
And broke the Rhines swift current; thy command
To do, my will's as ready as my hand.
He Is not my friend, against whom thy trumpets sound,
By these thy colors, which ten Camps have found
Ever victorious, Caesar, here I swear,
And by thy triumphs, ore what foe so ere,
If thou command me spill my brothers life,
Kill my old Father, or my pregnant wife,
I Will do it though with a most unwilling hand*
Fire Temples, rob the godds at thy command.
Great Iunoes Temple in our flames shall sink:
If to encampe on Tuscan Tybers brinke,
I Will boldly pitch in Italy thy tent.
If to dismantle towns be thy intent,
These arms of mine the battering Ram shall place,
Although the city, thou would quite deface,
Were Rome it self. The Soldiers all agree,
And promise ^im their lifted hands on high
To any war. Their shout not that can pass,
Which the loud blast of Thracian Boreas
On piny Ossa makes, and bows amain
The rattling wood, or lets it rise again.
Caesar perceiving that the Fates gave way
To war, and his Men prone, fearing delay,
His troops through France dispersed straight calling home
With flying colors marches on to Rome.
They leave their tents pitched by Lemanus ( v) Lake,
And those on Vogesus high Rocks forsake,
Which aw'de the painted Lingones so strong,
Isara's Fords they leave, that run so long
Alone; but in a River of more fame
Falling to' the Ocean bears an other name.
The yellow Ruthens eas'de of their long fear:
Mild A tax joys no Roman ships to bear:
And Varus Italyes increased bound.
That haven Alcides consecrated ground
With Cliffes orelookes the Sea; no Northwest wind,
Nor West blow there* Cirtius their proper wind
Reigns there, where safe Alcides fort dooes stand.
And that still doubtfull-coast, that Sea and Land
Callenge by turns: firm land it is when low
The Ocean ebbes, but sea at every flow.
VVhither the wind strong blowing from the Pole,
And then retiring, to and fro do roll
The Sea: or that the Moon his course do guide:
Or burning Titan moist food to provide,
Attracting lift the Ocean to the sky,
Seek you that labor for such skill: for me,
What ere thou be that cause this ebb and flow,
Be still concealed; since heaven will have it so.
They march away that Nemasus did hold,
And Adors banks, where Tarbe does enfold
In her crookt shore the sea that gently flows.
The Santoni rejoice now freed from foes:
Th'Leuci and Rhemi Archers good; with these
Bituriges, and Speare-arm'd Suessones.
The dwellers near Sequana skillful riders.
The Belgae hooke-arm'd Chariots expert guiders.
Sprung from the Trojan blood the Hedui,
That durst claim b^otherhood of Italy.
Rebellious Ne^uiars ( x) stained with Cotta's fate;
And they that in loose Mantles imitate
Sarmatia; fierce Batauians whom to war
Crookt Trumpets call; those that near Cinga are;
Where Araris with Rhodanus now met
Runs joined into the Sea; the men whose seat
Is on Gebenna mount covered with snow.
The Pictones now free their fields can plow.
The fickle Turones are not restrained
By garrison; the Andian now disdained
To pine in Medna's thick fogges: but goes
For pleasure, where delightful Liger flows.
Fair Genabos is freed from garrison;
Treuer is glad the war from thence is gone:
The Ligures now shorn, once like the rest.
Long haird, of all the unshorn Gauls the best:
And where with offerings stayn'd of humane blood
Hermes and Mars their cruel Altars stood,
And Jove that vil^ as Scythian Dian's are.
Then you that valiant souls, and slain in war
Do celebrate with praise that never dies,
You Bards securely sung your Elegyes.
You Dr^ides now freed from war maintain
Your Barbarous rites, and Sacr^fice again.
You what heaven is, and gods alone can tell,
Or else alone are ignorant; you dwell
In vast, and desert woods: you teach no spirit
Plutoes pale kingdom can by death inherit.
They in another world inform again:
The middst twixt long lives (if you truth maintain)
Is death. But those wild people happy are,
In this their error, whom fear greatest far
Of all fears iniures not, the fear of death;
Thence are they prone to war: nor loss of breath
Esteem: nor spare a life that comes again.
They that the hair'd Cayes did contain
In their obedience, marching now to Rome,
From Rhines rude banks, and new found country come
When Caesar's now collected strength had bred
More lofty hopes; through Italy he spread
His troops, and all the neighboring Cities seized,
Then idle rumors their true fears increased,
And pierced the peoples hearts, swift fame began show
The wars approach, and their ensuing woe.
Then every tongue a false alarm yields:
Some dare report that on the pasture fields
Of fair Meuania is the war begun,
And bloody Caesar's barbarous Cohorts run
Where Vmbrian Nar does into Tyber flow:
That all his Eagles, and joined Standards now
With a vast strength make furious approach:
Nor do they now suppose him to be such,
As once they saw him: fiercer far then so
They think, and savadge as his conquered foe:
That all the inhabitants twixt th'Alpes and Rhine
Drawn from their countries and cold Northern clime
Follow: and Rome (a Roman looking on)
By barbarous hands shall fall; thus every one
By fear gives strength to Fame: no author known,
They fear what they suppose: but not alone
The People dooes this vain surmise deceive:
The Senate shakes; the affrighted Fathers leave
Their seats: and flying to the Consuls give
Directions for the war; Where safe to live,
What place t'avoide they know not: whither ere
Their sudden wits directs their steps, they be^re
The Amazed people forth in troops: whom naught
So long had stirr'de: a man would then have thought
The city fired, orth'houses sudaine fall
By earthquake threatened, the madd people all
With hasty steps so unadvised run,
As if no way at all were left to shun
Their imminent, and feared destruction,
But to forsake their habitation:
As when rough Seaes by stormy Auster blown
From Libia's Sands, have broke the maire mast down,
Master and Mariners their Ship forsake
Not torn as yet, leap into th'Sea, and make
Themselves a Shipwreck: so from the City they
Fly into war: no Sire his son can stay,
No weeping wife her Husband can persuade:
No nor their household gods, till they have made
Vows for their safety; none an eye dares cast
Back on loved Rome, although perhaps his last.
Irrevocably do the people fly.
You gods that easily give prosperity,
But not maintain it, that great city filled
With native souls, and conquered; that would yield
Mankind a dwelling: is abandoned now
An easy prey to Caesar; when a foe
Begirts our Soldiers in a foreign Land,
One little trench nights danger can withstand;
A soddaine work raised out of earth endures
The foes assault; the encamped's sleep secures.
Thou Rome, a war but noysd, art left by all,
Not one nights safety trusted to thy wall.
But pardon their amaze; when Pompey flies,
It Is time to fear; then lest their hearts should rise
With hope of future good, sad augury bodes
A worse ensuing fate: the threatening gods
Fill heaven, and earth, and sea with prodigies.
Unheard Of Stars by night adorn the skies:
Heaven seems to flame, and through the Welkin fire
Obliquely flies: state-changing comets dire
Display to us their blood portending hair:
Deceitful lightnings flash in clearest air.
Strange formed Meteors the thick air had bred
Like Iavelins long, like lamps more broadly spread*
Lightning without one crack of thunder brings
From the cold North his winged fires, and flings
Them against our Capitol: small stars, that use
Only by night, their luster to diffuse,
Now shine in midst of day: Cynthia bright
In her full orb, like Phoe^us, at the sight
Of earths black shades eclipses Titan hid^s,
(When moun^ed in the amidst of heaven he rides)
In clouds his burning Chariot, to enfold
The world in darkness quite* day to beh^ld,
No Nation hopes: as once back to the East
He fled at sight of sad Thyestes feast;
Fierce Vulcan opts Sicilian Aetna's throat,
But to the sky her flames she belches no^,
But on the Italian shore obliquely flings;
Blood from her bottom black Charibdis brings:
Sadlyer bark Scyllaes dogs then they were wont:
The Vestall fire goes out: on th'Alban mount
Jove's sacrificing fire it self divides
Into two parts, and rises on two sides,
Like the two Theban Princes funeral fires.
Earth opes her threatening jaws: the Alps nodding spires
Shake off their snow: Thetis does highe^ now
Twixt Libyan Atlas, and Spaines Calpe flow.
The native gods did weep: Romes certain thrall
The Lares sweating showed: the offerings fall
Down in the Temples: and (as we have heard)
Nights fatal Birds in midst of day appeared:
VVilde Beasts at midnight from the deserts come,
And take bold lodging in the streets of Rome.
Beasts make with men's articulate voice their mon^;
Births monstrous both in limbs proportion,
And number; mothers their own infants feared:
Sibilla's fatal lines were sung and heard
Among the people: and with bloody arms
Cybel's head-shaking Priests pronounced their charms,
I the peoples ears howling a balefull moan:
And Ghosts from out their quiet vrnes did groan.
Cl^shing of armor, and loud showtes they hear
In desert groves, and threatenings Ghosts appear.
The dwellers near without the City wall
Fled: fierce Erynnis had encompast all
The town: her snaky hairs, and burning brand
Shaking: as when she ruled Agau^'s hand,
Or the self maimed Lycurgus: such was she,
Who once, when sent by Inno's cruelty,
Great Hercules (new come from Hell) did fright:
Shrill trumpets sounded, dismal airs of night
That horrid noise, that meeting armies yield,
Did then present: in midst of Mars his field
Rose Sylla's ghost, and woes ensuing told:
Plowmen near Aniens streams Marius behold
Rise from his sepulcher, and fly appalled.
For these things were the Tuscan Prophets called
As custom was: the sagest of them all
Dwelt in Etrurian Luna's desert wall.
Aruns, that lightnings motion understands,
Birds flight, and entrails op'te* he first commands
Those monstrous birthes, that from no seed did come,
But horrid issues of a barren womb,
To be consumed in fire: then all the town
To be encompast in procession:
The high Priests (whose charge it is) he next does urge
The City walls with hallowed rites to purge
Through their whole circuit: following after these
The inferior Priests attired Gabinian wise:
The Vestall Maids with their veiled Sister come,
That only may see Troy's Palladium:
Then those that Sibyll's secret verses keep,
And Cybell yearly in still Almon steep:
Septemuir^ that govern sacred Feasts;
The learned Augurs, and Apolloes Priests:
The noble Flame^, Salius that bears
On his glad neck the target of great Mars.
Whilst they the town compass in winding tracts,
Aruns the Lightnings dispersed fire collects,
And into the ea^tn with a sad murmr flings:
Then names the places, and to the altar brings
A chosen Bull: then wine betwixt his horns
He ^owres, and sprinkles ore with Salt and Corn
His knife: the Bull impatient long denies
Himself to so abhorred a Sacrifice.
But by the guirded Sacrificers strength
Hanging upon his horns, ore come at length
Bending his knees holds forth his conquered neck;
Nor did pure blood come out, but poison black
Instead of blood, from the wound opened flies
Aruns grew pale at this sad Sacrifice,
And the gods wrath he in the Entrails seeks,
Whose color scared him: pale they were with streakes
Of black the infected blood congealed shows
(Sprinkled with different palenesse) various.
The liver putrifi'de, on th'hostile side
Were threatening veins: the lungs their fillets hide:
A narrow line divides the vital parts:
The heart lies still, and corrupt matter starts
Through gaping clefts: no part oth'cause is hid:
And that which never without danger did
Appear, on th'entrailes was a double head,
One head was sick, feeble, and languished:
The other quick his pulses nimbly beats.
By this when he perce^u'de what woe the Fates
Prepar'de, he cri'de aloud, all that you do
O gods, I must not to the People show:
Nor with this hapless sacrifice can I
Great Jupiter thy anger pacify:
The black infernal deities appear
In th'entrailes: woes unspeakable we fear,
But greater will ensue: you gods lend ayd^,
And let no credit to our Art be had,
But counted Tages fiction: thus with long
Ambages darkly the old Tuscan sung.
But Figul^^, whose care it was aright
To know the gods and heavens: to whom for sight
Of planets, and the motion of each star,
Not great Egyptian Memphis might compare,
Either no laws direct the world, quoth he,
And all the stars do move uncertainly;
Or if Fates rule, a swift destruction
Threatens mankind, and the earth; shall Cities down
By earthquakes swallow'de be? intemperately
Shall air grow hot? false earth her seeds deny?
Or shall the waters poyson'de be? what kind
Of ruin is it, gods, what mischiefs find
Your cruelties? many dire aspects meet,
If Saturn cold in midst of heaven should si^
Aquarius would Deucatious flood have bred
And all the earth with waters overspred;
If Sol should mount the Nemean Lions back,
In flames would all the worlds whole fabric crack,
And all the sky with Sol's burnt chariot blaze.
These aspects ce^se; but thou that burn'st the claws,
And fir'st the tail of threatening Scorpion,
What great thing breedst thou Mars? mild Jove goes down
Oppressed in his fall, and in the skies
The wholesome star of Venus dulled is;
Mercury looses his swift motion,
And fiery Mars rules in the sky alone
Why do the stars their course forsaking, glide
Obscurely through the air? why does the side
Of sword-bearing Orion shine too bright?
VVarres rage is threatened, the sword's power all right
Confounds by force: impiety shall bear
The name ^f Virtue, and for many a year
This fury lasts; it boots us not to crave
A peace with peace a master we shall have.
Draw out the series of thy misery,
O Rome, to longer years, now only free
From civil war. These prodigies did scarre
The multitude enough: but greater far
Ensue; as on the top of Pindus mount
The Thracian women full of Bacchus wont
To rave; so now a matron ran possessed,
By Phoebus urging her inspired breast.
Where am I carried now? where leau'st thou me,
Paean, already rapt above the Sky?
Pangaea's snowy top, Ph^lippi plains
I see: speak, Phoebus, what this fury means:
What swords, what hands shall in Romes battles meet,
What wars without a foe? oh whither yet
Am I distracted? to that Eastern land,
Where Nile discolours the blew Ocean:
There, there alas I know what man it is,
That on Nile's bank a trunk deformed lies.
Ore Syrtes sands, ore scorched Libya,
Whether the relics of Pharsalia
Erinnis carried ore the Alps cloudy hill,
And high Pyrene am I c^rried still.
Then back again to Rome, where impious*
And fatal war defiles the Senate house.
The Factions rise again; again I go
Ore all the world; show me new Kingdoms now,
New Seas; Philippi I have seen; this spoke
The furious fit her wearied breast forsook.
FINIS Libri primi.
Annotations on the first Book:
(a) Roman Darts or Iavelins which their footmen used, about five foot long.
If any man quarrel at the word Pile, as thinking it scarce English, I desire
them to give a better word. For, Dart or Iavelin is a wood too general, and
cannot intimate a civil war: for darts had fought against darts, though a
Roman Army had fought against barbarous, and foreign Nations. But Pilum was a
peculiar name to the Roman darts, and so meant by Lucan, which if any deny, let
him read these Verses in the seventh book of our Author* -- sceleris sed
^r^mine nullo
Externam maculant Chalybem, stetit omne coactum
Circa pila nefas. --


(b) Marcus Crassus a great, and rich Roman, ruling the Province of Syria, went
with a Consular Army to the Parthian war, and was there defeated, and slain,
together with his Son, and his whole Army, by Surena the Kings General.

( c) Nere Munda a City in Spain, the two Sons of Pompey were overcome by
Julius Caesar. C^eius was slain, and Sextus fled, thirty thousand Pompeians
were there slain: insomuch that Caesar to besiedge the conquered, made a
countermure of dead carcasses.

(d) Anton^us besiedged D. Brutus in Mutina a city of Gallia Cisalp^na: in
raising which siedge, both the Consuls, Hircius and Pansa were slain: but
Augustus afterward raised it.

(e) Perusia a city in Thuscia, whither Lucias Antonius had fledd, was by
Augustus forced to yeed through Famine.

(f) Where Augustus in a Sea Fight vanquished Antonius and Cleopatra.

(g) A fight on the Sicilian Sea, where Sextus Pompeius had armed Slaves and
bondmen against Augustus, by whom he was there defeated

(h) These three were Crassus, Caesar, and Pompey; who all excelling in wealth,
dignity, fame, and ambition, reconciled to each other, and linked together in
affinity, entered into such a league, that nothing should be done in the Common
wealth, that displeased themselves, dividing among themselves, Provinces, and
Armies. Pompey by his Lieutenants governed Spain and Africa, Caesar had his
government over all Gallia prorogued for another five years; Crassus governed
all Syria

(i) Iulia a virtuous Roman Lady daughter to Caesar, and wife to Pompey the
great; who dyed untimely for the Commonwealth, since her life might have
preserved peace between her husband and her father.

(k) Beside Rubicon was a pillar raised up, and upon it a decree of the Senate
engraven, that it should not be lawful for any to come armed homeward beyond
that place.

(l) Quintus Cassius and Marcus Antonius Tribunes of the people, for speaking
boldly in the behalf of Caesar, were commanded out of the Court by the two
Consulls, Marcellus and Lentulus, who vpbraided them with the sedition of the
Gracchi, and threatened the same end to them unless they departed; the
Tribunes escaping out of the City by night, in poor and base attire, fled to
Caesar, and with them Curio.

(m) This Curio had lately been Tribune of the people, and a great enemy to
Caesar; he was beloved by the vulgar, and an excellent speaker; but being much
in debt, Caesar relieved him, and made him of his Faction.

(n) The lawful age to triumphin, was thirty yeares-old; but Pompey the great
had triumphed over Hiarbas King of Numidia, when he was but four and twenty
years old.

( o) The Praetorship Pompey, without voices, took to himself, being twenty
three years old, he was Consul alone, and had held other Honors contrary to
custom.

(p) Pompey the great, that he might beech ^sen at Rome overseer for Corn,
took a course that none should be brought in from other parts, insomuch as
that the City endured fami^e: upon which Clodius could say, The law was not
made for the Famine, but a Famine was brought in of purpose, that such a Law
might be made.

( q) When Milo was arraigned for Clodius death, Pompey to suppress the tumult
of the people, environed the judgment place with armed men, a thing unlawful
to do.

(r) Sylla 60. years old gave over his Dictatorshippe, and lived privately at
Putcoli.

(s) Mithridates King of Pontus warred with the Romans forty years; he was
weakened, and received overthrowes from Sylla and Lucullus, and conquered by
Pompey, being besiedged in a town by his son Pharnaces, he could not poison
himself, having much used Antidotes, but fell upon his sword, and dyed.

(t) Pompey the great had made a Colony of Cicilian pirates, whom he had
vanquished.

(v) Lac de Lorange; those several towns and Countries of France, where
Caesar's Army lay in Garrison, and from whence they were now drawn, are here
set down by their old ^amos; and this little volume will not afford room so
far to enlarge my Annotations, as to set down the names as they are now called,
being all changed.

( x) The most fierce people of the Belgians, where T^turius Sabinus, and
Arunculus Cotta, two of Caesar's Lieutenants, with five Cohorts were entrapped,
and slain by fraud of Ambiotix.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The Second Book.
The Argument of the second Book.
The author complains that future fates are known,
The sorrow of affrighted Rome is shown.
An old man calls to mind the civil crimes
Of Marius, and Syla's bloody times.
Brutu^ with Cato does confer; to whom
Chaste Martia come from dead Hortensius Tomb
Again is married in a funeral dress.
Pompey to Capua flies. What Fortr^sses
By Caesar are surprisde; who without fight,
Puts Sylla, Scipio, Lentulus to flight,
And takes Domitius at Corfinium.
Pompey's Oration. From Brundusium
He sends his eldest Son to bring from far
The Eastern Monarchs to this civil War.
But there besiedg'd by Caesar scarce can he
Escape safe away by nights obscurity.
NOw the gods wrath was seen: plain signs of war
The world had given: forespeaking nature far
From her true course, tumultuous monsters made,
Proclaiming woe, Oh Jove, why do thou add
This care to wretched men, to let them see,
By direpo^tents their following misery?
Whether the worlds Creator when he did
From the dark formlesse Chaos light divide,
Stablisht eternal Laws, to which he ty'de
The creatures, and himself, and did divide
The worlds set ages by unchanged fate:
Or whither (nothing preordain'd) the state
Of mortal things chance rules: yet let that be
Secret that thou entendst: let no eye see
His future Fate, but hope as well as fear.
When the sad City had conceived how dear
Heavens truth would cost the world: her general woe,
Proclaim'de a Fast: the mourning Senate go
Like the Pl^beians clad: the Consuls ware
No purple Roabes: no words their grief declare:
Mute is their sorrow; such a silent woe
A dying man's amazed household show,
Before his funeral conclamation,
Before the mothers lamentation
Call on the se^vants weeping; but when she
Feels his stiff limbs, dead looks, and standing eye,
Then it is no fear but grief: down she does fall,
Howling upon him. So Romes Matrons all
Leave off their habits, and attires of grace,
And in sad troops the Altars do embrace.
One weeps before the gods; one he^ torn locks
Throws in the sacred porch: another knocks
Her breast against the ground: the god, whose ears
Were vide to p^ayers, now only howling hears:
Nor to Jove's temple did they all repair:
They part the gods: no altar wants his share
Of envy-making mothers: but one there
Her pl^int-brusde arms, and moystned cheeks did tear
Now, now, quoth she, oh mothers tear your hair,
Now beat your breasts; do not this grief defer
Till the last ills: while the Cheifes doubtful are;
We may lament: when one is conqueror,
We must rejoice; thus grief it self did move.
Such just complaints against the powers above
The Soldiers make, that to each army turn:
Oh miserable men, that were not borne
When Carthage warr'de, at Trebia's overthrow,
Or Cannae's mortal field; nor beg we now
For peace, oh gods; stir each fierce Nation,
Raise mighty Cities: let the world in one
Conspire: let Median powers from Susae come,
Nor let cold Ister hold his Scythians from
This war: the Suevians from the Northren clime
Let Albis send, and the rude head of Rhine:
Make us all peoples foes, so not our own:
Here let the Daci, there the Getes come on:
Let one his forces against Spain employ;
Against th'Easterne bows let tothers Egles fly:
Let Rome have war with all; or if our names
You gods would ruin, let the sky to flames
Dissolved fall down, and quite consume our coasts;
Or thunder strike both Captains with their hosts
While they be guiltless, Jove; seek they to try
With so much mischeife who Romes Lord shall be?
'Twere scarce worth civil war that none should reign;
Thus then did bootlesse piety complain.
But the old men moved with particular grief
Curse their old age, and ill prolonged life,
Their years reserved again to civil war:
( a) One seeking presidents for their great fear;
Such woes, quoth he, the gods intended us,
When after ( b) both his triumphs, Marius
His flying head among the reeds and sedge
Once hid; the Fennes then covered Fortunes pledge^
But taken he endured a prison's stinch,
And his old limbs did iron shackles pinch.
To dye a Consul, happy, and in Rome
Before ( c) hand suffered be for guilt to come,
Death fled him often, and power to shed his blood
In vain a Cimbrian. ( d) had, who trembling stood:
Offering a stroke, his faultring hand the sword
Let fall; his dungeon did strange light afford.
The affrighted Cimbrian furyes seemed to see,
And heard what Marius afterward should be:
Thou can not touch this life to fate he owes
Thousands of lives, ere he his own can loose:
Cease thy vain fury: if you Cimbrians would
Revenge on Rome your sl^ughtred Nations blood,
Save this old man, whom their stern will to serve
Not the gods love, but anger did preserve:
A cruel and fit man, when Fate contriu'de
Romes ruin: he on Libyan coasts arriu'de
Wandered through empty cottages upon
Triumphed Iugurth's spoiled dominion,
And Punicke ashes troad: each others state
Carthage ( e) and Marius there commiserate,
And both cast down, both now the gods excused:
But into Marius mind that air infusde
A Libian rage; when Fortune turn'de again,
Slaves from ( f) their Lords, and prisoners from the chain
He free'de, and arm'de: no man his Ensigns bore,
But who the badge of some known mi^chief^ wore,
And brought guilt to the camp: oh Fates how sad
A day was that, when conquering Marius had
Surpris'de the walls? how swift flew cruel death?
Senators with Plebeians lost their breath.
The sword raged vncontrol'de: no breast was free:
The temples stainde with blood, and slippery
Were the red stones with slaughter, no age then
Was free, the near spent time of aged men
They hasten'de on; nor sham'de with bloody knife
To cut the Infants new span thread of life.
What crime had lnfants done to merit death?
But 'twas enough that they could loose their breath.
Fury directs them, guilty lives to take
A lone, seemed too remiss; for number sake
Some fall; one cutt' off heads he does not know,
Whilst empty-handed he is a shamed to go.
No hope to escape, but kiss the bloud-staind (g) hand
Of Marius; though a thousand swords did stand
Ready, base People, did you not disdain
At such a price a life, though long, to gain,
Much less a time so short, so troublesome,
And breath but respited till Sylla come?
Who now has time to wail Plebejan fates?
Scarce can we thine, brave Babim, (h) whom the hates
Of the fierce multitude in pieces tore:
Nor thine Antonius (i) that thy death before
Could prophecy, whose gray-head bleeding yet
On Marius table the rude Soldier set.
Torn are the headless Crassi, (k) impious wood
Is stained with sacred Tribunitiall ( l) blood.
Thou Scavola (m) that did a kiss disdain
Of Marius hand, at Vestaes Altar slain,
And never quenched fires; but ages drought
Left thee not so much blood; as would put cut
The flame. His seventh ( n) Consulship now come,
Old Marius dies: a man, that had overcome
Fortunes worst hate, and her best love enjoy'de,
And tasted all that Fates for man provide.
How many near the Colline port were killed,
How many Carcasses on heaps were pil'de
At Sacriportum? ( o) where almost her seat
Had the worlds E^pire changed, and S^mnis yet
Hoped deeper far to wound the Roman name,
Then at the Caudine ( p) Forkes; then Sylla came
With a revenge more bloody: His sword reft
Rome of that little blood before was left,
Whilst cutting off (cruel Chirurgian)
The affected parts, too far his lancing hand
Follows the sore; first guilty men are slain,
At last when none but guilty could remain
Their hates take greater freedom; forth they break
Without the curb of any law; they wreake
Their private angers now: for Sylla's sake
All is not done: for every one fulfills
Their own blood thirsty, and revengefull wills
Pretending his command; with impious steel
Servants their masters, sons their fathers kill;
Which son shall be the parricide by strife
They seek: a brother sels a brothers life.
Some hide themselves in tombs: live men remain
Among the dead: beasts dens can scarce contain
The flying multitude; one strangled dies
By his own hand; one from a precipice
Dies broken with the fall, preventing so
The tyranny of his insulting foe.
His funeral pyle one making, ere he dies
Leapes in, and whilst he may, those rites enjoyes.
Great Captains heads born through the streets on spears
Are pil'de up in the Market; there appears
Each secret murder; not so many heads
In stables of the tyrant Diomed's
Thrace saw; nor Lybia on Antaeus wall,
Nor mourning Greece in Oenomaus hall.
Limbs putrifi'de, which all known marks had left
Worn out by eating time, by fearful theft
The wretched parents take, and bear away:
My self (I still remember that sad day)
Desirous those forbidden rites to do
To my slain brothers head, searched to and fro
The carcasses of Sylla's peace, to see
What trunk amongst all, would with that head agree.
What need I tell how Catulus was paid
With blood, how Marius a sad offering made
And wretched sacrifice before the tomb
Of his perchance unwilling foe did come.
His (q) mangled joints, as many wounds as limbs
We saw: yet no wound deadly given him
Through his spoiled body, an example rare
Of cruelty, a dying life to spare.
His hands chopped off, his tongue cut out as yet
Wagg'de, and the air did with dumb motions beat:
One slits his nostrils, one cuts off his ears;
His eyes out last of all another tears,
Left in till then his mangled limbs to see,
A thing past credit, one poor man should be
The subject of so many cruelties.
A lump deformed his mangled body lies
So strangely slaughtered, not disfigur'de more
Floates a torn shipwrackt carcass to the shore
From the mid-Sea. The fruit of all your toil
Why do you loose, and Marius face so spoil,
That none can now discern him; 'twere more need
Silla should know him to applaud the deed.
(r) Praneste's fortune saw her men all dye
In one death's space, the flower of (s) Italy,
The only youth of Latium sadly slain
Did wretched Romes Ovilia distaine.
So many men to cruel death at once
Often Earthquakes, Shipwrackes, or infections
Of Air or Earth, Famine, or War has sent:
Never before a doom of punishment
The soldiers throng'de could scarcely weild at all
Their killing hands, the slain could hardly fall
Supported so; but number did oppress
The dying people, and dead carcasses
Encreasde the slaughter, falling heavily
On living bodies; his strange cruelty
Secure and fearelesse Sylla from above
Beheld* nor could so many thousands move
His heart, by him commanded all to dye.
IN the Tyrthene gulf their pil'de up bodies lie.
The first thrown in under the water lay,
The last on bodies; strongest ships they stay,
And Tiber parted by that fatal bay
Sends one part to the Sea; carcasses stay
The other; till the violent stream of blood
Enforced the waters course to Tibers flood.
Nor can the banks the River now contain*
But ore the fields the bodies floate again
Rolling at last into the Tyrrhene maine,
On the blew waves it sets a purple stain.
For this did Silla merit to be stil'de
Happy, and ( t) savior, and in Mars his field
To be interr'de? but these black mischiefs are
To be endurd again; this cruel war
Will the same order, and conclusion take,
But fears more horrid suppositions make,
And in this war mankind shall suffer more.
The exil'de Maris sought but to restore
Themselves again; and Sylla's victories
Sought but the ruin of his enemies.
Their aims are higher; both long powerful take
Up arms; and neither civil war would make
To do as Sylla did. Thus wayles old age,
Remembering past, and fearing future rage.
This terror struck not noble Brutus heart,
Nor in this frightfull stir was he a part
Of the lamenters; but at midnight he
(When now her waine Parrhasian Helice
Turn'de) at his uncle Catoes no large house
Knockes; him he finds waking and anxious,
For Rome, and the whole State a fearful man,
Not for himself; when Brutus thus began.
Banished, and flying virtue's only hold,
And refuge, which no storm of fortune could
Ere reaue thee off? guide thou this wavering heart,
And to my thoughts a certain strength impart
At Caesar's side, or Pompeye's others stand,
Ore Brutus none but Cato shall command.
Will thou keep peace, and in this doubtful age
Unshaken stand? or mingling with the rage
Of the mad rout, this civil war approve?
Others to this sad war bad causes move:
One his stained house in peace, and fear of Laws,
Another fights for want, mingling that cause
With the worlds wrack; blind fury leads on none*
All drawn with gainefull hopes; but thee alone
The war it self affects* What boots it thee
To Have been so long from the times vices free?
This only meede of thy long virtue take,
The wars find others guilty, thee they make.
But let not wicked war have power to employ
These hands, O gods, let not thy lavelin fly
Amongst others in a thick sky darkning cloud:
Let not such virtue be in vain bestowde.
The wars whole chance will cast it self on thee.
Who would not dye upon that sword, and be
Cato's offense, though slain by another hand?
Thou might alone, and quiet better stand,
As stars in heaven still unshaken are,
When lightnings, storms and tempest rend the air,
Nearer to earth: VVindes rage, and Thunders spite*
Plain grounds must suffer; when Olympus height
Placed by the gods above the clouds, ^s free;
Small things jarres vex, the great ones quiet be*
'Twill glad proud Caesar, in this war, to hear
So great a Citizen has deign'de t'appeare:
Nor will it grieve him that great Pompeye's side
Is chose, not his; 'twill be enough his pride
That Cato has approved of civil war.
Romes Senate, and both Consuls armed are
Under a private man, and many more
Of note and worth, to these add Cato too
Under command of Pompey, none lives free
In all the world but Caesar; but if we
Do for our countries, Laws, and freedom go
To war; then Brutu^ is not ^aesars foe,
Nor Pompeys, but the Conquerours, who ere:
Thus Brutus spoke; when for an inside clear
These sacred words drew Cato; We confess,
Brutus, that civil war's great wickedness:
But where the Fates will lead, virtue shall go
Securely on; to make me guilty now
Shall be the gods own crime, who would endure
To see the world dissolve, himself secure?
Who could look on, when heaven should fall, earth fail,
And the con^usde world perish, and not wail?
Shall unknown Nations in our Roman war
Engage themselves? and foreign Kings from far
Crossing the Seas? and shall I rest alone?
Far be it, gods, the Daci, and Getes should moan
Their losses in Rome's fall, and Cato lie
Secure: as parents, when their children die,
In person mourn, build up with their own hands
The funeral pyle, and light the fatal brands;
I will not leave thee, Rome, till I embrace
Thy hearse, and liberty, thy dying face,
And fleeting Ghost with honor do attend.
So let it go; let the angry gods intend
A complete Roman sacrifice; no bloods
Will we defraud the war of; would the gods
Of heaven, and Ereb^^ would now strike dead
For all our crimes this one condemned head.
Devoted Decius by his foes could fall:
Me let both Roman hosts assault, and all
Rhines barbarous troops; let me in the midst receive
All darts, all wounds, that this sad war can give.
Let me redeem the people: let my Fate
What ere Romes manners merit, expiate,
Why should the easily conquered people die,
That can endure a Lord? Strike only me,
Me with all swords, and Piles, that all in vain
Our wronged laws, and liberties maintain:
This throat shall peace to Italy obtain.
After my death he that desires to reign,
Need not make war: but now let us follow all
The common Ensigns, Pompey general.
Though he overcome, it is not yet known that he
Means to himself the worlds sole Monarchy.
I Will help him conquer, lest he should suppose
He conquers for himself. From this arose
Young Brutus courage: this grave speech too far
Made the young man in love with civil war.
Now Phoebus driving the cold dark away,
They heard a noise at door; ( v) chaste Martiae
Come from Hortensius tomb, stood knocking there:
Once given a Maid in marriage happier:
But when the fruit, and price of wedlock she
Three births had paid: another Family
To fill, was fruitful Martia lent a Bridle,
To join two houses by the Mothers side.
Now when Hortensius ashes vined rest,
She in her funeral robes, beating her breast
With often strokes and tearing her loose hair,
Sprinkled with ashes from the Sepulcher,
To please sour Cato, with a gesture sad
Thus speaks: Whilst blood, and childing strength I had,
Cato, I did thy will, two husbands took:
Now worn away, and with often travel ^roke
I come, no more to part: grant now our old
Wedlocks untasted rites: grant me to hold
The empty name of wife, and on my Tomb
Write Cato's Martia, lest in time to come
It may be ask'de whether I left the bed
Of my first Lord bestow'de or banished.
Nor come I now prosperity to share,
But to partake thy labors, and sad care.
Let me attend the Camp; leave me not here
In peace, Cornelia to the war so near.
These speeches moved the man; though these times are
Unfit for Hymen, when Fate calls to war,
Without vain pomp to tie a nuptial knot
In the gods presence, he refuses not.
No garlands on the marriage doors were worn*
Nor linen fillets did the posts adorn:
No bridal Tapers shone: no bed on high
With Ivory steps, and gold embrodery:
No Matron in a towred crown, that led
The Bride, forbid her on the threshold tread:
No yellow veil covered her face, to hide
The fearful blushes of a modest Bride:
No precious girdle guirded her loose Gown:
No Chain adornd her neck; nor lin^en down
From off her shoulders her nak'de arms orespred;
So as she was, funeral habited,
Even like her Sons, her Husband she embrac'de,
A funeral robe above her purple plac'de.
The usual Jests were sparde: the husband wants,
After the Sabine use, his marriage tants.
None of their kindred met; the knot they tie
Silent: content with Brutus auspicy.
His ore-growne hair he from that sacred face
Shaues not, nor will in his sad looks embrace
One joy (since first that wicked war begun
He lets his unshorn hoary locks fall down
Ore his rough front, and a sad beard to hide
His cheeks* for he alone from factions freed,
Or hate, had leisure for mankind to weep)
Nor in his bridal bed would Cato sleep,
Even lawful love could continence reject.
These were his manners, this sour Cato's sect,
To keep a mean, hold fast the end, and make
Nature his guide, dye for his Countries sake.
For all the world, not him, his life was lent
He thinks; his feasts but hungers banishment;
His choicest buildings were but fence for cold:
His best attire rough gowns, such as of old
Was Roman wear; and nothing but desire
Of progeny in him warmed Venus sire:
Father, and husband both to Rome was he,
Servant to justice, and strict honesty:
For th'publike good, in none of Catoes acts
Creepes self borne pleasure, or her share exacts
Now with his fearful troops Pompey the great
To Trojan Capua fled, meant there to seat
The war: his scattered strength there to unite,
And his aspiring foes assaults to meet.
Where Apenine raised somewhat higher fills
The amidst of Italy with shady hills?
Then which no part of earth dooes swell more high
In any place, nor nearer meets the sky.
The mountain twixt two seas extended stands
Th'vpper, and lower sea: on the right hand
Is Pisae seated on the Tyrrhene shore:
Ancona on the left vexed evermore
With storms and winds that from Dalmatia blow.
Here from vast foun^aines do great rivers flow,
And into th'double seas divorce do slide
In several channells; down on the left side
Metaurus swift, and strong Crustumium flow,
Isapis joined t'Isaurus, Sonna too
And Aufidus the Adriaticke beats:
Eridanus, then which no river gets
More ground; whole forests rowles into the sea
Oreturn'd: and robs of rivers Italy.
They say that Poplars on this rivers side
First grew, when Phaeton amiss did guide
The day; his wandering Chariot burnt the sky,
And scorcht the earth: all rivers then were dry
But this; whose streams did Phoebus fires withstand,
Not less then Nile, if on plain Libyan sand
It flowed like Nile: not less then Ister 'twere,
Unless that Ister running every where
The streams that fall into all seas, does meet,
And not alone the Scythian Ocean greet
From springs, that down the hills right side do flow;
Rutuba, Tyber, swift Vulturnus grow:
Night-ayre infecting Sarnus, Liris too
Runs, strengthened by the Vestine rivers, through
Maricars woody lands: Siler that glides
Through Salerne's fields; Macra whose Ford abides
No ships, into the sea near Luna fall.
The hill (where he in length extended all
Meeting the b^nding Alps France oversees)
Tot^ 'Vmbrians, Marsians, and Sabellians is
Fer^ile, and does with woody arms embrace
The people of the ancient Latin race:
Nor leaves he Italy, before he end
In the Scyllaean cavernes, and extend
Unto Lacinian Juno's house his hill.
Longer he was then Italy, until
The s^a divided him, and water forced
The land; then when two meeting seas divorced
What was conjoined, part of the hill the sea
Gave to Pelorus in Sicilia.
Caesar now mad of war loves not to find,
But make his way by blood, nor is his mind
Joyed that in Italy he sees no foes,
No Countries guarded from him, meets no blows:
But counts his journey lost; desires to break
Not open gates, and loves his march to make
By fire and sword, not sufferance; thinks it shame
To tread permitted paths, and bear the name
Of Citizen The Italian Cities are
Doubtful which way to lean; and though when war
Makes her first feared approach, all easily
Will yield: with Bulwarks yet they fortify
Their walls, dig trenches round about below:
Vast stones and weapons from above to throw
They get, and engines on their walls provide.
The People most incline to Pompey's side:
But faith with terror fights: so when we see
The South-windes horrid blastes possess the sea.
The waves all follow him, till by the stroke
Of Aeolu^ his Sp^are, the opened Rock
To the rough seas lets out the Fasterne wind:
They still retain, though new assaults they find,
The old, though th'Eastwind the air with dark storms fill,
The Ocean d^es the Southwind challenge still.
But peoples minds fear changes easily,
And Fortune swayes their wavering loyalty.
By Libo's flight Etruria's naked left,
And Vmbria, Thermus (y) gone, of freedom rest:
Sylla far differing from his fathers fame
In civil war, flies hearing Caesar's name.
Varus, (z) before the first assault forsakes
Auximum's walls, and flight disordered takes
Ore rocks and deserts: Le^tuius (a) is beat
From As^ulum: the foes pursuing get
His men; that now alone the Captain flies
With empty Standards rest of Companies.
Thou Scipio, (b) leau'st the trust committed thee
Luceria's Fort, though in thy Camp there be
The valiantst Youth, whom fear of Parthian war
From Caesar took, whom Pompey to repair
His French loss, lent him; and while he thought good
Bestowed on Caesar the use of Roman blood.
But fair Corfinium's well fenced walls contain
Thee, slout Domitius: (c) in thy Camp remain,
Those that arraigned Milo did enclose.
He when a cloud of dust from far arose,
And on bright Arms the Sun reflecting shone,
And glittering swords, cries, run my Soldiers, run
Down to the river, drown the bridge, and thou
Increased from all thy empti'd fountains now
Rise swelling stream: break down and beat away
This scattered bridge: there let the war now stay:
Let thy banks make our furious enemy
Linger a while: we will count it victory
That Caesar first stays here. This said, in vain
He sends swift Cohorts from the town amain.
For Caesar first, when from the fields he spy'de.
His passage lost by bridge, enraged cry'de,
Cannot your walls, base cowards, shelter you
Enough, but that the fields and rivers too
Must help? I Will pass, through Ganges in my way
Rolled all his strength: no stream shall Caesar stay
Since Rubicon is past; go winged Horse,
Second bold foot, the bridge now falling force.
Thus spoke he: forth the winged Horsemen ride,
And like a storm of Hail on the other side
The water, their well brandisht Iavelins light:
Caesar then takes the river, puts to flight
The Soldiers all that were in station
To guard the bank, and safe before the town
Is come: when straight up lofty works are thrown,
And Engines raised the walls to batter down.
When lo (oh shame of war) opening the gate
The Soldiers brought their Captain bound, and at
The feet of his proud Foe present: but he
With looks not shaming high Nobility
Offers his throat undaunted: Caesar sees
Death's sought* and mercy feared, then thus replies,
Live, though thou would not, by our bounty live,
Enjoy this light, and to the conquer'de give
Good hope: the example of our clemency
Be thou: or else again wars fortunes try:
Naught for this pardon Caesar from thy hands
Expects, if thou overcome: with that commands
T'vnbinde him: had his death the Conqueror pleased*
How much a Romans blush had fortune easde.
For following Romes, the Senates, Pompey's arms,
Pardon to a Roman was the worst of harms.
He yet vnfear'd, his anger does retain,
Speaks thus t'himselfe: Will thou, base man, again
See Rome, or seek peaceful retirements? No,
Rather into wars fury dying go,
Rush boldly through the midst, sure end to make,
Of this loath'de life, and Caesar's gift forsake.
Pompey, not knowing he was taken, provides
Forces, to strengthen with joined power his side;
Meaning his Camp next morning to remove,
The Soldiers spirits before their march to prove,
He thus with a majesticke voice bespake
His silent troops; guilt-punishers, that take
The better side, you truly Roman band,
Arm'de by the State, no private man's command,
Fear not to fight: Italy's wasted all
By barbarous troops: through the cold Alps the Gaul
Is broken loose: blood has already died
Caesar's polluted swords: the gods provide
Well that the mischief there begins, and we
First suffer wrong; oh n^w let Rome by me
Take punishment: nor can you call it here
True war, but over revenging countrye's ire:
Nor is this more a war, then that wherein
Nak'de-arm'de Cethegus, and fierce Catiline
Meant to fire Rome, Lentulus, and their mates*
Oh madness to be pittyed* when the Fates
Would with Camillus, and Metellus join
Thee Caesar, thou to Marius should incline,
And Ci^^a; fall thou shall, as Lepidus
Fell under Gatulus, Carbe by us
Beneaded then, that in Sicilia lies,
And he that made the Spaniards fierce to rise
Banished Se^to^i^^: though I grudge with those
Thou Caesar should be placed: and Rome oppose
My arms against thee Would from the Parthian war
Crassus had safe returned, and conqueror:
That thou in such a cause as Spartacus
Might fall: but if the gods intend to us
Thou shall one title add: this arm a dart
Can ably brandish yet: about this heart
The blood is hot; know then not all that love
To live in peace, in war will cowards prove:
Nor let my age affright you, though he call
Me worn, and weak: let an old General
Be in this camp; in that old soldiers be.
I have attained what ere a people free
Can give, and nothing but Monarchy
About me left: he that in Rome would be
Greater then I, no private state demands.
Here both Romes Consuls, here her Senate stands
Shall Caesar then subdue the Senate? sure
Thou Art not quite shameless fortune, to endure
Things should so blindly turn Does rebel France
So long a taming, and those wartes advance
His thoughts so high? because from Germany
He fled; and calling a small stream a sea
On the sought Britains turned his flying back?
Or swells he cause all Rome, though armed, forsake
The City, hearing his fierce troops are nigh?
Ah fool they fly not thee, all follow me.
My glorious Ensigns on the Ocean borne.
Ere Cynthia twice had filled her waned horns,
All Pirates fled the seas, and at my hand
Humbly craved dwellings in a narrow Land.
I that stout King, that stayed Romes growth, did force
Flying along the Scythian seas divorce,
(Which Sylla never could bring to pass) to dye
By his own hand: no land from me is free:
My Trophies all that Titan sees possess.
Going from thence Ph^sis cold river sees
Me conqueror in the North: in the hot Zone
Known Egypt, and Syene, that at noone
No shadow spreads: my laws the West obeyes,
Baetis, that meets the fa^thest Western seas*
Me tamed Arabia knows, th'Aenio he bold,
And Colchos famed for her sto^ne fleece of gold
The Cappadorians from my Colors fly,
And jews that serve an unknown Deity:
Me soft Sophene fears, the Armenians,
Taurus, and the subdued Cilicians:
What wars for him, but civil, do I leave?
These words his soldiers with no shout receive,
Nor are they eager of the fight: their fears.
Great Pompey sees, and back his Standard bears,
Loath in so great a war to venture men
Overcome with same of Caesar yet not seen.
As a Bull beat in the first fight he tries,
Through th'empty fields, and desert forests flies
Exiled, and tries against every tree his horns,
Nor till his strength be perfited, returns
To pasture, then recovering his command,
Maugure the Heardsman, leads them to what land
He lift: so now as weakest, Italy
Dooes Pompey leave, and through Apuli^ fly,
Himself immuring in Brundufirm's hold,
A town by Cretan colonies of old
Possessed, that in the Athenian navy fled,
When lying sails reported Theseus dead.
Hence Italy's now straightned coast extends
Her self in form of a thin tongue, and bends
Her horns t'inclose the Adriaticke sea:
Nor yet could these straight shut up waters be
A haven, if high cliffes winds violence
Did not restrain, and the tired waters fence
On both sides, Nature, the winds tyranny
To stop high cliffes opposes to the sea;
That ships by trembling cables held may stand.
Hence all the Maine lies open, if to thy land
We sail Corcyra, or our courses bend
On the left hand, where Epidamnus tends
To the Ionian; thither Sailors fly
When th'Adrian's rough, and clouds obscure the high
Ceraunian mountains, and with violent dash
The foaming seas Calabrian Sason wash.
When of forsaken Italy there was
No hope at all, nor that the war could pass
Into the Spanish coast, for twixt that land
The lofty Alps did interposed stand.
Thus th'eldest of his noble progeny
Pompey bespake; the worlds far Regions try
Nile and Euphrates, wheresoere my name
Is spread: and all the Cities where Romes fame
I have advaunc'd; bring back unto the seas
The now dispersed Cicilian colonies.
The strength Pharnaces holds I charge thee bring:
Arm my Tigranes, and th'Aegyptian King.
Those that inhabit both Armenia's ore,
And the fierce nation by the Euxine Shore:
Riphaean bands, and those, where Scythian carres
On his slow back congealed Maeotis bears.
Why speak I more? through all the East my Son
Carry this war; through every conquered town
In The world: to us all triumphed regions join.
But you, whose names the Latian feasts do sign,
To Epire sail with the first Northeast wind,
Through Greece and Macedon new strength to find
While winter gives us respite from the war.
To his commands they all obedient are,
And from The Italian shore their anchors weigh,
Caesar impatient of wars long delay,
Or rest, lest changing fates might ought withstand,
His flying Son in law pursues at hand.
So many towns at first assault surpriz'de,
And Forts disarmed others had suffic'de:
Rome the worlds head, wars greatest booty, left
A prey; but Caesar in all actions swift,
Thinking naught done, whilst ought undone remained,
Feircely pursues, and though he have obtain'de
All Italy, and that great Pompey lives
In the utmost edge, that both are there, he grieves:
Nor would he let his foes pass forth again
By Sea, but seeks to stop the watery maine,
And with vast hills damme up the Ocean:
But this great labor is bestow'de in vain:
The Sea those mountains swallows, mixing all
With sands below; so if high Erix fall
Into the midst of the Aegaean Sea,
No land above the water seen can be;
Or if the lofty Gaurus quite torn down
Were to the bottom of Avernus thrown.
But when no earth thrown in would firmly stand,
Then with a bridge of fastened ships the Land
He joins; each Galley do four anchors stay:
Once ore the Sea proud Xerxes such a way
Made by report: when joined by bridge he saw
Sestos to Abydos, Europe to Asia;
And fearing not th'Eastwinde, nor Wests affront
Walked ore the curled back of Hellespont,
When ships their sails round about Athos spread;
So now this Haven's mouth Ships straightened,
On which their Bulwarks up apace they raise,
And lofty towers stand trembling on the seas.
When Pompey saw that a new land orespread
The ocean's face: care in his breast is bred
To open the sea, and carry forth the war.
Filled sails, and stretching shrowds the Ships often bare
Against these works, breaking them down made room
Into the Sea for other ships to come*
Often well driven engines lightened the dark night
With flying fires. When time for their stolen flight
Was come: he warnes his men, no Sailers noise
Might on the shore be heard: nor trumpets voice
Divide the hours: nor cornets sound at all
The mariners should to their charges call.
Now near her end Virgo began to be;
And Libra follows his first day to see.
The silent fleet departs: the anchors made
No noise, when from thick sands their hooks are weighed
Silent, while they the sayle-yard bow, and rear
The maine-mast up the fearful masters are:
The Sailors softly spread their sails, nor dare
Shake their strong shrowds within the whizzing air.
The General makes his prayer, Fortune, to thee
To give him leave t'abandon Italy,
Since thou wilt not let him keep it; but alas
The Fates will scarce grant that: the waters flash,
And furrowed with so many keeles at once
The st^mme beat sea with a vast murmur groans.
The foes let in by gates, and up the wall
(Which faith by Fortune turned had opened all)
Along the havens stagge-like Horns they run
Swiftly to shore, grieved that the fleet was gone.
Is Pompey's flight so small a victory?
A straighter passage let him out to sea,
Then where th'Eubaean channel Chaleis beats.
Here stuck two ships, which fast the engine gets.
In fight, and near the shore the skirmish tri'de:
Here first the Sea with civil blood was died.
The Fleet escaped of those two ships bereft:
So when Thessalia Iasons Argo left
For Colchos bound, Cyanean Isles at sea
Shot forth; the tayle-maim'd Ship escaped away
Amidst the rocks: in vain the Islands beat
The empty sea: she comes a sayler yet*
Now that the Sun was near the Eastern sky
Declared, palefac'd before his rosy dye:
The Plejades grow dim: each nearer star
Looses his light: Boots lazy carre
Turns to the plain complexion of the skies,
And Lucifer, the great stars darkened, flies
From the hot day: and now were thou at sea
Pompey, not with such Fate, as when from thee
The fearful Pirates through all seas retired:
Fortune revolts with thy often triumphs tired:
Now with thy Country, Household gods, thy Son,
And Wife, art thou a mighty exile gone.
A place for thy sad death is sought afar,
Not that the gods envy thee Sepulcher
At home; but damned is Egypt to that crime,
And Latium spared: that Fates in foreign clime
May hide this mischief, and the Roman land
Clear from the blood of her dear Pompey stand.
FINIS Libri secundi.
Annotations on the second Book:
(a) An old man to express the present calamity, repeats the whole course of
the civil war, between Mariu^ and Sylla, as it follows in this discourse.

(b) Marius had twice triumphed, once over Iugurtha King of Numidia, and
afterward over the Cimbrians and Teutones; but afterward envying the honor of
Sylla, to whose hands Bocchas King of Mauritania had delivered Iugurtha, and
endeavoring by the aid of Sulpitius Tribune of the People to hinder Sylla
from his expedition against Mithridates King of Pontus, bed incensed Sylla
being then warring in Campania, so far, that Sylla brought his Army to Rome,
and entering the City, subduing his adversaries, got them to be judged enemies
by the Senates decree, and banished the city; Marius escaping by flight, hid
himself in the Fennes near Minturna; but being there taken, he was put in a
dungeon at Minturna.

(c) Marius suffered before hand at Minturna for those cruelties, which he
afterward acted at Rome, when he returned, and was Consul the seventh time.

(d) The executioner of Minturnae being a Cymbrian, entering the dark dungeon
to kill Marius, saw fire sparkling, out of Marius his eyes, and heard a voice
saying, dare then kill Carus Marius? at which the Cymbrian affrighted fled
away, and the men of Minturnae moved with pity, and reverence of the man,
that once had saved Italy, released C. Marius, and let him go

(e) Marius escaped from Minturnae, took flight by obscure passages toward the
Sea, and getting into a ship, a tempest arising, was cast upon the ^^anas
c^lled Meninges, where he receiv^d some companions, and heard that his Son,
with Cethegus were ^otten safe into Afric, to Hy^mpsall; he then said to the
coast of Cartha^e, but being forbidden by the Lictor of Sextilius the Prator,
to set foot in Afric; Gee tell thy Praetor, quoth he, that thou have seen
Ca^us Marius sitting in the ruins of Carthage: not unfitly comparing the
ruin'de estate of that great City to his own now decayed fortunes.

(f) When Caius Cinna the Consul appealed to the people, for restering those
banished men, whom the Senate at request of Sylla had judged enemies: a great
contention arising, Cinna was expelled the City, by his colleague Cneius
Octavius and flying, solicited the cities of Italy to war* he armed slaves and
prisoners, and joining himself to Marius returning, they entered Rome in a
fourefold army, Cinna, Marius, Carbo, Sert^rius, And tyrannized over their
Adversaries.

(g) Marius had given this token to his Soldiers, that they should kill all,
whom he did not resolute, and offer his hand to kiss.

(h) Baebius was torn in pieces by the Soldiers.

(i) Marcus Antonius an excellent Orator, that by his eloquence made the
Murderers relent: at last his head being cut off, Anius the Tribune brought it
to Marius, as he was at supper, who handling it a while, and scoffing at it,
commanded it to be nailed to the Rostra.

(k) Fimbria a cruel Soldier of Marius killed the two Crassi, Father and
Son, in each others sight.

(l) That place of the prison, from whence offenders used to he cast down
headlong, was stained with the blood of Licinius the Tribune, whose Office was
sacred.

(m) Mucius Scaevola the high Priest, an old man, embracing the Altar of Vesta,
was there slain

(n) C. Marius entering his seventh Consulship, within thirteen days after
dyed mad of a disease in his side, being 70. years old, having tasted the
extremities of prosperity, and adversity.

(o) At Sacriportum, not far from Praeneste, Sylla overcame Caius Marius the
Son of old C. Marius, who fled to Praneste; Sylla sent Lucretius O^^lia to
besieage him there; but Marius offering to escape through a Min^ under ground,
and being discovered there killed himself; Sylla then not ten furlong^ from
Porta Collina overthew Lamponius, and Telesinus, two Captains of the Samnites,
who came to raise Ofellas siedge. At these two places Sylla flew above seventy
thousand men.

(p) Marius had promised the Samnites, who had been of his party, that he would
translate the seat of the Empire from Rome to them, who now conceived a hope of
subiecting the Romans mere then once they did ad Furcas Caudinas where the
Romans under the conduct of Titus Veturius, and Spurius Posthumous received a
disgraceful overthrow.

(q) Quintus Luctatius Catulus, which had been Colleague with C. Marius, and
triumphed with him over the Cimbrians, hearing that Marius was determined to
put him to death, entering his chamber, voluntarily choked himself. In revenge
of which, his brother Catulus obtained of Sylla, that Marius the brother of C.
Marius might he delivered into his hands, who sacrificed him at his brothers
Tomb, and wounding his arms, thighs, and legs, he cut off his nose, and
ears, cut out his tongue, and dug out his eyes, letting him so live awhile
that he might die in pain of every limme.

(r) Lucretius Offella by Sylla's command and having taken Praneste, had
killed, or cast in Prison all the Senators, that he found there of Marius
faction: but Sylla coming thither, commanded five thousand and men of
Praeneste, who in hope of mercy had cast away their arms, and prostrated
themselves upon the ground, to be all slain.

(f) Sylla commanded four whole Legions, which had been of his Enemies side,
among whom were many Samnites, to be all killed at one time in the field of
Mars.

(t) Sylla called himself Felix: he named his Son Faustus, and his Daughter
Fausta; leaving his Dictatorship, he lived privately at Puteoli, where be dyed
eaten with Lice, his Funerals were kept with great honor in the field of Mars.

(v) Martia being a virgin was married to Cato, by whom she had three children;
and then his friend Hortensius desiring to have her, and wanting children, Cato
bestowed her upon him, being the^ great with child: after Hortensius his death
she returned thus to Cato.

(x) Cornelia the daughter of Lucius Scipio, and widow of Publius Crassus, was
married to Pompey after Iuliaes death.

(y) At the fame of Caesar's approach, the Governors through Italy all fled, not
daring to withstand him, or maintain any Forts against him; many of those are
here named: First Scribonius Libo leaves his charge at Hetruria, and Thermus
forsakes Vmbria: Faustus Sylla, son to Sylla the Dictator, wanting his Fathers
spirit, and fortune in civil war, fled at the name of Caesar.

(z) Atius Varus, when he perceived that the chief Citizens of Auximum
favored Caesar, took his Garrison from thence, and fled.

(a) Lentulus Spinther with ten cohorts, kept the Town of Asculum who hearing
of Caesar's coming, fled away, thinking to carry with him his cohorts, but was
forsaken by most of his s^uldiers.

(b) Lu Scipio father in law to Pompey the great, fled from Luceria, although
he had two strong Legions. Marcellus to diminish the strength of Caesar,
counseled the Senate to make a decree, that Caesar should deliver one Legion,
and Pompey another to Bibulus, whom they pretended to send to the Parthian
war^e: Caesar according to the Senates decree, delivered to him one Legion for
himself, and another Legion which he had borrowed of Pompey for a present
supply, after the great loss received by his two Praetors, Teturius, and
Cotta. both these Legions Caesar delivered, and they were new in Scipio's camp.

(c) Lu: Domitius Aenobarbus with twenty cohorts was in Corfinium: he had
with him those soldiers of Pompeys who had enclosed the Forum, when Milo was
arraigned for Clodius death. He sent five cohorts to break down the bridge
of the River watch was three miles from the Town; but those cohorts meeting
the forerunners of Caesar's army, were beaten back again.

(d) Spartacus a Thracian Fencer fled with 70 companions of his, from Lentulus
his games at Capua, and gathering slaves to his party, and arming them, made up
an army of 70000 he overcame many Roman Prators, and Consuls; at last he was
vanquished, and slain by Marcus Cr^ssus.

(c) Caesar having wasted Germany with fire and sword, after eighteen days
returned in o France, cutting down the Bridge behind him, that it should not
be useful to the Germans; which Pompey detractingly calls a flight.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The Third Book.
The Argument.
Fair Iulia's Ghost a dream to Pompey shows.
Curio for corn into ^icilia goes.
To Rome comes Caes^r with unarmed Bands,
Where though Metelius all in vain withstands,
He robs the Tre^sury Each Nations name
That to the War in aid of Pompey came.
Caesar thence hasts to Spain, and by the way
Lays cruel siege to true Massilia,
But stays not there himself: Brutus maintaynes
The siege, and Caesar's first Sea-conquest gains.
THe wind-stuff'd sails had sorth the Navy sent
Into the main, the Sailers looks were bent
Upon th'^onian wants: but Pompey's eye
Was nere tu^n'd back^ from his dear Italy,
His native coast, and that beloved ^hore,
Which fate ordaines he nere shall visit more,
Till the high cliffes no more for clouds he se^s,
And the hills lessening vanish from his eyes:
Sweet sleep did then his weary limbs compose,
When Iulia's ghost through the cleft ground arose
In woeful wise, and with a funeral brand
Seemed fury-like before his face to stand.
From the blessed souls abode, th'Elizian field,
To Stygian darkness, and damned Ghosts exiled
Since this sad war, I saw the furies fire
Their brands (quoth she) to move your wicked ire.
Charon pre^ares more boats for souls to come,
And hell's enlarged for tormenting room.
Three sisters speedy hands cannot suffice,
For breaking threads has tired the Destinies,
Pompey, whilst mine, a life triumphant led:
Thy fortunes changed with thy marriage bed:
Strumpet Cornelia, damned by destiny
To ruin her great Lords, could marry thee,
My funeral fire scarce out. Let her in flight
Attend thee now, and through this civil fight
Follow thy Standard, whilst I still have power
To breal^e your rest at every sleepy hour.
No how regiues freedom to your loves delight;
The day holds Caesar, Iulia holds the night.
Lethe's dull waters made not me forget
Thee husband, and hell princes did permit
That I should follow thee; through both the hosts
I Will rush, while thou art fighting: Iuliaes ghost
Shall tell thee still whose Son in law thou art;
Think not that war shall this alliance part;
Th^s war shall make us meet again. This sed
She through her fearful lords embraces fled,
He, though the gods by ghosts do threaten, still
Madder of war, with sure presage of ill,
Why are we scarr'd (quoth he) with fancies vain?
Either no sense does after death remain,
Or death is nothing Now the setting Sun
To drown as much of his bright Or^e begun,
As the Moon wants, when after full she waines,
Or grows near full. Dyrrachium entertaines
His navy now; the Sailors make to shore,
Pull down the sails, and labor at the oar.
Caesar perceiving all the Ships were gone
Past sight with prosperous winds, and he alone
Left Lord in Italy, no joy receiv'de
In the honor of great Pompey's flight, but grieved
His foes fled safe along the Ocean;
No fortune could suffice this eager man,
Differring of the war to him seemed more
Then this small conquest; but he now gives ore
Wars care awhile, intent on peace again,
And knowing how the peoples loves to gain,
That corn most stirs their hate, most draws their loves,
That only famine to rebellion moves
Cities, and fear is bought, where great men feed
The sloathfull Commo^s; naught starude people dread.
Curio is sent to the S^ilian Towns,
Where once the violent Sea did either drown,
Or cut the land, and made it self a shore
In the mid-land, the waters ever roar,
And strugle there, lest the two hills should close.
Part of the war into Sardinia goes:
Both famous Islands for rich fruitful fields,
No land to Italy more harvest yields,
Nor with more Corn the Roman Garners fills:
Not Libia these, as Granaries excells,
When Boreas blasts (the Southwindes ceasing) tear
The showring clouds, and make a fruitful year.
These things provided thus, with peaceful shows,
And Troops unarmed to Rome the Conqueror goes.
Oh had he but come home with victory
Only of Britain, France and Germany,
What long triumphant pomp, what honor than,
What stories had he brought? How the Ocean,
And the Rhine both his Conquests brideled,
The noble Gauls, and yellow Britains led
Behind his lofty Chariot; winning more
He lost those triumphs were deserved before.
No flocke^ of people now his coming greet
With joy; all fear his looks; none stand to meet
His troops; yet proud is he such fear to move,
And would not change it for the peoples love.
Now Anxurs steepest hills he had orepast,
Where a moist path ore Pomine fennes is placed;
Where the high wood does Scythian Dian' show:
Where to long Alba^ feasts the Consuls go.
From an high reeke he viewes the town afar
Not seen before in all his Northren war.
Then thus (admiring his Romes wall) he spoke,
Could men not for^'d by any fight forsake
Thee the gods seat: What City will they dare
To fight for? ^ere the gods their loves declare,
That not the furious Eastern nations,
Pannonians, or swift Sarmatians,
Daci, or Getes invade thee: fortune spares
Thee Rome in this to send thee civil wars,
Having so saint a chief. Then fearful Rome
He ent^rs with his Troops; they think him come
To fire and sack the city, not to spare
The gods themselves; This measure had their fear.
They think he will do what ere he can; no songs,
No shoutes they counterfeit in joyful throngs;
They scarce have time to hate; the fathers meet
In Phoebus temple by no lawful right
Of convocation, from their houses set,
And lurking holes: the Consuls sacred seat
Was not suppli'de; next them no Praetor fills
His room, but em^ty stand those honored Sells.
Caesar was all the S^nate fit to bear
Witness of private power, and grant what ere
He please to ask; Crowne^, Temples, their own blood
Or banishment; fortune in this was good
He blushed more to command, then Rome to obey,
But liberty in this durst make ass^y
By one, if law could overmaster force;
Metellus seeing the vast massy doors
Of Saturn's temple ready to fly open;
Running enraged breaking through Caesar's troop,
Before the yet vnopen'd door he stayed.
(Only the love of gold is not afraid
Of death and threatening swords; the laws are gone
And broke without one ^onflict: wealth alone
The worst of things had power this jar to make)
Staying the rapine thus the Tribune spoke
Aloud to Caesar; thought this breast of mine
The temple opes; n^^r asure shall thou find,
Robber, but what thou buyest with sacred blood;
This office wronged will find a vengefull God.
A Tribunes curse pursuing Cr^ssus, made
A fatal Parthian war; but draw thy blade:
Let not the peoples eyes scarre thee from this
Thy wickedness; the town forsaken is:
No wicked soldier from our treasuryes
Shall pay himself, find other enemies
To spoil, and conquer, other towns to give.
No need can thee to this foul rapine drive;
In me alone, Caesar, thou find'st a war:
These words incens'^ the angry conqueror;
In vain, Metellus, h^p'st thou to obtain
A noble death (quoth he) we scorn to stain
Our hand in such a throat; no dignity
Makes thee worth Caesar's (...); must liberty
Be saved by thee; the fates confound not so
All this, but that the laws, rather then owe
To thee their preservat^on, would be broke,
And taken away by Caesar; thus he spoke;
But when the temple doors the Tribune stout
Left not, more angry grown, he looks about
On his keen swords, to play the gown man now
He had forgot; when Cotta began to woo
Metellus to give ore his enterprise;
The freedom of men subjugated dies,
By freedoms self (quoth he) whose shadow thou
Shall keep, if all his proud commands thou do.
So many unjust things have conquered we
Already suffered, and this now must be
Th'excuse to our shame, and most degenerate fear,
That naught can be denied; now let him bear
Away from hence these seeds of wicked war.
Loss hurts those people that in freedom are.
Worst to the Lord is serving poverty.
Metellus is remoov'd, and opened be
The temple doors; all the Tarpejan hill
With horrid noise the broken hinges fill,
And from the bottom of the temple there
The Roman peoples wealth, which many a year
Had not been touched, which Carthage wars to us,
And the two Kings, Philip, and Perseus
Both conquered brought, is ransackt; gold they reaue
Which flying Pyrrhus to thee, Rome, did leave,
For which Fabritius would no traitor be.
What ere the virtuous frugality
Of our forefathers had yet kept unspent,
And Asias wealthy tributaries sent.
What ere Metellus brought from conquered Crete,
And ore the seas from Cyprus Cato ^et.
The spoils of all the East, and treasures proud
Of captive Kings, which Pompey's triumphs showed.
This temples impious robbing brought to pass
That Rome then first then Caesar poorer was.
Now had great Pompey's fortune drawn from all
The world strong nations with himself to fall.
Aid to the war so near first Graecia lends,
And Cyrrha on the Rock; Amphissia sends
Her Phocian bands; Parnassus learned hill
From both her tops sends men, Baeotians fill
The camp, near whom the oraculous waters flow
Of swift Cephissus; men from Pisa too,
And Theban Dirce, and where under sea
Alphaeus sends his streams to Sicily.
Th'Arcadians leave their Maenalus, and from
Herculian Octa the Trachinians come.
The Thesprots came, and their now silent oak
Th'Epirots near Chaonia forsook.
Athens, though wasted now with musters quite,
Yet levies men, and to this civil fight
Three Saliminian ships sends from her fleet
To Phoebus dedicated: Ioue-lou'd Crete
From Gnossus, and Gortina sends to the field
Archers, that need not to the Parthians yield:
Soldiers from out Dardanian Oricum,
From Athamas, and from Encheleae come,
Famed for transformed Cadmus funerals:
From Colchos, where Absyrtus foaming falls
Into the Adrian: those where Peneus flows:
He that Iolchos in Thessalia plowes:
Thence was the sea first tried, when Argo bore
Those that first sailed to a foreign shore,
And first of all committed frail mankind
To mercy of the raging sea and wind:
That ship taught men a way unknown to die*
From Thracian Aemus, and from Pholoe
Beely'd with Centaures, and from Strymon too,
From whence the birds to Nile in winter go:
From barbarous Cone, where into the seas
Six headed Ister dooes one channel ease
At Peuce, soldiers come: the Mysian,
And cold Caicus-washt Idalian,
Barren Arisbe helps, and Pitane:
Celenae by Apolloes victory
Condemned, that cursed Minervaes fatal gift;
Where into crook'd Maeander Marsyas swift
Falling, there mingled back again^ dooes flow;
The land, that from gold mines letts Hermus go,
And rich Pactolus; those of Ilium
With Ilium's fate to falling Pompey come;
The tale of Troy, and Caesar: pedigree
Drawn from Julius could no hindrance be.
The Syrian people from Or^ntes go,
Windy Damascus, happy Minos too;
Gaza, and Idumaea rich in Palms;
Instable Tire, Sidon, whom purple fames:
These ships bound to the war, the Cynosure
Guides straight along the sea, to none more sure;
Phaenicians, that (if fame we dare believe)
To humane speech first characters did give.
The rivers yet had not with paper served
Egypt; but ^arv'd beasts, birds, and stones preserved
Their magic language. Taurus lofty wood
Forsaken is; Tarsus, where Per^eus flood,
From Coricus, dug from an hallow rock,
Mallos, and Aegae the Cilicians flock
No Pirates now, but to a just war pressed.
Fame of this war had stirred the farthest East
Where Ganges is, that only cross doo^s run
Of all earth's rivers to the rising Sun,
And roules his waves against the Eastern wind.
Philips great Son, there stayed, was taught to find
The world more large, then his ambitious mind
Conceived it: and where double channell'd Inde
Feels not Hydaspes mixture: Indians,
That suck sweet liquor from their sugar canes:
And those, whose hair with saffron is bedy'd,
Whose garments loose with colored gemmes are tied;
Those that alive their funeral piles erect,
And leap into the flames helping to effect
Fates work; what glory it is, content to live
No more the remnant to the gods to give;
Fierce Cappadocians, the hardy Nations
Near to Ammannus, the Armenians
Near strong Niphates; the Coastrae from
Their lofty woods, and the Arabians come
Into an unknown world, wondering to see
Shadows of woods on the right hand to be.
Farthest Olostrians come to Roman war;
Carmanian Captains too; who Southward far
See not the set of the whole Northern Bear;
By night but little shines Boots there.
The Ethiopian land not seen at all
By any of the signs Septentrionall
But crooked Taurus hoof; those people too
Whence great Euphrates, and swift Tygris flow,
From one sp^ing Persis sends them; it is unknown
What name, should those two Channells meet in one,
They Would bea^e Euphrates flowing on the fields,
That profit there, that Nile in Egypt, yields.
But Tigris swallowed by the gaping earth
Long hides his course: but at his second birth
Deni^s not to the Sea his newborn flood.
Betwixt both Camps fierce Parthians neuters stood,
Content that they alone had causde this war.
With poisoned arrows wandering Scythians far
Come to the Camp, whom Bactros joy flood
En^los^s, and Hyrcania's desert wood.
The valiant Heniochian Horsemen there
Sprung from the Spartan race: Sarmatians near
To the fierce Moschi, where cold Phasis glides,
And Col^hos richest pasture fields divides.
Where Halys fatal to the Lydian King
Does flow; where Tanais, that draws his spring
From the Riphaean hills, and does divide
Europe from Asia, giving to each side
The name of several worlds, and (as he bends)
Now to this world, now that increase he lends.
Where slow Moeotis driven into the seas,
Takes from the pillars of great Hercules
Their fame; denying that the Gades alone
Admit the sea. Scythonian nations,
The valiant Arians, Arimaspians
With gold decked locks, and swift Gelonians.
The Massegets, their thirst that satisfy
With the same horses bloods, whereon they fly.
Not Cyrus leading th'Easterne troops, nor when
Xerxes by darts numbering his armed men
Came down; nor Agamemnon bound to set
His brothers ravished wife with that famed fleet,
So many Kings brought under their commands,
So many nations drawn from several lands,
Different in language, and attire; nor ere
Did fortune bring so many men to bear
Part in a mighty ruin, making all
Sad obsequies at Pompeys funeral.
Marmaricke troops the horned Ammon pressed,
And all scorcht Affricke from the farthest West
To th'Easterne shore, send aid, as far as ly
The Syrtes gulfes; lest Caesar severally,
And often be troubled, here all nations
Pharsalia brings to be suddu'de at once.
Caesar now leaving fearful Rome in have
With his swift troops the cloudy Alps orepast:
But though his fame all people else affright,
Phocian Massyllia (f) dares yet keep aright
Her faith, and far from Greekish levity
The cause, the laws, not fortune follows she:
But first of all they labor to assuage
With peaceful parley his vncurbed rage,
And stubborn mind: and to their foe now nigh
They send an Oliue-bearing Embassy.
As Latiums annals can true mention make,
Massilia still was ready to partake
The fate of Rome in any foreign war:
And now if triumphs over nations far
Caesar, thou seek, to such a conflict take
These hands, and lives of ours; but if you make
Sad civil war, then give us leave to bend
To neither side, and naught but tears to spend.
Let not our hands in wounds so sacred be:
If th'heavenly gods had civil enmity,
Or earth-borne Giants should assault the sky,
No aid to Jove durst human piety
By arms or prayers lend; their states above
We know not, but are bound to think that Jove
Has thunder still; besides how many from
All nations now do voluntaryes come?
The slothful world is not from vice so far
That you should need forced sword to civil war.
Would every people would this cause refuse,
And this sad war no hands, but Roman use.
Some hands would falter at their fathers sight,
And brothers faintly would against brothers fight.
The war will soon have end, if foreign states
You use not t'exercise their ancient hates.
Our humble suite is, that within our wall
Thou 'ldst trust thy self, and leave behind thee all
Thy threa^ning Eagles; let us this obtain
To shut out war, and Caesar entertain.
Let this place free from guilt safely receive
Thy self and Pompey, if fates please to give
Peace to unconquered Rome; here both may meet
Unarmed; but why, when danger did invite
Thy wars to Spain, turn'dst thou to us aside?
We are of no avail to turn the tide
Of your great wars; our arms have prooved still
Unfortunate; when fortune did exile
Us from our first plantation, here we sat,
And Phocis sacked towers hither did transla^e:
Here in a foreign coast, and weak walled town
Safe have we lived; our Faith is our r^nowne.
If thou intend seidge to our walls to lay,
Or through our gates to enforce a speedy way;
In the defense we are resolved to dye,
And fury of the sword, and fire to try.
If thou divert our waters course, the ground
We Will dig, and lick the puddle we have found:
If food should fail, flesh of our children slain
(Fearful to touch or see) our jaws should stain:
For liberty to suffer we will not fear
What once Saguntum, when besiedg'd, could bear
In Carthage war: our babes in vain that strive
To suck their mothers dried up breasts, we will give
Freely to th'fire: a wife shall sue for death
At her dear husbands hand: a brothers breath
A brothers hand shall stop; this civil war
We Will choose o'th'two; so spoketh' ambassador.
But Caesar's troubled look his anger speaks
Before his words; but this at last; these Greeks
Vain hope of our departure has possessed;
Though we were marching to the farthest West,
Yet have we time to sack Massilia,
Soldiers rejoice, fate meets us in the way
With war; as winds in th'empty air do loose
Their force, unless some strong grown oak oppose:
As mighty fires for want of fuel dye,
So want of foes, breeds our calamity.
Our strength were lost unless some durst stand out
To be subdued; but if I come without
My arms, they will receive me; they desire
Not to exclude, but take me prisoner.
But they (forsooth) would feign that guilt eschew
That follows civil war; I Will make them rue
Their asking peace, and know that naught can be
Safer then war to those serve under me.
Then on he marches; the town fearelesse shut
Their gates, and soldiers on the rampires put.
Not far off from the walls a hill there stood,
Whose top was like a field level and broad;
Which Caesar in surveying judged to be
Safe for a camp, and fit to fortifie^
The towns n^e^'st part did an high castle raise
Aequall to th'hill; in midst a valley was.
Caesar resolves on a labor^ous thing,
To fill the valley, and together bring
Both hills; but first to shut up quite the town
By land, from both sides his high camp brings down
A long work to the sea, a bulwark raised
Of turfes, with rampires on the top, and placed
In length, to cut all convoyes from the town.
This was a thing for ever to renown
This Greekish town, to stay the violent course
Of this hot war, not t^ne by sudden force,
Or fear; when Caesar all the rest orerunne,
The cities conquest as'kd him time alone:
It Was much ^o stay ^is fates: fortune in have
To make him lord of all the world did wast
Time at this ^eidge: n^w round about the town
The lofty woods are felled, large Oaks hew'n down,
To fortify with posts the bulwarks side,
Lest earth too brittle of it self should slide
Away, not able the towers weight to bear.
A wood untouched of old was growing there,
Of thick set trees, whose boug^s spreading and fair,
Meet^ng obscured the enclosed air,
And made dark shades exil^ng Phoebus rays,
There no rude Fawn, nor wanton Silvan plays;
No Nymph disports, but cruel Deityes
Claim barbarous ^ites, and bloody sacrifice:
Each tree's defiled with humane blood: if we
Believe traditions of antiquity,
No bird dates light upon those hallowed bows:
No beasts make there their dens: no wind there blows,
No lightning falls: a sad religious awe
The quiet trees vnstirr'd by wind do draw.
Black water currents from dark fountains flow:
The gods unpolished images do know
No art, but plain and formelesse trunks they are.
Their moss, and mouldinesse procures a fear:
The common figures of known Deities
Are not so feared: not knowing what God it is
Makes him more awful: by relation
The shaken earths dark cavernes often did groan:
Fallen Yew trees often of themselves would rise:
With seeming fire often flamed th'vnburned trees:
And winding dragons the cold oaks embrace:
None give near worship to that balefull place;
The people leave it to the gods alone.
When black night reigns, or Phoebus guilds the noone,
The Priest himself trembles afraid to spy
O^ find this woods tutelar Deity.
This wood he bids them fell: not standing far
From off their work: untouched in former war,
Among the other bared hills it stands
Of a thick growth; the soldiers valiant hands
Trembled to strike, moov'd with the majesty,
And think the axe from off the sacred tree
Rebounding back would their own bodies wound*
Tn' amzement of his men when Caesar found,
In his bold hand himself an hatchet took,
And first of all assaults a lo^ty oak,
And having wounded the religious tree,
Let no man fear to fell this wood (quoth he)
The guilt of this offense let Caesar bear.
The soldiers all obey, not void of fear,
But ballancing the gods, and Caesar's frown.
The knotty Holmes, the tall wild Ashes down,
Jove's sacred Oak, ship-building Alder falls,
And Cypress worn at great m^ns funerals,
Then first cut down, admit the sight of day;
The falling trees so thick each other stay.
The Gauls lament to see the wood destroyed:
But the besieged townsmen all orejoy'd,
Hope that the wronged gods will vengeance take;
But gods often spare the guiltiest men, and make
Poor wretches only feel their vengefull hand.
When wood enough was felled, waines they command
From every part, plowmen their seasons lose,
Whilst in this work soldiers their teames dispose.
But weary in this ( g) lingering war to stay,
Before the walls Caesar goes far away
To meet his troops in Spain; his army stays
Before the town: there lofty forts they raise,
And bulwark^s equalling the height o'th town,
Which had in earth no fixed foundation,
But rolled to and fro, the cause vnknone:
The townsmen viewing this strange motion,
Thought it some earthquake, where the struggling wind
From the earths cavernes could no passage find:
But much they wonder their own walls stand fast:
From thence against the town their Piles they cast;
But the Greeks missill weapons did more harm
To Caesar's men, sent from no feeble arm,
But mighty engines with a whirlewinds might;
These not content one breast alone to split,
Through many bodies, bones, and armours cleave,
Not loosing in one wound their strength, and leave
Behind them many deaths; but when they throw
Great massy stones, the mortal force is so
As from a mountains top a falling rock,
Which the winds force, and ruining time has broke;
Not only killes what man so ere it dash,
But every limme dooes into pieces pash.
But when with fence of shields conjoined all
The sheltred soldiers could approach the wall,
Their heads all covered like a fishes shell,
Those darts and stones flue over them, which fell
With danger on their heads before; but now
The Greeks at such small distance could not throw,
Nor th'engine change, content with weight alone
On their foes heads they roll down heavy stone:
But while the fence did last, hurtlesse did all
Their stones, and darts, like hail on houses fall;
Until the townesmens teased valor broke
(When Caesar's m^n were tired with often strokes)
The fence, and did their joined shields divide:
Then did a thin earth covered work proceed;
Under whose covert those that lay did fall
To work in undermining of the wall.
Sometimes the back forced ram did strongly drive
Forward, the well compacted wall to riue.
But from above with fires, with often strokes
Of broken bars, stakes, and fire hardened oaks
They force the fence; the work broke down and vain,
The soldiers tired fly to their camp again.
The Greeks then sally fo^th, not satisfied
That their walls safely stand, and fire works hide
( h) Under their arms no mortal bow nor spear
Arms the bold youth, but flaming fire they bear,
Which with swift wings into the Roman trench
The strong winds carry: naught has power to quench
Or slacken it, the wood though green dissolues,
And in black clouds of smoke the air involues,
But fire all pieces of the buildings take,
Not only wood, but stones, and rocks do crack,
And moulder into ashes: greater now
The failing bulwarks in their ruins show.
The conquered now loosing all hope by land
Resolve the hazard of sea fight to stand:
Their ships f^re-decke no gilded names adorn;
But timber plain, such as the woods had borne
Growing, make stations firm for Navall fight,
Now down the stream of Rodanus the fleet
From Staechas comes to sea, and there attends
Br^tus Praetorian ship: Massilia sends
Her utmost strength to trial of the war;
Old men, and beardlesse boys all armed are.
The fleet then ready on the Ocean
Was rigged, and ^ld wo^ne ships repaired again.
Now when the sky is clear, and his bright rays
On the calm sea the rising Sun displayes:
The North and Southern winds their fury spare,
And leave the calm^d Ocean fit for war:
Both nations rowing from their stations meet,
Here the Caesarian, there the Grecian fleet.
With often and lusty strokes of Rowers from
The havens trembling the great Galleys come.
The ho^es of Caesar's fleet Galleys that bore
Three Oars aside, and some that went with four
Or more did ma^e, themselves opposing so
In front, behind them smaller vessels go,
Liburnian Galleys with two Oars content.
Con^oyn'd in fo^me of a^ half Moon they went.
Brutus Praetorian galley swert the sea
Like a vaste house, then the rest more high was she,
And rowed with six strong Oars on a side.
But when (...) little sea-roome did divide
Both fleetes, as that one stroke would make them meet,
Numberless voices the vaste air did gree^,
Plowing the Seas. Soldiers loud shouts quite drowned
The noise of rowing, and shrill trumpets sound.
Then sweep they the blew waves: the rowers seat
Themselves, and against their breasts strong strokes they f^t
Ships against ships, beakes meeting beakes resound,
And run ^sterne; the air is darkened round
With flying darts, which fa^ling The Ocean hide.
Then turning their forecastles far more wide,
They make their hornest' engir^ the adverse fleet.
As when strong winds with tides repugnant meet,
One way the Sea, the waves another go,
These ships upon the furrow'de Ocean so
Make different tracts, and waves upon the maine,
Which oars raised the sea beats down again.
But the Greek vessels were more nimble far
Either to fly, or turn about the war,
They could without long tedious turning weild
Themselves, and quickly to the stern could yield
The Roman ships slow keel'd would firmly stand,
And lend sure footing like a fight by land.
The master then of his Praetorian ship
Brutus be spoke, why do thou let them slip?
Leave thy Sea-tricks and join the battles close,
Against the Phocaicke stemmes ^ur ships oppose:
He straight obeyes, and turns his own bro^d side
Against their stemmes; what ship so ere they tried
To encounter her, with her own stroke overcome
Sti^kes fast, and is surprisde; they ho^ke in some,
With oars some, some they with chains hold fast:
On the seas covered face the war is placed.
No brandisht Iavelins manage now the war,
No darted steel bestowing wounds from far:
Hands join with hands, and in this Navall fight
The sword acts all: in their own ships upright
They face their foes prone strokes, some fall down slain
In their own ships* died is the Ocean,
And the waves stiffen'd with congeal^d blood:
Ships hook't together could not meet, withstood
By falling carcasses; some half dead sink,
And their own blood mixed with salt water drink:
Some, that desire their struggling lives to keep,
Fall in the ruins of their broken ship.
Iavelins, that mist the aim they did intend,
Fall in the sea, and finish there their end,
Finding their bodies to receive a wound.
A Roman ship by Greeks environed round
Fights stiffely still, on left hand, and on right
Maintaining long against all a doubtful fight;
Upon whose lofty deck whilst Ta^us bold
Strived a seized Grecian flag to hold,
Two darts together sent together split
His breast and back, and in the middle meet:
The blood not knowing yet which way to run
Makes stand; but out at last both darts are thrown:
He in two wounds his dying soul divides.
Hither his ship whilst hapless Telo guides,
Then whom none better on a boistrous sea
Could guide a ship, none better knew then he
Tomorrow's weather, if the Sun he spy'de,
Or Moon, and could for fut^^re storms provide.
He with his stem a Roman ship had broke,
But through his heart a trembling javelin stroke;
The ship turns off following his dying hand;
Gyareus leaping to his friends command
Straight with a Roman javelin strongly flung
Was slain, and to the ship fast nailed hung.
Two twins stand up, their fruitful mothers fame,
That from one womb with fates far different came,
(Death par^s them: their sad parents reft of one
Without mistaking know their living son,
Whose looks the cause of lasting sorrow keep,
And make his friends for his slain brother weep.)
One of those twins from his Greek ship was bold
Upon a Roman keele to lay strong hold:
But from above a stroke cuts off his hand,
Which in the place did still fast bended stand,
And kept the hold; the nerves more stiff became
By death, his courage by this noble maime
Was raised, and greater by this accident
His valiant left hand against his foes he bent,
And rushes on his lost right hand to reach,
But that (alas) another sword did fetch
Off by the shoulder: now both hands were gone,
Nor sword, nor target could he weild; yet down
He did not sink, but naked breasted stood,
Foremost to save his armed brothers blood,
And there all darts, all wounds that were ordained
For many deaths one dying breast contained;
And then his soul fleeting so many ways
He recollects, and in his tired limbs stays
That little strength, and blood was left, to skip
Before his death into the Roman ship
His enemies by weight alone t'oppresse:
For now the ship laden with carcasses,
And full of blood, bored through the side had been,
And through her ^eakes drinking the water in
Was filled up to the hatches, sinking than
It turned the face of the near Ocean:
The waters to the sinking ship gave way,
And in her room closed up again. That day
Miraculous fates the Ocean did behold.
An iron hook thrown to lay violent hold
Upon a ship, on Lycidas did light:
Drowned had he been, but his friends hindered it,
And on his lower parts caught hold, in two
The man was plucked: nor did his blood spin slow
As from a wound, but gushing in one spout
From all his broken veins at once let out:
Into the sea falls his life-carrying blood.
Never so great a passage open stood
To let out any soul, life straight forsakes
His lower half, since vital parts it lackes:
But in his upper half (since in that part)
Lay the soft lungs, and life susteining heart,
Death sta^es a while, and finds repugnancy,
Nor at one time could all his members dye.
The men, that manned one ship, eager of fight
All pressing to one side leave empty quite
The other side: whose weight ore turned the ship,
Which topsie turvy sinking down did keep
The Sailors under water; all of them
Were drowned nor could their arms have room to swim.
One horrid kind of death that day was seen,
A young man swimming was, whose breast between
Two meeting Ships sharp stemms was bored through.
The brazen stemms through bones, and flesh did go,
And made a noise; his squeezed belly sent
Up through his mouth blood mixed with excrement.
But when the ships divide themselves again,
The body thrown into the Ocean,
The water through his bored bosom came:
Now in the Sea shipwrack'd Massi^ia^s swame
Toward their fellows ship to save their lives:
But that already over burdened str^ues
To keep her friends (though thus distressed) out,
And from above with swords the Soldiers cut
Their arms, when hold upon the ship they lay,
Then down again into the Sea fall they
Leaving their hands behind, the Ocean
Can now no longer their maimed trunkes sustain.
But now when all the Soldiers darts were gone,
Fury finds weapons, Oars by some are thrown
Against their foes: with a strong arm. The mast
Do some tear down, and in their fury cast:
Some tear the Sailors seats, bords from the deck
Some throw* for weapons they their ships do break.
Some wanting swords their friends dead bodies spoil:
From his own breast one draws the mortal Pile,
With the left hand holding the wound, so long
To keep in blood and strength, till he had flung
The iavelin at his foe, then lets it run.
But nothing wrought so much destruction
At Sea, as Seas opposed Element,
The fire, which wrapped in unctious stuff was sent,
And sulphur balls, the ships apt fuel were,
Their pitch, and melting wax took easily fire:
Nor now could water quench th'vnruly flame,
Fragments of broken ships still burning swam:
Into the Sea to quench his fire one skips,
For fear of drowning to the burning ships
Another cleaues: that death, that was most near
Among a thousand deaths, they most did fear.
Nor did their shipwrackt valouridly live:
Darts floating on the waves they take and give
Their fellows in the ship, or on the seas
Themselves those darts (though feebly) exercise.
When weapons want, the seas their weapons be;
Foes grasping foes together gladly die.
But in that fight one Phocian did excel:
To search the seas he under water well
Could keep his breath, diue to the lowest sands,
And loosen fastened anchors with his hands.
He grapling with a foe down in the maine
Had sunk and drowned him, and himself again
Safe, and a conqueror rose: but rising found
Ships in his way, and so at last was drowned.
Some with their arms on their foes oars lay hold
To stay their flight: dear as they could they sold
Their lives: some vvounded, to keep off the blows
From their friends ships, their bodies enterpose.
Tyrrhenus standing on the deck aloft,
^^gdamus with a Balearicke shaft
VVounded: the ponderous lead his temples broke,
His falling eyes their hollow feate forsook,
The opticke nerves, and ligaments were broke:
He now stark blind, amazed at the stroke
Thinks this to be deaths darkness: finding than
That all his limbs their perfect strength retain,
Fellows (quoth he) place me where I may throw
A pile, and plant me as you use to do
Engines of war: this little life that now
Remains, Tyrrenus, on all hazzards throw;
This body, though in part already dead,
Will serve for warlike uses, and instead
Of men alive take vvounds; Thus having spoke
In his blind aymelesse hand a Pile he shook,
And threw it not in vain, which as it light
Below his belly noble Argus hit,
Whose weight now falling made it further glide.
Argus unhappy Sire on the other side
The beaten ship then stood (to none would he,
When he was young, in feats of soldiery
Give place, his strength is now by age decay'de,
And he no Soldier but a pattern made)
He seeing his son fall with trembling step
Stumbling along came to that side the ship,
And finding there the body panting yet,
No tears fell from his cheeks, nor did he beat
His woeful breast; His hands now stiff were grown,
And all his joints cold numnesse seizes on:
A sudden darkness closes up his eyes,
That he discernes not Argus, whom he sees.
Argus his dying head began to rear,
And feeb^e neck seeing his Father there
Speachlesse, yet seemed in silence to demand
A kiss, and to invite his Fathers hand
To close his dying eyes; but the old man
Free from amaze, when bloody grief began
To recollect his strength, I will not loose
That time (quoth he) that angry f^te bestows.
Pardon thy wretched father, that from thee
Argus, and from thy last embrace I flee;
Thy wounds warm blood yet signs of life do give,
Thou Art but half dead, and yet a while may live:
I Will go before thee Son: these words expressed,
And with a bloody sword piercing his breast
He leapt into the sea, hasting to death
Before his dearest Son: his flitting breath
Unto one single kind of destiny
He durst not trust. Now great commanders dye;
And now no longer doubtful is the fight;
Some of the Greeks are sunk: by hasty flight
Some get into the haven; others bear
(Changing their load) the Roman Conqueror.
But now sad Parents mournings fill the town:
The shore with mothers lamentation
Did ring; instead of her dear husbands face,
A weeping wife mistaken did embrace
A Roman; Fathers funeral rites to give
About their Sons deformed bodies strive.
But Brutus Conqueror on the Ocean
To Caesar's side first navall honor wan.
FINIS Libri tertii.
Annotations on the third Book:
(a) The usual time of mourning, among the Romans, for the loss of Husband or
wife, was ten months; within which space of time it was accounted infamous to
marry; and therefore Cornelia daughter to Lucius Scipio, and Widow of Pub.
Crassus, who was married to Pompey the great within that time, it here styled
by Iulia strumpet.

(b) Caesar, although it much concerned him to pursue Pompey, and overtake him
before his strength were too much increased by foreign aid, yet partly for
want of ships, and partly fearing lest in his absence there might happen some
new commotion in Italy, and withal fearing the Pompeian army, that was then in
Spain under the conduct of Afranius and Peticius, he resolved first to go and
settle things at Rome, and afterward to go fight against those armies in
Spain.

(c) Valerius was sent into Sardinia to fetch Corn, and Curio into Sicily as
Propraetor with three legions; those countries were two the greatest Granaries
of the Roman Empire.

(d) Caesar assembled the Senators into Apolloes temple, and there with
courteous language excused himself concerning this war, as a thing undertaken
only to preserve his own dignity against the envy and injury of a few, he
entreats them to take care of the commonwealth, and join with him in it:
likewise to send Ambassadors to Pompey and the Consuls concerning peace.

(e) The Tribunitiall power was held so sacred, that whosoever did offer any
violence unto it, they thought the gods would take revenge, and conceived the
reason of that great and miserable overthrow, which Marcus Crassus received in,
Parthia, to be because At^ejus the Tribune had cursed him as he went away

(f) Caesar passing through the further Gallia, and understanding that
Domitius, whom he had lately taken prisoner at Co^finium, and released again
was come into Massylia, a city that favored Pompey's faction, he called out
some of the chief of the city, and admonished them not too much to obey one
man, and so draw a war upon themselves; they shut the gates against Caesar,
but requested him gently to pass by them, hoping by that means to have kept
themselves in safety, and to have remained as neuters in the war, but that drew
this heavy seidge upon them. Unhappy Massilia (says Florus) which desiring too
much to preserve her peace, for fear of war fell into a war.

(g) Caesar had sent Caius Fabius his Lieutenant with three legions into
Spain, to dislodge Afranius a Lieutenant of Pompey's in the Pyrenaean
straights: and now himself leaving Caius Trebonius to besiedge Massilia by
land, and Decius Brutus to besiedge it by Sea, goes with nine hundred horsemen
into Spain to Fabius his camp.

( h) The story in the place concerning the firing of these works which
Caesar's soldiers had raised, and the actions of the Massy^ians is not rightly
related by Lucan; but differs much from the relation of true histories.

LVCANS Pharsasia. The Fourth Book.
The Argument.
Caesar in Spain near high ^erdaes walls
E^campes against two Pompeyan generals.
By sudden floods his camp endangered i^.
Caesar divides the stream of Sicoris,
Oretakes Petrejus flight, who bloodily.
Breaks off his Soldiers new-made amity;
But by extremity of thirst compelled,
Afranius, and himself to Caesar yield.
Famish'^ Antonius yields to his enemy.
Vulteius, and his valiant cohort dye
By their own swords. Curio on Libya^ sand^
Is slain by Iubaes Manritanian bands.
But now stern Caesar in Spaines farthest coast
Makes war: on which, though little blood it ( a) cost,
The fortunes of both Generals much did stand.
Affranius (b) and Petreius did command
Those camps with aequall power, but concord made
Their government more firm: their men obay'd
Alternally both Generals commands.
Here besides Romans bold Asturian bands,
Light Vestones, and Cel^a (c) were, that came
From France, and with the Iberi mixed their name.
A little hill not steep of fertile lands
Swells up, on which the old Ilerda stands;
Before the town flows Sicoris soft stream,
Among Spaines rivers of no small esteem;
On which a bridge of stone high arched stood
TO endure the violence of a winters flood.
The next hill the Pompeyans camp did bear;
Aequall to which Caesar his tents did rear.
The river in the midst both camps divides,
From whence the champion fields upon both sides
Extend themselves b^yond the ken of man.
Swift Cinga bounds them, that to the Ocean
Carries no name, ( d) Iber, where you two join,
That gives the land her name, takes from thee thine.
The first day they encamped, from fight was free:
The Captains stood each others strength to see
Numbering the Eagles; shame did then beg^n
To damn their rage, and hold their fury in;
One poor days respite to their country they
And broke laws gave; but Caesar when the day
Declined, did with a sudden trench enclose
His camp about, and to deceive the foes
His army in the front kept station
To hide the work; and when the morn drew on,
He sends swift troops the next hill to surprise,
That twixt the foes camp, and Il^rd^ lies;
Thither the foes with shame and terror make,
And by a nearer way the hill they take.
The fight grows there; on sword, and valor one
Relyes, the other on possession.
Laden with arms march Caesar's soldiers up
Against the steep hill: their following fellows prop
Their backs with targets up, to keep them so
From falling back; their Piles against the foe
They could not use* Pile^ guide their faltring steps:
Hold, as they clime, they catch on shrubs and slips:
Their swords serve not to fight, but cut their way.
This danger Caesar saw, and sent away
His horse to wheel charging in flank the foe,
And all his foot retreat in safety so
The skirmish ended thus and neither side
Obtained the conquest. Thus far fighting tried.
What other fates were added to this war
Grew from th'vnconstant motions of the air,
For by cold winters dry North-windes the r^ine
The clouds congeale^ bowels did contain.
Snowes on the hills, and tops of mountains lie,
And frosts, that at the Sunne's appearance fly.
All lands within those Western climates are
Hardened by Winters dry con^ealing air.
But when the Sun now wexed warmer came
To take possession of the heavenly Ram,
Making the aequinoctiall again,
When day t'exceede the night in length began,
When Cynthia from the Sunne's conjunction
But newly come could hardly yet be known;
Boreas sh' excludes, and fire from Eurus takes:
He all the clouds that his whole quarter makes
Throws to the West with Nabathaean blasts,
The foggs that India, that Arabia casts
Exhaled, and grown under the rising Sun,
Sky darkening Co^us exhalation,
Which cooles the Indian air, now blown away
From thence, make hot the Eastern countries day.
Nor could the loades of those thick clouds fall down
On the mid world, strong tempests drive them on
From North and South; alone does Calpes ground
Drink the moist air, the farthest Western bound,
Where heavens bowed hinge does with the Ocean meete^
The clouds driven thither could no further get:
Their vastness hardly could involved be
In such strait room, as twxit that earth and sky.
Those clouds then crushed together by the pole
Contract in the air, and down amain they roll
In gushing showers; lightnings though thick retain
No flashing fire, extinguished by the rain.
Iris no colors can distinctly show
Circling the air with an imperfect bow:
She drinks the sea, and to the Ocean
The ponderous waves fall from the sky again.
The Pyrenaean nowes, which Titan yet
Could never melt, flow down: the rocks are wet
With broken ice: rivers their wonted way
Fors^ke; as channells the whole fields display
Themselves: and now as shipwrack'd on the seas
Flo^e Caesar's tents, and drenched companyes
The stream breaks down his camp: rivers oreflow
His trenon and works, nor an the soldiers go
To for^age: the drowned fields no vittaile leave:
The ways by water covered all deceive
The fetchers of provision* then came on
A famine still the sad companion
Of other woes: the soldiers by no foes
Besidg'd, are pined, one his whole wealth bestows
Upon a crust of bread not dearly sold:
(Oh meagre thirst of gain) for ready gold
An hungry ^eller is not wanting there
The waters now have all, no hills appear,
The joining rivers like ore-spreading fe^ns
Cover high rocks; transported are the dens
Of beasts; the stream carries the struggling horse
Not touching ground, and as of greater force
Then The Ocean, repells the Oceans tide.
The darkened Pole does Phoebus luster hide,
And the black skies all colors do confound*
So lies the farthest part of the worlds ground,
Which the cold zone, and frosts perpetual
Cover those countries see no stars at all:
Their barren ice breeds nothing: good alone
To temper with their cold the torrid zone.
So let it be, great Jove, so let it be
Neptune, whose three fork'd scepter rules the sea.
Thou, Jove, with storms perpetual fill the air:
Thou, Neptune, let no rivers home repair,
Let no streams find prone passage to the maine,
But with the Oceans tide turn back again.
Make the struck earth to deluge pervious:
These fields let Rhine oreflow, and Rhodanus.
Hither their course let all great rivers bend:
Hither Riphaean snowes, lakes, fountaine^ s^nd;
Hither all standing pooles from far command,
And save from civil war this wretched land.
But Caesar's fortune, with this little fear
Of his content, returns greater then ere:
The gods began favor, and deserved t'obtaine
Pardon: the clowded air cleared up again:
The mastered waters Sol in fleeces spread:
The night, presaging a fair morn, looked red:
Things keep their place: moisture the sky forsakes;
Water (late high) her own low center takes:
Trees, and emergent hills t'appeare began:
The fields at sight of day grow dry again.
When Sicoris to his own banks restored
Had let the field, of twigs, and willow board
They made small botes covered with bullockes hide,
In which they reached the rivers further side.
So sail the Veneti if Padus flow,
The Britains sail on their calm Ocean so.
So the Egyptians sail with woven boats
Of papery rushes in their Nilus floates.
The army in these boats transported now
Build up a bridge, and fearing the overflow
Of the fierce stream, their work they do note^nd
Upon the bank, but ore the fields extend.
And lest again Sicoris should oreflow,
In several channells cut, he suffers now
For his first crime: but when Petreius spied
That Caesar's fort^ne did all actions guide,
Ilerda he forsakes, trusting no more
The strength of that known world, but seeking for
Untamed nations fierce with wars dire love,
( e) To that worlds end the battle to remo^ue.
When Caesar saw the hills and camp forsook,
He bids his men take arms, and never look
For bridge, or ford, but with their hardy arms
Swim ore the stream: the soldiers his alarmes
Obey with speed, and rushing on to fight
Venture those ways, that they would fear in flight,
Then taking arms cherish their bodies wet,
And their be^ummed joints with running heat,
Till noone made shadows short; the horsemen then
O retake the hindniost of Petreius men.
Who doubtful are whether to fight or fly.
Two rock^ hills lift their proud tops on high
Making a vale beneath: above the ground
Is joined: below safe passages are found
Through windings dark: which straights if once the foe
Had in possession, Caesar well did know
He might from thence carry the war as far,
As Spaines remote, and barbarous nations are.
Run without rank (quoth he) pursue your foes:
Turn back the war, that by their flight you loose:
Make them turn face to face: though they would fly,
Give not the cowards leave basely to die,
But on their breasts let them receive our blows
This said, with swiftness they prevent their foes
Flight to the hills, encamping close beside.
A narrow trench did both the camps divide,
And of so little distance was the place,
They might distinctly know each others face.
There finding fathers, brothers, sons, they see
The wickedness of civil enmity.
And first for fear standing a little mute
With nods, and swords lift up friends, friends salute;
But when dear love conquered the law of wars,
Over the trenches leap the soldiers
TO embrace each other: some their old hosts meet,
Some their schoolefellowes, some their kinsemen greet.
He was no Roman, that no enemy knew:
Sighs break their kisses, tears their arms bedew,
And though no act of blood were yet begun,
They fear the mischief that they might have done.
Why mourn'st thou fool? why do it thou beat thy breast,
And weep in vain? why have thou now confessed
Thou against thy will to wicked war do go?
Stand'st thou in such great fear of him whom thou
Thy self make dreadful? let this trumpets sound,
Neglect the cruel noise, let none be found
To bear his Eagles, and the war there ends;
Caesar and Pompey private men are friends.
Now concord come, that all things do enfold
In thy white arms, and the worlds safety hold,
The earths blessed love: future impietyes
Our age may fear; the ignorance here dies
Of their misdeeds: and from excuse does bar
Their guilt, they know, their foes their kinsemen are.
Sinister fates, that will by this short peace
Their future woes, and wickedness increase.
It Was peace, and in both camps mixed soldiers strayed,
And on the grass their friendly banquets made:
By the same fire together Bacchus rites
They celebrate, and spend the watchful nights
In stories of the war as lovingly
Together they in joining lodginges lie.
Where first they did encampe, from what hand fled
Each Pile, and boast of every valiant deed
Denying much they grant the wish of Fate,
And love the wretched Soldiers renovate.
This love their future wickedness encreast,
For when Petreius saw their friendly feast,
Thinking himself and camp to sale betrayed
He arms his household servants to invade
Dire war: and guarded with a troop of those
Out of his camp th'vn^rm'd Caesarians throws.
The sword, as in embraces joined they stood,
Divides them, and disturbes the peace with blood.
Then wrath these war provoking speeches gave,
Soldiers unmindful of the cause you have,
Though Caesar's conquest you cannot bestow
Upon the Senates cause, this you can do,
Fight till you are overcome: whilst you have hands,
And blood, and whilst the war yet doubtful stands,
Will you go serve, and traitrous Eagles take?
And beg of Caesar he no odds would make
Between his slaves, and at his hands desire
Your Captains lives? our safetyes treasons hire
Shall never be; nor make we civil war
To live: by name of peace betrayed we are.
People for veins of brass, which deepe-hid lie
Would never seek, nor towns would fortify:
No stately horses to the war should pace,
No tower-like ships ore spread the Oceans face,
If liberty for peace were ere well sold.
Shall Caesar's Soldiers damned obedience hold
Bound by a wicked oath, and you make light
Your faith, because in a good cause you fight?
But pardon's hoped: oh shames dire funeral.
Not knowing this, great Pompey, thou ore all
The world art mustring, and each farthest King
Bringing to fight, whilst we are articling
Basely about thy safety. This feirce speech
Turned back their minds, and stirred wars wicked itch;
As when wild beasts weaned from the woods, and shutt
Up close to ^ame, have off their wildenesse put,
And learned to endure a man, if blood once stain
Their jaws, their wildenesse straight returns again,
Their jaws grow hot, and their new boiling rage
The trembling keeper hardly can aswage.
They run on wickedness, and what might seem
In a blind war the gods or fortunes crime,
Deceived trust makes ours; at board, and bed
The late embraced breasts are murdered;
And though unwillingly at first they draw,
Yet when their wicked swords drawn out they saw,
And striking were, their friends they truly hate,
And with the stroke themselves they animate.
Petreius camp is with strange tumult filled,
And horrid murder: sons their fathers killed:
And as if hidden mischief lost should be,
They boast their guilt, and let their Captains see.
Caesar, though robbed of thy men, yet see
The gods high favor: not so much for thee
On Egypt, or Massilias seas is done,
Nor so much honor in Pharsalia won.
( f) For this sole crime of civil war does make
That thou at length the better cause shall take.
The Generals now their blood-stained Soldier
No more dare trust within the camp so near.
But by swift flight toward Ilerda make,
From whom all passage Caesar's horsemen take,
And there in those dry hills shut up their foes,
Whom Caesar strives with a deep trench t'enclose
Cutting all water off, he lets them take
No springes, nor tents near to the river make
They seeing the way of death, convert their fear
To rage; their horses, that unuseful were
To men beseidg'd, they kill, and since in flight
Twere vain to hope, address themselves to fight
Caesar perceiues them coming, and well knows
That death is sought by his devoted foes.
Contain your Piles, and swords, Soldiers (quoth he)
I Will loose no blood to get this victory.
That foe, that meets the sword, nere gratis dies:
Hating their lives, and cheap in their own eyes,
They come to mix our losses with their death:
They Will feel no wounds, but joy in loss of breath.
But let this heat forsake vm, this mad fit,
They Will loose their wish of death. Caesar the fight
Forbids, and lets their choler spend in vain,
Till Sol descended to the Ocean,
And stars appeared; then when no hope's at all
Of fight, their fierceness does by little fall,
Their minds grow cold. So is most courage found
In late hurt men, whilst freshness of the wound,
And the blood hot gives nimble motion
To every nerve, and muscles guide the bone:
If the wound-giver hold his hand, and stay:
Then a cold numnesse, (strength being taken away)
Seizes the mind, and the stiff members ties,
The wound grown cold (the blood congealing) dryes.
The Soldiers wanting water through each creek
Of the dug earth for hidden fountains seek.
Not only now the mattocke, and the spade,
But swords earth-digging instruments are made.
Down from the tops of mountains as profound
They go, as lies the lowest marish ground.
Farther from day, and deeper in earths mould
Diverse not the searcher for Assyrian gold.
But no sought rivers hidden course is shown;
No springs appeared opening the Pummice stone:
No bubbling brook rowles little pibble stones:
Nor sweating cave makes distillations.
Weary with digging then the sweating men
Are from those rocky pits drawn out again:
And this vain search of water the dry air
Makes them less able to endure; nor dare
They f^ede their weary bodies, eating naught,
As medi^^ne against thirst is hunger sought.
If the soft earth do moisture yield, they bring
The clods, and ore their mouths with both hands wring.
The black unstirred mud, that every sink
Aff^rds by strife the greedy Soldiers drink.
And what to save their lives they would have stuck
To take now dying drink; like beasts some suck
Beasts dugs, and when milk fails, with greedy jaw
Mere blood from their exhausted udders draw.
Herbs, and green leaves they wring: bedewed twigs
They lick, and juce of bleeding vines: small sprigs
Of t^ees they for their tender sap do squeeze.
Oh happy men, whom barbarous enemies
Flying by ( e) poisoning all the rivers killed:
But, Caesar, though these rivers should be filled
With poisons, carrions, and pale Aconite
Growing on Cretan rocks* yet knowing it
These Romans then would drink, their bowels now
Are scorcht, their mouths, and tongs dried rougher grow,
Their veins shrink up: their lungs in this distress
Not moist contract the breathing passages
Breathings hard drawn their vlcer'd palates tear,
They open their thirsty mout^es, to drink nights air,
And wish such showers, as all did lately drown,
And the dry clouds their looks are fixed upon.
But that which most increased their misery,
They were encamped not no dry Meroe,
Nor where the naked Garamantes plow
Hot Cancers tropicke; but between the flow
Of swift Iberus, and full Sicoris:
The thirsty camp two neighboring rivers sees.
Now both the generals yield; Afranius lays
Down arms and peace (become a suppliant) prays.
In^o the enemies camp his starved bands
Drawing before the conquerors feet he stands:
Then begging pardon with a careless breast
He lost no Majesty; but twixt his ^ast,
And former state he bears himself in all,
A conquered man, but yet a general.
Had I fallen under a base enemy,
I had not lacked an hand my self to free:
Know then the cause that now I beg to live,
I think thee, Caesar, worthy life to give.
For no sides favor, nor as foes to thee
Did we take arms; both Generals were we
Before this civil war, and have maintained
The former cause: now we will not fate withstand.
Spain we deliver up, and open the East:
Of all the world behind thou now may rest
Secure: nor has much bloods effusion,
Sharp swords, or wearied arms this conquest won:
Only thy foes, that thou have conquered,
Forgive: nor beg we much, grant us to lead
Unarmed those lives, that thou have now bestowed:
Suppose that all our slaughtered troops lay strow'd
Over the field^: to mix unfortunate
With happy arms, and we participate
Thy tryumphs were unfit: our fates we know:
( h) Compel us not with thee to conquer now.
But Caesar gently, and with smiling cheer
Both pardons, and dismisses them from war.
But when the league was firmly 'gree'd upon,
The soldiers to the unguarded rivers run,
Fall on the banks, troubling the granted stream.
But long continued draughts in many of them,
Not suffering air through the empty veins to fly,
Shut up their lives: nor could they easily
Cease this dry plague: but though their guts they fill,
The covetous disease is craving still.
At last their nerves, and strength again it brings
Oh luxury too prodigal of things,
Content with no provision easily brought;
Ambitious hunger for things dearly sought
Ore land, and sea, pride of a sumptuous table:
See what small store to cherish life is able,
And nature please: these Soldiers fainting souls
No unknown Consuls noble wine in bowls
Of mirrhe, and gold restores from fountains pure
Water, and bread their fleeting lives assure.
Wretches that follow wars. These soldiers
Being now disarmed are made secure, from cares
Exempt, and innocent return again
To their own towns. When peace they did obtain,
How much they grieved that ever they had cast
One pile, or suffered thirst, or ever asked
The gods in vain to grant them prosperous wars?
For to the happyer fighting Soldiers
What toiles through all the world, what doubtful fields
Remain to fight? Though fortune always yields
Happy success, yet must they oftentimes
Conquer, spill blood throughout all lands, and elimes,
And follow Caesar, through all fates of his.
When the world's ruine's near, he happy is,
That knows his settled place. Their weary arms
No war calls forth: their sleeps no loud alarmes
Disturbes; their wives, children, and houses they*
And lands (though no deducted colony),
Enjoy; by fortune from this burden freed
No favor does their minds disquiet br^ed:
One general saved their lives: t^ther their own
Commander was. Thus happy they alone
Freed from desires the civil wars behold.
But through the world this fortune did not hold;
She durst act some what against Casar's side.
Where long ( f) Salonae's beaten with the tide
Of the Adriaticke sea; where Zephyre blows
Upon the warm Iader's gentle flows,
Ant^nius there trusting the warlike bands
Of his Curetes, whose environed lands
The Adriaticke sea encircles round,
Was straight beseidged in the utmost bound,
Safe from wars reach, if famine, that alone
Conquers the strongest fortresses, were gone:
The ground no pasture for their horses yields,
Nor yellow Ceres clothes the fallow'd feilds.
The men eat grass^, and when the feilds grow bare,
The grass from off their camps dried turffes they tear.
But when their friends on th'adverse shore they spied*
And Zasil^^ the admiral, they tried
New ways of flight by sea; for their stern end
They did not hoift, nor did their keele extend
(As custom was) but with unusual slight
Firm timber boats to bear a mighty weight
They made. These empty boats on every side
Sustain the ship; whose double rank was tied
With chains acrosse Nor were the oars disposed
On the open front to the foes darts exposed:
Only that sea, that was enclosed round
By those conjoined boats, their oars did wound.
A miracle of silent slight it showed;
She bo^e no sails, or sea discovered rowed.
Now they observe the tides, till the ebbing seas
Leave the sands bare, and make the shore increase;
Then from above into the Ocean prone
The ship falls by two galleyes waited on:
Ore which a lofty threatening tower was reared,
Where spires, and trembling pinnacles appeared.
Octavius keeper of th'Illyrian sea
Would not assault this ship too suddenly:
But his swift vessels thought it good to stay
Till the easy passage might increase his prey,
And farther on to sea by peace invites
His rashly entered foes; such are the slights
Of huntsmen, when their toiles they have disposed:
And fearful dear in plumed nets enclosed:
Their dogs of Crete and Sparta they contain,
And their wide mouthed Molossians restrain:
No dog is trusted in the wood, but he,
That can upon a full sent silent be,
And never open when he finds the game,
Content alone to signify the same
By wagging of the string; then presently
The Soldiers leave the I Will, and eagerly
They come a board the ship, when day's last light
Gave place to the approach of dusky night.
But the Cilicians of great Pompey's side
According to their old sea-craft, had tied
Chains through the midst o'th'sea, of which no show
Appeared above, but loosely let them flow:
The chain was fastened to the Illyrian shore.
The first, and second ships not staid got ore:
The third was caught of burden much more vast,
And to the rock by a drawn rope was cast.
The rock hangs ore the sea (a wonder it is)
Hollow, and still (though falling) stands, with trees
Making a shade: hither the sea by tides
Often drives: and in those darkesome cavernes hides
Ships broke by Aquilon, and drowned men:
Which hidden store the rock restores again;
And when the cavernes belch it up, in heat
Sicilian Charybdis cannot get
Pre-eminence. Here did the great ship stand,
That was with valiant Opitergians manned
Her from all havens did all ships enclose:
Some from the rock, some from the shore oppose.
Vulteius found this vnder-water train
(The Captain of the ship) who all in vain
Striving to cut the chains, did then desire
Without all hope, to fight: where to retire,
Or how to conquer is not seen: but here
As much as snared valor could appear,
It did: against so many thousand wights,
That did enclose, scarce one full cohort fights,
Not long endeed, for night in her black shade
Shut up the day, and peace the darkness made.
Then stou^ Vulteius thus began animate
The cohort fearing sad ensuing fate.
Young men, that but for one short night are free,
Provide in time for sates extremity:
There Is no man's life is short, that does allow
Him time to seek his death: nor think it now
Less glorious that we meet a fate at hand.
The times of future life none understand.
It Is aequall praise of mind to give away
Our lives last moment, and the hoped stay
Of many years, so we the actors be:
No man can be compelled to wish to dye.
No way for flight is left: at every hand
Bent against our throats the stern Cilicians stand.
Let fear be banished then: resolve to dye,
And let your wishes meet necessity.
Nor shall we fall in a blind cloud of war,
As when two battles joined in darkness are,
When heaps of carcasses bestrow the field,
Valor lies buried, all are aequall held.
But in a ship the gods have placed us
Both to our friends and foes conspicuous.
The I Will, the continent, the seas allow
VVitnesses to us, and two parties now.
From diverse shores behold us: in our ends
What great, and rare example Fate entends
I know not. What ere Chronicles afford
Of trust, of Soldiers faith maintained by sword,
We shall excel: it is a small thing to die
Upon our swords, Caesar, we know for thee:
But greater pledges in this sad distress
We want, our great affections to express
And envious Fates us of much praises bar,
That not our parents, nor our children are
Here with us. Let our foes our valor find,
And fear our force, and death contemning mind:
Let them be glad that no more ships were caught,
Perchance they will try by leagues what can be wrought,
Proffering base life: would they would promise us
Pardon, to make our deaths more glorious,
Lest when we fall our killing swords upon,
Our foes should call it desperation.
Much valor must deserve that Caesar may
Account the less of us a fatal day
Among so many thousand. Should fate give
Egresse from hence, I would not wish to live;
I have already cast away my breath,
Drawn by the sweetness of approaching death:
A fury it is, which none but they can know,
To whom nere Fates such knowledge do allow;
The Gods deaths sweetness do conceal, to make
Men live. A noble courage straight did take
The young men's minds; though all with weeping eyes
(Before the Captains speech) had viewed the skies,
And feared to see the turn of Charles his waine:
But now their valiant minds wish day again
After this speech; nor was day slowt' appear:
Sol leaving Gemini, and drawing near
His height in Cancer, when the shortest night
Urged the Thessalian Archer. Day grown light,
Discovered warrelike Istrians on the land,
The fierce Liburnians, and Greek fleet, that stand
Covering the seas. They first suspending fight,
Strive to overcome by covenants, and invite
The ship to yield by granting life; but they
Devoted, scorning life, stand in array,
Secure in sight, resolved what end to take:
No storms their strong resolved minds could shake:
And though but few, by land, and sea they fought
(Such confidence deaths resolution brought)
Against innumerable hands; but when
War had drawn blood enough, their fury then
Turned from their foes. The Captain first of all
Vulteius offering his bare throat began call
Seeking for death, is there no Soldier here
Worthy to shed my blood? let him appear,
And killing me show that himself dares bleed.
With that of life his wounded breast was freed
By many swords; Vulteius thanks bestowed
On all; but dying him, to whom he owed
His first kind wound, he thankefully again
Requites with death. Thus meeting all were slain,
And on one side the wars whole mischief hung.
So the serpentine brood by Cadmus Sprung,
Fell by each others hand, a dire presage
Of the ensuing Theban brothers rage.
So those of th'waking Dragons teeth once framed
In Colchos fields, by Magic spells enflamed,
With kindred blood the fields plowed furrows died;
Which mischief wrought by herbs before vntry'd
Medea feared her self. So fell these men
By ba^gain'd fate, and in the death of them
To dye was the least valor: they both fall,
And kill at once: no right hand mist at all,
Though at the point of death: nor to their blades
Owed they their wounds: a breast the sword invades,
Their throats invade their hands; and if blind chance
A brothers sword against brother did advance,
Or sons against father, with undaunted hand,
And all their strength they strike; in this did stand
Their piety alone, that at one blow
They would dispatch them; on the hatches now
Half dead they draw their bowels, and much blood
Streamed down into the sea; it did them good
To see the scorned day, death to prefer,
And with proud looks despise the conqueror.
Now on the ship the heaps of bodies showed
The slaughter made: on which the foes bestowed
Fit funerals, admiring much to see
To any Captain such fidelity.
Fame flying through the world did never raise
Any one ship with such resounding praise.
Yet will not coward nations since such brave
Examples, learn to know, that death to save
Their liberty is not a price so dear:
But kingdoms armed with power of sword they seare^
Liberty can use arms, and swords should be
(As men should know) to keep their liberty.
Oh would the fates would let the fearful live,
That valor only death to men might give.
Nor was that war that did in Libya grow
Less terrible then this: bold (g) Curio
By a mild Northren wind was wasted ore
From Lilybaeum to that well known shore,
Where Clupea seated is, and where he sees
Great Carthages half ruined aedifice:
And pitching his first tents far from the maine,
Where Bagrada furrows the sandy plain,
Those hills, and eaten rocks goes to behold,
Which were A^taeus kingdom called of old;
Asking the cause of this old name, a clown
Thus tells the tale by long Tradition known*
For Giants births Earth yet not barren made
In Libian caves a feared issue had,
Which to his mother brought as true a fame,
As Typhon, Tityus, and Briareus name.
'Twas good for heaven Antaeus was not borne
At Phlegra; but this gift did more adorn
His mighty strength: into his limbs (though tired,)
His mothers touch a vigor fresh inspired.
This cave his dwelling was, this mountain here
He lurckt about, his food slain lions were:
His bed no leaves of trees, no skin of beasts:
His strength by sleeping on the ground encreast.
By him the inhabitants of Libya died,
And strangers all, that to our coast applied.
His strength (not using a long time to fall)
Needed not earths rich gift: too strong for all
He was though standing up; at length through fame
Of this dire plague the great Alcides came,
Whose hand both sea and land from monsters freed
And for the encounter each put off his weed,
One's Nemean, tother's Libyan Lions skin:
Hercules oiles his limbs ere he begin
According to the Olimpicke rites: but he
Rubbed ore his limbs with sand: it could not be
Enough to touch his mother with his feet.
They grapple then, and arms, arms folded meet.
Striving each others neck with heavy hand
To bend; yet both fixed, and vnbended stand.
Both wonder much to meet their match at length:
But Hercules used not his utmost strength
At the first bout, but wearied out his foe,
Which his often blowing, and cold sweates did show:
His shaking neck, nor breast could firmly stand:
His bending hammes yield to Alcides hand:
Alcides then about his short ribs cast
His conquering arms, and gripped his yiedling wast,
Then tripping up his legs he fairly ^ayes
His foe stretched out upon the sand; earth stays
His sweat, and fills with fresh blood every vain,
His arms grow brawny, his joins st^ffe again,
And his fresh limbs unclasp the others hands.
Amazed at this new strength Alcides stands
Nor feared he Hydra so in Lerna lakes
Fruitful by loss of her reviving snakes,
Though then but young; Now both were aequall grown
One in earths strength, the other in his own.
Nere had stern Juno more encouragement
To hope; she sees his limbs with sweating spent,
And his neck dried, as when he did sustain
The heavens: but when he clasped his foe again,
Antaeus staying not till he be thrown,
Falls of himself, and rises stronger grown:
His mother earth to his tired members gives
What spirit she has, and labors when he strives.
But when Alcides found ^arths touch to be
Strengthening to him, now thou shall stand (quoth he)
No more thou fal^'st, nor will we trust again
The ground: this breast shall thy crushed limbs suste^ne;
Hither, Antaeus, shall thou fall this spoke,
Him striving to fall down aloft he took,
And grasped his middle fast: earth could not lend
Strength to her dying son, nor succor send.
But till his fo^s breast stark and cold he found
Alcides durst not trust him on the ground.
From hence selfe-lov'd antiquity, and fame,
Old times recorder, gave this place a name.
But to these hills a nobler name gave he,
That drew the Punicke foe from Italy.
Scipio arriving on our Libya, here
Pitched his first camp: the ruins yet appear
Of that old trench; this place of all the rest
Was first by Roman victory possessed.
Curio, as if the place were fortunate,
And still retained those former Captains fate
In war, rejoiced, and in this lucky place
Pitched his unlucky tents, which did deface
The places Omen: and provoked stern foes
With strength unequal; Affricke all that owes
Obedience to the Roman Eagles, then
Was under Varus, who, (though strong in men
Of Italy) aid from the Libyan King
Requires, to whom the worlds far regions bring
Their force with Iuba; no one King alone
Was master of such large dominion:
In length the extent of his great Kingdoms ground
Gades-neighbouring Atlas, and Jove's Ammon bound
Near Thera; but in breadth the torrid zone,
Betwixt the sea, and it, it coasts upon
So many people to his army press,
The Autolodes, and wandering Nomades:
Getulians horsed without caparison:
The Mauritanians of complexion
Like Indians: poor Nasamonians,
Scorcht Garamantes, swift Marmaricans:
Massylians, that without saddles ride,
And with a wand their bitlesse horses guide:
Mazacian darts, that Median shafts excel:
Those that in empty cottages do dwell;
Affrican hunters, that all darts refuse,
And their loose coats against angry Lions use.
Nor did the cause of civil war alone,
But private anger bring King Iuba on.
Curio that year, wherein he did defile
Divine, and human laws, strived to exile
By tribunitiall law from Libyas throne
This King, and bar him his forefathers crown,
VVh^lest he would make thee, Rome, a monarchy.
He mindful of the wrong thinks this to be
The greatest gift his scepter could bestow.
This Iuba's fame affrighted Curio:
Besides no Soldiers firm to Caesar's side
Were in his army, none that had been tried
In Germany* but at Confinium taken
False to new Lords did to their first remain
Doubtful, and thought both sides indifferent were.
But when he saw all slack through slavish fear,
That the night-guards their trenches did forsake
With a distracted spirit thus he spoke.
Daring conceales great feare^ I Will first assay
The fight, and put my Soldiers in array
While they are mine: doubt grows from rest alone:
Fight shall prevent their consultation;
When swords whet their dire wills, and helmets hide
Their blushes, who can then compare the side,
Or weigh the cause? they favor as they stand:
As no old hate does on the stage command
Sword-players to meet: they hate by faction.
This said, in open field he leads them on;
Whom the wars fortune, meaning to deceive
After, at first does prosperously receive.
For Varus he defeated, following on
Their flying backs in execution
Even to the camp When Iuba first did know
Of this sad field, and Varus overthrow,
Glad that the glory of the war did stay
For him, by stealth he lead his troops away:
And without noise (commanding silence) goes,
Fearing he should be feared of his foes
Sabura next in honor to the King
With a small troop is sent before to bring
Curio on by provocation,
As if the war were left to him alone:
Himself with all his kingdoms strength below
Keeps in the valley, The Ichneumon so
Provoking by his tails deceitful shade
The Egyptian Aspe, dooes at the last invade
(Freed from the deadly venoms danger quite)
The s^rpents throat stretched out in vain to meet
A slying shade: out the lost poison goes,
And all about the Aspes jaws vainly flows.
Fortune assists this fraud: fierce Curio
Descrying not the strength of his hid foe,
En^oines his horsemen all to issue out
By night, and range the unknown fields about:
And after them himself by break of day
With all his Eagles spread marches away,
Much (but in vain) entreated to suspect
Libyan deceit, and frauds that still infect
The Punicke wars: but to his funeral
Fate gave him up, and civil war did call
Her author on: ore rocks and mountains high
They march; when on the hill from far they spy
The foe: who cunning, seems to fly away
Till he have set his battles in array
Under the hill: this Curio did not know,
But thought it flight, and like a conqueror now
Brings forth his troops into the open plain:
Then first discovered they this guilefull train^:
The seeming-fled Numidians they espied
On the hills tops enclosing every side:
Curio, and his lost troops astonished quite;
The fearful could not fly, the valiant fight:
The horses now not feirce attrumpets sound
Chaw not their foamng bitts, beat not the ground:
Spread not their manes nor do their ears advance,
Nor with their wonted spright curyet and prance:
Their sweating shoulders fumed, their tired necks hung
And their dried mouth thrust out their weary tongue:
Their breasts, and throats hoarse with often blowing grew:
Their heavy pulse far their spent bowels drew:
The fomings dry and hot grew hard upon
The bloody bits: no strokes could force them on,
Nor often spurrings make them mend their speed;
Wounds make them go: to hasten on the steed
Boots not the rider, for the weary horse
In coming on wants courage, strength and force:
He only brings his Rider to the foes,
And does his breast to all their spears expose.
But when the Lybian horse came coursing nigh,
The ground did shake, and clouds of dust did fly
(As great as Thracian whirlewinds blow about)
Ore the skies covered face, and darkness wrought.
But when wars miserable fate did fall
Upon the foot, no doubtful field at all
Was fought: the battle in that time was done,
That men could die: for forth they could not run
To make their flight, enclosed on every side
From far by darts directly thrown they died,
Obliquely near: not wounds alone they feel
Orewhelm'd with storms of darts, and weight of steel:
Pent up in a straight room the army's kept:
Those that for fear neer'st to the middle crept,
Amongst their fellows swords are not secure,
For the forefront not able to endure
The foes assault, slept back, and straighter made
The Globe: no room to weild their arms they had:
Their crowded limbs are pressed: one armed breast
Against another driven to death is pressed.
The conquering Mauritanian could not have
So glad a spectacle as fortune gave;
He saw no bodies fall: no streams of blood,
Kept so by crowde upright the bodies stood.
Let Fortune this new parentation make
For hated Carthages dire spirits sake:
Let bloody Hanniball, and Punicke ghosts
Of this sad Roman expiation boast.
Let not in Lybia, gods, a Roman fall
For Pompey or the Senate make at all:
Us rather for her self let Africa
Conquer: his men ore'throwne when Curio saw,
And the dust laid with blood gave leave to see,
Scorning t'out-liue such a calamity,
Or hope in flight, he meet his death, to dye
Forward, and valiant by necessity.
What now availes thy place, and troubled bars,
From whence a Tribune to seditious wars
Thou stirr'dst the people, and the Senates right
Betray'dst, and could to civil war encite
The son, and father in law? thy death is wrought
Before these Lords have in Pharsalia fought.
To see that field is not permitted thee.
This satisfaction in your bloods give ye
Great ones, to wretched Rome, and pay for war;
Oh happy Rome, and Romans happyer far.
Would but the gods above as careful be
To keep, as to revenge our liberty.
Unburied Curio's noble flesh is food
For Libyan birds: but (since it will do no good
To conceal that, which from times injury
Fame still will vindicate) we will give to thee
The praise that to thy life dooes appertain.
Rome never nurtured a more able man,
Nor one to whom (whilst good) the laws owed more:
But vice then hurt our city, when the store
Of wealth, Ambition, Riot had declined
To the worst part his yet unsettled mind,
And changed Curio the states fate controlled
Bribed by the spoils of France, and Caesar's gold.
Though potent Sylla, and fierce Marius,
Cinna, and Caesar's line got rule ore us
By sword: to whom did such power ever fall?
This man sold Rome, the other bought it all.
FINIS, Libri quarts.
Annotations on the fourth Book:
(a) For this conquest much avayled Caesar, having quieted Spain he might
securely prosecute the rest of the war, having debarred Pompey of those legions
on which he most relied, this conquest cost little blood, for Afranius and
Petreius forced by famine yielded to Caesar.

(b) Afranius and Petreius with aequall power, with mutual love and care
governed five legions for Pompey in Spain, and chose Ilerda by the appointment
of Pompey as a convenient seat for the war.

(c) The Celtae leaving France and passing the Pyren^an mountains seated
themselves by the river Iberus, and were called Celt^beri.

(d) Cinga falling into Iber looses his name to Iber, which also gives name to
all Spain.

(e) Afranius, and Petreius, when Caesar's horsemen had stopped their ways of
forraging and fetching in Corn, and withal frighted, because many cities in
that part had revolted to Caesar, and the rest were like to follow their
example, res^lved to transserre the war into Celtiberia, which remained yet in
the friendship of Pompey, at having received great benefits from him in the
Sertorian war; besides they supposed that the fame of Caesar was yet more
obscure among those barbarous people: therefore at the third watch they
secretly disl^dged, and passing over the river Sicoris they marched with speed
toward Iberus. When Caesar by his scouts understood this, and hearing that
beyond there were mountainous, strait, and rugged passages, which if the enemy
should first enter, they might with ease keep him back, and car^y the war
into Celtiberia, and those far countries, he commanded his horsemen with
speed to prevent them, and himself marching through devious, and rough ways,
arrived first at those places, and encamped himself between Afranius and the
river Iberus, which Afranius was marching to the two camps were here fortified
so near, to each other, that the Soldiers distinctly knew each others faces,
and talked with their kindred, and ancient acquaintance,

(f) In this appeared a strange clemency of Caesar, that after he had heard
the cruelty of Petrejus toward his Soldiers, how taking them from their
friends company, (that had upon promise secured them) he caused them to be
murdered (as the Poet relates plainly) Caesar notwithstanding seeking out
Petrejus his soldiers in his camp, spared their lives all, and suffered as
many of them as would to depart: but many Tribunes, Centurions, and others
would not retune, but stayed, and served after under Caesar.

(g) It was a policy had often been used by barbarous enemies against the
pursuing armies of the Romans, to poison all their river: it was done by
Ingurtha King of Numidia, Mithradates King of Pontus, and Iuba King of
Mauritansa.

(h) These two Generals, Afranius and Petrejus, though they were here pardoned
by Caesar, upon promise to serve no more against him; did notwithstanding
afterward in the Affrican war follow Scipio against Caesar, where they were
again overthrown. Afranius was taken prisoner, and by Caesar's command and
was slain. Petrejus despairing of pardon (as is afterward shown) slew
himself upon King Iuba's sword.

(i) Fortune yet presumed to do somewhat against Caesar in his absence above
about Illyrium; for Dolabella and Antonius commanded by Caesar to possess the
Strenghts of the Adriaticke sea e^camped one on the Illyrian, the other on the
Corcyraan share. Pompey far and near was master of the seas, whose
Lieutenant Octavius and Libo with great strength of shipping besiedged
Antonius, and by famine forced him to yield. Basilus from the other shore sent
ships to aid Antonius, which were caught by the Pompeyans in a strange snare
casting ropes cross the sea under water not to be spied. Two of the ships
escaped, and got over the ropes, the third which carried the men of Opitergium
was ensnared, and held fast. The Opit^rgians in that place left an example
memorable to all posterity; for being scarce a thousand men, they endured from
morning to night the assaults of a great Army round about them, and at last
when valor could not possible release them, rather then yield themselves into
the enemies hands, by the exhortation of their captain Vultejus, all killed
themselves.

(k) In Africa also the side of Caesar enduring the like calamity showed the
like valor. Curio sent by Caesar to win Libyae, having vanquished, and put
to flight Varus, was enclosed on the sudden by the unexpected horsemen and
army of Iuba King of Mauritania. Curio might have fled when he saw the day
lost, but much ashamed, and scorning to return to Caesar after the loss of
his legions, he dyed with all his men.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The First Book.
The Argument.
Romes flying Senate met at Epire, chose
Great Pompey general, faint Appius goes
To Delphos Oracle to seek advise,
Which his own death obscurely signifies.
Caesar returned from Spain with victory
Quiets his Soldiers dangerous mutiny:
Dictator then, and Consul both at Rome
He makes himself, sails from Brundusium
To Greece* but vexed with Anthony's delays,
In a small boat himself alone assayes
By night the stormy sea, and crosses ore.
His legions all met on the Grecian shore
Address themselves for trial of the day.
Pompey to Lesbos sends his wife away.
THus fortune kept (mixing her good with ill)
The two ( a) war-wounded generals aequall still
For Macedonia; when with Winter's snow
The Pleiades did Oemus top bestrow:
And when the times new-naming day drew near
Old Ianus feast beginner of the year:
Then both the Consuls at the utmost date
Of their expiring honor convocate
To Epire the fled fathers; where a plain
And foreign seat Rome's Nobles did contain:
A borrowed court in foreign land heard all
The secrets of the State. For who can call
That place a camp, where all Romes Fasces were,
And axes borne? The reverend order there
Taught all the people 'twas not Pompey's side,
But Pompey there a member did abide.
Silence possessing the sad Senate than,
From an high seat thus Lentulus began:
If you retain a strength of mind as good
As Roman spirits, and your ancient blood
Befitts; then think not in what land you are
As banished, from surprised Rome how far:
But know the face of your own company:
Fathers, that govern all, this first decree,
Which yet all kingdoms, and all people know,
We are the Senate. For if fortune now
Should carry us under the frozen waine
Of Vrsa ma^or, or where days remain
Aequall in length with nights, the torrid zone,
Thither the Empire and dominion
Would follow us* When Rome by Gauls was fired,
And that to Vey Camillus was retired:
There then was Rome; this order never lost
Their right by changing place. Caesar can boast
Only of mourning walls possession,
And judgment seats by sad vacation
Shut up, and silenced, empty mansions.
That court those fathers only sees, whom once,
When full, it banished; of that rank, who ere
Is not a banished man, is sitting here.
We that long peaceful, free from guilt have stood,
At wars first fury were dispersed abroad:
Now to his place each part returns again;
And for the loss of Italy and Spain
The gods the strength of all the world bestow.
Th'Illyrian Sea has overwhelmed one foe:
And Libyan fields does slaughtred Curio
No little part of Caesar's Senate strew.
Advance your Eagles, follow fate, and grant
The gods your hope: do not that courage want
In this good fortune, which when first you fled,
Your cause stirred up. The year has finished
Our power: you fathers, whose authorityes
No time shall end, for th'publike good advise:
Command great Pompey to be general;
His name with joyful cries the Senate all
Receive, imposing upon Pompey straight
His countrey's, and his own most wretched fate.
Then faithful Kings, and Nations had their praise*
Phoebus sea-powerfull Rhodes rewarded was,
And Spartans rough; prais'de were th'Athenians*
(b) Phocis made free with her Massylians.
Faithful (c) Deiotarus, young Sadalis,
The valiant (d) Cotys, and (e) Rhasipolis
Of Macedon were praised; Iuba to thee
The Senate gives all Libya by decree;
And (oh sad fare) ignoble Ptolemy,
Worthy of treacherous subjects, unto thee
The crime of all the gods, and fortunes shame,
Is granted the Pellaean diadem.
A tirants sword over thy nation
Thou take, proud boy, would 'twere ore them alone*
Ore (f) Pompey's throat it is; thy sisters crown
Thou take, and Caesar's impious action.
The Senate now broke up, the troops all take
Their arms: the people, and the captains make
For wars uncertain preparation.
But (g) Appius fears wars doubtful chance alone
Soliciting the gods the events to hear,
And Phoebus Temple, that for many a year
Had been shut up at Delphos, opens he.
Parnassus with two tops reaching the sky
Twixt East, and West aequally distant lies
To Bacchus, and Apollo's deityes
Sacred: to whom in mixed sacrifice
The Theban wives at Delphos solemnize
Their trieterickes; this one hill alone
Appeared, when all the world was overflowne,
And stood as middle twixt the sea and sky.
One top, Parnaffus, then contented thee:
For one alone did above water show.
Young Phoebus there with shafts unused slew
The speckled Python, that in wait long lay
His banished mother great with child to slay;
Themis the kingdom then, and Tripos held.
But when (h) Apollo the cleft ground beheld
T'inspire oraculous truth, and further finds
The gap^ng earth exhale prophetike winds:
Down in that sacred cave himself he hides
And now turned Prophet there Apollo bides
Which of the gods lurkes here? what deity
Shot down from heaven vouchsafes to dignify
This cave? what heavenly god dwells here below,
That does the fates aeternall courses know,
And things to come? and telling people sure
Vouchsafes the touch of woman to endure?
Whether this powerful god barely relate
The fates, or his relation make them fate?
Perchance that spirit, that all the world maintains,
And the poised earth in empty air susteines,
Through these Cirrhaean caves does passage get.
Striving with his aethereall part to meet.
This spirit once entered the virgins breast,
Striking her humane soul, sounds forth expressed
With hideous noise; so urging flames come from
Sicilian Aetna's over burdened womb:
Typhaeus so throws up his stones abroad
Pressed with Inarime's aeternall load.
This god exposed to all, denied to none,
Is freed from hearing human crimes alone.
To him no man whispers unlawful prayers;
For he things fixed unchangeable declares,
Forbidding men to wish: and graciously
Gives just men dwellings, though whole towns they be,
As once to Tire; he teaches us wars slight,
As to the Athenians in their navall fight
At Salamine; he cleares, the causes shown,
Earths barrenness, and aire's infection.
Our age no gift of heaven wants more then this
Of Delphos oracle, which silent is,
Since Kings afraid to have their fates expressed,
Forbid the gods to speak; nor is the Priest
Of Delphos, for the god's long silence sad:
This Oracle's cessation makes them glad.
For to that breast, where ere he do inspire,
Untimely death is punishment or hire
Of his reception, the fitt's vehemence
Too much orecomes the strength of human sense;
And their frail souls the god's high motion shakes,
Appius, whilst too too near a search he makes
To know Rome's fate, to the vnstirr'd Tripodes,
And silent cavernes does his steps address,
The Priest commanded t'ope that dreadful seat,
And for the god a prophetess to get,
Finds young Phemonoe, as she careless roues
Amongst the Castalian springs, and silent groves,
And makes her break the Temple doors. The maid
To stand in that most horrid place afraid,
Thought by a vain deceit Appius to bring
From his desire of knowing future things.
Why hop'st thou, Roman, truth should here be shown?
The hill (quoth she) is mute, the god is gone
Whether the spirit have left these cavernes quite,
And to the worlds far regions taken his flight:
Or Phytho burnt by barbarous Brennus up
Did with the ashes fill this hole, and stop
Great Phoebus way: or that the gods decree
Make Cirrha mute, thinking it prophecy
Enough that Sibyll's books among you live:
Or Phoebus wont from out his temple drive
All wicked persons, now no mouth have found
Worthy enough his Oracles to sound.
The Maids deceit appeared; her fear implied
She falsely had the present gods denied.
Then a white fillet ties her locks behind
With Delphian Bays; and wreathed garlands bind
Her hair before. The Priest thrusts on the maid.
Who fearful still about the entrance staid,
And durst no nearer to the god to come,
Nor to approach the temples inmost room.
There counterfeiting that she was possessed
She vtters from an undisturbed breast
Feigned words with no confused murmr flowing,
Nor the least sign of divine fury showing.
Her words so deeply could not Appius wound,
As great Apolloes truth; no trembling sound
That broke her speech, there was, no voice so shrill,
As all the caves capacious throat might fill:
Her Laurel fell not from her frightd hair:
The temple and the wood unshaken were.
These signs betrayed her fearful to receive
The god; when angry Appius did perceive
That 'twas no Oracle, Thou wretch, quoth he,
Both I, and these abused gods will be
Revenged for this, unless thou straight descend,
And truly tell what all these stirs portend
To the affrighted world; with that the maid
Descends down to the Oracle afraid,
And standing ore the vault, the god possessed
With a full spirit her vnaccustom'd breast.
The rocks so many years unwasted spirit
He fills her with, and coming to inherit
A Delphian breast, nere filled he Prophetess
Fuller: her former mind he banishes,
And bids all woman from her breast begone.
She raging bears in this distraction
Not her own neck; her hair upright throws down
The sacred ornaments, and Phoebus crown:
Her neck turns wildly round: and down she throws
All tripodes she meets with as she goes.
And with an inward fire she burns, which shows
Thee, Phoebus wrath: nor do thou only use
Thy pricks, thy flames, and incitations now,
But bridles too, the Prophetess shall know
More then she must reveal; all times are heapt
Up in one heap, and many ages crept
Into her wretched breast; things orders too,
And all contend out into light to go.
The Fates desiring utterance strive within:
When the world ends, and when it shall begin
The prophetess can tell, and understands
The Oceans depth, and number of the sands.
As the Cumaean Sibyll in a scorn
Her prophecies should serve all nations turn,
From the vast heap of universal Fate,
With a proud hand culled out the Roman State:
So now the Phoebus filled Phemon^^
Strives, obscure Appius, where to find out thee
Amongst all the Delphian inspirations:
Then first from her mad mouth the foaming ^unnes,
And in the horrid cave were heard at once
Broke-winded murmurs, howlings and sad groans.
At last these words fall from the maid overcome:
Great threats of war, thou only freed from,
Shall in Eubaea's pleasant valleys rest.
And there she stopped; Phoebus her speech suppressed.
Ye Tripodes keepers of fate, that know
All the world's secrets, and Apollo thou
Skilled in all truth, from whom the gods conceal
No future times, why fear thou to reveal
That action, that our Empire's ruin brings,
Great Captains deaths and funerals of Kings,
And all the people that with Rome shall bleed?
Have not the gods this mischief yet decreed?
Or stay those fates, whilst planets are at strife
And doubt about condemning Pompey's life?
Or hid'st thou, fortune, to effect more sure
Our liberties revenge, and Brutus cure
Of monarchy again? then the maids breast
Should open the temple doors, and out she pressed.
Her mad fit holds, nor had she all explain'de,
Part of the god within her still remained.
And round about her wandering eyes he rolled;
Nor does her face one constant posture hold:
But sometimes threatening, sometimes fearful it is;
Sometimes a fiery red her countenance dies:
Sometimes her pallid cheeks anger expressed,
Not fear: nor can her wearied heart find rest;
But as a while after the winds are c^as'd
The Ocean mu^mur's; so often so bings eased
The maidens breast. But twixt this inspired light,
And her plain humane understandings sight
A darkness came; Phoebus oblivion sent;
Then from her breasts the gods high secrets went,
And divinations to the Tripodes
Returned again. But when her fit began cease
She falls. Nor did thou, beguiled (i) Appius, fear
From doubtful Oracles thy death so near;
But in that tottering world with hopes most vain
Thought quietly Eubaea to retain.
Ah fool what god but death could set thee free
Out of the world's general calamity,
And war? there shall thy hearse entombed lie,
And so possess Eubaea quietly,
Where the sea by marble-fam'd Carystos is
Straightn'd, and pride-revenging Nemesis
Rhamnus adores, a straighten'd currert strong
That channels holds, and Eurypus along
Bears ships by violence, changing often his tide,
From Chalcis to ill harboring Aulis side.
By this time Caesar come from conquered Spain
With his victorious Eagles was again
Marching ( k) another way: when rate almost
The prosperous course of his whole war had crossed;
For conquered in no fight the general
In his own camp began fear the loss of all
His treason's fruit, those hands that faithful still
Had served his wars, now glutted with the fill
Of blood, began to quit their general.
Th'alarmes tragic sounds not heard at all
A while, and cold sheathed swords their thirst of war
Had cooled; or else the greedy soldier
Damning for gain both cause and general,
Would set his blood stained sword at higher sale.
Caesar not more in any danger tried
How tottering and vnfirme a prop his pride
Had leaned upon, and well might stagger, reft
Of all those soldiers hands, and almost left
To his own sword; he that so many lands
Had drawn to war, knows now the soldiers hands,
Not his must do the deed. Their plaints now be
Not dumb, nor timorous is their mutiny.
That cause, that does suspicious minds restrain,
Whilst each one fears, where he is feared again,
And thinks that he himself distasts alone
His rulers tyranny, in this was gone.
Their number to secure their fear is able.
Where all offend, the crime's unpunishable.
They pour out threats; now Caesar let us cease
From wicked war; thou seek'st by land and seas
Swords for these throats, and upon any foe
Would our too cheap esteemed lives bestow;
Some of us slain in war in Gallia lie,
In Spain lie some, and some in Italy;
Ore all the world thy army's slaughtered
While thou orecom'st, what boots our blood that is shed
Against Gauls and Germans in the North so far?
For all thou pay'st us with a civil war.
When Rome we took, and made the Senate fly,
What spoils from Men or Temples gathered we?
Guilty in swords and hands, all villainy
We go upon: virtuous in poverty
Alone; what end is there of war at all,
Or what can be enough, if Rome too small?
See our gray hairs, weak hands, and bloodlesse arms
Our use of life is gone; in wars alarmes
Our age consumed; send us now old at least
To choose our deaths, this is our bad request:
Our dying limbs on hard ground not to lay,
Nor strike steel helmets till our dying day:
To seek some friends to close our eyes in death;
To get our proper Piles; our last to breath
In our wives arms; let sickness end our days;
Let Us under Caesar find some other ways
Of death then sword; why hood winkt leadst thou us
With a vain hope on acts portentuous?
As if in civil war we were not able
To know what treason is most profitable?
Our wars have taught him nothing, if not this,
What we can do; nor is this enterprise
Forbid by law; he was our general
In th'German wars: here we are fellows all*
Whom treason soiles, it makes of aequall state.
Besides in his unthankful aestimate
Our valor's lost, and whatsoere we do
Is called his fortune; but let Caesar know
We are his fate. Though friended by the gods,
Caesar is nothing if with us at odds.
This said, about his tent they mustur all
With angry looks seeking their general.
So let it go, ye gods, since piety
Forsakes us, and our hopes on vice rely,
Let discord make an end of civil war.
What general would not such a tumult scarre?
But Caesar; that the fates still sudden tryes,
And loves through greatest dangers t'exercise
His fortunes, comes; nor till their rage abate
Stays he, but meets the fury of their hate.
Cities, and Temples spoils to them he nere
Denied, though Ioue's Tarpejan house it were,
Senators wives and daughters to deflower.
All villanyes would Caesar from his power
Have them ask freely, and wars guerdon love:
And nothing fears, but that his men should prove
Honest. Ah Caesar art thou not ashamed
That civil war by thine own soldiers damned
Should be allowed by thee? shall they first be
Weary of blood, and hate impiety,
Whilst thou runn'st headlong on through wrong and right?
Give ore, and learn to live out of a fight;
Give thy guilt leave to end. Why to these wars
Do thou enforce unwilling soldiers?
The civil war flies from thee; on the top
Of a turfe mount stands Caesar fearlesse up,
Deserving fear by his undaunted look;
And thus, as anger prompted him, he spoke.
Whom you with hands and looks did absent brave
Soldiers, unarmed, and present now you have.
Here sheath your swords, if you would end the wars.
Sedition, that no act of valor dares,
Faint hearted fools, and flying spirits declares,
Tired with their matchless Captains conquering state.
But go; leave me to war with mine own fate:
These weapons will find hands, when I cashiere
All you, as many men, as swords are here,
Will fortune send me; shall all Italy
In such a fleet with vanquished Pompey fly?
And shall my conquests not bring men to share
The wealthy spoils of this near finished war,
Reaping the profit of your toil, and so
Unwounded with my laurell'd chariot go?
You an old worn, and bloodlesse company
(Then Rom's plebeians) shall my tryumphs see.
Can Caesar's fortune feel the loss of you?
If all the streams, that into The Ocean flow,
Should threaten to withdraw themselves; the seas
Would by the loss of them no more decrease,
Then now they fill. Think you that such as ye
Can any moment to my fortunes be?
The gods care never will so low descend,
That fates your deaths or safeties should attend,
The fates attend on great men's actions:
Mankind lives for a few; and you, whom once
Spain feared, and all the North, whilst under me,
If Pompey were, your general would fly.
Whilst Labienus did with Caesar stay,
He was a man; now a base runaway
Flies with his chosen chief ore sea and land.
Nor shall your faith in my opinion stand
Better though me ye make nor enemy
Nor general; he that revolts from me,
And does not Pompeys faction straight maintain,
He never will my soldier be again.
The gods themselves over my camp have care,
And would not venture me in such a war
Ere I have changed my men. A burden maine
Has fortune from my weary shoulders taken;
I may disarme those hands now lawfully,
Whose boundless hopes earth could not satisfy.
Out of my camp; I Will for my self make wars:
Resign those Eagles up to soldiers
Base citizens: but those that authors were
Of this sedition, punishment shall here
Detain, not Caesar; fall upon the ground,
Yield your disloyal heads and necks to wound;
And you, which now my camps sole strength shall be
Young soldiers, learn to strike, and learn to dye.
Veiwing their death; the foolish people than
Began tremble at his anger; and one man
Made all them fear* who had it in their hand
To ruin him, as if he could command
The swords themselves, and without soldiers make
His wars; but in this punishment to lack
Assisting swords he fears: they patient all
Exceed the hope of their stern General;
Not only swords, but throats they offer; he
Fears naught but 'batement of their cruelty.
A ( l) covenant dire this quarrel does decide,
With punishment the army's pacified.
In ten days march to reach Brundusium
He bids them straight, and call all shipping home,
That on crookt Hydrus, and old Taras then,
Leucas close shores, and the Salapian fen
Dispersed were, and Sypus, ore which stands
Fruitful Garganus on Italian lands
Reaching the Adriatike, and their tastes
Dalmation North, Calabrian Southern blasts.
Caesar without his troops goes safe alone
To trembling Rome now taught to serve a gown,
And (kind forsooth) yields at the peoples prayer
To be dictator ( m) honor's highest staire,
And joyful Calenders, being Consul, made.
For all those words ( n) then their beginning had,
With which ere since our Emperors we claw.
But Caesar that his power might want no law,
Falsely the name of Magistrate purloines,
And to his swords the Roman axes joins,
Fasces to his Eagles, and with fitting shame
Signs the sad times; for by what Consuls name
Will the Pharsalian year be better known?
A feigned assembly in the field is ( o) shown;
The people give their suffrages compelled,
Not lawfully admitted, th'urnes are held,
The tribes are cited; voices thrown in vain
Into the vene; the Augurs deaf remain
Though loud it thunder, and are forced to swear
That birds auspicious, though sad owls, appear.
Thence that once honored power her dignity
First lost; but left the times unnamed should be,
Our Calenders do ( p) monthly Consulls fill.
That god that dwells on Trojan Alba's hill
Though not deserving (Latium conquered) sees
The Consuls solmne nightly sacrifice.
Caesar departing thence runs forward right
Swifter then whelpe-robb'd Tiger, or the flight
Of lightening ore Apulia, where the field
Vnplow'd no cerne, but slothful grass does yield.
And come to Cretan crookt Brundusium finds
The sea vnsaileable for dangerous winds,
And the fleet fearful of cold winters face.
He thinks it shame thus to delay the space
Of war, and keep the haven, when the sea
Lies open to men less fortunate then he,
And thus persuades his men to try the seas:
The Northern winds more constantly possess
Both air and Ocean, when they once begin,
Then those which the unconstant spring brings in.
We have no turnings different shores upon,
Our way's forth right; the North wind serves alone.
Would he would stuff our sails, bending our mas^^
And force us upon Greece with furious blasts,
Lest Pompey's gallys from Dyrrachium meet
With their swift oars our becalmed fleet.
Then cut the cables, that our fleet do stay,
We loose the storms, these clouds will pass away.
Now in the Sea bright Sol had hid his head,
And stars appeared, the moon her shadows spread:
The fleet at once weighed anchor, and drew out
The sails at length, which straight they turned about
To the ships length and spread the topsailes too,
To loose no gust of wind that ever blew.
When a soft gale had made the sails to swell,
For a short space, down to the mast they fell^
Again; that wind, that put them from the shore,
Was able now to follow them no more.
The seas flat face now all becalmed lies
Like standing pooles; no waves, no billows rise.
So bridled is the Euxine sea, whose course
Ister, nor Thracian Bosphorus can force:
The frozen sea lets go those ships no more,
That once it takes; the horses trample ore
Safely where ships have saild; the Bessians
Furrow Maeotis frozen back with waines,
This cruel calm does the sad Ocean make
(As if the seas their nature did forsake)
Like standing pooles, The Ocean observes no more
His ancient course; he had forgot to rore:
No tides flow to and fro, nor seems the Sun
To dance upon the waters motion.
To many dangers this becalmed fleet
Is subject; on one side they fear to meet
Pompey's swift galleys; on the other side
Detained at sea a famine to abide.
From these new fears arose a new desire:
They wish the Ocean would collect his ire,
And all the winds would wrestle, so it were
No calm; but no such signs, no clouds appear:
The skies, and seas conspired to take away
All hope of shipwreck; but the ensuing day
All clouded ore did comfortable prove:
Waves from the seas bottom rose; hills seemed to move.
The ships were borne away, and as they swim
The waves in crooked furrows follow them.
With prosperous winds, and seas they reach the land,
And anchor cast upon Palestes sand.
The place, where first both generals ( q) camps did pitch
Near to each other, was that region, which
Swift Genusus, and gentle Apsus round
Encompasse; Apsus, because slow, profound,
And navigable is: the other flows
(Encreast by showers, and sun-dissolved snowes)
More swift; both channells are but short, not far
From sea the springs of both these rivers are.
Here fortune first those two famed Heroes brought
Together; the vaine-hoping world had thought
The generals now no farther off remoov'd
Thus wicked war would both have disaprov'd;
Each others face they saw, and well might hear
Each others voice; ah Pompey, many a year
Not nearer did thy once loved father in law,
Since that dear pledge the death of Iulia,
And her young son, see thee, till stained with gore
He saw thy face on Aegypts cursed shore.
But part of Caesar's (r) forces left behind
Made him protract the battle though his mind
Were feirce on fight; those bold (s) Antonius led,
In civil wars now under Caesar bred
For Leucas fight; whom making long delay
With threats, and prayers thus Caesar calls away:
Thou mischeife of the world, why do thou wast
The gods, and fates good will? my prosperous ha^^
Has done all hitherto, fortune from thee
Requires the last hand to this speedily
Successful war; do Libya's quicksands lie,
Or her devouring gulfes twixt thee and me?
Have I committed thee to unknown seas,
Or sent thee on untried casualtyes?
Caesar commands thee not, coward, to go,
But follow him; my self here, where the foe
Encamped lies, am first arrived now.
Fear thou my camp? we loose what fates bestow:
And to the winds, and seas I bootlesse plain.
My forward soldiers do not thou detain,
That would take any seas, if I judge right,
They Would come through shipwreck under me to fight.
Now I must speak in grief, the world I see
Is not divided twixt us aequally,
In Epire Caesar, and the whole Senate rest,
Thou art alone of Italy possessed.
But having often used such words as those,
They still delaying, Caesar began suppose
The gods not wanting unto him, but he
To them: and rashly did resolve to try
By night those seas, which they for fear forbore
Although, commanded, finding evermore
Bold actions thrive; and hopes in a ( t) small bote
T'orecome those waves whole navyes ventured not.
Now weary night wars toilesome cares did end:
Poor men took rest, whose mean estates could lend
Their breasts sound sleep; the camp all silent proou'd,
When the third hour the second watch had moov'd.
With careful steps through this vast silence then
Caesar, what not the meanest of his men
Would do, entends; leaves all, and goes alone
With none but fortune his companion:
And passing through the courts of guard, he finds
All fast asleep, complaning in his mind
That he could pass; but at the water side
He found a boat with a small cable tied
Fast to a rock: the man that owed, and kept
This boat, not far from thence securely slept
In a small cottage of no timber trees,
But woven reeds, and barren bulrushes
Built up: a boate's turned bottom did suffice
To fence his wall. There Caesar twice or thrice
Knocked with his hand that all the cottage shak'd:
From his soft bed of sedge Amyclas waked,
What shipwrackt man, quoth he, knockes there, or whom
Has fortune driven to my poor house to come
For shelter? speaking thus he rose from bed,
And his fired match with better suell fed,
Secure from fear of war: such houses are
(Full well he knows) no spoil for civil war.
Oh safe blessed poor man's life, oh gift of all
The gods, not yet well known; what city wall,
What temple had not feared at Caesar's stroke?
But when the door was open, thus Caesar spoke:
Enlarge thy hopes, poor man, expect to have
More wealth from me then modesty can crave:
Only transport me to the Italian shore,
This trade of living thou shall need no more,
No more shall labor thy poor age sustain.
Yield to thy fate; a god is come to rain
Down showers of wealth thy little house upon.
Thus Caesar, though disgui^d, forgetts the tone
Of private men, when poor Amyelas made
This answer; many things (al^s dissuade
My mind from trusting of the seas to night.
The Sun set pale, his beams dispersed; whose light
Partly to North, and partly South inclined.
The middle of his orb but dimn ely shined,
And dazzled not the weak beholders eyes:
With dulled horns did the pale move arise,
Not free from clouds her middle part she had:
Her pointed ends no horn directly made:
First red betokening winds, ^^en pale sh^was,
And in dark clouds obscured her mourning face.
But the shor^s ^olse, the murmur of the woods,
The Dolphins playing up and down the floods
With course uncertain I mislike no more
Like I there Cormo^ants flock^ng to the shore:
Nor that the Herne ^n her smooth wing relying
Presumes to rea^h the skies with lofty fly^ng;
No that the Crow wagl^ng along the shore
Diu^s down, and seems t'anti^ipate a shower.
But if affairs of weight requi^e mine aid,
To use my skill I will not be afraid;
Either the winds, and seas shall it deny,
O^ I will reach the shore of Italy.
This said, loosing his vessel he puts on,
And sp^eads his sails, at whose first motion
Not only th'vsuall falling stars did make
In the dark air a long and fiery tra^ke,
But even those stars, which make their fixed abode
In the higheast ^phaeres, did seem to sha^e and nod.
The seas black face a terror does diff^se,
The threatening waves in t^ackes voluminous
Boil up; the seas by blasts uncertain blown
Betoken many winds conception
Then thus the master spoke; behold how great
A danger the sea teemes withal: as yet
Uncertain it is what wind rough East or West
Shall come; the ba^ke's on every side distressed
With several waves; the clouds and skies express
The Southwindes rage: the murmur of the seas
The Northwest wind, in such a storm to shore
Not safe, nor shipwrackt can we ere get ore,
No course but one of safety do^s remain,
Hopeless to steare our courses back again.
Let Us set our danger'd bark a land, before
We are too far gone from the Grecian shore.
Caesar presuming that all dangers great
Would yield to him, contemn quoth he, the threat
Of raging seas; spread sails, and if the sky
Warrant thee not to go for ^taly,
I Will warrant thee; the just cause, why thou fear
Is this, because thou know not whom thou bear:
Him whom the gods never forsake; to whom
Fortune accounts it injury to come
After his wish; break through the waves; alone
Think thy self safe in my protection.
These are the troubles of the seas and skies,
Not of our bark this bark, where Caesar is,
Her carriage shall protect; nor long shall this
Storm last: but happy for the Ocean it is
This bark is here. Oh turn not back thy hand,
Nor think upon Epire's adjoining land;
Think on Calabria's shore safe to arrive,
Since no land else to me can safety give.
Alas thou know not why these terrors rise;
In all these tumults of the seas and skies
Does fortune strive to pleasure me. No more
He spoke; when straight a furious whirlewind tore
From the rent bark her shrowdes, and down it flunge
The sails, that on the trembling mainemast hunge.
The joint dissolved vessel sounds, when lo
Winds full of danger from all quarters blow:
First from the Atlantike Ocean Corus blows
Rolling the waves and raised billows throws
With violence against the rocks amain:
Him Boreas meets, and turns them back again;
The sea stands doubtful, to what wind to yield;
But Scythian Boreas fury winnes the field;
But though high waves he from the bottom rear,
Yet to the shore those waves he cannot bear;
They meet with those that Corus brings, and break
The seas thus raised (though now the winds were weak)
Would meet themselves. Nor must you now surmise
Eurus is still, or showre-blacke Notus lies
Imprisoned close in Aeal's rocky cave
They from their several quarters rush to save
With furious blasts their lands from being drowned,
And keep the sea within his proper bound.
For often (they say) small seas by violent wind
Have been transported: so the Aegaean joined
With the Tyrrhene: so with the Ie^^an
The Adriatike met. How often in vain
That day the sea seemed mountains topps to' ore flow*
And yiedling earth that deluge to undergo.
But such high waves on no shore raised be,
But from the worlds far part, and the maine sea
They roll; the earth embracing waters bring
Their monstrous waves, so when the heavens high king
Helped his tired thunder with his ^rotheis mace
To mankinds ^uine, earth then added was
To Neptunes kingdom, when the sea confounded,
All lands, and Tethys by no shore was bounded,
Contented with no limit but the skies
Then also would those ^welling seas arise
Vpto the stars; had not great Jove kept down
Their waves with clouds, nor sprung that night alone
From natural causes; the think air was grown
Infected with the dampes of Acheron,
And clogged with foggy storms, waves from the maine
Fly to the clouds, and fall like showers again.
The lightnings light is lost; it shines not clear,
But shootes obscurely through nights stormy air.
The heavens then trembled; the high pole for fear
Resounded, when his hindges moved were.
Nature then feared the old confusion:
The elementall concord seemed undone;
And night, that mixed th'aetheriall deityes
With the infernal, ^eem'd again to rise;
Their hope of safety was that in this great
Wra^ke of the world they were not perished yet.
As far as you from Leucas top may see
The quiet sea, so far could they desery
From waves high tops the troubled Ocean;
But when the swelling billows fall again,
The maine-mast top scarce above water stands:
The topsailes touch the clouds, the keele the sands.
For ground is seen from whence the s^as arise
In hills; in waves the seas whole water is.
Fear conquers art: the master does not know
Which wave to break, which wave to yield unto.
But the seas discord only aides them now;
The bark one billow cannot overflow
Let by another force, which still susteines
The yiedling side; the bark upright mainteines
Her course, supported by all winds, no more
Low Sasons gulfes, Thessalia's crooked shore,
Or the Ambracian dangerous ports they feared,
But ore the high Ceraunia to be reared
^y billows; Caesar thinks it now to be
A danger worthy of his destiny;
Are the gods troubled so to ruin me,
Whom sitting here in a small bark (quoth he)
They have assaulted with a storm so loud?
If on the seas, not wars they have bestowed
The glory of my death, fearelesse I come
Ye gods, to any death that ye can doom:
Though this too hasty fate great acts break off,
I have already done things great enough;
The Northren nations I have tamed, and quelled
My foes at home by arms: Rome has beheld
Great Pompey my inferior; honors stayed
From me in war, the people forced have paid,
All Roman honors in my titles be.
Let it be known, fortune, to none but thee
(Though full of honor to the shades below
I both Romes Consul, and Dictator go)
I dye a private death, o gods I crave
No funeral: let the seas inmost wave
Keep my torn carcass let me want a tomb,
And funeral pyle whilst looked for still to come
Into all lands I am, and ever feared.
Thus having spoke (most strange) the tenth wave reared
His bark aloft; nor from the billows top
Did she fall down, kept by the water up,
Till on the rocky shore she stood at last.
His fortune, and so many kingdoms (cast
On shore) and towns again he did receive.
Caesar's return next morn could not deceive
His soldiers so, as his stolen flight had done;
About their general flock they every one
Assaulting him with lamentations,
And not ungrateful accusations;
VVhither did thy rash valor carry thee
Too cruel Caesar? to what destiny
Did thou leave us poor souls, venturing upon
The unwilling seas, and storms thy self alone?
In thee to seek for death was cruelty,
When all the world esteems thy head so high,
And on thy life so many lives of ours
Depend; did none of us deserve to have power
Not to surviue thee? sleep did us detain,
While thou were tossed upon the watery maine.
Was this the cause thou went to Italy?
(Alas it shames us) it was cruelty
To venture any man on such a sea;
For the last act of things such hazards be.
Why do thou tire the gods so much to go,
And venture the worlds greatest Captain so;
From fortune's work, and favor thus to have sent
Thee safe a shore to us, be confident.
Of the wars issue. This use do thou make
Of the gods favor to escape a wrack,
Rather then gain the worlds sole soveraignety?
Thus while they talk, night past, the Sun they see,
And a clear day; his waves the tired maine
(By the winds leave) composed, and smoothed again.
The Captains also on the Italian side
When the t^r'd Ocean free from waves they spied
By the pure Northwinds rising; thence convay'd
Their ships, which their skilled Mariners had stayed
So long for fear while winds auspicious failed.
Like a land army their joined navy sailed
On the broad Sea; but the changed winds by night
Filled not their sails, but broke the order quite.
So Cranes in VVinter Strymon's cold forsake
To dr^nke warm^ Nile, and in their first flight make
(As chance directs) of letters various forms;
When their spread wings are by the violent storms
Of strong South-windes assailed, by and by
^n a confused globe all mingled fly:
The letter's lost in their disranked wings.
But the next morn when rising Titan brings
A stronger wind to drive the navy ore,
They pass the vain attempted Lissus shore,
And to Nymphaeum come: Southwinds that blow,
The haven on them (the Northwindes fled) bestow.
When Caesar's legions all collected were,
And Pompey saw the war was drawn so near
To his own camp, he thinks best to provide
For his wiu^^ safety, and in Lesbos hide
Thee, fair Cornelia, from the noise of war.
Alas in just and noble minds how far
Prevails true love? true love alone had power
To make great Pompey fear wars doub^full hour;
His wife alone he wished free from that stroke,
That all the world, and Romes whole fortune shook.
But now a ready m^nd wants words in him:
He yields to sweet delays; from fare steals time.
But when th'approching morn had banished rest,
And fair Cornelia his care-wounded breast
Clasping, from her averted husband seeks
A loving kiss, wondering to feel his cheeks
Moistened with tears; t^ hid^en cause she fears,
And da^es not fin^ great Pompey shedding tears.
He then thus mourning spoke: oh d^arest wife,
Dearer to me then life, not now, when life
I loath, but in our best prosperity,
That sad day's come which too too much have we,
Yet not enough d^fferr'd. Caesar's addressed
For fight; thou must not stay; Lesbos the best,
And safest place will be for thee to hide;
Do not en^treat me sweet; I have denied
It to my self; nor absent long shall we
Remain, for swift will this wars trial be,
Great things fall speedily. To hear, not see
Thy Pompey's d^nger is enough so thee
Thy love deceiues me, if thou could e^dure
To see this fight; for me to sleep secure
With thee (this war begun) and from thine arms
To rise, were shame, when the wars loud alarmes
Shake all the world, and that thy Pompey came
Sad with no loss to such a war were shame.
Nor shall thy husbands fortune all together
Oppress thee, far remoov'd safer then either
People or king. And should the gods contriue
My death, let Pompeys better part surviue,
And a place be, whither I may desire,
If fate and Caesar vanquish, to retire.
Her weakness could of such great grief contain,
Her senses fled, she did amazed remain.
At length when sad complaints these words could frame,
My Lord, quoth she, I have no cause to blame
Our wedlockes fortune, or the gods above:
No death, no funeral divides our love:
We part the common, and plebeian way,
For fear of war Cornelia must not stay.
Let Us be divorced to gratifye the foe,
Since he is at hand. Pompey esteem'st thou so
My faith, or think thou any thing can be
Safer to me then thee? Depend not we
Upon one chance? can cruel thou command
Thy absent wife this ruins shocke to stand?
Or think thou it a happy state for me
(While thy chance yet does doubtful stand) to dye
For fear of future ill? I will attend
Thy death; but till sad fame the news can send
So far, shall be forced to surviue.
Besides thou will accustom me to grieve,
And bear so great a sorrow, as I fear
(Pardon that I confess) I cannot bear.
And if the good gods hear my prayers now,
I last of all the happy news shall know.
I on the rocks, when thou art conqueror,
Shall careful sit, and even that ship shall fear,
That brings the happy news: nor will my fear
Have end, so soon as I thy conquest hear*
So far remoov'd from thee, that Caesar may
(Though flying) seize Cornelia as a pray.
My banishment will Lesbos shore renown*
And make the town of Mitylene known,
Where Pompey's wife abides. My last request
Is this, if thou be conquered, and naught rest
To s^u^ thy life but flight, to any bay
Rather then that turn thy unhappy way.
Upon my shore thou will be surely sought
This said, from bed she leapt with grief distraught,
Her woes with no delays to enterlace;
Nor could she then her Lord's sad breast embrace,
Nor hang about his neck; the last fruite's gone
Of so long love: their griefs they hasten on:
And at the parting neither had the power
To say farewell. Never so sad an hour
In all their life had they Su^ceeding woes
Their minds by custom hardened could compose.
She fainting falls, and in her servants hands
Lifted is borne to sea, but on the sands
She falls, as if that shore she feign would keep,
At last perforce she is carried to the ship*
From her dear countrey's shore not so distressed
Fled she, when Caesar Italy possessed.
With Pompey then she went: now all alone
Wanting that guide; she from her Lord is gone.
Sleepelesse she spent in her now widowed bed
Cold, and alone, the night that followed.
That side that naked used not to be left,
Is of a husbands company bereft.
Often would she, when her sleepy arms she spread,
With hands deceived embra^e the empty bed,
Seeking her Lord, her flight she would forget;
For, though l^ues flame-fed on her marrow, yet
Ore all the bed she would not tumbl^ng spread.
Fearing to miss her Lord, that part of bed
She kept; but fate did not so well ordain;
The howr's at hand that brings her Lord again.
FINIS. Libri quints.
Annotations on the fifth Book:
(a) Pompey's losses, as we saw before in the 2.3. and 4. Books were these,
all his garrisons beaten cut of Italy, and himself driven from thence;
Massilia sacked: all Spain lost, together with his army under the conduct of
Afrarius and Petrejus Caesar's losses a cohort of Opitergians, which killed
themselves on the Illyrian sea with their captain Vulteius, and Curio killed
by king Iuba.

(b) Phocis was then made free as well as Massilia her colony, which Caesar
besiedg'd.

(c) Dejotarus king of Galatia brought to the army of Pompey six hundred
horsemen.

(d) Cotys king of Thracia sent to the Army five hundred horsemen under the
conduct of his s^^ne Sadalis.

(e) R^asipolis brought from Macedonia two hundred horsemen

(f) Ptolemey defra^ded his sister Cleopatra of her share in the kingdom, and
in killing Pompey, saved Caesar the doing of that impious act.

(g) Appius the Governor of A^haia desirous to know the event of the civil
war, compelled the chief Priest of Delphos to descend to the Oracle, which had
not of a long time been used

(h) In the midst of the hill there was a deep hole into the earth, out of
which came a cold spirit, as it were a wind, and filled the Prophetesses with
a fury, so that they instan^ly prophesied of things to come.

(i) Appius thinking this oracle had warned him only to abstain from this
war, retired himself into that country which lies between R^am^u^, and
Caryst^s called Cala Eub^a, where before the battle of Ph^rsalia he dyed of a
disease, and was there buried, and so ^ossest quietly the place which the
Oracle had promised him.

(k) Caesar was now returned to Placentia from Spain, Where he had conquered
Afranius and Petrejus two of Pompey's Lieutenants, and was going from thence
into Epire and Macedonia against Pompey; in the mean time this mutiny happened

(l) Caesar cashiered with ignominy all the ninth legion at Placentia; and with
much ado after many prayers received them again, but not without taking
punishment of the chief muten^ers.

(m) Caesar made himself Dictator at Rome without any lawful election, that
is, neither named by the Senate nor Consul; but eleven days after he left his
Dictatorshippe, having made himself and Publius Servilius Consuls.

(n) Then began all those names of flattery, which they afterward used to
their Emperors, as Diuus, Ever Augustus, Father of his country, Founder of
peace, Lord, and the like.

(o) After all government was in the hands of Caesar alone, all the ancient
rites in creating of Magistrates were quite taken ^way, an imaginary face of
election was in the field of Mars, the tribes were cited, but were not admitted
distinctly, and in the true form to give their suffrages, the other orders
were but vain; for the Emperor commended him to the Centuries whom he would
have Consul, or else designed him, and chose him himself; their Augury also
was abused and the Augurs interpreted every thing as they were compelled.

(p) Under the Emperors, Consuls were often chosen for half an year for 1.2.
or 3 months.

(q) Pompey was then is Candavia but when he heard that Caesar was come, and
was possessed of Oricum, and Apollonia; he hasted to Dyrrachium Caesar pitched
his tents at one side of the river Apsus, and Pompey at the other.

(r) Caesar having landed his men the same night sent back the ships to
Brundusium for Antonius to transport the rest of his legions, and his horsemen,
whose slow coming made Caesar defer the fight.

(s) This Marcus Antonius after the death of Julius Caesar had war with
Augustus, by whom he was vanquished in a sea fight near Leucas

(t) When part of the army for want of Ships stayed at Brundusium, under
Antonius, Gabinius and Calenus, Caesar impatient of delay resolved to go
himself as a messenger to call them in a stormy night, and a little vessel,
some say a boat that would bear twelve oars; but unknown to all his army he
past in a disguised habit through all the courts of guard, and went to Sea.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The Sixth Book.
The Argument.
Caesar enclosing Pompey with a fence,
And trenches of a vast circumference
Endures a famine, Pompey pestilence,
Who breaking through escapes a conqueror thence.
Brave Scaeva's valor, and admired fight.
Into Thessalia Caesar takes his flight;
Great Pompey follows: the description,
And Poets tales, That Thessaly ren^wne.
To the dire witch Ericttho Sextus goes
This fatal wars sad issue to disclose:
She quickens a dead carcass, which relates
To Sixtus ear, his and his fathers fates,
And craving then deaths freedom to obtain
^s by a magic spell dissolved again.
WHen on near ( a) hills both Generals fierce ( b) of fight
Had pitched their tents, and drawn their tro^pes in sight
And the gods saw their match: Caesar in Greece
^cornes to take towes, or own the destinyes.
For any conquest, but his son in law's.
The worlds sad hour, that to a trial draws
This wars maine-chance, he wishes for alone,
That cast of fortune, that must ruin one.
Thrice on the hills his battle he arrayed,
And all his threatening Eagles thrice displayed,
Showing that he would never wanting be
T'ore^hrow the Roman state. But when he see
No provocations could his son in law
(Who close entrenched lay) to battle draw,
From thence ( c) he marched by woody passages,
And close, to take Dyrrachiums fort^esses.
Thither a nearer way great Pompey takes
Along the shore and on high Petra makes
His camp, to guard from thence Dyrrachium town
Safe (without men) by her own strength alone.
No human labor, no old structure made
Her fence, which would (though nere so lofty) fade
By force ^f war, or eating time oretaken.
A strength, that by no engine can be shaken,
Her site, and nature give, the sea profound,
And steep waue-breaking rocks enclose it round;
But for on little hill an Island 'twere:
Ship-threatning rocks sustain the walls, and there
The Ionian sea raised by the Southwindes blasts
Her temples shakes, and frothy foamings casts
Ore houses topps War-thirsty Caesar then
Conceived ( d) a cruel hope, spreading his men,
Round on the hills from every side to enclose
With joined trenches his vnwar^ foes:
And all the ground surveying with his eye
Is not content alone to fortefie
His works with brittle earth, but weighty-stone
From quarryes digs, vast rocks, houses torn down,
And Greekish walls brought thither make a fence,
Able the rams assaulting violence,
And all wars furious engines to withstand;
Hills levelled, valleys raised make even l^nd
In Caesar's wo^kes, with trenches wide enclosed
And tow^^d castles on the hills disposed.
With a vast circuit he takes in the ground,
About the pastures, woods, and shelters round
As 'twere for dear, spreading a wide-stretch'd toil.
Pompey no room, nor pasture wants; for while
He thus enclosed by Caesar's trenches is,
He remooues camps; (so many rivers rise,
And their whole course within this circuit run)
And Caesar, tired going to look upon
His works, makes often stays Let ancient tales
To the gods work adscribe the Trojan wall;
Let flying Parthians still admire alone
The brittle earth-built walls of Babylon.
As far as Tigris, and Orontes run,
As the Assyrian Kings dominion
Stretched in the East, a sudden work of war
Encloses here. Lost those great labors are.
So many h^nds would to Abydos put
Sestos: fill up the Hellespont: and cut
Corinth from Pelops land: and from the seas
Take long Malea for the sa^lers ease:
Or mende some part (though nature should deny)
Of the worlds structure. Here wars quarters lie:
Here feeds that blood that in all lands must flow,
The Libyan, and Thessalian overthrow.
Wars civil fury boiles kept straightly in.
The wo^kes first structure Pompey had not seen.
As who in midst of S^^ily safe dwell,
When rough Pelorous barks, can never ^ell:
As Northren Brit^ain^s c^nn^t hear the rore
Of flowing seas against the K^nt^sh shore.
But when himself be^u^t to fa^ he ^new
By a vast trench, he from safe Petra drew
His troops: and ore the hills disposed them so.
To keep the ranks of his beseidging foe
More thin and took of the enclosed ground
As much in length, as in true distance found
Twixt lofty Rome, and the A^icinian wood,
Where Scythian Dian's adored image stood:
As far as Tyber's stream from Romes walls ends
By straight account, not as the river bends.
No trumpets sound: piles uncommanded fly:
Mischeifes often done as they their javelinstry.
Both cheifes are kept from fight b^ greater care:
Pompey because his pasture feilds are bare;
The ground he had, by horse or^tram^led was,
Whose horny hoofes trod down the springing grass.
The warlike steed wearied in those barred feilds,
When the full rack provi^der far brought yeil^s,
Tasting his new-brought food falls down and dies
Treading the ring, failed by his trembling thighs.
Their bodies wast by dire consumption;
The vnstirr'd air dr^wes moist contagion
Into a pestilentiall ^loud, such breath
Nasis exhales from her dark caves beneath;
Such poisoned air, where buried Typhon lies,
The ground sends forth; apace the army dies.
The water from the air infection taking
With costiuenesse to^ments the bowels aching:
Dry's their discolored skin their blood-swolne eyes
Do break: the fiery plague with bot^^es flies
All ore the face: their heavy heads fall down.
Now more and more sudden their death was grown:
Twixt life and death the si^kenesse has no room;
But death does with the first faint symptoms come.
By carcasses, which all unburied lie.
Among the living grows mortality.
It Was all the sou^d^ers burial to be cast
Out of the tents. This plague was staid at last
By blasts of strong aire-stirring Northern wind,
Ships fraught with Corn, the shore, and sea behind.
But Caesar free upon the spacious hills,
No p^stilence from air or water fe^les:
But (as if straight beseig'd) a famine strong
Is forced to suffer: corn as yet not sprung
To the full height: his wretched men he sees
Fall to beasts food, eat grass, and rob the trees
Of leaves, and tender twigs: and venturing more
Death-thr^atning herbs from roots unknown they tore.
What ever they could bite, soften with heat,
Or through their wounded palats down could get,
And things, that human tables nere did know,
Content to eat, besidg'd ( c) their full fed foe.
When through the trenches Pompey pleased to make
His way, and freedom of all lands to take:
He seeks not the obscure time of dusk^ night,
Scorning to steal a passage free from fight:
But rather force the trenches, and break down
The forts and pass, where ruin leads him on,
Through swords and slaughter to enforce his way.
The part of the near trench most fitly lay
Minutius castle called; trees thickly set
Making a grove obscure ore shadowed it.
Hither his Cohorts by no dust betrayed
He led, and suddenly the walls assayed.
So many Roman Eagles glister round
The field at once, so many trumpets sound,
That now to swords the victory naught owes:
Fear had discomfited the astonished foes
Yet (wherein valor only could be showed)
That ground, where first they stood, they dying strow'd
But the Pompeyans now want foes to slay:
Whole showers of Pil^s in vain are thrown away.
Then fire row^'d up in pitchy stuff they throw
Upon the works: the shaken turrets bow,
Threatening a fall, the battred bulwarks groan
Beat by the rams impetous fury down,
And ore the trenches Pompeys Eagles fly
To vindicate the Roman liberty.
That place, which not a thousand companyes,
Nor all the strength of Caesar could surprise,
One man alone guards from the Conquerers,
Denying Pompey's conquest, whilst he wears
A sword, and lives His name was Scaeva, once
A common soldier of those legions,
That served in Gallia: then Centurion,
By blood promoted, to all mischief prone,
And one that knew not in a civil war
How great a crime the soldiers valors are.
He when he saw his fellows leaving fight,
And seeking out safe places for their flight,
Whither (quoth he) base slaves, and beasts, does fear
(Unknown to all that arms for Caesar bear).
Drive you? can you retire without one wound?
Or are you not ashamed not to be found
Among the heap of men? though faith were gone,
Anger (me thinks) should make you fight alone.
We are the men of all, through whom the foe
Has chose to break; let this day bloody go
On Pompey's side. I should far happyer die
In Caesar's sight: but since the fates deny
Him for a witness, Pompey shall commend
My death; your breasts and throats undaunted bend
Against their steel, and turn their weapons back.
The dust far off is seen, this ruins crack^
Has by this time entered our generals cares.
We conquer, fellows; Caesar straight appears
To challenge (though we dye) this fort; his voice
More then the alarums first inciting noise
Their fury stirred: then wondering at the man,
And eager to behold the soldiers ran
To see if valor disadvantag'd so,
Surprised by place and number could bestow
Ought more then death. He making good alone
The falling work, first throws dead bodies down,
From the full tower to overwhelme the foes.
The posts, the walls, slaughter it self bestows
Weapons on him, threatening himself to fall
Down on their heads, and thrusts off from the wall
The breasts of scaling foes with poles, and stakes,
And with his sword cuts off his hand that takes
Hold on the bulwarks top; and with vast stones
Pashes their heads in pieces, breaks their bones,
And dashes out their weakely-fenced brains.
Down on another hair, and face he raines
Pitch fired; the fire whizzes in burning eyes.
But when the pil'd up carcasses began rise
To aequall the walls height, as nimbly then
Into the midst of Pompey's armed men
Scaeva leapes down from thence, as Libbards fierce
Break thorough the besetting huntsmens spears.
Then Scaeva wedged in round, and by the whole war
Enclosed, yet where he striks is Conqueror.
His swords point dull with blood congealed grows,
And blunt; nor does it pierce, but bruise his foes.
His sword has lost the use, and without wound
It breaks men's limbs. The foes encircling round
At him direct their weapons all, and all
Their hands aim right, and javelins rightly fall:
There fortune a strange match beholds, one man
Against a whole war. His strong shield founded than
With often strokes: his broken helmet beat
Down to his Temples wrings with pain and heat,
And nothing else protects his vital parts
But the outside of his flesh stuck full of darts.
Why with light darts, and arrows do you strive
(Vain fools) such wounds, as cannot kill, to give?
Let the Phalaricke strong her wild fire throw,
Or massy walls of stone against such a foe:
Let battring Rams, and wars vast engines all
Remove him thence; he stands for Caesar's wall
Against Pompey's course. His breast no arms now hide,
Scorning to use a shield, lest his left side
Should want a wound, and he be forced to live
By his own fault, what wounds the war can give,
He takes alone; and bearing a thick wood
Of darts upon his breast, now wearyed stood
Choosing what foe to fall on; so at sea
Do whales, and monstrous beasts of Libya.
So a Getulian Elephant closed in
By hunters round, all shafts from his thick skin
Beats back, and breaks: or mooving it shakes off
The sticking darts (his bowels safe enough)
And through those wounds no blood he looses; so
So many shafts, and darts cannot bestow
One death. At last a Cretan bow let fly
A sure Gortyan shaft: in the left eye
Of Scaua stuck the shaft; be void of fears,
The ligaments, and opticke sinnewes tears,
That the arrows forked iron head did stay,
And kicked the shaft with his own eye away.
So if a Libyan looped javelin pierce
The side of a Pannonian bear, more fierce
Grown by her wound, she wheels her self about,
Eager to catch the dart, and pull it out,
Which still turns with her, Scaeua's looks now bore,
No fierceness, all his face deformed with gore.
A shout that reached the sky, the Conquerers raise;
So little blood (though drawn from Caesar's face)
Could not have joy'd them more. But Scaeua now
In his great heart suppressing this deep woe,
With a mild look, that did no valor show,
Hold Contrymen (quoth he) forbear me now;
VVounds further not my death, nor now need I
More weapons in, but these pulled out, to dye.
Into the camp of Pompey carry me:
Do It for your generals sake, let Scaeua be
Rather the example now of Caesar left,
Then of a noble death. Aulus be left
These fained words of his unhappily:
And did not the swords point against him see:
But as to seize him, and his arms he ventures,
His throat the lightning sword of Scaeua enters.
His valor then by this one death renewed
VVax'd hot; who ere dares think Scaeua subdued,
Thus let him rue (quoth he,) if from this steel
Pompey seek peace, let him to Caesar kneel.
Thought you me like your selves, fearful, and base?
You love not Pompey, and the Senates cause,
As I love death. With that the dust raised high
Gave them all notice Caesar's troops were nigh,
And from wars shame did the Pompeyans free,
Lest a whole troop should have bin thought to flee
From Scaeua only. When the fight was done
He fell, and died: for fight (when blood was gone)
Lent strength. His friends taking him, as he fall^,
Upon their shoulders to his funerals
Are proud to bear him, and that breast adore,
As if some sacred deity it bore,
Or valors glorious image there did live.
Then all from his transfixed members strive
To pluck the Piles: and therewithal they dressed
The gods themselves: on Mars his naked breast,
Scaeua, they put thy arms. How great endeede
Had bin thine honor, if those men, that fled;
Had bin the warlike Celtiberians.
Germans long armed, or short Cantabrians.
No triumphs now; no spoils of this sad war
Can deck the temple of the thunderer.
With how great valor, wretch, have thou procured
A lord? nor did great Pompey lie immured
And quiet from attempting fight again
At this repulse, no more then the Ocean
Is tired, when lifted by strong Eastern blast
Against the repelling rocks, and eats at last
The rocks hard side, making, though late, a way
Assault^ng then (f) the fort that nearest lay
To the sea, he takes it by a double war,
And spreads his men over the fields afar,
Pleased with this liberty of changing ground.
So when full Padus swells above the bound
Of his safe banks, and the near fields oreflowes:
If any land, not able to oppose
That hill of water, yield: that it oreruns,
Opening to it self unknown dominions
Some owners must of force their lands foregoe,
Some gain new lands, as Padus will bestow.
Caesar, at first not knowing it, by light
From a towers top had notice from the fight:
The dust now la'id, he sees his walls beat down;
But when he found it past, and the foe gone,
This rest his fury stirred, enraged deep
That Pompey safe on Caesar's loss should sleep.
Resolving (though to his own loss) to go
On, and disturb the quiet of his foe.
First he assaults Torquatu^, who descryes
As soon his coming, as the sayler spies
The approach of a Circaean storm, and takes
Down all his sails, when once the maine mast shakes.
His men within the inner wall does bring,
To stand more firmly in a narrow ring.
Ore the ( g) first trenches works Caesar was gone,
When Pompey from the hills above sent down
All his whole troops upon the enclosed foe.
The inhabitants near Aetna fear not so
Enceladus, when the fierce Southwind blows,
And Aetna from her fiery cavernes throws
Her scalding entrails forth: as Caesar's men,
By the raised dust overcome ere they begin
To fight; and in the cloud of this blind fear
Flying they meet their foes; terror does bear
Them to their fate. Then might have been let out
The civil wars whole blood, and peace been brought.
Pompey himself their furious swords restr^in'd.
Oh happy, Rome, still free had thou remained
With all thy laws, and power, if there for thee
Sylla had conquered; it is, and still shall be
Caesar, our grief, thy worst of wicked deeds
(To fight with a good son in law) succeedes.
Oh lucklesse fates, for Munda's bloody day
Spain had not wept, Aff^icke for Vtica;
Nor had Nile borne, her stream discoloring,
A carcass ( h) nobler then the Egyptian King;
Nor Iuba (i) naked on Libyan sands had died,
Nor had the blood of Scipio pacify'd^
Carthage dire ghosts: nor men's society
Had lost good Cato. That day, Rome to thee
Had been the last of ills; Pharsalias day
In midst of fate had vanished away.
Caesar this ill-possessed place forsakes,
And with his mangled ( k) troops t'Aemathia makes.
Pompey pursues his flying father in law.
Whom from that purpose his friends strive to draw,
Persuading him to turn to Italy
Now free from enemies Never, quoth he,
Will I like Caesar to my country come,
Nor never more unless with peace, shall Rome
See my return. In Italy I could
Have stayed at the beginning, if I would
Before Romes temples this sad war have brought,
And in the midst o'th market place have fought.
To draw the war from home, to' th'torrid zone,
Or Scythiaes farthest cold I would be gone.
Shall I a conqueror now rob Rome of rest,
Who fled, lest she should be with war oppressed?
Let Caesar think Rome his, rather then she
Should suffer from this war. Then Easterly
He turns his course, paths devious marching over,
Where regions vast Candavia does discover,
And to Thessalia comes, which fate for this
Sad war ordaind Thessalia bounded is
By the ^^ill Ossa on the Northeast side;
Pelion, when Summer's in her height of pride,
His shade opposes against Sols rising rays;
The woody Othrys Southward keeps away
The scorchi^g Lions heat; Pindus his hight
Keeps off the Western winds, and hastens night
By hiding the Suns set; those men near feel
(That in the bottom of Olimpus dwell)
The Northwindes rage, nor all night long can see
The shining of the Bear. The fields, that lie
A vale betwixt those hills, were heretofore
A standing poole with water covered ore.
The fields kept in the rivers; Tempe then
Had no vent to the sea: to fill the fen
Was all the rivers course. But when of yore
Alcides Ossa from Olimpus tore,
And Peneus suddenly the sea did fill:
Sea-borne Achilles kingdom (that had still
Been better under water) first was shown;
And Phylace, that landed first upon
The Trojan shore her ship; and Dorion
For the nine Muses anger woe-begone;
P^eleos, and Trachis, Me^^baa proud
Of great Alcides shafts on her bestowed,
Raze hire for Oeta's fire; and where men now
Over the once renowned Argos plow:
Larissa potent once: and where old tales
Describe the Echionian Theban walls;
Thither Agaue banished, there the head,
And neck^ of her dead Pentheus buried,
Grieved she had torn no more limbs from her son.
The fens thus broke in many rivers run.
On the West side into th'lonian sea
Clea^e, but small, Aeas run: as small as he
Runs the Egyptian Isis fathers flood:
And Acheloiis, whose thick stream with mud
Soiles the Echinades: Euenus ore
Meleagers Calydon stained with the gore
Of Nessus runs: Sperchios swiftly slides
Into th'Maliacke sea, whose channel glides
Purely along Amphrysus pasture fields,
Where Phoebus served: Anauros, that nere yields
Nor fog, nor wind, nor exhalation:
And what ere river by it self not known
To th'sea, his waves on Peneus bestows:
Apidanos in a swift torrent flows:
Enipeus never swift unless combined:
Melas: and Phaenix with Asopus joined:
Alone his stream pure Titaresus keeps,
Though in a different named flood he creepes:
And using Peneus as his ground, he flows
Above: from Styx (they say) this river rose:
Who (mindful of his spring) scorns with base floods
To mix, but keeps the reverence of the gods.
When first, these rivers gone, the fields appeared,
Fat surrowes the Boebician plowshares reard:
Th'Aeolian husbandmen then break the ground,
The Leleges, and Dolopes then wound
Her fertile breast; the skilled Magnetians
In horesemanship: the sea famed Minyans.
In Pelethronian dens t'^xion there
A fruitful cloud did th'halfe-wilde Centaures bear:
Thee, Monichus, that could on Pholoe
Break hardest rocks: and furious Rhacus, thee,
That up by th'rootes could strong wild ashes tear
On Octa's mount, which Boreas blasts would bear;
Phol^^, that did Alc^des entertain:
Ravishing Nessus on the river slain
By venomed shafts: and thee, old Chiron, made
A constellation now, who seem t'invade
The Scorpion with thy Thessalian bow:
Feirce wars first seeds did from this country grow;
Here the first horse for war sprang from a rock,
Which mighty Neptune with his trident stroke;
To chew on the steel bit he not disdained,
And fom'd by his Thessalian rider rained.
From hence the first of ships the Ocean plowed,
And seas hid paths to earth-bred mortals showed.
Itonus first of all Thessalia's King
To form by hammer did hot mettalls bring;
Made silver liquid, stamped his coins impresse
In gold, and melted brass in furnaces.
Hence did the account of money first arise,
The fatal cause of war and tragedies.
Here was that hideous serpent Python bred,
Whose skin the Delphian Tripos covered;
Whence to those games Thessalian bays are brought.
Aloeus wicked brood against heaven here fought;
When Ossa on high Pelions top was set,
And the Celestial orbs swift motion let.
When both the generals in this land (by fate
Destined) encamped: the wars ensuing state
Fills all presaging minds, all saw at hand
That hour, on which this wars last cast should stand
Cowards now trembled that wars fate so near
Was drawn, and feared the worst; both hope and fear
To this yet-doubtfull trial brought the stout.
But one (alas) among the fearful rout
Was Sextus, Pempey's most unworthy son;
Who afterward a banished man upon
Sicilian seas, turned Pirate, and there stained.
The famed sea-triumphs his great father gained
He brooking no delay, but weak to bear
A doubtful state, endeauoures, urged by fear,
To find fates future course. Nor does he crave
From Delphian Phoebus, from the Py^hian cave,
Or that famed Oak fruitful in akehornes, where
Jove's mouth gives answer, this event to hear.
Nor seeks advice from them, to whom are known
Birds flights, beasts entrails, lightnings motion,
Nor the Chaldaean skilled Astrologer,
Nor any secret ways, that lawful were:
But magic damned by all the gods above,
And her detested secrets seeks to prove,
Aid from the ghosts, and feinds below to crave,
Thinking (ah wretch) the gods small knowledge have.
The place it self this vain dire madness helped,
Nere to the camp the Aemonian witches dwelt,
Whom no invented mon^^ers can excel;
Their art's what ere's incredible to tell.
Besides Thessaliaes fields, and rocks do bear
Strange killing herbs, and plants, and stones that hear
The charming Witches murmurs: there arise
Plants, that have power to force the deityes.
Medea there a stranger in those fields
Gathered worse herbs then any Colchos yields.
Those wretches impious charms turn the gods cares,
Though deaf to many nations zealous prayers:
Their voice alone bears through the inmost skies
Commands to the unwilling deityes,
Which not their care of heavens high motions
Can turn away; when those dire murmurs once
Enter the sky, though the Egyptians wise,
And Babylonians their deep misteryes
Should utter all, th'Aemonian witch still bears
From all their altars the gods forced ears.
These witches spells loves soft desires have sent
Into the hardest hearts against fates intent;
Severe old men have burned in impious love,
Which tempered drinks, and philtrums could not move,
Nor that, to which the fool his damms love owes,
The swelling flesh that on his forehead grows.
Minds by no poison hurt, have perished
By spells; those, whom no love of marriage bed,
Nor tempting beautyes power could ere inflame,
By Magic knot-ty'd thread together came;
The course of things has stayed, to keep out day
Night has stood still* the sky would not obey
The law of Nature: the dull world at their
Dire voice has been benumn'd: great Jupiter
Urging their course himself, admired to see
The poles not moov'd by their swift axeltree.
Showers they have made; clouded the clearest sky,
And heaven has thundered, Jove not knowing why.
By the same voice, (with hair loose hanging) they
Moist swelling clouds, and storms have chased away.
The sea without one puff of wind has swelled;
Again in spite of Auster has been stilled:
Ships sails have quite against the winds been swayed:
Steep waters torrents in their fall have stayed:
And rivers have run back. Nile not oreflowne
In Summer time: Maeander straight has run.
Arar has hastened, Rhodanus grown slow:
High hills sunk down have aequall'd vales below.
Above his head the clouds Olympus saw:
In midst of VVinter Scythian snowes did thaw
Without the Sun: the tide-rais'd Ocean
Aemonian spells beat from the shore again.
The ponderous earth out of her center tossed
Her middle place in the worlds orb has lost;
So great a weight struck by that voice was stirred,
And on both sides the face of heaven appeared.
All deadly creatures, and for mischeife borne
Both fear, and serve by death the witches turn;
The Tigers fierce, and Lions nobly bold
Fawn upon them: cold snakes themselves unfold,
And in the frosty fields lie all vntwin'd:
Dissected vipers by their power are joined.
Their poisoned breathings poisoned serpents kill.
Why are the gods thus troubled to fulfill,
And fearful their enchantments to contemn?
What bargain has thus tied the gods to them?
Do they obey upon necessity,
Or pleasure? or some unknown piety
Deserves it? or some secret threats prevail?
Or have they jurisdiction over all
The gods? or does one certain deity fear
Their most imperious charms, who, what so ere
Himself is forced too, can the world compel?
By them the stars often from the pole down fell;
And by their voices poison Phaebe turned,
Grown pale with dark, and earthly fires has burned,
No less then if debarred her brothers shine
By enterposall of the earth between
Her Orb, and his: these labors undergone
Has she, deprest by incantation,
Until more nigh she foamed her gelly on
Their herbs. These spells of this dire nation,
And damned rites dreadful Erictho scorns
As too too good, and this foul art adornes
With newer rites; in towns her dismal head,
Or houses roofes is never covered.
Forsaken graves, and tombs (the ghosts expelled)
She haunts; by fiends in aestimation held.
To hear hells silent counsels, and to know
The Stygian cells, and misteryes below.
Of Dis, her breathing here no hindrance was.
A yellow leanenesse spreads her lothed face;
Her dreadful looks, known to no lightsome air,
With heavy hell-like pa^enesse clogged are.
Laden she is with long vnkemmed hairs.
But when dark storms, or clouds obscure the stars,
From naked graves then forth Ericttho stalks
To catch the nights quick sulphur; as she walks
The corn burns up, and blasts where ere she tread;
And by her breath clear aires are poisoned.
She prays not to the gods, nor humbly cries
For help, nor knows she pleasing sacrifice;
But funeral flames to th'altars she preferres,
Frankincense snatched from burning sepulchers.
The gods at her first voice grant any harm
She asks, and dare not hear her second charm.
Live souls, that rule their limbs, she does entombe:
Death (though unwilling) seizes those, to whom
The fates owe years; with a cross pomp men dead
Return from gr^ue, coarses from tombs have fled;
Young men's hot ashes, and burnt bones she snatches
Out of the midst of funeral Piles, and catches
The kindling brand in their sad parents hand;
The funeral beds black smoking fragments, and
Their ashy garments, and flesh-smelling coals.
But when she finds a coarse entombed whole,
Whose moisture is drawn out, and marrow grown
Hard by corruption, greedy havocke on
Each limb she makes; and from their orbs does tear
His congealed eyes, and sticks her knucles there.
She gnawes his nails now pale, oregrowne, and long:
Bites halters killing knotts, where dead men hung:
Tears from the gibbetts strangled bodies down,
And from the gallows licks corruption.
She gathers dead men's limbs, which showers have wet,
And marrow hardened in Sols scorching ^eate.
She keeps the nails that pierced crucified hands,
And gathers poisonous filth, and slime that stands
On the cold joints, and biting with her fanges
The hardened sinews, up from ground she hangs.
And where so ere a naked carcass ly,
Before the beasts, and ravenous fowls sits she;
But tears, or cuts no limb; till it be bit
By Wolves; from whose dry jaws she snatches it.
Nor spares she murdering, if life blood she need,
That from a throat new opened must proceed.
She murders, when her sacrifices dire
Lifeblood, and panting entrails do require:
And births abortiue by unnatural ways
From wounded wombes she takes, and burning lays
Them on her wicked altars; when she lacks
Stout cruel ghosts, such ghosts forthwith she makes.
All deaths of men serve for her action.
From young men's chinns she pulls the growing down,
And dying striplings hair she cuts away.
Ericttho often when ore the coarse she lay
Of her dead kinseman, and did seem to kiss,
Off from his maimed head would bite a piece;
And opening his pale lips, gelled, and clung
In his dry throat she bites his cold stiff tongue:
And whispering murmurs dire by him she sends
Her banefull secrets to the Stygian feinds.
By general fame when Sextus notice had
Of her, in depth of night, when Titan made
At the Antipodes their noone of day,
Over the desert fields he takes his way:
The servants waiting on his folly then,
Searching through broken tombs, and graves of men,
Spied on a rock at last, where Aemus bends,
And the Pharsalian lofty hills extends,
Ericttho sitting; she was trying there
Spells, which nere witch, nor magic god did hear,
And for new purposes was framing charms,
For fearing lest the civil wars alarmes
Should to some other land be carried thence,
And Thessaly should want that blood's expense:
Phillippi feilds with incantations stained,
And sprin^kled with dire juice she did command
Not to transfer the war, meaning t'enioy
So many deaths, and the worlds blood t'employ:
The carcasses of slaughtered Kings to ma^me,
And turn the Roman ashes was her aim:
To search for princes bones, and each great ghost.
But what best pleased her, and she studied most,
Was what from Pompey's coarse to take away,
Or upon which of Caesar's limbs to prey.
Whom first thus Pompey's fearful son bespake;
Wisest of all Thessalians, that can make
Foreknowne all things to come, and turn away
The course of destiny, to me (I pray)
The certain end of this wars chance relate.
I am no mean part of the Roman state,
Great Pompey's son, now either lord of all,
Or woeful heir of his great funeral.
My mind, though wounded now with doubtful fear,
Is well resolved any known woe, to bear.
Oh take from chance this power, it may not fall
Unseen, and sudden on me; the gods call;
Or spare the gods, and force the truth out from
The ghosts below, open Elysium
Call forth grim death himself, bid him relate
Which of the two is given to him by fate,
It Is no mean task, but labor worthy thee
To search what end of this great war shall be.
The impious Witch proud of a fame to spread
Replies, young man, would thou have altered
Some meaner fate, it had been easily done
I could have forced to any action
The unwilling gods. I can preserve the breath
Of him, whom all the stars have doomed to death:
And, though the planets all conspire to make
Him old, the midst of his life's course can break.
But fates; and the order of great causes all
Work downward from the worlds original,
When all mankind depend on one success,
If there you would, change ought, our arts confess
Fortune has greater power: but if content
You be alone to know this wars event,
Many, and easy ways for us there be
To find out truth; the earth, the sea, the sky,
The dead, the Rodopejan rocks, and fields
Shall speak to us. But since late slaughter yields
Such choice of carcasses in Thessaly,
To raise vpone of those will easyest be:
That a warm new-slaine carcass with a clear
Intelligible voice may greet your ear.
Least (by the Sun the organs parched, and spilled)
The dismal ghost uncertain hizzings yield.
Then double darkness ore nights face she spread,
And wrapping in a foggy cloud her head,
She searches where th'unbury'd bodies lie;
Away the wolves, and hungry vultures fly
Loosening their tallands, when Ericttho comes
To choose her prophet, griping with her thummes
Their now cold marrows, seeking where a tongue,
And lungs, with fillets whole, unwounded hung.
The fates of those slain men stand doubtful all
Which of their ghosts she from the dead would call.
Had she desired to raise the whole army slain,
And to reviue them for the war again,
Hell had obeyed: from Styx, by her strange might
The people all had been drawn back to fight.
When she a carcas sitting had espied,
An hook she fastened in his throat, and tied
To it a fatal rope, by which the hag
Ore rocks and stones the wretched carcass drag,
That must reviue. Under the hollow side
Of an high mountain, which to this black deed
The witch had destined, she the carcass lays.
A deep, and vast descent of ground there was,
As low (almost) at the blind caves of Di^:
Which a pale wood with thick, and spreading tre^
Barring the sight of heaven, and by Sol's light
Not penetrable, did oreshadow quite.
Within the cave was bred by dreary night
Pale moldy filth, darkensse sad: no ligh^,
But light by magic made, ere shined there
Within the jaws of Tanar^^ the air
Is not so dull, that balefull bound twixt hell,
And us; the princes, in those shades that dwell
Send without fear their spirits hitherto;
For though this hag can force the fates to do
What ere she please, it is doubtful whether here,
Or there those ghosts in their true place appear.
She puts a various colored clothing on,
And fury-like her hair loose hanging down
Was bound about with vipers, her face hid;
But when young Sextus, and his train she spied
Shaking for fear, and his astonished eye
Fixed on the ground, banish those fears, quoth she,
His life's true figure you shall see him take,
That cowards need not fear to hear him speak.
But if the furyes to your eyes were shown,
The Stygian lakes, and burning Phlegeton,
The giants bound, and Cerberus that shakes
His dreadful curled mane of hissing snakes,
Why should yon fear, cowards, whilst I am by,
To see those fiends, that shake at sight of me?
Then with warm blood, opening fresh wounds she fills
His breast: and gore to the inward parts distills:
Of the Moons poisonous gelly store she takes:
And all the hurtful broodes, that nature makes
Foame of mad dogs, which sight of water dread:
The pyth of staggs with serpents nourished
Was mixed there: the dire Hyaena's knot,
The spotted Lynx his bowels wanted not:
Nor that small fish, whose strength, though Eurus rise
Can stay the course of ships: the Dragons eyes:
The sounding stone, that brooding Eagles make
Warm in their nests: the Arabian nimble snake:
The red sea-viper, precious gemms that kept:
Skins from the alive Libyan Cerastes stripped:
The Phoenix ashes laid in Araby.
With these when vile, and namelesse poisons she
Had mixed, and leaves filled with enchantments strong,
And herbs which her dire mouth had spit on young,
What poison she did on the world bestow.
Then adds a voice to charm the gods below
More powerful then all herbs confounding noises
Much dissonant, and far from humane voices.
There was the bark of dogs, the wolves sad howl:
The scriches wa^ling, hollowing of the Owl:
All voices of wild beasts, hissing of snakes,
The sound that beat from rocks the water make^*
The murmur of stirred woods, the thunders noise
Broke from a cloud: all ^^is was in her voice.
The rest Aemonian incantations tell,
And thus her voice peirces the lowest hell.
Furyes, and Stygian fiends, whose scourges wound
All guilty souls, Chaos, that would confound
Vn-number'd worlds: king of the earth beneath,
That griev'st to see the gods exempt from death:
Thou Styx, and fair Elysium, which no spirit
To a Thessalian witch deserves t'enherit:
Thou, that thy mother hat'st, Persephone,
And heaven, thou lowest part of Hecate,
By whom the silent tongues of fienes with us
Have intercourse: hells porter Cerberus,
That currishnesse into our breasts do put*
You destinyes, that twice this thread must cut*
And thou the burning streams old ferriman
Tired with ghosts brought back to me again:
If I invoke you with a mouth profane,
And foul enough, to hear these prayers daine:
If with a breath fasting from humane flesh
These incantations I did nere express:
If women's wombes whole burdens upon you
And lukewarm brains I often did bestow:
If one your alt^rs heads of infants slain
I set, and bowels, that must live again,
Obey my voice; no ghost, that long has felt
The Stygian shades, nor long in darkness dwelt,
But one that lately from the living went,
And is but yet at pale hells first descent,
And one, which (though obedient to this spell)
Could be but once transported ore to hell
I ask; let some known soldiers ghost relate
Before great Pompey's son his fathers fate,
If civil war of you have merited.
Then lifting up her foaming mouth and head
She saw hard by, the ghost of that dead man
Trembling to enter his old goal again;
Fearing those cold pale members, and into
Th^^ ^ounded breast, and entrails torn to go.
Ah wretch, from whom deaths gift is taken away
(To dye no more) that fates durst thus delay
Ericttho wondered; wrath with death, and fate
The liueles coarse with living snakes she beaten
And through earths craneys, which her charms had; broke
Barked to the fiends, and thus hells silence shook.
Maegera, and Tisiphone that slight
My voice through hell with your dire whips affright
Hither that wretched spirit, or from below
By your true names of Stygian bitches you
I will call up, and to the Suns light leave:
No dead men's graves shall harbor, or receive
Your heads, I Will follow you observing well,
And from all tombs, and quiet vrnes expel.
False Hecate, thee to the gods I Will show,
(To whom thou use with bright looks to go)
In thy pale rotten form and so provide
Thou shall not thy Tartarian visage hide.
Under the earths vast weight, I will relate
What food destaines thee: in what wedlockes state
Thou love the nights sad king, with such a stain,
That Ceres shall not wish thee back again
Against thee, the worlds worst judge, I will set free
The giants, or let to the day to thee.
Will you obey, or shall I him invoke,
Whose name the earths foundations ever shook?
Who without hurt th'vnvailed Gorgon sees:
Of whose strong stripes Erinnys fearful is:
Who keeps an hell unknown to you; and where
You are above: that dare by Styx forswear.
Then straight the clotted blood grows warm again
Feeds the black wounds, and runs through every vein
And the outward parts: the vital pulses beat
In his cold breast: and life's restored heat
Mixed with cold death through parts disused runns*
And to each joint gives trembling motions;
The sinnews stretch: the carcass from the ground
Rises not by degrees, but at one bound
Stands bolt upright: the eyes with twincking hard
Are opened: not dead, nor yet alive appeared
The face: his palenesse still, and stiffenesse stays,
He stands at this revivall in amaze;
But his dumb seal'd-vp lips no murmur made,
Only an answering tongue, and voice he had.
Speak (quoth Ericttho) what I ask, and well
Shall thou rewarded be: if truth thou tell,
By our Haemonian art I Will set thee free
Throughout all ages, and bestow on thee
Such funerals, with charms so burn thy bones.
Thy ghost shall hear no incantations.
Let this the fruit of thy revivall be,
No spells, no herbs shall dare to take from thee
Thy long safe rest, when I have made thee die.
The gods, and Prophets answer doubtfully;
But he, that dares enquire of ghosts beneath,
And boldly go to th'oracles of death,
Is plainly told the truth; spare not, but name
Plainly the things, and places all, and frame
A speech, wherein I may confer with fate:
Adding a charm to make him know the state
Of whatsoere she asked; thus presently
The weeping carcass spoke; I did not see
The sisters fatal threads, so soon (alas)
Back from those silent banks enforced to pass.
But what by speech from all the spirits I gained,
Among the Roman ghosts fell discord reigned:
Romes wicked war disturbed hells quiet rest:
Some Captains from sad hell, some from the blessed
Elysian fields come forth, and there what fate
Entends to do, they openly relate:
The happy ghosts looked sad, the Decii then
Father and son, wars-expiating men:
I saw the Curii, and Camillus wailing,
Sylla himself against thee, fortune, railing:
His issues Libyan fate brave Scipio
Bewailed; and Cato Carthages great foe
His nephew's bondage-scaping death did monc.
among the blessed spirits Brutus alone
Reioyc'd, first Consul, that Romes king exiled.
Fierce Catiline, stern Marius, and the wild
C^thegs breaking chains orejoyed were:
The popular law promulging Drusi there,
And daring Gracchi shouting clapped their hands
Fettered for ever with strong iron bands
In Plutoes dungeons; impious ghosts had hopes
Of blessed seats; Pluto pale dungeons opes,
Prepares hard stones, and adamantine chains,
To punish the proud Conqueror, ordaines.
Take you this comfort, in a blessed room
The ghosts expect your side, and house to come,
And for great Pompey in Elysium
Prepare a place. The hour shall shortly come
(Envy not then the glory of so small
A life) that in one world shall lodge you all.
Make have to meet your deaths, and with a mind
Haughty, (though from small funerals) descen'd
To tread upon the souls of Roman gods.
For burialls ^all this mortal odds;
And the Pharsalian fight must only try
Who shall by Nile, and who by Tyber lie.
But seek not thou thy destiny to hear,
Which fate, though I be silent, will declare:
A surer prophet shall thy father be
In Sicily, although uncertain he
Whither to call thee, whence to bid thee flee,
Or in what coast or climate safe to be,
Tear Europe, Asia, Affricke* fates divide
Your funeral, as they your triumphs did.
Oh wretched house, to you the world shall yield
No place more happy then Pharsalia's field.
Thus having spoke the carcass did remain
With a sad look, and begged for death again,
But could not die without a magic spell,
And herbs: nor could the fates restore to hell
His soul once sent from thence. With that the witch
Builds up a lofty funeral pile; to which
The dead man comes: she lays him on the fires,
Leaves him, and lets him dye, and then retires
With Sextus to his fathers camp: and now
The welkin began Auroraes light to show:
But to the camp till Sextus take his way,
The dark charmed night kept off approaching day,
FINIS Libri Sexti.
Annotations on the sixth Book:
(a) From their camps by the river Aps^^ both generals at one time brought
forth their armies; Pompey entending to entercept M. Anthonius, and Caesar
entending to join with Anthony. Anthony certified by some Greeks of Pompey's
ambushes, kept within his camp, till the next day Caesar came to him. Pompey
then fearing to be enclosed by two armies, departing thence marched to asparagu
near Dyrrachium, and there encamped; thither also marched Caesar, and encamped
not far from him.

(b) Caesar wanting provision was desirous of battle: but Pompey better
provided of all necessaries purposely delayed it.

(c) Caesar perceiving that Pompey would not be drawn out to fight, the next
day by a great compass, and difficult way went to Dyrrachium hoping to exclud
Pompey thence, where his corn, and provision lay, which Pompey perceiving,
went thither also by a nearer way.

(d) Caesar (that his own men might with the less danger forage, and fetch
in corn, as also to hinder Pompey from forraging, and to lessen his estimation
among foreign nations) kept with garrisons all the tops of the hills, and
fortified castles there, and drew strong trenches from castle to castle, so on
every side enclosing Pompey. The work extended fifteen miles in compass,
being so tar^e that Pompey within wanted nothing, and Caesar could not man his
works round.

(e) Caesar's soldiers wanting victual besieged Pompey abounding with all
store of provision. Pompey seeing the strange unheard of food, that Caesar's
soldiers eat while they besieged him, said that he now made war against
beasts.

(f) Pompey understanding by some renegadoes that Caesar's cross trench
between the two bulwarks toward the sea was not finished, sent a ship manned
with archers, and other soldiers to assault the defenders of the work behind.
Himself about the end of night came thither also with his forces. Caesar's
cohorts, that watched there near the sea, seeing themselves assaulted both by
land and sea, ran away: whom the Pompeyans pursued with a great slaughter, till
Mar. Anthonius with twelve cohorts coming down the hill made the Pompeyans
retreat again.

(g) Caesar to repair that days loss assaulted with three and thirty cohorts
the castle which Torquatus kept, and beat the Pompeyans from the trench. Which
Pompey hearing brought his fifth Legion to their succor. Caesar's horsemen
fearing to be enclosed began first to fly, which the foot seeing, and seeing
Pompey there in person, fled also; this victory if Pompey had pursued, he had
utterly overthrown Caesar.

(h) Pompey the great slain upon the banks of Nile.

(i) Iuba King of Mauritania which had slain Curio and his Legions before, in
the Affrican war was vanquished by Caesar, and fearing to fall into Caesar's
hands, (...) and Petrejus slew each other.

(k) For in these two conflicts Caesar lost nine hundred footmen, sixty two
horsemen, thirty Centurions, ten Tribunes, and thirty two Ensigns of war.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The Seventh Book.
The Argument.
Great Pompey's flattering dream; his soldiers all
Eager of battle, urge their General;
Their wish (though rash and fatal) finds defense
In Ciceroes unhappy eloquence.
Against his will great Pompey's forced to yield:
The signalls given: Pharsalias dreadful field
Is fought; Romes liberty for ever dies,
And vanquished Pompey to Larissa flies.
SAd Titan later Thetis lap forsook
Then natures law required, and never took
A crosser way, as if borne back again
By the sphaeres course, would be eclipsed feign*
Attracting clouds, not food to his flames to yield,
But loath to shine upon Pharsalia's field.
That night of Pompey's happy life the last,
Deceived by flattering sleeps, he dreamed him placed
In the Pompeyan Theater, among
Romes people flocking in vnnumber'd throng;
Where shouting to the skies he heard them raise
His name, each room contending in his praise.
Such were the peoples looks, such was their praise,
When in his youth, and first tryumphant days
Pompey but then a gentleman of Rome,
Had quieted the west, and Spain overcome,
Scattring the troops revolt Sertorius led;
And sat by the Senate as much honored
In his pure candid, as trumphall gown.
VVhither the doubtful fancy fearful grown
Of future fate, run back to former joys;
Or prophesying by such sights implies
Their contrary, and bodes ensuing woe:
Or else on thee fortune would thus bestow
A fight of Rome, that could not otherwise.
Oh do not wake him from this sleep to rise,
No trumpet pierce his ear; the next nights rest
With the foregoing day's sad war oppressed
Will naught but fights, but blood and slaughter show,
Happy were Rome, could she but see (though so)
Her Pompey, blessed with such a dream at this,
And happy night; oh would the deityes
Had given one day, Pompey, to Rome, and thee,
That both assured of your destiny
Might reap the last fruit of a love so dear.
Thou go, as if thy Rome should thee interre:
And she, still mistress of her wish in thee,
Hopes that the fates lodge not such cruelty,
As to depri^^ (...) of thy honored tomb.
To mourn for thee old men, and young would come,
Children untaught would weep: the Matrons all
With hair (as once at Brutus funeral)
Loose hung, would beat their breasts; now though they fear
The swords of the injurious Conqueror,
Though he himself relate thy death, they will mourn
At public sacrifice, as they adorn
Jove's house with laurel; wretched men, whose moan
Concealed, in sighs must vent it self alone,
And dares not sound in public theaters.
Now had the rising Sun obscured the stars,
When all the soldiers murmuring up and down
(The fates now drawing the worlds ruin on)
Desire a signal to the fight; poor men,
Whose greater part should never see the end
Of that sad day, about their Generals tent
(Hasting the hour of their near death) they vent
Their passions, and complaints; and frantic grown
Their own, and public fate they hasten on.
They call great Pompey sluggish, timorous,
Patient of Caesar, and ambitious
Of soveraignety, desirous still to reign
Ore all those Kings, and fearing peace again.
The Kings, and Eastern nations all complained
War was prolonged, and they from home detained.
The gods, when they our ruin had decreed,
Would make it thus our own erroneous deed.
Ruin we sought, and mortal wars required,
In Pompey's camp Pharsalia is desired.
No^ did this wish want Cicero's defense
The greatest author of Romes eloquence;
In whose growne-rule fierce Catiline did fear
The peaceful axes. Now turned soldier
From bars and pleadings had been silent long,
And this bad cause thus strengthens with his tongue.
Pompey, for all her gifts fortune implores
That thou would use her now: thy Senators,
Thy kings, and all the suppliant world entreat
Thy leave to conquer Caesar: shall he yet
So long a war against mankind maintain?
Well may the foreign nations now disdain
(Who suddenly were vanquished by thee)
That Pompey is so slow in victory.
Where Is now thy spirit, thy confidence of fate?
Can thou now doubt the gods (ah most ingrate!)
Or fear thou to commit into their hand
The Senates cause? thy troops without command
Their Eagles will advance: 'twere shame for thee
To be compelled to conquer: if thou be
Our general, and ours the war, to try
The hazard lies in our authority.
Why hold'st thou the worlds swords from Caesar's throat?
They all are drawn almost, and tarry not
Thy ^low alarmes; make have, lest thy command
They all forsake: the Senate does demand,
If they thy soldiers, or companions be.
Great Pompey sighed to see how contrary
The gods were bent, and fortune crossed his mind^.
If you be all (quoth he) this way inclined:
And me a soldier, not a general
The time require: I Will be no let at all
To fate: let fortune all these nations cast
Into one ruin: be this day the last
To the great'st part of men. But witness Rome
Pompey's enforced to this sad field to come.
The wars whole work need not have cost one wound;
But Caesar, without blood subdued, and bound
Might have bin brought to answer injured peace.
What fury's this (oh blind in wickedness!)
To conquer without blood in civil war
You are afraid. Masters o'th'land we are:
The seas are wholly ours: the famisht foe
To fetch in Corn unripe is forced to go;
And it is become his wish by swords to dye,
And with his ruin mix our tragedy.
In this some part is finished of the war,
That our fresh water soldiers do not fear
The fight (if that be in true valor done;)
Into extremest dangers many run
For fear of future ill: valiant'st is he,
That fears not t'vndergoe a danger nigh,
Nor to differ it. Would you then commit
Your strength to fortunes hand, and to one fight
The worlds estate, desiring all, that I
Should rather fight, then get the victory?
The rule of Romes estate thou did bestow
Fortune, on me: receive it greater now:
Protect it in this wars blind chance: to me
Nor crime, nor honor shall this battle be.
Caesar thy wicked prayers against mine prevail:
We fight: how dismal to all people shall
This day appear? how many lands undone
Shall be? how crimson shall Enipeus run
With Roman blood? would the first pile of all
This mortal war would light (if I could fall
Without the ruin of our side) on me;
For not more joyful can the conquest be.
Pompey a name shall be to every one
Of hate, or pity, when this fight is done.
The conquered shall endure the worst of woe:
The worst of crimes the Conqueror shall do*
With that the reins be to their fury gives,
Suffering the fight. So th'artlesse sailer leaves
His helpelesse bark, when Corus blasts are grown
Too strong, to guidance of the winds alone.
A fearful murmuring noise rose through all parts
Of th'campe: and diversely their manly hearts
Beat against their breasts; upon the face of some
Appeared the palenesse of a death to come,
And ghastly looks; that day (they think) fate brings
A lasting state of rule on earthly things:
And what Rome was, after this field is fought,
Be asked: no man of his own danger thought
Amazed with greater fears. Who, when he sees
All shores oreflowne, and th'vncurb'd Ocean rise
Ore mountains tops, the Firmament and Sun
Fall down to earth, in such confusion
Could fear his own estate? no private state
Has time to fear, but Romes, and Pompey's fate.
Nor did they trust their swords, unless sharp set
On stones: the points of their dull piles they whet;
Each archer fitts his bow with surest strings,
And choicest arrows in his quiver brings;
Horsemen sharp spurs provide, and strongest raines.
So when earths Giants upon Phlegra's plains
(If with the acts of gods our humane wars
We may compare) rebelled: the sword of Mars
In Aetna's f^rge, and Neptunes three-fork'd spear
Were scowr'd, and sharpened: Phoebus arrows there
With Python dulled, made sharp the blew-ey'd maid
Upon her shield Medusa's hairs displayed:
Jove's lightning then the Cyclops molded new.
Fortune foretold the woes that should ensue
By many tokens; for the stormy sky
Withstood their marches into Thessaly:
The clouds against their eyes did lightnings throw:
Meteors like lamps, like fiery posts in show,
And beam^s, cloud-breaking Typhons did arise,
And lightnings flashes dimmed, and closd their eyes.
Their helmets plumes were sindg'd, their piles did melt^
Sword-blades dissolved run down the hilts they felt:
Their impious swords with sulphur from the skies
Did smoke; their Ensigns hid with swarms of Bees
Could scarce be plucked from ground: the bearers bowed
Themselves to get them up: which seemed oreflow'd
With tears from thence even to Thessalia:
The bull from the holy altars ran away,
And to Pharsalia field directly flies,
VVhilest their sad altar wants a sacrifice.
But what night furyes, what Eumenides,
What Stygian powers, or gods of wickedness,
What hellish feinds, Caesar, did thou appease
Preparing for such wicked wars as these?
Whether the gods, or their own fear had wrought
These wonders, doubtful it is, but many thought
They saw Olympus meet with Pindus hill,
And Aemus fall th'adjoyning valleys fill:
That in the night Pharsalia sounded loud
The noise of battle: that Baebei's flowd
Swiftly with blood. But most admired they
To see each others face show dark; the day
Grow pale: and night their helmets overspread;
Their fathers ghosts and all their kinsemen dead
TO appear before their eyes. But this alone
Comforted their sick minds knowing their own
Impious entents, brothers to kill, and open
Their fathers throats, they hence conceived hope,
Thinking these monsters, and portents t'imply
The Accomplishment of their impiety.
No wonder it is if men so near their end
Trembled with frantike fear: if fates do lend
Presaging minds of future ills to men,
Romans, that sojourned in Armenia then,
And Tyrian Gades, and in what coast soere,
Or climate they abode, lamented there,
Blaming their causeless grief, and did not know
Their losses in Pharsalia's overthrow.
An Augur sitting on ( a) th'Euganean mount,
(If fame record a truth) where springs the fount
Of foggy Aponus, where Timauus does
First part, and thence in several channells flows,
This day (quoth he) the action's in the height,
Pompey, and Caesar's impious armies fight;
Whether Jove's thunder, and divining stroke
He had observed, or how thick air did choke
The jarring heavens, or on the poles did look,
Or in the firmament had found this fight
By the Suns palenesse, and stars mournful light;
But nature sure did differently display
From other days, the sad Thessalian day:
And if all men had skillful Augurs bin,
By all the world Pharsalia had bin seen*
Greatest of men, whose fates through the earth extend,
Whom all the gods have leisure to attend;
These acts of yours to all posterity
Whether their own great fame shall signify,
Or that these lines of mine have profited
Your mighty names; these wars, when they are read,
Shall stir the affections of the readers mind,
Making his wishes, and vain fears inclined
As to a thing to come, not past, and guide
The hearts of all to favor Pompey's side.
Pompey descending down the hill displayes
His troops reflecting rising Phoebus rays,
Not rashly ore the fields: in order good
And marshalled well the hapless army stood.
The left wing first was L^ntulus his care
With the first ^egion, then the best in war,
And fourth: Thou, stout Domitius* lead'st the right,
Valiant, though still unfortunate in fight:
In the maine battle with his warlike bands
Brought lately from Cilicia, Scipio stands
Well fortified: here under a command,
A g^ner^ll first in Aff^cks scorched land.
But all along the swift Enipeus side
The loose-rain'd troops of Ponticke horsemen ride:
And mountaniers of Cappadocia;
Upon the dryer fields in rich array
Do the earths Monarchs, Kings, and Tetrarchs stand,
And all the states, that Roman swords command.
Thither from Libya came Numidians,
I^gr^as ar^hers, Crete's Cydonians:
F^i^ce Gauls there fought against their wonted foe:
The^e warlike Spaniards their short shields did show.
The Conqueror of all triumphs now deprive,
And let no people this sad war surviue.
Caesar that day dislodging to provide
For corn, was marching out, when he espied
The foes descending down the champ^on field,
And that so often wisht-for ^ay beh^ld,
That on one chance of war should set the maine;
S^^ke of delay, and covetous of reign,
In this small tract of time condemned had he
The civil war as a slow villainy.
But when fates falling ruin shake he saw,
And both their fortunes to a trial draw:
His wondrous love of sword some languishment
Began feel: his mind, though ever confident
Of good success, now doubts: from fear his own,
As Pompey fortunes from presumption,
Did keep his mind: at last exiling fears
With confidence he cheeres his soldiers.
Brave soldiers, the worlds aw, Caesar's estate,
That lay of fight is come, which we from fate
So often have begged: oh do not now desire,
But by your valors fortunes aid acquire.
What Caesar is lies in your hands al^ne.
This is the day, which passing Rubicon
Was p^omist me: in hope of which we stirred.
And our forbidden triumphs have differr'd.
This is the day that shall restore to you
Children and wives, and shares of land bestow
Freed from wars duties: this the day, that tryes
(Wi^ness'd by fate) whose cause the juster is
This field the conquered side shall guilty make.
If you with fire, and sword have for my sake
Assaulted Rome, now fight like soldiers,
And free your swords from guilt: no hand in wars
Is pure in both sides judgment: nor for me
Fight you alone, but that your selves may be
Free lords of all the world. I, for mine own
Content, could live in a Plebejan gown,
Or be in any state, so you obtain
A perfect freedom; by my envy reign.
Nor with much blood shall all the world be bought:
But youths of Greece in schools of wrestling taught,
Base sluggish spirits, that never arms did bear,
And mixed Barbarian troops are standing there,
That, when the armies join, will nere abide
The trumpets sound, nor showtes of their own side.
In civil war few hands, alas, shall fight:
Most of the blows upon Romes foes shall light,
And rid the world of well-spar'd people, go,
Break through those dastard nations, and orethrow
The world at your first onset; make it known
That all those nations, which so often were shown
In Pompey's triumphs, are not worthy proved
Of one poor triumph Ar^ the Armenians moov'd
Think you, what General shall Rome obtain?
With least bloods loss would the Barbarians gain
A soveraignety for Pompey? they abhor
All Romans, as their lords: and hate those more,
Whom they have known. The trust of my affairs
To friends, whose valor through so many wars
In France I have beheld, does fortune now
Commit: what soldiers sword do not I know?
And when through the air a trembling pile is sent,
I Will truly tell you from what arm it went.
Those signs I see that nere your General failed,
Feirce looks, and threatening eyes you have prevailed:
Me thinks the rivers swelled with blood I see,
And at your feet the slaughtered bodies ly
Of Kings, and Senators; nations to day
Swim in this bloody field. But I delay
My fortunes, in detaining from the field
Your forward spirits: pardon me though I yield
A while to pleasing hope: I nere did see
The gods so liberal, and so speedily:
But one fields distance from our wish are we.
What Kings, and nations are possessed of now,
When this field's fought, is Caesar's to bestow.
O gods, what stars, what influence of the sky
Has given so great a power to Thessaly?
This day allots the punishm^nt, or gains
Of all our wars: think upon Caesar's chains,
His wrackes, and gibbets: think you see this face,
These quartered limbs stand in the market place:
Remember Sylla in the field of Mars,
For against a Syllane General are our wars.
My care's for you: this hand shall free mine own,
Who ere looks back before the day be won,
Shall see me fall on mine own sword, and die.
You gods, whose cares are drawn down from the sky
By Romes dissentions, let him Conqueror be,
That to the Conquered means no cruelty:
And thinks his countrymen have not in ought
Misdone, because against his side they fought.
When Pompey in a narrow place had shut
Your helpelesse valor up, how did he glut
His sword with blood? but this I beg of you
Soldiers, let no man wound a flying foe:
Account him still your countreyman, that flies.
But while they stand in fight, let not your eyes
Be moov'd with piety, though in that place
Your fathers stood, but with your swords deface
Their reverend looks. Who ere has sheathed his blade
In kinsman's breast, or by the wound he made
Has done no wrong to kindred, all as one
Shall I esteem, kinseman, and foe unknown.
Fill up the trenches tear the rampires down,
That in full maniples we may come on:
Spare not your camp; that camp shall be your own
From which you dying army is come down.
Scarce thus had Caesar spoke, when every one
Fell to their charge, and straight their armor don;
A quick presage of happy war they take:
Of their neglected camp ^avocke they make:
Not ranked, nor marshalled by the general
Confused they stand, leaving to fortune all.
Had all been Caesar's* had each soldier fought
For monarchy, and Romes sole Empire sought,
They could not all with more desire come on.
When Pompey saw them march directly down,
That now the war admitted no delay,
But this by heavens appointment was the day,
He stands amazed, and cold: the war to fear
It Was fatal in so great a soldier.
But cheering up his men his own fears hiding,
On a proud steed through every quarter riding;
The time your valors wished for, soldiers,
Is come, qu^th he, the end of civil wars,
This is the sword's last work, the judging hour
Of nations fates: now show your ^tmost power.
He that would see his household gods again,
His country, wife, and children, must obtain
All by the sword* the gods have in this fight
Disposed them all: our just cause does invite
To hope: our swords the gods themselves shall guide
Through Caesar's breast, and in his blood provide
The establishment of Roman liberty.
Had they to him decreed a Monarchy,
To my old age death might long since have come.
It was no sign the gods were wroth with Rome,
Preserving Pompey for her leader now,
And all helps else, that conquest can bestow.
Illust^ious men, such as old times did show,
Do willingly these dangers undergo.
Should the Camilli the ancient Curii
Reviue, or the devoted Decii,
Here they would stand. Forces we have from the East,
Numberless ^ityes aides* war never pressed
So many hands: we use all nations
Of the whole world, people of all the zones,
Of all mankind twixt North, and South that dwell
Are here: we may enclose that army well
With our wide stretch'd-out wings: the victory
Asked not all hands: some need but shout, and cry.
Caesar's small strength cannot employ us all.
Think that your mothers from the city wall
Tearing their hair entreat your valor now,
Think that the old unarmed Senate bow
Their honored hoary heads before your feet,
And Rome her self for freedom does entreat:
Think that this age, and our posterity
Do both entreat: one would in freedom die,
The other be freeborne. And if there be
After these pledges, a room left for me,
I with my wife and sons before your feet
(If the honor of a general would permit)
Would fall; unless you conquer here, your shame,
And ^aesars mock is banished Pompey's name.
I crave in freedom my ^ast age to spend,
And not ^e taught to serve so near my end.
This sad speech fi^'d the Roman spirits anew,
They wish to die, should, what they fear, be true.
With aequall fur^ then both armies meet;
One for ambition, the other freedom fight.
These hands shall act, what no succeeding year,
Nor all mankind for ever can repair
Thou^h free from wars: this fight kills men to come,
And the next age, before they enter womb:
All Latian names thence fabulous shall be,
And men in ruined dust shall scarsely see
The Gabii, Veii, Cora, nor the room
Where Alba stood; nor fair Laurentium,
A country desolate, which none espyes.
But the forced Consuls in night sacrifice
Blaming old Numa's institution.
These monuments times ruining hand alone
Has not defaced: wars civil crimes we see
In that so many cities emptied be
To that small number is mankind reduced?
We all, whom the whole earth has since produced,
Are not enough the towns, and fields to fill:
One town us receives us all, and bondmen till
The Italian lands old houses stand alone
Rotten, and want a man to fall upon:
And wanting her old Citizens there slain,
Rome with the dreggs of men is filled again.
This slaughter makes that Rome hereafter free
From civil war for many years shall be.
Pharsalia is the cause of all these ills,
Let Canna yield that our black annalls fills,
And Allia damned in Roman Calenders,
Rome has remembered these as her small scarres,
But would forget this day: oh fatal time!
Those lives, that fortune had from every clime
Brought here to perish, might all loss repair
Mankind susteines by pestilentiall air,
Sickness, towne-swallowing earth quakes, or fires rage:
Here fortune shows the gifts of many an age
People, and Captains, robbing us of all
In one sad field: to show, when Rome did fall,
How great she fell; the more thou did possess.
Of earth, the shorter was thy happiness.
All wars before did land on thee bestow;
To both the poles Sol saw thy conquests go:
But that a little of the East: remained,
Thou all the sky-encompass'd globe had gained:
Thine had been night, and day: the stars could shine*
And planets wander ore no land but thine.
But this one day thy fate as far back bears,
As 'twas advaunc'd in all those former years.
This bloody day is cause that India
The Roman Fasces cannot keep in aw:
That Consuls do not with their plowes design
Sarmatian walls, nor in their bounds confine
The Scythian Daa, that still Parthians owe
For the blood lost in Crassus overthrow.
That liberty nere to return again,
And flying civil war, her flight has taken
Ore Tigris, and the Rhene; and can be brought
No more, though with our bloods so often sought:
Would we had nere that happiness possessed,
Which Scythia, and Germany has blessed:
Would Rome had ever served, since that first light
When by the augury of Vul^urs flight
Romulus filled with thieves his walls begun,
Even till Pharsalia's woeful field was won.
Brutus we tax; fortune, why did we frame
Our freedoms, laws, or yeare^ by Consuls name?
Happy Arabians, Medes, and Eastern lands,
That still have lived under their Kings commands:
We last of all (though now ashamed to bow)
A Monarch's yoke are forced to undergo.
No gods at all have we: when all things move
By chance, we falsely think there is a Jove.
Can he down from the starry sky behold
Thessalia's slaughter, and his thunder held?
Can he with thunder cleave a senseless tree,
Pholoe, Oete, harmless Rhodope?
Must Cassius hand rather this tyrant slay?
He at Thyestes feast could shut up day,
Involving Argos in a sudden night;
And can he lend Thessalia his light,
Where brothers fight, and sons against fathers are?
For mortal men no god at all takes care.
But for this woe revenge we do obtain
As much as fi^ts that earth against heaven should gain:
This war our Emperors does aequalize
To gods above, and their souls deifyes,
Adornes their heads with thunder, rays, and stars:
Rome by men's souls in her gods temples swears.
When both the armies marching on apace,
Near met, stood parted but a little space,
They veiw'd each others hands, striving to know
Each others face, thinking which way to throw
Their piles, from whence their fates most threatening show
What monstrous acts they were about to do:
There they their brothers, and their fathers spied
Against them stand, yet would not change their side.
But piety their breasts amazed held,
And the cold blood in every limme congealed:
And every soldier his prepared pile,
And ready stretch'd-out arm contained a while.
The gods send thee, o Craestinus, not death
The common plague, but feeling after breath,
Whose pile first thrown of all, the fight began,
And Thessaly with Roman blo^d did stain.
Oh frantike violence, did Caesar stand
Quiet, and was there a more forward ( b) hand?
Shrill cornets then began the air to wound,
The alarums beat, and all the trumpets sound:
The noise, and showts of soldiers pierce the sky,
And reach the convexe of Olympus high,
Above the thundering clouds: the noise they make
The Thracian Aemus sounding valleys take:
High Pelion's cavernes echo back the sound,
Which Pindus, and Pangaean rocks rebound:
Th'Octaean mountains groan: the soldiers fear
Their showtes thus echoed from all hills to hear.
Numberless piles with different minds are thrown;
Some wish to wound; others to light upon
The ground, and keep their harmless hands from ill;
Chance rules them, and makes guilty whom she will.
But the least part of slaughter here was done
With darts, and flying steel: the sword al^ne
Was able civil quarells to decide,
And Roman hands against Roman breasts to guide.
Pompey's great army narrowly disposed
In a thick Phalanx stand with bucklers closed
For fence: but wanted room (their ranks thus filled)
To throw their piles, their swords, or arms to weild*
But Caesar's loose-rank'd troops all nimbly go,
And the thick armed wedges of the foe,
Making their way through men and steel, assail,
And through the strongest joynted coats of maile
Pierce the ill guarded breasts* each stroke finds out
A breast, though nere so fenced with arms about.
One army suffers, the other makes the war:
All cold and guiltless Pompeys weapons are:
All Caesar's impious swords are reeking hot.
But fortune here long doubting waver'd not;
She swiftly bore (fitting so great a day)
A mighty ruin torrent-like away.
When Pompey's horse ore all the fields at large
Had spread their wings, the foes in flank to charge,
The light armed soldiers scattered all attended,
And against the foe their missile weapons bended;
With their own weapons every nation fought,
Yet by all hands the Roman blood was sought;
Arrows, stones, fire, lead headed darts were thrown,
Which melted in the aires hot motion.
There th'Ituraeans, Medes, Arabians shot
Their shafts, good archers all, yet levelled not;
The air before their eyes was only sought
By their wild aims, yet death from thence was wrought.
But no dire crime could stain the foreign steel:
Naught could work mischief, but the Roman pile.
The air was da^kened with thick arrows flight,
Which ore the fields orespread a sudden night.
Then (c) Caesar fearing lest his front should yield
To their assault, obliquely cohorts held,
Which suddenly from the right wing he sent,
VVhither the wheeling horse their forces bent.
But Pompey's horse unmindful now of fight
Nor stayed by shame at all, take speedy flight;
Unhappily (alas) were civil wars
Left to the trust of barbarous soldiers.
As soon as ere some galled horse had thrown
Their riders, and their limbs had trampled on,
The horsemen fled, and left the field each one,
Or turning reins upon their fellows run.
No fight ensues, but execution hot,
One side with sword, the other with bare throat
Made war; nor could Caesarian hands suffice
To execute their routed enemies.
Oh would the blood that barbarous breasts did yield,
Could have sufficed Pharsalia's mortal field,
And that no other blood thy streams might stain:
Let those bones scattered ore thy fields remain:
But if thou would with Roman blood be filled,
Spare all the nations: Let the Spaniards wild,
The Armenians, Syrians, and Cilicians,
Galatians, Gauls, and Cappadocians
Surviue: for when this civil war is done,
These people will be Romans every one.
These fears once raised through every quarter fly,
Sent by the fates for Caesar's victory.
Then came the war to Pompey's Roman power
The war, that variously had wandered ore
The fields, there stuck, there Caesar's fortune stayed:
No foreign Kings fought there, no barbarous aid
From several nations to that place was brought:
There their own brothers, there their fathers fought:
Mischief, and fury raged: there Caesar, are
Thy crimes; oh fly from this sad part of war
My soul, and leave it to eternal night:
Let no succeeding age by what I write
Learn how much ill may be in civil fight.
Or rather let our tears, and sorrows die:
What here thou did, O Rome, concealed shall be.
Caesar th'inciting fury of his men,
And spur to their blind rage, lest his guilt then
Should wanting be at all, rides through all parts
Adding new fury to their fired hearts:
Viewing their swords, looking whose points with gore
Were lightly stained, whose blades were bloody'd ore:
Who faulter in their blows, who hold their hand,
Who faintly strike, who fight as by command,
And who with greediness: who changes look
To see a Roman sla^ne; himself then took
Survey of bodies gasping on the ground,
To let out all the blo^d crushing their wounds;
As fierce Enyo shakes her bloody lance,
And Mars incites his warlike Thracians,
Or drives with furious lashes ore the field
His Horses starting at Minerva's shield.
Black nights of slaughter, and dire deeds arise;
Like one great voice the dying soldiers cries,
Clashing of armed breasts falling to ground,
And swords with swords meeting, and breaking sound.
He with fresh swords his soldiers still supplies,
To strike the faces of their enemies,
Forcing them on, still urging at their back,
And with his javeling beating on the slack.
Against the Senate not Plebejan f^es
He guides their hands, and swords; full well he knows
Where the laws live, where the states blood does flow:
Where he may conquer Rome, and overthrow
The worlds last liberty. Together then
Fall Senators with Roman Gentlemen.
Those honored names Metells, Lepidi,
Corvini and Torqauati slaughtered die,
That often commanders ore great Kings have bin,
And, except Pompey, all the best of men.
In a Plebejan helm disguised there
What weapon, noble (d) Bru^us, did bear?
The Senates highest hope, R^mes greatest grace,
The last of all thy ancient honored race?
Through the armed foes rush not too rashly on,
Nor seek out thy Philip^i^ke fa^e too soon:
Fate will to thee a Thessaly allot.
In vain thou aimest there at Caesar's throat:
He has not yet mounted the top of fate,
And reached that height, that governes humane state,
To me^it that brave death; no, let him reign,
That he, as Brutus offering, may he slain.
Here call Romes honor dies: here heaped on high
The slaughtered Senate with Plebeians ly.
But amongst those nobles, that to Styx were sent,
Wa^ like Domitius (e) death was eminent
Whom ^ates had carried through all overthrowes;
Nere without him did Pompey's fortune loose:
Vanquished so often by Caesar, yet dies now
With liberty, and gladly falls into
A thousand wounds, proud that he shall no more
Be pardoned now. Him weltering in his gore
Caesar espied, with taunts vpbraiding thus,
Now my successor proud Domitius,
At length thou shall forsake thy Pompey's side,
And war is made without thee. He r^ply'd
With that last breath, which in his dying breast
Struggled; thou, Caesar, have not yet possessed
The dire reward of all thy wickedness:
But yet art doubtful of thy fate, and less
Then Pompey: under whom se^ure I go.
And a free ghost down to the shades below:
And dying hope that thou subdued to day
To ^s, and him for thy misdeedes shall pay.
With this last speech away his spirit flies,
And night eternal closes up his eyes
We cannot in the worlds sad funeral
Particular tears pay to the death of all,
Nor search each private fate; whose breast a wound
Received; who spurned men's hearts upon the ground;
Who through the mouth received his mortal wound,
And thence breathed out his soul; who fell to ground
At the first stroke who stood upright, the while
His lopt-off limbs fell down; who with a pile
Was fast nailed to the earth; whose blood spun out,
And sprinkled all his foes armed breast about;
Who kills his brother, and, that then he may
Without shame rifle, throws his head away.
Who tears his fathers face, that standers by
Conjecture by his too much cruelty
It Was not his father, whom he robbed of life.
No death is worthy of particular grief,
Nor have we time to weep for every wight.
No other loss was like Pharsalia's fight:
Rome there by soldiers, here by kingdoms dies:
There private men's, here nations tragoedyes:
Here flowed Assyrian, Grecian, Ponticke blood:
But all these bloods the powerful Roman flood
Drove through the field away. All people there
Are deeplyer wounded, then one age can bea^e:
Far more then life, then safety here is gone:
For all succeeding times we are orethrowne.
These swords subdue all ages that shall serve.
Alas what could posterity deserve
To be in thraldom bone? fought we with fear?
Spared we our throats? the punishment we bear
Of others flight. To us, that since do live,
Fates should give war, if they a tyrant give.
Pompey perceived Romes fate, and gods were gone,
In all this loss not moved for his own
Ill hap. Ascending a small hill to see
The slaughters all, that covered Thessaly,
Which, while the war endured could not be spied:
He thence discerned how many people died,
How many swords reach at his destiny,
In how much blood he falls, nor wishes he
(As wretches use) all with himself to drown,
And mix the nations ruin with his own:
But for survivall of most part of men
He deignes to think the gods even worthy then
Of prayers from him, and makes this to be
His sorrows comfort; spare, ye gods, quoth he
To sink all nations: Pompey (if you lift)
Although the world remain, and Rome subsist,
May be made wretched; if more wounds on me
You would inflict, a wife and sons have I:
So many pledges have we given to fate.
Is It naught for civil war to ruinate
Me, and my house? are we a loss so small
Without the world? why would thou ruin all
Fortune? now naught is mine. With that he rides
Through his distressed troops, and on all sides
Sounds a retreat, from death calling them back,
Thinking himse^fe not worth so great a wrack.
Nor lacked he spirit their weapons to defy
With throat or breast, but feared, if he should die,
No soldier then would fly, but there would fall,
And all the world ^y with their general,
Or out of Caesar's sight a death he sought
In vain: thy head to Caesar must be brought,
Where ere he please to see it. His wives dear sight
Another reason was that caused his flight.
For in her sight the fates his death decreed.
Then Pompey mounted on a gallant steed,
Fled from the field, fearing no swords behind,
But bearing still a fate-vnconquer'd mind:
No sighs, nor tears he spent: with majesty
His grief was mixed, such as befitted thee
Pompey, in Romes calamity to show.
With looks unchanged did thou Aemathia view.
That mind, which wars success could near erect
To pride, wars losses cannot now deject.
Fortun's as far below thy wretched fate,
As she was false to thy triumphant state.
Securely now from Empires burden free
Thou go; and on thy past prosperity
Have time to look: all boundless hopes are gone;
And what thou were may now be truly known.
Fly this dire battle, and to wit^esse call
The gods, that none for thy sake, Pompey, fall,
That stay behind thee; in Thessalia,
No more then Egypt, Munda, Africa,
The battles greatest part fought not for thee:
Nor shall the honored name of Pompey be
Wars quarrel now; the foes that still will be
Amongst us, are Caesar, and Rom^s liberty:
And twill appear more plain after thy flight
Thy dying Senate for themselves did fight.
Let thy flight comfort thee, thou shall not see
Those blood-staind troops, nor their impiety;
The rivers swelled with blood look back, and see,
And pity Caesar: with what heart can be
Revisite Rome, made happyer by this field?
What banishment in foreign lands can yield
To thee by thee what ere can be endured
Under th'Aegyptian tyrant, rest assured
The gods; and favoring fates, as best, prefer;
Twere worse for thee to be the conqueror
Let all the people wail and weep no more,
But dry their tears, and let the world adore
As well thy ruin, as prosperity.
Look upon Kings with a commanding eye,
Egypt, and Libyas Kings, whom thou have crowned,
And cities buil^ by thee and choose a ground
Where thou will die. Larissa town beheld
(First witness of thy fall) fled from the field
Thy noble self unconquered by the fates.
Whose Citizens all issuing forth the gates
To meet thee (as if Conqueror) they went,
And gifts from love, and sorrow did present:
They open their temples, and their houses all:
And wish themselves pa^t^k^rs of his fall:
Much of his great name's left: in his own eye
He seems the least: nations would help him tr^^,
Once more his fortune, and renew the war.
He cries be faithful to the Conqueror:
What should the conquered do with towns and men?
Thou Caesar, thy countries bowels then
Were wading through Pharsalia's bloody field,
Whilst peoples loves to thee he reconciled.
Pompey rides thence: the people sigh, and cry,
And rail against each cruel deity
The people's favor now is truly proov'd:
Whilst great, thou could not know thy self beloved.
When Caesar saw the field with Roman blood
Was overflowed enough, he thought it good
His swords from execution to refrain,
And spare poor lives, that would have died in vain.
But left the foes should to their camp in flight
Retire, and rest should banish terror quite;
He straight determines to assault their wall,
Whilst fortune's hot, and terror works in all,
Nor does he think that this command appears
Too harsh, too hot, and wearied soldiers:
Small exhortation leads them to the prey.
Our victory (quoth he) is full to day,
And for our blood naught is remaining now
But the reward: which it is my part to show,
I cannot say to give, what every man
Shall give himself; behold yon tents that stand
Full of all riches: there gold raked in Spain,
There the Eastern Nations treasuryes remain:
Pompey's, and all those Kings estates do lack
Possessours, soldiers: run, and overtake
Whom you pursue: and what so ere to you
Pharsalia gives, take from the conquered now.
This speech of Caesar's, and golds impious love
Over the swords the furious soldiers drove,
To tread on Senators, and Captains slain,
What trench, what bulwark could their force sustain?
Seeking the price of all their wars, and sin,
To know for what they have so guilty been
Spoiling the world they found a wealthy mass,
Which for wars future charges gathered was:
But their all-covering thoughts could not be filled
With what Spa^nes mines, and Tagus streams could yield,
Or on their sands rich Arimaspians find;
Though all the spoils be theirs, yet in their mind
Their mischeife at too cheap a sale they vent,
And are bid loss in spoiling of these tents,
When to himself the Conqueror Rome decreed
And in that hope whole mountains promised:
Patricians tents impious Plebejans keep,
In Kings pavilions common soldiers sleep;
On brothers, and on fathers empty beds
The killers lay their parricidall heads;
But furious dreams disturb their restless rest;
Thessalia's fight remains in every breast*
Their horrid guilt still wakes; the battle stands
In all their thoughts: they brandish empty hands,
Without their swords: you would have thought the field*
Had groaned, and that the guilty earth did yield
Exhaled spirits, that in the air did move,
And Stygian fears possessed the night above.
A sad revenge on them their conquest takes;
Their sleeps present the furies hissing snakes,
And brands; their countreymens sad ghosts appear:
To each the image of his proper fear:
One sees an old man's visage, one a young,
Another's tortu^'d all the evening long
With his slain brothers spirit: their fathers sight
Dants some: but Caesar's soul all ghosts aff^ight.
Orestes so, not purged in Scythia,
The Eumenides affrighting faces saw;
Not more was Pentheus in Agaves fit
Dismayed, nor she, when she was freed from it.
Him all the swords that dire Pharsalia saw,
And which the Senate in revenge should draw,
Oppress that night, and Hellish-monsters scourge.
But that, which most his guilty soul did urge,
Was this, that S^yx, the fiends, and furyes grim
( Pompey being yet alive) had seized on him.
But having suffered all, when days clear light
Displayed Pharsalia's slaughter to his sight,
No dismal objects could ^uert his eyes
From thence; the rivers swelled with blood he sees,
And heaps of bodies aequalling high hills,
And car^asses, whence blood, and filth distills,
He numbers Pompey's people, and that place
Ordaines for banqueting, from whence each face
He might discern, and know them as they ly,
Proud that Aemathia's earth he cannot see,
Or scarce discern the slaughter-cover'd ground.
In blood his fortune, and his gods he found.
And with that joyful sight to feed his eyes,
To the wretch'd souls he funeral fire denies,
Making Aemathia noisome to the air.
Carthage, that gave our consuls sepulcher,
And Libyan fire on Cannae did confer,
Could not teach him his enemies t'inter:
Remembering still (his anger not even then
With slaughter slack'd) they were his country men.
We do not several fires, or tombs desire:
Do but to all these nations grant one fire;
And let them not on pyles distinct be brent.
Or if thou aim at Pompey's punishment,
Pyl'd up let Pindus wood, and Ossa be,
That he from sea Pharsalia's fire may see.
This anger boots thee not; fort is all one
Whether the fire, or putrefaction
Dissolve them; all to natures bosom go,
And to themselves their ends the bodies owe.
If now these nations, Caesar, be not burned,
They shall, when earth, and seas to flames are turned.
One fire shall burn the world, and with the sky
Shall mix these bones; where ere thy soul shall be,
Their souls shall go; in air thou shall not fly
Higher, nor better in Avernus ly.
Death frees from fortune: Earth receives again
What ever she brought forth: and they obtain
Heavens coverture, that have no vrnes at all.
Thou that deny'st these nations funeral,
Why do thou fly these slaughter smelling fields?
Breath, if thou can, the air this region yields,
Or drink this water, Caesar, but from thee
The rotting people challenge Thessaly,
And keep possession against the conqueror.
To the sad food of this Aemathian war,
Senting from far the bloods corruption
The Thracian wolves, Arcadian lions run:
Bears from their dens, dogs from their kennells come:
And all those ravenous creatures else, on whom
Nature bestows the strongest sents, full well
The air by carrion putrified to smell.
Hither all birds of prey assembled are,
That long had waited on this civil war:
Birds, that from Thrace to Nile in winter go,
Stay'^ longer then, then they were wont to do:
Nere did more birds of prey in one air fly,
Nor did more vulturs ever cloud the sky;
From every wood came foul: each tree was filled
With bloody birds, that crimson drops distilled
Down from the air blood, and corruption rained
The conquerours face, and impious eagles stained.
Birds from their weary tallands often let fall
Gobbets of flosh; nor were the people all
Consumed so, buried in bird, or beast,
Which would not on their bowels fully feast,
Nor suck their marrow all, but lightly taste;
The greatest part of Roman flesh is cast
Disdained away: which by the Sun, and time
Dissolved, is mixed with Thessalian slime.
Unhappy Thessaly, what have thou done
TO offend the angry gods, that thee alone
So many deaths, and impious fates should stain?
What age, what length of time can purge again
The gu^lt that thou have wrought? what corn in thee
And grass with blood discolored shall not be?
What plow share, but some Roman ghost shall wound?
Before that time new battles on thy ground
Shall be; and impious civil wars shall stain
Thy fields (before this blood be dry) again.
If all the graves of our dead ancesters
We should turn up, their tombs that stand, and theirs
Whose time-consumed vrnes have cast abroad
Th'enclosed dust: more ashes would be trod,
And bones by harrows teeth dug up, and found
In the sad fur^owes of Thessaliaes ground.
No Mariners had sailed from thy shore,
Nor Husbandmen had plowed thee any more,
The Roman peoples grave; thy ghostly field
Had no inhabitant for ever tilled:
No herds of cattle on thy plains had run.
Nor durst the shepherds feed their flocks upon
Thy pasture fields, with Roman blood manured:
Nor habitable nor to be endured,
(As in the torrid, or cold i y zone)
Should thou have lain, forsaken, and unknown,
If thou had been not first, but only seat
Of wicked war* Oh give us leave to hate
This guilty land; ye gods* why do you stain
The world, t'absolue it so? the blood in Spain,
Sicilian seas, Mutina, Leucas spilt
Has quite absolved Philippi fields from guilt.
FINIS Libri Septims.
Annotations on the seventh Book.
( a) The same day when this great Pharsalian field was fought, an Augur C.
Cornelius being then at Padua, observing his rules of augury, told unto them
that stood by him the very instant when the battle began: and going a^aine
to his art, returned as it were inspired, and cries out with a loud voice,
Caesar the day is thine.

( b) This Chrastinus was an old Soldier of Caesar's army, and now Emeritus,
that is freed from the duties of the war, but for love of Caesar served in
this war a voluntary, he desiring to give the onset spoke thus to Caesar; I
hope, Caesar, this day so to behave my self, that thou shall thank me either
alive or dead; he was slain, run through the mouth.

(c) When Caesar perceived that his horsemen could not withstand the force of
Pompeys horsemen and archers, he drew forth 3000 men which for that purpose
he had placed in the right wing, they with such fury assaulted Pompeys
horsemen, that they all fled; after whose flight all the archers wanting their
defense were without resistance slain.

(d) Marcus Brutus was there fighting in Plebeian armor, and escaped the
knowledge of Caesar's soldiers This was that Brutus, that joining afterward
with Cassius, was with him Vanquished in the Philippian fields by Octavius and
Antonius; after which battle all hope of Roman liberty was for ever lost.

(e) L. Domitius was by the Senates decree to succeed Caesar in the government
of France; In this war taking Pompeys side he was at Corfinium by his own
soldiers brought bound to Caesar, and by him pardoned: afterward in Massilla
he was vanquished by D. Brutus, Caesar's Lieutenant, and fled.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The Eight Book.
The Argument.
Through devious deserts vanquished Pompey flies,
And sails to Lesbos; whence with weeping eyes
He takes his wife In several flying fleetes
Sextus, and other Roman Lords he meets.
Deiotarus the Gallogracian King
Is sent to great Arsacides, to bring
To aid of Pompey's side the Parthian bows.
The Lords consult where to retire, and chose
Aegypts base shore. Th'vnthankefull king betrays
Old Pompey coming: and before the face
Of Sextus, and Cornelia, ere he lands,
By base Achillas, and Septimius hands
Great Pompey dies. By night poor Codrus comes,
And on the shore his half burnt trunk entombes
Without the head. The author does inveigh
Against treachereous Egypt, and base Ptolemey.
ORe woody Tempe, and the Herculian straits
Following th'Aemonian woods desert retre^ts
(Though far about) great Pompey rode; his steed
Quite spent past help of spur had lost his speed.
Through devious ways he turns, and leaves behind
No tracke of his uncertain flight; the wind
Filling the shaken woods with murmuring noises
Made him afraid, and his own followers voices,
That rode behind, and by him For (although
Fallen from his height of former fortunes now)
He thinks his blood set at no vulgar rate:
But as high prized (still mindful of his fate)
By Caesar, as himself for Caesar's head
Would give. But through the deserts as he fled,
His presence, and majestike face denied
A safe concealment; many, as they hy'd
Unto his cam^e, and had not heard his fall,
Stood in amaze to meet their general:
Wondering at fortunes turns, and scarce is he
Beleft, relating his own mis^ry.
He grieu^s that any his low state should see,
And wishes rather in all lands to be
Unknown, and through the world obscurely go.
But fortunes ancient favor brings this woe
His present sinking state more to depresse
By honors weight, and former happiness.
Now he perceiues he did too early clime,
Blames his triumphant youth in Sylla's time.
And grieves to thin^e upon, in these sad days,
His Ponticke lau^^ll, or Pyratick^ bays.
So too long age gre^t'st happiness destroys,
And life surviving Empire; former joys
Breed grief, unless wi^h them our end be sent,
And timely death ensuing wors prevent
Let none but with a mind prepared to die,
Dare to adventure on prosperity.
Now to the shore be came, where Peneus ran
Red with Pharsalia's slaughter to the maine.
There a ( a) small bark unfit for seas, and winds,
Scarce safe in shallowest rivers, Pompey finds,
And goes aboard* He, with whose navyes oars
Even yet Corcyra shakes, and Leucas shoares,
That tamed Cicilia, and Liburnia,
Goes fearful now in a small bark to sea.
To Lesbos shore his sails commanded are
By thee, Cornelia, conscious of his care,
Where thou then lay'st, far more with sorrow filled,
Then if thou had bin in dire Pharsalia's field.
Thy careful breast still sad presages shake,
And fears thy restless slumbers still awake.
Each night presents Thessalia: when night's done,
To th'shore, and sea orehanging rocks begone
With woe, to veiw the Oceans face, she hyes,
And still all ships, that come, she first espyes,
But dares ask nothing of her husbands state.
Lo now a ship that comes; alas what fate
It brings, thou know not; but behold thy fears,
Thy cares whole sum, thy vanquished lord appears
Himself the sad relater of wars crime.
Why now lament'st thou not, thus loosing time?
When thou may weep, thou fear, the ship drawn nigh,
She runs, and sees the crime of destiny,
Pompey palefac'd, his hoary hairs hung down
Ore his sad brow, his garments squallid grown.
Then grief contracts her soul: a sudden night
Invades her sense, and reaues her eyes of light;
Her nerue-forsaken joints all fail: cold is
Her heart; deceived with hope of death she lies:
But Pompey landed searches the shores side;
Whom when Cornelia's maids now near espied,
They durst not on fates cruelty complain,
More then with silent sighs, striving in vain
To lift their lady up; whom in his arms
Great Pompey takes, and with embraces warmes
Her key-cold breast. But when the fled blood fills
Her outward parts, Husbands hand she feels,
And better brooks his visage; he forbid
Her veild to fate, and thus her sorrow chid.
Why is thy noble strength of courage broke
(Woman descended from so great a stock)
By the first wound of fate? thou have the way
To purchase fame, that never shall decay,
Thy sexes praise springs not from war, or state,
But faithful love to an unhappy mate.
Advance thy thoughts, and let thy piety
Contend with fortune: love me now cause I
Am conquered, sweet, it is more true praise for thee
To love me thus, when all authority,
The sacred Senate, and my Kings are gone.
Begin to love thy Pompey now alone.
That grief extreme, thy husband yet alive,
Becomes thee not; thou should that sorrow give
To my last funerals, thou art bereft
Of nothing by this war: thy Pompey's left
Alive and safe: his fortunes only gone:
It Is that thou wail'st, and that thou lovd'st alone.
Chid by her Husband thus, by shames constraint
She rise, and vtter'd this most sad complaint.
Would I to hated Caesar had bin led
A bride, since happy to no Husbands bed.
Twice have I hurt the world: my bridal lights
Erinnys, and the unhappy Crassi's sprights
Carried; accursed by those ghosts I hare
The Assyrian fortune to this civil war.
I was the cause that all these nations died,
And all the gods forsook the juster side.
O greatest Lord, worthy of better fate
Then my sad marriage: had dire fortunes hate
Such power on thee? why did I marry thee
To make thee wretched? take revenge on me,
Which willingly I Will pay; to make the sea
More passable, Kings faiths more firm to thee,
And all the world more hospitable, drown
Me by the way, oh would this life had gone
Before to get thee victory, but now
Dear Pompey expiate thine overthrow.
Where ere thou lie, o cruel Iulia,
Revenged already in Pha^salia,
Come wreake thine anger, et thy strumpets death
Appease thy wrath, and spare thy Pompey's breath.
This said, and sinking in his arms, her fall
Again drew tears from the spectators all:
Pompey's great heart relented, and that eye
Wept there, that in Pharsalia's field was dry.
The M^tylenaeans then thus on the shore
Bespake great Pompey; if for evermore
It shall our honor be to have preserved
Thy dearest pledge, if we have so deserved:
To grace the city of thy servants daine,
And here with us, though but one night, remain;
Make this a place honored for evermore,
A place, that Roman pilgrims may adore.
Our town before all towns thou should approve;
For all towns else may hope for Caesar's love:
We have already trespast; further yet
This is an I Will, and Caesar wants a fleet;
Besides, thy nobles know this place, and here
Will meet; thy fates on this known shore repair:
Take our gods wealth, our temples gold, and bands
Of our young men to serve by sea, or land:
Take thou (though conquered) Lesbos forces here,
Lest Caesar press them as the Conqueror.
Oh clear this faithful land of that foul crime,
That thou, which loud'st us in thy prosperous time,
Should fear our faith in thy adversity.
Glad of these men's so wondrous piety
For the worlds sake, that some fidelity
Was left to wretched states, this land (quoth he)
That I of all the world most dear esteemed
By this great pledge I left with you it seemed
She was the hostage that my love was here,
That here my household gods, and country were;
Here was my Rome, fled from the field, before
I came to you, I toutch'd upon no shore;
Knowing that Lesbos in preserving her
Had purchased Caesar's i^e, I did not fear
To give you cause your p^rdons all to plead;
Let it suffice that I your guilt have made:
I must through all the world my fates pursue.
Oh happy ^esbos, ever famed; from you
People, and Kings shall learn fidelity
To us, or faithful you alone shall be.
Which lands are true, which false I now must try.
Hear o ye gods, it any gods with me
Remai^e, my last of prayers, grant us to find
A land like Le^bos, whose sti^l faithful mind
Dares give safe landing to our conquered state,
And parting safe not fearing Caesar's hate.
His sad companion then aboard he took.
You would have thought all Lesbos had forsook
Their nat^ue soil exiled: so great a cry
Was raised, and woeful hands heaved to the sky
All ore the shore, for Pompey least of all,
(Though he deserved their sorrow by his fill)
But seeing her depart, whom they had seen
All this war time, as their own citizen,
The people wept; of her the matrons dry
From tears, could hardly have taken leave, though she
Unto her lord a Conqueror had gone:
She so had gained the love of every one
By virtuous, courteous carriage, modesty
Of a chaste look: proud to no company:
Lowly to all, and such her life was seen
While her lord stood, as he had conquered bin.
Now Titans orb half drowned in the seas
Gave part to us, part to the Antipodes:
When care in Pompey's restless bosom runs
Sometimes on Romes confederate states, and towns,
And kings uncertain faiths, sometimes upon
The South-scorch'd regions of the torrid zone:
Sometimes, as too sad burdens, he lays by
His wearied cares of future destiny,
Asking the master of each star, and where
He guesses land: what rules heaven gives to steer
His ship at sea: what stars to Syria guide:
Which of Boots fires to Lybias side
Directs; to this the master thus replies:
We follow not those stars, which through the skies
Do slide, and pass away* unconstant stars
In the vnfixt pole deceive the mariners;
That pole, that never falls, nere drownes in sea
Famous for Cynosure, and Helice,
Does gui^^e our ships, when ere that stars got up
Right vertical, just ore the saileyards top,
Then to the Bosphorus we make apase,
And sea^, that Synthiaes crooked shores embrace.
But when more low, and nearer to the sea
Artophil^x, and Cynosura be,
Then to the Syrian po^ts our course we steer:
Cano^us then is elevated there,
Which fears the North, and in the Southern skies
Remains alone. Who thence to th'left hand plyes
(Pharos ore past) into the Syrtes falls
But whither now shall we direct our sails?
To whom with doubtful thoughts Pompey replies:
In all the course at sea observe but this,
To keep thy ship still far from Thessaly,
And to the heavens, and seas leave Italy,
The rest trust to the winds; I now have taken
My dear left pledge Cornelia in again.
I then was certain whither to resort,
But now let fortune find us out a p^rt.
Thus Pompey spoke; the master straightway turns
About his sails stretched out with aequall horns,
And to the left hand guides the ship, to plow
Those waves, that twixt Chios, and Asia flow,
To the ships length he turns his sails about.
The sea perceiues the change: her waves are cut
By the sharp stem with different motion.
The skillful Charrioter not half so soon
Raines round his horse, and does with sudden change
About the goal his wheeling chariot range.
Sol hid the stars, and land discovered,
When those, that from Pharsalia's battle fled,
To Pompey came; and first from Lesbos shores
He met his son; then Kings, and Senators.
For Pompey yet (although at that sad time
Vanquished, and fled) had Kings to wait on him*
Proud sceptered Kings, that ore the East did reign,
Attended there in banished Pompeys train.
Then Pompey King Deiotarus commands
To go for aid to farthest Eastern lands.
Most loyal King, since on Pharsalia's plains
This world was lost from Rome, it now remains
To try the East, those that by Tigris ly,
And by Euphrates yet from Caesar free.
Grieve not, though to repair my fortunes lost,
Thou to the Medes, or farthest Scythians go,
Or quite beyond the day, that this world sees.
Bear my salutes to great Arsacides;
And if our ancient league remain, which I
By Latian Jove, by his own deity
He swore let the Armenian archers strong,
Their well-bent bows, and quivers bring along:
If you, O Parthians, vndisquieted
I ever left, when I pursued the fled
Unquiet Alans to the Caspian strait,
And forced you not for safety to retreat
To Babylon: marching ore Cyrus ground,
And the Chaldaean kingdoms utmost bound,
Appearing nearer then the Persian
To the Suns rise, where into the Ocean
Nysas, Hydaspes, and swift Ganges fall,
Suffered you only, when I conquered all,
To go vntriumph'd: Parthias King alone
Of all the Easts monarchs, escaped subjection.
Nor once alone do you your safety ow
To me; who after Crassus overthrow,
Appeased the just incensed wrath of Rome?
For all my merits now let Parthia come
Out of her bounds appointed, and pass ore
Greek Zeugma's walls, and the forbidden shore.
Conquer for Pompey: Rome will loose the day
Gladly. The King refused not to obey
(Though hard were his command; laying aside
His kingly robes, and in a servants weed
Attired he goes; in a distressed time
It Is safe for Kings like poorest men to seem.
Therefore how much lives he, that is truly poor,
Safer then Kings? The King took leave at shore.
And by the Icarion rocks great Pompey gone
Leaves Ephesus and sea-calme Colophon:
Shaving small Samos foaming rocks he go's:
A gentle gale blows from the shore of Cos:
Gindon, and Phebus-honour'd Rhodes he leaves,
And sailing straight in the mid-Ocean saues
Telmessums long, and winding circuits. First
Pamphylia greetes their eyes; but Pompey durst
Commit his person to no town, but thee
Little Phaselis: thy small company,
And few inhabitants could not cause a fear,
More in the ship then in thy walls there were.
But sailing thence again, high Tau^us shows
It self; and Dipsas, that from Taurus flows.
Could Pompey think, when erst he cleared the seas
Of Pirates rage, it purchased his own ease?
He now flies safe along Cicilian shores
In a small ship* there many Senators
Following oretake their flying general
Within the haven of Celendrae small,
Where in and out ships on Selinus past.
In full assembly of the lords at last
Thus sadly Pompey spoke; my Lords, whose sight
(As dear companions bot^ in war, and flight)
I do esteem my country, though we stand
On a bare shore, in poor Cicilian land,
Attended with no force, advice to take,
And new provision for a war to make,
Yet bring courageous hearts: I lost not all
In Thessaly, nor did my fortune fall
So low, but that this head again may rise.
Could Marius after all his miseryes
In Libya, rise to a seventh Consulship?
And me so lightly fallen will fortune keep?
A thousand Captains on the Grecian sea,
A thousand ships I have: Pharsalia
Has rather scattered, then quite overthrown
My strength: but me my actions fame alone
Which all the earth have seen, my name, that now
The whole world loves, shall guard* Consider you
The Egyptian, Libyan, Parthian monarchies,
B^th in their strength, and faith, and then advise
Which fittest is to aid Roms laboring state.
But I; my Lords, will to your ears relate
Freely my secret'st cares, and tell the truth
How I incline; I do suspect the youth
Of Aegypts King; for true fidelity
Requires strong years; I fear the subtlety,
And double heart of Mauritania's King;
Remembering Carthage, whence his race did spring,
He gapes for Italy, and his vain breast
Is much with thought of Hanniball possessed;
Whose blood commixt with the old Numidi^ns
Obliquely Iuba's pedigree distaines.
He swelled to see Varus a suppliant grown,
And Roman fates inferior to his own.
Therefore, my Lords, to the Eastern world let us
Retire; Euphrates with a spacious
Channel divides the world; the Caspian straits
On the other side yield safe, and large retreats;
Another pole measures the Assyrian days,
And nights: another color bear the seas,
Severed from ours; their ain^e is sovereignty:
Their bows more strong, their steeds more fierce, and high
Then ours, no boy, nor aged man wants skill,
Or strength to shoot: deadly their arrows kill.
Their bows first brook Pellaean spears, and won
The Assyrian wall-renowned Babylon,
And Median Bactra. Nor so fearful are
The Parthians of our piles, but that they dare
Come out to war against us, they have tried
Their shafts sufficiently when Crassus died.
Nor are their trusty shafts armed at the head
With steel alone, but deadly venomed:
Slight wounds are mortal, and the least blood drawn
Will kill. Oh would on the fierce Parthian
I were not forced to depend: their fate
Does too too much Romes fortune aemulate:
Too many gods aid them. He draw from home
Some other nations of the East to come
To war. But if Barbarians leagues deceive
Our hopes or else our scorned alliance leave;
Let fortune then our sad, and shipwrack'd state
Beyond the known, and traffiqu'd world translate;
I will not sue to Kings whom I have made,
But in my death this comfort shall be had
Lying far off this body shall not be
Subject to Caesar's rage, nor piety
But there revolving my whole life's past fate
Still honored in those parts was Pompey's state.
How great has Eastern Tanais me seen?
How great beyond Maeotis have I bin;
Into what lands did my victorious name
More sound, or whence in greater triumph came?
Favor my purpose Rome, what happyer
Can the go is grant thee, then in civil war
To use the Parthian arms to overthrow
That land, and mix their ruin with our woe?
When the fierce Parthians have with Caesar fought
Crassus revenge, or mine must needs be wrought,
This said he heard their murmur to condemn
His plot. But Lentulus amongst all of them
In spirit, and noble grief the forward'st man
Thus (worthy his late Consulship) began.
Has the Pharsalian loss so broke thy mind?
Has one days fate the world so low declined?
Does that one battle our whole cause decide,
And no cure left to help our wounded side?
Is no hope left thee, Pompey* but to sue
At the proud Parthians feet; woul^st thou eschew
All lan^s, and climes, and thither aim thy flight,
Where cross poles reign, and unknown stars give light,
To Adore the Parthians, and their deityes,
Chaldaean fires, and Barbarous sacrifice?
Why in this war pretend'st thou liberty?
Why is the wretched world deceived by thee,
If thou can serve? whose name they trembled at,
As the chief ruler of the roman fate,
Whom they have seen lead captive Kings before
From wild Hyrcania, and the Indian shore,
Shall they now see cast down, and broke by fate,
Measuring themselves by Pompey's begging state,
With Rome, and Italy aspire t'enherit?
Thou can spoke nothing worth thy fate, and spirit:
Their ignorance in the Roman tongue requires
That thou in tears should utter thy desires.
Would thou so wound our shame, that not from Rome,
But Parthia the revenge of Rome should come?
She chose thee General of her civil war.
Why do thou spread her loss, and wounds so far
As Scythia, and teach Parthia to go
Beyond her bound? Rome shall in her deep woe
This special comfort loose of bringing in
No Kings, but serving her own citizen.
Can thou delight from farthest parts to come
Leading fierce nations against the walls of Rome,
Following those Eagles, that slain Crassus lost?
That only King, that from the Aemathian ( a) host
Was absent (fortune did his favor guide)
Will he provoke the Conquerers strong side,
And join with vanquished Pompey, think you? no,
We have no cause to trust that nation so,
The people all borne in the Northren cold
Are lovers of the war, hardy, and bold;
But in the East, and Southern climes, the heat
Of gentle air makes them effoeminate.
Their men soft clothing; and loose garments wear.
Parthians upon the Median fields, and where
Along Sarma^ian plains swift Tigris flows,
By liberty of flight can by no foes
Be vanquished; but where the earth does swell,
Ore craggy hills they cannot clime so well:
Nor in dark places can they use the bow:
Nor dare they swim torrents that swiftly flow:
Nor in the field with blood all over died
Dare they the dust, and Summer Sun abide;
No rams, nor engines can the Parthian use,
Nor fill the trenches up: when he pursues,
What ere is arrow-profe, serves for a wall,
Slight are their wa^s, their fights like flyings all;
They straggling fight, apter to fly then stand.
Their arrows venomed are, nor close at hand
Dare they maintain a fight: far off with bows
They shoot, and where it lists the wind bestows
Their woun^s; but fight of sword does strength require^
All manly nations the sword-fight desire.
At the first on set they will disarmed be,
And when their quivers are exhaust, must flee;
Their trust in poison is, not in their hands.
Think thou them men, Pompey, that dare not stand
Without such helps, the hazard of a fight?
Can such base aid be worth so long a flight?
For thee so far from thine own land to die,
And under barbarous earth entombed to ly
In a base monument, yet such a one
As will he envied, Crassus having none?
Thy state is not so pitiful: for death
(Nor feared by men) ends all: but loss of breath
Under that wicked King Cornelia fears not.
The Venus of those barbarous courts who hears not?
Which like bruit beasts all wedlocks rites exile,
And with wives numberless all laws defile:
Th'incestuous beds abhorred secrets ly
Open to a thousand concubines; raised high
With wine, and banqueting, the King refraines
No lawless lust, though nere so full of stains:
The embraces of so many women can
Not all the night tire one insatiate man;
In Kings incestuous beds their sisters ly,
And mothers, which should names unstained be.
O^dipus woeful tale condemns alone
Thebes of a crime, though ignorantly done:
But there how often does the Parthian King
Arsacides from such foul incest spring?
What can be wickedness to him, that may
Defile his mother? shall Cornelia
Metellus noble progeny be led
The thousand'th wife to a Barbarians bed?
Yet none more often will the tyrant use
Then her: her husbands titles will infuse
A scornful lust: and, which will please him more,
He Will know that she was Crassus wife before,
And comes, (as fate did her to Parthia ow)
A captive for that former overthrow.
Think on that slaughter: 'twill not only bring
Shame, to have begged aid from that fatal King,
But to have made a civil war before;
For what will Caesar, and thy self be more
Accused by all, then that, while you two fought,
There could for Crassus no revenge be wrought?
Against Parthia all our armies should have gone:
And that no strength might want, from garrison
Our Northren lands should have bin freed each one,
Till treacherous ^usa, and proud Babylon
Had fallen for tombs upon our slaughtered men.
Of Parthian peace, fortune, we beg an end;
And, if Thessalia end the civil war,
Against the Parthian send thy Conqueror:
Of all the world I should rejoice alone
At Caesar's triumphs ore that nation.
When thou the cold Araxis streams have crossed,
Shall not the slaughtered Crassus mourning ghost
Vpbraide thee? thou, whom our vnbury'd ghosts
Long since expected with revenging hosts,
Come thou to sue for peace? besides thine eyes
Sad monuments of Roman tragoedyes
Shall greet the walls, on which our Captains heads
Were fixed: where bodies of our soldiers dead
Euphrates swallowed and swift Tigris stream
Rolled back again to earth. If thou to them
Can sue, why, Pompey, do thou scorn to pray
To Caesar sitting in Thessalia?
Look rather upon Romes confederates,
And if thou do suspect the Southern states,
And Iuba's falsehood, go to Ptolomey;
Egypt by Lybian quickesands Westerly
Is guarded: on the East fall Niles seven floods,
To the sea; a land content with her own goods;
A land that needs nor rain, nor merchandise,
So much on only Nilus she relyes.
Young Ptolemey reigns there, that owes his crown
To thee, once left to thy tuition.
Fear not the shadow of a name: no hurt
Can be in tender years: in an old court
Let not religion, faith, or trust be sought:
Men used to scepters are ashamed of naught:
The mildest government a kingdom finds
Under new kings. This speech quite turned their minds.
How are despairing states most free and bold?
Pompey's opinion is by all controlled.
They leave Cilicia, and to Cyprus move
Their course. No land does Venus better love
Still mindful of her birth (if we at all
Think gods were borne, or had original)
Pompey departing thence his course began bend
Round all the Cyprian rocks, that Southward tend,
And got into the enterposed maine;
Nor by the nights weak light could he attain
Mount Casius; but with struggling sails, and strength
A lower port of Egypt reached at length,
Where parted Nilus greatest channel flows
And to the Ocean at Pelusium goes.
That time was come, wherein just Libra weighes
The hours, and makes the nights aequall with days:
Then pays the winter nights hours, which the spring
Had taken away. They, hearing that the King
Was at mount Casius, thither make repair:
The Sun yet was not down, the wind blew fair.
The s^outs along the shore post to the court,
And fill their fearful ears with the report
Of Pompey's coming; though their time were small
For counsel, yet the Egyptian monsters all
Were met: amongst whom Achoreus began,
Whom age taught modesty, a mild old man,
(Him superstitious Memphys, that observed
The increase of Nile, brought forth: while he had served
At the gods altars, not one Apis lived
Five changes of the Moon) his speech revived
The sacred league of Ptolomey's dead father,
And Pompey's merits; but Photinus rather
A counselor for tyrants, with base breath
Durst thus presume to counsel Pompey's death.
Justice, and truth have many guilty made:
Faith suffers, Ptolomey, when it would aid
Whom fortune hates; join with the gods, and fate,
And fly the wretched, love the fortunate:
Profit from honesty differs as far
As does the sea from fire, earth from a star.
Crowns loose their power, whilst only good they do:
Respect of right all strength does overthrow.
It Is mischeifes freedom, and th'vncurbed sword,
That does to hated crowns safety afford.
No cruel actions, unless thoroughly done,
Are done secure; let him from court be gone,
That would be good; virtue, and soveraignety
Do not agree; nothing but fear shall he,
That is ashamed a tyrant to be deemed.
Let Pompey rue that he thy years contemned,
Thinking thou could, not from thy shore drive back
A conquered man: let not a stranger take,
Thy scepter: if thou would resign thy reign,
The have nearer pledges, give the crown again
To thy condemned sister: lets keep free
Our Egypt from the Roman slavery.
Shall we, that did not in the war adhere
To Pompey, now provoke the Conqueror?
Vagrant through all the world, hopeless of all
He seeks with what lands ruin he may fall:
Haunted with civil war slain ghosts he flies
Not only Caesar, but the Senates eyes,
Whose greater part feeds fowls in Thessaly.
He fears those nations, whom he left to die
Mixed in one bloody field: he fears those Kings,
Whose hapless states his fall to ruin brings.
Now guilty of the loss, harbored by none,
To us, whom yet he has not overthrown,
He seeks; a greater cause, o Ptolomey,
Have we to accuse Pompey; why would he
Our quiet land stain with the crime of war,
And make us hated by the Conqueror?
Why does thy misery choose our land alone
To bring Pharsalias fortune, and thine own
Feared punishment into? we bear a blame
Already, (and our swords must purge the same,)
In that, because the Senate moov'd by thee
Gave us a crown, we wished thy victory.
This sword, now drawn by fate, we did provide
To wound not Pompeys, but the conquered side,
And rather could we wish for Caesar's head:
But whither all are carried, we are led.
Make thou a doubt of our necessity
To kill thee now we may? what strength have we
For thee to trust, wretch'd man? thou sawst our men
Unarmed, to plow soft mould scarce able, when
Nile ebbed. Our kingdoms strength it is fit that we
Try, and confess; can thou, o Ptolomey
Raise Pompey's ruin, under which great Rome
It self is fallen so low? or dare thou come
To stir the ashes of Pharsalia,
And such a war upon thy kingdom draw?
We to no side, before the battle, clest;
Shall we now cleave to Pompey's, which is left
By the whole world? provoking the known fates,
And feared strength of Caesar? wretched states
Aid they, that did their prosperous times attend.
No faith ere chose a miserable friend.
The mischief pleased them all: the young king proud
Of this strange honor, that his men allowed
Him to command so wonderful a thing,
Chose out Ach^llas for the managing.
Where the false land in Casian sands does ly
Stretched out, and fords witness the Syrtes nigh,
Weapons, and parteners of his murdrous guile
He puts in a small boat. Oh gods, durst Nile,
Durst barbarous Memphis, and th'effoeminate men
Of soft Canopus harbor such a spleen?
Has civil war deprest the world so low?
Or are the Roman fates dejected so?
Are Pharian swords admitted, and a room
For Egypt left into this war to come?
In this at least ye civil wars be true:
Bring well known hands, keep foreign beasts from you,
If Pompey's far-fam'd name deserve to be
The crime of Caesar. Fears not Ptolomey
The ruin of that name? or when the sky
Thunders, dare thou, effoeminate Ptolomey,
Insert thy profane hands? to terrify
Thee, King, a Romans name enough should be,
Without that worth that did the world control:
Rode thrice in triumph to the capitol:
That governed Kings: that led the Senates war:
And son in law was to the Conqueror.
Why with thy sword our bowels do thou wound?
Thou do not know, proud boy, upon what ground
Thy fortunes stand, thou now can claim no right
To Aegypts scepter: for in civil fight
He Is fallen, that Aegypts crown on thee bestowed.
Now Pompey's ship took down her sails, and: ^ow'd
Toward the shore. The wicked band drew ( b) near
In a small two-oar'd boat; with fained cheer
Tell him the Kingdom at his service stands;
And f^ining that the shore for shelues, and sands
Could not approached be by ships so great,
Into their little boat they do entreat
He would descend. If by the fates decree,
And everlasting laws of destiny
Pompey condemned to that wretched end
Had not bin forced to shore; ( c) none of his friends
VVanted resages of the dire event.
For had their faith been pure, if they had meant
Their Scepter giver truly t'entertaine
In Court, th Egyptian King with all his train
And fleet had come. Pompey to fate gives way,
And, bid to leave his navy, does obey,
Preferring ( d) death before base fear. Into
The enemies boats Cornelia feign would go,
Now more impatient to be separate
From her dear Lord, because she fears his fate.
Stay wife, and son, and far from shore (quoth he)
Behold my fortune: and in this neck try
The tyrants faith: but deaf to his commands
Frantic Cornelia wrings her woeful hands:
VVhither without me go thou, cruel man?
Remoov'd from Thessaly, must I again
Be left? still fatal have our partings bin
In flight thou needed'st not to have touched in
At Lesbos, but there still have let me be,
If thou entend I nere shall land with thee,
Only at sea thy sad companion.
Thus all in vain Cornelia making moan
Upon the ships foredecke stood looking ore,
So full of grief, and fear, she could not more
Look after him, nor turn her eyes away.
Doubtful of his success the fleet did stay,
Not fearing swords, nor force, nor treachery.
But lest great Pompey should submissiuely
Adore that scepter that himself bestowed.
Septimius then a Roman soldier bowed,
Saluting Pompey from the Egyptian boat,
Who (oh Heavens shame) leaving his pile, had got
A Barbarous partizan, one of the guard
To Aegypts King: fierce unrelenting hard,
Bloody as any beast Who would not then
Have thought that fortune meant to favor men,
When she had kept this impious sword so far
From Thessaly, and stayed from civil war
This hand? but she disposed the swords (alas)
That civil mischeife might in every place
Be done. A tale the Conquerors to shame
It was, the gods eternal blush, and blame,
A Roman sword should by a King be led,
And the Egyptian boy reach Pompey's head
With his own sword. What fame shall future time
Give thee Septimius? or how style thy crime,
That Brutus act as parricidall blame?
And now the ending hour of Pompey came:
Putting himself into the monsters (e) hands
He went aboard their boat; the murdrous bands
Straight draw; great Pompey seeing their drawn swords,
Covers his face, disdaining to spend words,
Or looks on such a fate, and shut his eyes,
Containing his great spirit, lest words might rise,
Or tears, his everlasting fame to taint.
But when Achillas murdring weapons point.
Had pierced his side, scorning the villains pride
No groans he gave: great, like himself he died
With vnstirr'd breast, and thus in secret spoke;
All times, that mention of Romes labors make,
And future ages through the world will see
This fact, and Aegypts base disloyalty.
Maintain thine honor now, the fates to thee
Through the whole life gave long prosperity;
And the world knows not (unless now they see)
How Pompey's spirit could bea^e adversity.
Blush not that such base hands thy death afford;
But think, who ever strike, it is Caesar's sword.
Though they these limbs all torn, and scattered leave,
Yet am I happy, god; no god can reaue
My happiness; my fortunes, and my breath
Expire at once: nor wretched is my death.
Cornelia; and my son this slaughter see:
So much more patient let my sorrow be.
The more Cornelia, and my son approve
My dying constancy, the more they will love.
So well could he his dying spirits guide:
Such strength of mind had Pompey when he died.
But poor Cornelia, that had rather die
Then see that sight, with shreekings fills the sky:
It Was wicked I, dear Lord, that murdered thee:
For whilst at Lesbos thou turnd'st in to me,
Caesar had entered Aegypts shore; for who
But he, had power that horrid act to do?
What ere thou art, sent from the gods to kill,
Pleasing thine own revenge, or Caesar's will;
Thou know not, wretch, where Pompey's bowels be*
Thou strik'st with fury there, where conquered he
Desires thy stroke, now let him suffer more
Then his own death, and see my head before.
I am not guiltless from the crime of war,
The only wife following my Lord so far,
Fearelesse of camps, or seas; and conquered too
I took him in, which Monarchs durst not do.
Did I for this, husband, deserve to be
Left safe aboard? false Lord, why spar'st thou me?
Or thought thou life (thou dying) fit for me?
I Will find a death, though not from Ptolomey.
Oh sailors, let me leap down from the deck,
Or with these twisted shrowdes to break my neck:
Or let some worthy friend of Pompey's now
Here sheath his weapon, and for Pompey do
An act, that h^e'll impute to Caesar's hate.
Why do you hinder my desired fate?
Husband, thou liv'st, Cornelia has not power
Yet of her self; they hinder my deaths hour
(And there she sounds) to be the Conquerours pray;
The fearful fleet hoist sails, and post away.
But when great Pompey fell, that sacred face,
And honored visage kept his former grace
Though angry with the gods* deaths utmost hate
Changed not his visage, and majesticke state,
As they confess, that his rent neck did see.
For stern Se^timius in that cruelty
Finds out an act more cruel: to uncover
His face, he cuts the cloth, that was cast over,
Invading halfe-dead Pompey's breathing face,
His dying neck acrosse the bords he lays;
Then cu^s the nerves, and I veins, the twisted bones
He breaks the art to whip off heads at once
Was not yet found* But when the head was torn
Off from the trunk, 'twas by Achillas borne.
D^generate Roman, base Septimius,
Used in an under office, could thou thus
Basely cut off great Pompey's sacred head
To be (oh shame) by another carried?
Young Ptolomey to know great Pompey's face,
Those hairs, that kings have honored, whose curled grace
Adorned his noble front, strokes with his hands;
Fixed on a pole the head of Pompey stands,
Whilst yet his lips with throbbing murmurs shook,
His eyes vnclos'd, and lively was his look:
That head that still determined war, and peace,
That ruled the Senate, laws, and suffrages;
Romes fortune in that face took greatest pride.
Nor was the wicked tyrant satisfied
With sight: but for memorial of the fact,
Dire arts the heads corruption must extract,
The brain is taken out, dried is the skin,
The noisome moisture purged from within,
Medicines make solid, and preserve the face.
Degenerate issue, last of Lagus race,
Whom thy incestuous sister shall depose;
When sacred vaults the Macedon enclose,
When dust of Kings in sumptuous buildings lies,
And the ignoble race of Ptolomey's
In Pyramids, and rich Mausolean graves
Unjustly rest, must Pompey by the waves
And headless trunk against the shore be swept?
Was it too great a trouble to have kept
The carcass whole for Caesar? this sad date
Did fortune give to Pompey's prosperous state;
By such a death as this to pull him down
From such an height: heaping all plagues in one
Sad day, which he so many years had bin
Free from: nor yet had Pompey ever seen
Joy mixed with woe: no god his prosperous state
Did ere disturb, none helped his wretched fate;
But once for all with a differring hand
Did fortune pay him; torn upon the sand,
Salt water playing in his wounds, the mock
Of seas he lies, and beat against every rock:
No figure left of him, it is note enough
To know great Pompey, that his head is off.
But fates, ere Caesar on that shore arrive,
A sudden funeral to Pompey give,
Lest he in none, or in a better tomb
Should ly. To th'shore did fearful Codrus come
Out of his lurking hole, that was before
Great Pompey's quaestors, and from Cyprus shore
Had followed him; he by the shades of night
Durst go (true love had vanquished terror quite)
To find his slaughtered Lord, along the sand,
And through the waves, to bring the trunk to land.
Faint light through dusky clouds sad Cynthia gave;
But different colored from the foamy wave
The trunk appeard; which Codrus catching straight
When the waves ebbed, but tired with the weight
Expects their flow to help him, and so bore
The trunk to land, and placed it on the shore;
Then falling down, bathing the wounds in tears,
Thus to the gods he speaks, and clouded stars.
Fortune, no costly pile with odours filled
Thy Pompey craves, nor that his hearse may yield
Precious Arabian fumes to fill the air,
Nor that the pious Roman neekes should bear
Their countries father forth, nor to adorn
A funeral pomp old tryumphs should be borne*
No funeral songs, nor that his troops the while
March a dead march about their generals pyle.
Great Pompey but a base Plebejan Beer,
That his torn limbs may carry to dry fire.
Let him not want wood, and a burner, though
But mean, and let it be, o gods, enough
That with loose hair Cornelia does not stand
To take her last embrace, and then command
To fire the pile, from this last funeral rite
She is away, yet hardly out of sight,
This said, far off a little fire he kenn'd
Burn a neglected hearse, watched by no friend.
Thither he goes, and taking thence a part
Of fire, and halfe-burn'd sticks, who ere thou art
Neglected ghost, dear to no friend, (quoth he)
But happier then great Pompey, pardon me,
(If any knowledge after death remains)
That by a strangers hand thy hearse susteines
This wrong; I know thou yeild'st, and castendure
For Pompey's sake, this loss of sepulture,
And art ashamed of funeral rites, whilst he
Lies an unburied ghost. Then speedily
With his arms full of fire poor Codrus ran
To find the trunk, which to the shore again
The waves had beat; then off the sand he wipes,
And gathering up the ribs of broken ships,
He lays them in a ditch; on no hew'n trees
Or well built pyle the noblebody lies:
Fire brought, not vnderbuilt great Pompey takes.
Then sitting by the fire thus Codrus speaks.
Romes greatest Lord, the only majesty
Of Italy, if worse this burial be
Then none at all, then floating on the sea,
Avert thy Manes, and great ghost from me.
It Is fortunes injury that makes this right,
Lest fish, or foul, or beast, or Caesar's spite
Might wrong thy coarse, accept this little brand
Of fire since kindled by a Roman hand.
If fortune grant recourse to Italy,
Not here shall these so sacred ashes ly:
But from my hand Cornelia shall take,
And vrne thy relics, until then we will make
Thy burialls mark upon the shore, that who
So ere would pacify thy ghost, and do
Full right^ of funeral, may find out so
The bodies ashes, and the sands may know,
Whither to bring thy head. Thus having spoke
He does with fuel the weak flame provoke;
Pompey dissolved, his fat distilling fed
The little fire; and now day promised
By bright Aurora, dimmed the stars weak lights.
Codrus abruptly leaves the funeral rites,
And runs, himself about the shore to hide.
What mischeife fear thou (fool) for such a deed;
Which long tongued fame for ever shall renown!
Caesar himself shall praise what thou have done
To Pompey's body. Go then void of dread:
Confess the funeral, and require his head.
An end of dutious works piety makes.
The bones halfe-burnt, and yet dissolved he takes,
Still full of nerves, and unconsumed marrow;
Quenching them in seawater, in a narrow
Piece of the earth together lays them down:
Then lest the ashes should abroad be blown
By the winds force, he lays a stone above;
And lest some sailer should that stone remove
To tie his cable, with a cole-burnt staff
Upon the top he writes this Epitaph.
Here Pompey lies, fortune, this stone we call
His tomb: in which, rather then none at all,
Caesar would have him ly. Why in a room
So small, rash hand, includ'st thou Pompey's tomb,
And shutt'st up his great ghost? as far he lies
As the earths farthest shore extended is.
Romes mighty name, and Empires utmost bound
Is Pompey's tomb; this mark for shame confound
The shame of heaven; if Alcides ly
Over all Oete, and all Nysa be
Great Bacchus monument, why should one stone
In Egypt stand for Pompey's tomb alone?
Did no one piece of earth thy name express,
All Aegypts land, Pompey, thou might possess.
Let us be still deceived, and still for fear
Of thee, to tread on Aegypts land forbear,
But if that sacred name must grace a stone,
Write his each deed, and glorious action:
The Alpine war of rebel Lepidus;
The conquest of revolt Ser^ortus
(The Consul being called home:) those triumphs note,
Which he but gentleman of Rome had got:
Cilician Pirates tamed: traffic made free:
Barbarian kingdoms conquered all that ly
Under the East, and North; with this make known
How still from war he took a peaceful gown
Contented with three triumphs, he to Rome
His other conquests did forgive; what tomb
Can hold all this? his ashes in this grave
No titles, nor triumphant stories have.
That name, that temples lofty roofes, and high
Triumphall arches decked with victory
Were wont to beat, now near the lowest sand
A small grave shows, which strangers cannot stand
Upright to read, which (if it be not shown)
The Roman travelers pass by unknown,
Egypt, whom civil fate has guilty made
'T was not in vain the Sibylls verse forbad
A Roman Niles Pelusian mouth to touch,
Or once his summer-swelled banks approach.
How shall I curse thee for this impious deed?
May Nile run back, and stay at his first head,
May thy unfruitful fields want winter rain,
And all like Aethiops barren sands remain.
We let thy Isis in Romes temples dwell,
Thy deify'd dogs, and sorrow causing bell:
Osiris, whom thou show, while thou weep'st,
A man; our god in dust thou Egypt keep'st.
And thou that gave the tirant temples, Rome,
Has not yet fetched thy Pompey's ashes home:
His ghost ly^s yet exiled If Caesar's frowns
That first age feared, yet now thy Pompey's bones
Bring home, o Rome, if yet on that cursed land
Not turned by the waves, the marks do stand.
VVhoo'll fear that grave? whoo'll fear to take from thence
Ashes deserving temples? that offense
Eni^ine me (Rome) to do, my bosom use:
Oh too too happy I, if Rome would choose
My hand to open that base sepulcher,
And his dear ashes hither to transfer.
Perchance when Rome from oracles would crave
An end of dearth, or pestilence to have,
Of too much fire, or earthquakes, thou to Rome
Shall by the gods expressed appointment come,
Thy ashes borne by the high Priest For who
To s^orch'd Siene in lunes heat can go,
In view of Nile, or Pharian ^hebes descry
Under the showry Plejades still dry;
What Fasterne Merchant traffiquing resorts
To the red sea, or rich Arabian ports,
But at thy graves ever adored stone,
And ashes (though perchance scattered upon
The sands) will stay, thy ghost to pacificy,
Before the Casian love preferring thee?
This little grave can nothing hurt thy name;
Thy ghost would be of a fair cheaper fame
Shrouded in gold, and temples: fortune now
Bears more divinity entombed so low;
The sea-beat stone is more maiesticke far
Then the proud altars of the Conqueror.
Some worship gods dwelling in dusky clay,
That to Tarpejan Jove refuse to pray.
Twill vantage thee hereafter in thy grave
No polisht marbles lasting works to have.
This little dust will quickly scattered ly:
The tomb will fall, proofs of thy death will die:
And then a happyer age will come, when none
Shall credit give to those that show the stone;
As false shall Egypt seem in times to come
(As Crete of Jove's) to boast of Pompey's tomb.
FINIS Libri Octavs.
Annotations on the eight Book.
(a) Pompey in his flight from Larissa came all along the Tempe to the shore,
and lodged that night in the small cottage of a fisherman; about morning he
went to sea in a little boat, and sailing along by the shore met with a ship
of greater burden, of which one Peticius a Roman was capt^i^e, who knowing
Pompey, received him, and transported him to Lesbos, where Cornelia lay.
Plutarch. Ap^ian.

(b) When their boat drew near to Pompey, Septimus arose, who had once served
as a Tribune under Pompey) and in the Roman language saluted his general, and
welcomed him in the Kings name. Achillas complemented with him in the Greek
tongue, and desires him to enter into his boat, by reason that the shelues,
and sands would not afford a passage to his ship.

(c) Those that attended Pompey, seeing his entertainment not Royal, no^
Magnificent, but that a few only in a small boat were sent to meet him, began
to suspect the treason and counseled Pompey to out to sea, and forsake that
sh^re whilst yet he was free from danger.

(d) Pompey disdaining to appear fearful, (although he were full of ill
presages) came into Achillas his boat, as how is invited, and taking his leave
of his wife, and son Sextus Pompejus, he repeated these two Iambike verses of
Sophocles. (...)
(...)
These were the last words he spoke to his friends, and so entered into the
boat, where Achillas was.

(e) When Pompey was now far from his ship, and perceived no courteous
entertainment in the boat, he looked upon Septimius and thus spoke; Have not
I known thee heretofore my fellow soldier? Septimius disdaining to answer
him at all only nodded his head to him, and when Pompey was rising out of the
boat, Septimius first run him through with his sword.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The Ninth Book.
The Argument.
Pompey's departed spirit to heaven ascends.
His wife, and sons lament; Cato commends
His worthy life: checks the Cilicians,
And marching are the scorched Libyan sands
To Iuba's Kingdom, with strong patience
Endures the heat, the Southwinds violence
And killing serpents venom. Caesar sees
Renowned Troys defaced antiquities,
To Egypt comes, and with dissembling breath
Complains, and weeps for noble Pompey's death.
IN Pharian coals his ghost could not remain,
Nor those few ashes his great spirit contain.
Out from the grave he issues, and forsakes
Th'vnworthy fire, and half burnt limbs, and takes
Up to the convexe of the sky his flight,
Where with black air the starry poles do meet.
The space betwixt the regions of the moon,
And earth, halfe-deify'd souls possess alone,
Whom fiery worth, in guiltless lives, has taught
To brook the lower part of heaven, and brought
Them to th'aeternall sphaeres, which not they hold,
That are with incense buried, tomb'd in gold.
There filled with true light, with wondering eyes
The wandering planets, and first stars he sees.
He sees our day involved in midst of night,
And laughes at his torn trunkes ridiculous plight.
Then ore the Aemathian fields, his scattered fleet:
And bloody Caesar's troops he took his flight:
And with revenge for these dire facts possessed
Cato^s bold heart, and brutus noble breast.
Cato, while chance was ( a) doubtful, and at stake
Whom civil war Lord of the world would make,
Then hated Pompey, though with Pompey he
(Led by the Senate, and Romes Auspicy)
Had fought, but when Pharsaliaes field was tried,
He altogether favored Pompey's side.
His country wanting a protector then
He took, and cheered the trembling hearts of men:
And ^utting swords in fearful hands again
Made civil war, neither for hope of reign,
Nor fear of bondage; naught at all in war
For his own sake did he; his forces are
Since Pompey's death, alone for liberty;
Which lest the speed of Caesar's victory
Should seize upon, being dispersed ore
The coast, he sails unto Corcyra's ( b) shore,
And in a thousand ships carries away
The conquered remnant of Pharsalia.
Who would have thou^ht so great a fleet had held
All flying men? that conquered ships had filled
The straightened seas? from thence they sail away
To ghost-fill'd Taenarus, and long Males;
Thence to Cytherus: Boreas blowing fair
Crete flies: and getting a good sea they clear
The Cretan coast Phycus, that durst deny
Their men to land, they sack deservedly.
And thence along the deep, while fair winds blow*
Unto thy shore, oh Palinurus, go:
(For not alone does our Italian sea
Keep monuments of thee, but Libya
Can witness well calm harbors once did please
Thy Phrygian master) when upon the seas
Descrying sh^p^ afar, they began to fear
Whether the men their foes, or partners were:
Caesar's known speed gave them just cause to fear,
And still suspect his coming every where.
But those sad ships brought grief, and woes, and cries
Able to draw soft tears from Catoes eyes:
For after that Cornelia all in vain
(^est Pompey's t^unke beat from the shore again
Should floate at sea by prayers had strived to draw
From flight the sailers, and her son in law,
When from the shore that little fire descried
His most v^worthy funeral, she cried,
Seemed I not worthy then, fortune, to thee
To light my husbands funeral fire, and ly
Stretched out on his cold limbs, burn his torn hairs,
And gathering his sea-scatterd limbs, with tears
To bath each wound? with bones, and ashes hot
To fi^l my lap, and in the temples put
The sad remainder of his funeral?
That fir's no honor to his hearse at all.
Besides perhaps some hands of Egypt now
This loathed office to his ashes do.
Well did the Crassi's ashes naked ly,
For by the gods far greater cruelty
Is Pompey burnt. Still shall my woes appear
In the same shape? and shall I nere interre
My slaughtered Lords? and at full v^nes lament?
What need'st thou tomb, or any instrument
Of sorrow, wretch? does not thy breast contain
Thy Pompey, and his image still remain
Within thee? let those wives that mean to live
After their Lords, vrnes to their ashes give.
But yet the fire, that lends you envious light
From Aegypts shore, brings nothing to my sight
Of thee, dear Pompey: now the flame is gone,
The vanished smoke bears to the rising Sun
Pompey aloft: the winds unwillingly
Bear us from thence, yet is no land to me
(Though triumphed by my Lord as Conqueror)
Nor chariot decked with laurel half so dear.
My breast has quite forgot his happiness,
And loves that Pompey, whom Niles shores possess,
Feign would ^ stay under this guilty clime:
The land's enobled by so great a crime.
I would not leave (believe me) Aegypts shore.
Sextus, try thou the chance of war, and ore
The spacious world thy fathers colors bear:
This his last will was trusted to my care,
When me of breath deaths fatal hour shall reaue,
To you, my sons, this civil war I leave;
And let not Caesar's race in quiet ^eigne,
VVhilest any of our stock on earth remain.
Solicit kingdoms, and free powerful towns
By my names fame: these are the factions,
These are the arms I leave; what Pompey ere
Would go to sea, shall find a navy there.
My heirs may stir war in what land they will.
Be but courageous, and remember still
Your fathers lawful power. Serve under none
But Cato (whilst he fights for Rome) alone.
I have performed thy trust, done thy behest
Dear Lord, thy cunning did prevail, and lest
False I those words of trust should nere deliver,
Deceived I lived Now Pompey, wheresoever
The art gone, through hell, if any hell there be,
Or empty Chaos, I will follow thee;
How long my life's decreed I do not know,
If long, I Will punish it for lasting so:
For not expiring when it first did see
Thy wounds, with sorrow broken it shall die.
It shall dissolve in tears: no halter, sword,
Or praecip^ce shall death to me afford.
It were a shame for me, now thou art gone,
Not to have power to dye with grief alone.
This said, and covering with a veil her head,
Under the hatches she resolved to lead
A life in darkness: nearly hugging woe
She feeds on tears, and for her husband now
Embraces grief. The noise of stormy wind,
Nor cries of fearful sa^lers move her mind:
Her hope contrary to the sailers is,
Composed for death, and wishing storms she lies.
They first arrived on Cyprus foamy shore.
From thence a mild Eastwinde commanding bore
Their ships to Catoes Libyan camp; as still
A doubtful mind do sad presages fill,
Cneius from shore spying his fathers train,
And brother, running to the sea amain,
Where is our father, brother? speak (quoth he)
Lives the worlds head, and honor, or are we
Undone, and Pompey to the shades below
Has borne Romes fate? he answers, happy thou*
Whom fate into another coast dispersed;
Thou, brother, this dire mischeife only hear'st:
Mine eyes are guilty of a fathers death,
Nor did he loose by Caesar's arms his breath,
Nor of his fall a worthy author found.
By the false tyrant of Niles impious ground,
Trusting the gods of hospitality,
And his own bounty to old Ptolomey,
In recompense of kingdoms given he died
I saw them wound our noble fathers side;
And thinking Aegypts King durst not have done
So much, I thought Caesar had stood upon
The shore of Nile. But not our fathers wounds,
Nor blood so shed so much my heart confounds,
As that his head, which mounted on a spear
Aloft we saw, they through their cities bear:
Which (as they say) is kept for Caesar's eye:
The tyrant seeks his guilt to testify.
For whether dogs, or fowls devouring maw
Consumed his trunk, or that small fire we saw
Dissolved it by stealth, I do not know.
What ere injurious fate to that could do,
I did forgive the gods that crime, and wept
For that part only, which the tyrant kept.
When C^^ius heard these words; his inward woe
In passionate sighs, and tears he could not show;
But thus inflamed with pious rage began speak,
Lanch forth the fleet, sailers, with speed, and break
Through the cross winds a passage with the oar,
Brave Captains follow me, never before
Knew civil war more worthy ends then these,
T'interre vnbury'd Manes, and appease
Pompey with slaughter of th'effaeminate boy.
Why should not I the Egyptians towers destroy?
And from the temples Alexander take,
To drown his hearse in Marcotis lake?
In Nile Amasis, and those Kings with him
Dug up from their Pyramides shall swim.
All tombs shall rue Pompey's no sepulcher:
Isis (their goddess now) I Will disinter,
Osiris linnen-cover'd shrine disperse,
And kill god A^is over Pompey's hearse.
Upon a pyle of gods I Will burn his head;
Thus shall the land by me be punished;
I will not leave a man to till those fields,
Nor take the profit, that Niles flowing yields.
The gods, and people banished, and gone,
Thou, father shall possess Egypt alone.
This said, to lanch the fleet forth he assayes,
But Cato stills the young man's wrath with praise.
Now ore the shore when Pompey's death was known
The sky was pierced with lamentation:
A grief not seen, not pararell'd at all,
That common people mourn a great man's fall.
But when Cornelia quite exhaust with tears
Was seen to land with torn disheveled hairs,
Their troubled lamentations sounded more.
Cornelia landed on a friendly shore,
Gathering the garments, and triumphall weeds
Of hapless Pompey, that expressed his deeds,
And ancient trophes, painted robes, and shield,
That thrice great Jove in triumph had beheld,
Into the funeral fire she threw them all;
Such was her lords imagined funeral.
Example from her piety all take,
And funeral fires all ore the shore they make
To Appease the ghosts slain in Pharsalia.
So when the shepherds of Apulia
Make winter fires on their ba^e-eaten ground
To spring their grass again; a glistering round
The Vulturs arms, and high Garganus yields,
And hot Matinus bullocke-pasture fields.
But not more pleasing was it to Pompey's spirit
That all the people rail at heaven, and twit
The gods with Pompey, then what Cato spoke,
Few words, but from a truth-fill'd breast they broke.
A Roman's dead, not like our ancestry
To know the rule of right, but good (quoth he)
In this truth scorning age; one powerful grown
Not wronging liberty: the people prone
To serve, he only private still remained;
He swayed the Senate, but the Senate reigned.
Naught claimed he by the sword, but wished what he
VVish'd most, the Senates freedom to deny,
Great wealth he had, but to the public hoord
He brought far more then he retained; the sword
He took, but knew the time to lay it down.
Armed he loved peace, though arms before the gown
He still preferred; and ever pleased was he
Entering, or leaving his authority.
A chaste vnriotted house, and never stained
With her Lords fortune, to all lands remained
His name renowned, which much availed Rome.
True liberty long since was gone, when home
Sylla, and Marius came: but Pompey dead,
Even freedoms shadow is quite vanished.
No Senates face, no color will remain
Of power; none now will be ashamed to reign.
Oh happy man, whom death, when conquered caught,
And Aegypts guilt swords to be wished for brought.
Perchance thou could have lived in C^sars state.
To know the way to die is man's best fate,
His next to be compelled; and such to me
(If captived now) fortune, let Iuba be;
Not to be kept to show the enemy
I do not beg, so headless kept I be.
More honor from these words the noble ghost
Received, then if the Roman bars should boast
Hit praise. Now mutinous the soldiers are,
Since Pompey's death grown weary of the war;
In which broiles Tarcho Catoes side to quit
Took up the colors, who prepared for flight
With all his ships was chid by Cato so.
Never reclaimed Cilician, would thou go
To thy old theft at sea? is Pompey slain,
And thou returned to Pyracy again?
Then round about he on each man began look
Among whom one boldly thus to Cato spoke
Not hiding his intent, 'twas not the love
Of civil war, but Pompey, first did move
Our arms, (execuse us Cato) we adhaer'd
By favor, now he, whom the world preferred
Before her peace, is dead, our cause is gone;
Now lets return to our left mansion,
Our household gods, and children dear to see.
For what can civil wars conclusion be,
If not Pharsaliaes field, nor Pompeys death?
Our time of life is spent; now let us breath
Our last in peace: let our old age provide
Our funeral pyles, which civil war denied
Two greatest Captains. For no barbarous,
Or cruel yoke will fortune lav on us.
No Scythian, nor Armenian tyranny.
The subjects of Romes gowned state are we.
He that was second, Pompey being alive,
Is first with us: the highest place we give
His sacred name, He whom wars fortunes make,
Shall be our lord, no general we will take.
Unto the war we followed thee alone;
We'll follow fate, Pompey, now thou art gone.
Nor have we cause to hope for good success,
Since Caesar's fortune now does all possess.
The Aemathian strength is by his victory
Dispersed we loose his mercy; only he
Has power, and will to spare the conquered.
Our civil war's a crime now Pompey's dead,
'Twas duty while he lived, If Cato, thou Will serve thy country still, lets follow now
Those Eagles, which the Roman Consuls keeps.
Thus having spoke aboard the ship he leapes
With all his company Romes fate had gone,
The people bent to slavery upon
The shore exclaim. But from a sacred breast
Cato to them at last these words expressed.
Fought you, young men, with Caesar's armies hopes
(No more true Roman, but Pompey an troops)
To gain a Lord? since for no Lord you fight,
But live to do your selves, not tyrants right,
Since your spent bloods can no man's rule procure,
But your own safety, you will not now endure
The wars; to live in bondage you desire
And for your slavish necks a yoke require.
Your danger's worthy now, the cause is good:
Pompey perhaps might have abused your blood.
And will you now, when liberty's so high,
To ai^le of Rome your swords, and throats deny?
Of three Lords fortune now has left but one.
Aegypts base King, and Parthian bows have done
More for the laws then you, (oh shame) go ye
Base men, and scorn^ the gift of Ptolomey;
Who will believe your hands could guilty be
Of any blood? he will rather think that ye
Were the first men, that from Pharsalia fled.
Go then securely: you have merited
Pardon in Caesar judgment, not subdew'd
By seidge, or open force. Oh servants lewd,
When your first master's dead, his heir you will serve.
Why would you not more then your lives deserve,
And pardons? ravish with you for a prey
Metellus daughter, Pompey's wife away,
And his two sons: the gift of Aegypt's King
Surpass, or could you to the tirant bring
My head no small reward 'twould render ye;
Then to good purpose have you followed me.
On then, and in our bloods your merit make;
It Is slothful treason a bare flight to take.
This speech of Cato straight recalls from seas
Their flyng ships; as when a swarm of Bees
Their honey comb^s, and barren wax forsake;
Nor hang in clusters now, but singly take
Their flight ith air, and taste not slothful grown)
The bitter Thyme: at sound of brass alone
Amazed they leave their flight: again approve
Their flowery taskes again their honey love.
Glad is the Shepherd on sweet Hyb^aes bill
To keep the riches of his cottage still.
So Catoes speech on their affections wrought,
And them to patience of a war had brought
And now their restless minds with toil t'inure,
And teach them warlike labors to endure,
With weary marches first their strength he tryes
Along the sands; their second labor is
To scale Cyrenes lofty walls: on whom
Cato no vengeance took, when overcome,
Though they against him shut their gates) to him
Revenge sufficient did their conquest seem.
He thence to Libyan (c) Iubaes kingdom goes;
But there the Syrts did nature interpose
Which Catoes dauntlesse virtue hopes to pass.
These Syrts, when all the worlds first structure was,
Nature as doubtful left twixt sea, and land;
(For neither sink they quite like seas to stand,
Nor yet like land with shores repel the maine,
But doubtful, and impassable remain,
A shelfe-spoil'd sea, a water covered land,
Where sounding waves let in by sands command.
This part of nature, Natures self disclam'd
As a vain work, and to no purpose framed)
Or once the deepe-drown'd Syrts were seas entire;
But burning Titan thence to feed his fire
Drew up those waves so near the torrid zone;
And now the water holds contention
With Phoebus drought: which by continuance spent,
The Syrts will grow a solid continent.
For now their topps but shallow waters hide,
The fading sea decays at every side,
When first the fleet began to launch from shore,
In his own kingdom did blacke-Auster rore:
Whose blasts the sea from ship invasion keep,
And from the Syrts far roll the wavy deep,
Or flatt the sea with thrown in heaps of sand.
Now the resistlesse winds the seas command,
Whose blasts of all spread sails, that fastened were
To the maine-mast quite robbed the mariner,
In vain the shrowdes to wind so violent
Deny their sails; beyond the ships extent,
Beyond the prow the swelled linnen's blown.
But where a man more provident was known,
That did his linen to the saileyard ty.
He quite despoiled of tackling presently
Was overcome. That fleet had far more ease.
Which on the deep was tossed with certain seas.
But all those ships, which had cut down their masts
TO avoid the fury of strong Austers blasts,
(As then the wind against the tide did strive)
Against the wind the conquering tide did drive.
Some ships the sea forsakes, whom straight the sands
Unseen surp^ise, whose state now doubtful stands:
Part of the ship upon firm ground does rest;
Part swimmes in water. Now the sea's oppressed
With flatts. The sands assault the Ocean,
And though strong Auster drive the waves amain,
They cannot master these high hills of sand.
On the Oceans back far from all countries stand
Heaps of dry dust not by the Ocean drowned.
The wretched sailers, though their ships on ground,
No shores can see. Part of the fleet this shallow
Detaines; the greater part their ^udders follow,
And safe by flight, by skillfull pylots aid
Are to Tritomaes standing poole convay'd.
This poole (they say) that god esteems dear,
Whose shrill shell trumpet seas, and shores do hear.
This Pallas loves, borne of the brain of Jove,
Who first on Libya trod. (The heart does prove
This land next heaven) she standing by the side,
Her face within the quiet water spied,
And gave herself from the loved poole a name
Tritonia. Here does the silent stream
Of dark oblivious Lethe gently fall,
That from hells Lethe takes original.
The waking dragons charge is near to these
The once robbed orchard of the Hesperides.
To rob old times of credit, the desire
Is spite, or truth from Poets to require.
A golden wood there was, whose yellow trees
Laden with wealthy fruit, stood bowed: of these
A dragon guardian was, which never slept,
And the bright wood a troop of Virgins kept.
Hither Alcides coming, did surprise
The wealth, and burden of those laden trees,
And leaving light their robbed boughs, did bring
Those glittering apples to the Argolian King.
Part of the fleet got off from hence again,
And from the Syr^es driven, did remain
Under great Pompey's eldest sons command
On this side Garamant is in rich land.
But Catoes virtue brooking no delay
Through unknown regions lead his troops away,
TO encompasse round the Syrts by land, for now
The stormy seas vnnavigable grow
In winter time: but storms desired are
To cool the temper of the sweltring air.
They fea^e no cold in Libya's scorched clime,
Nor too much heat, because in winter time.
Entering these barren sands thus Cato spoke;
You that have followed me, soldiers, and make
Freedom your only safety, settle now
Your minds with constancy to undergo
Virtues great work. We march ore barren fields,
Ore Sunburned regions, where no fountain yields
Water enough, where Titans heat abounds,
And killing serpents smeare the parched grounds.
Hard ways, but whom their falling countrey's cause
Through p^ths unknown, and amidst of Libya draws,
Who make no vows for their returning home,
But think of going only, let them come.
I would deceive no soldier, nor keep close
My fears to draw them on. Let only those
My followers be, whom dangers do invite,
Who think it brave, and Roman, in my sight
To Endure the worst of ills. He that would have
A su^ety for his safety, and ^^ine save
His loved life, let him be gone from me,
And find an easier way to slavery
Upon the sands whilst I first footing set,
Let me first suffer th'aires annoying heat:
Let serpents poisoned teeth first seize on me,
And in my f^te do you your dangers try.
Let him that sees me d^iming, water crave,
And plain of heat, wher^^ a shelter have,
Or when I ride before the foot, straight grow
Weary, if any by endurance know
Whether I go soldier, or general.
The ^ands, heat, thirst, and poisonous serpents, all
Are sweet to virtue: has things patience loves,
And sweetest still, when dearest, goodness proves.
These Libyan dangers only justify
The flight of men, thus their hot spirits he
With labors love* and virtue strived to fire*
Ma^^hing ore deserts never to retire
Se^ure he goes to Libya; gracing there
With his great name a little sepulcher.
If the old acc^unt we follow, Libya is
The world's third part: following the winds, and skies
A part of Europe* For not distant more
Then Scythian Tanais is Nilus shore
From Western Gades, where Europe Affricke flies,
And makes the Ocean room: but greater is
Asia then both. For as they both send forth
Libya from South, and Europe from the North
The Western wind: the Eastern wind alone
From Asia blows. That part that is fertile known
Of Libya, VVestward lies, but moisture lackes:
The North-winde dry with us, there stormy, takes
His flight but seldom thither. The rich soil:
No wealthy growing mineralls do spoil:
The earth corrupts into no brass, nor gold,
But keeps her natural, and perfect mold.
The Mauritanian men are rich alone
In Citron wood, of which no use was known
To them of old, contented with the shade.
Our axes first did that strange wood invade;
From far we fetch our tables, as our meat.
But in those parts about the Syrts, whose heat
Is violent, and scorching Sol too nere,
No corn can grow, no vines can prosper there,
Nor trees deep rooting take; the sandy ground.
Wants vital temper, and no care is found
Of Jove in that at all* the barren land
Through every season does unchanged stand
By natures negligence Yet this dull earth
Unto a few small herbs affords a birth,
Which are the hardy Nasamonians fare.
Near the sea coast they bleakely seated are,
Whom barbaraus Syrts with the worlds loss maintain
For spoil they still upon the sand remain.
And though no merchant trade with them, yet gold
They have, and still by shipwreck traffic hold
With all the world. This way did virtue bear
Cato along, the Soldiers could not fear
A storm by land, or think of blustering wind,
But there (alas) the Ocean's dangers find.
For more on land then sea the Southwindes rore.
About the Syrt, and hurt the land much more.
No rocks, nor mountains stand opposed there
To break his force, and turn him into air?
No well-growne oaks, no wood opposed stands;
The ground lies open all, free are the sands
To Aeols rage, which violently strong
Hurryes through the air a sandy cloud along.
Their greatest part of land the winds do bear
Into the air, which hangs not fixed there.
His house, and land the Nasamonian sees
Fly in the wind, their little cottages
Blown ore their heads into the air as high
As from a fire the smoke, and sparkles fly.
The mounted dust like smoke obscures the sky.
And then mo^e strong then usual did the blast
Assault our men; no soldier could stand fast;
No, nor the ground, ^n which they stood, could stay.
'T would shake the earth, and bear that land away
If Libya hollow were, or harder mould
The S^utherne winds in cavernes to enfold;
But ^^nce composed of loose, and fleeting sands
Resisting not, it bides; the lowest stands
Because the highest yields, helmets of men,
Their sheil^s, and piles the wind with fury then
Bereft them of, and through the VVelkin tossed.
That in some foreign far-remooved coast
Perchance by men was deemed a prodigy,
And nations feared arms falling from the sky,
Thinking those weapons rest from men, did f^ll
Down from the gods. So once I think that all
Our sacred sheilds to holy Numa were,
Which now our choice Patritian shoulders bear.
The Southern wind, or Northern robbed of yore
Some foreign people, that those bucklers wore.
The land thus plagued with wind, the soldiers all
Down to the ground, their clothes fast guirded, fall,
Hold fast the earth, yet sure they scarsely lay
By weight, nor strength from being blown away,
Mountains of dust the Southwindes furious hand
Rowles ore their heads; drowned is heaps of sand
The soldiers scarce can stir. Some though upright
With rising earth are orewhelmed quite;
And, though the earth remove, want motion.
Vast stones of ruined walls from far are blown,
And (strange to tell) in some far region fall,
They ruins see, that see no house at all.
No paths, nor difference now of ways are known:
Their course is guided by the star alone
Like navigators; nor all stars to us
In that Horrizon are conspicuous,
For to earths face (there bowed) many be
Obscured from sight. But when the air was free
From the winds rage, dissolved again by heat,
And scorching day their body flowed with sweat,
Their mouths with thirst were parched a little steame.
They spied which from a muddy fountain came;
From whence with much ado a soldier got
His hellmet full of water, and straight brought
The same to Cato, their dry throats were all
With dust besmea^ed, and the general
Himself was envied for that little draught.
Base soldier, answers he, in thy poor thought
Seemed I alone so worthless? none but I
Tender, and weak in all this company:
This punishment thou more deserve then I
To drink thy self while all the army's dry.
Then stirred with wrath he struck the helmet down,
The water spilt sufficed them every one.
And now to Libyaes only temple placed
In Garaman^is rude they came at last.
Jupiter Ammon is adored there,
Not armed with thunder like our Jupiter,
But crooked horns. To whom the Libyans build
No sumptuous Fane, no orient jewels filled
The house with luster. Though the Indians,
The Aethiopes, and rich Arabians
Jupiter Ammon's name do all adore,
And no god else, yet still that god is poor.
No wealth corrupts his Fane, a god of the old
Pureness, his temple guards from Roman gold.
That place of all the country only green
Shows a gods presence. All that lies between
Leptis, and Berenicis is dry sand,
And barren dust; no part of all the land,
But Ammons seat bears trees. The cause of it
A neighboring fountain is, whose waters knit
The moistened earth, and make fertility.
But when the Sun at noone is mounted high,
Those trees no shadow can diffuse at all:
Their boughs scarce hide their trunkes. No shade or small
The Sunbeames make, since perpendicular.
It is perceived this is the region where
The summer Tropicke hits the Zodiac.
The signs obliquely rise not, but direct.
Nor more direct the Bull then Scorpio,
Moist Capricornus then hot Cancer go:
Nor Gemeni then Sagitarius,
Nor Leo then opposed Aquarius:
Virgo then Pisces, Libraes motion
Then Aries. But whom the torrid zone
Divides from us, those people ever see
The shadows Southward, which here Northward be,
You slowly seeing Cynosure, suppose
Her vndrench'd carre into the Ocean goes.
And that no Northern sign from seas is free.
You stand far distant from each axeltree;
Your signs in midst of heaven converted be.
The Eastern people standing at the door,
The oracles of horned Jove t'implore,
Gave place to Cato; whom his soldiers ply
That of that Libyan far-fam'd deity,
His future fates event he would be taught.
Him Labienus most of all besought;
Chance, and the fortune of our way (quoth he)
L^nd us the mouth of that great deity,
And his sure counsels: we may now implore
His powerful guidance through this war, and ore
The dangerous Syrtes. For to whom should I
Believe the gods would truly or certify
Their secret wills, then Catoes holy breast,
Whose life to heavenly laws was still addressed,
And followed god? behold we now have here
A freedom given to talk with Jupiter,
Cato, enquires of wicked Caesar's fate,
And know what shall be Romes ensuing state,
Whether this civil war be made in vain,
Or shall our laws, and liberties maintain,
Let Ammon's sacred voice thy breast inspire.
Thou lover of strict virtue, now desire
To know what virtue is; seek from above
Approovement of the truth: He full of Jove,
Whom in his secret breast he carried ever,
These temple worthy speeches did deliver;
What, Labienus, should I seek to know?
If I had rather dye in arms, then bow
Unto a Lord? if life be naught at all?
No difference betwixt long life, and small?
If any force can hurt men virtuous?
If fortune loose, when virtue does oppose,
Her threats if good desires be happiness,
And virtue grow not greater by success?
Thus much we know, nor deeper can the skill
Of Ammon teach. The gods are with us still;
And, though their oracles should silent be,
Naught can we do without the gods decree;
Nor needs he voices; what was fit to know
The great Creator at our births did show.
Nor did he choose these barren sands to show
(Hiding it here) his truth but to a few.
Is there a seat of god, save earth, and sea,
Air, heaven, and virtue? why for god should we
Seek further? what ere moves, what ere is seen
Is Jove For oracles let doubtful men
Fearful of future chances troubled be:
Sure death, not oracles ascertaine me.
The coward, and the valiant man must fall.
This is enough for Jove to speak to all,
Then marching thence the temples faith he saues,
And to the people vntry'd Ammon leaves.
Himself afoot before his wearied bands
Marches with pi^e in hand, and not commands,
But shows them how to labor: never sits
In coach, or chariot: sleeps the least a nights:
Last tastes the water. When a fountains found,
He stays a foot till all the soldiers round,
And every cullion drink. If fame be due
To truest goodness, if you simply view
Virtue without success, what ere we call
In greatest Romans great; was fortune all.
Who could deserve in prosperous war such fame?
Or by the nations blood so great a name?
Rather had I this virtuous triumph win
In Libyaes desert sands, then thrice be seen
In Pompey's laurell'd chariot, or to lead
Iugurtha captive. Here behold indeed
Rome, thy true father, by whose sacred name
(Worthy thy Temples) it shall never shame
People to swear; whom, if thou ere art free,
Thou will hereafter make a deity.
Now to a torrid clime they came, more hot
Then which the gods for men created not.
Few waters here are seen; but in the sands
One largely-flowing fountain only stands,
But full of Serpents, as it could contain.
There on the banks hot killing Aspes remain,
And Dipsases in midst of water dry.
When Cato saw his men for thirst would die
Fearing those waters; thus he spoke to them.
Fear not to drink, soldiers, this wholesome stream,
Be not affrighted with vain shows of death.
The snakes bite deadly, fatal are their teeth,
When their dire venom mixes with our blood,
The water's safe. Then of the doubtful flood
He drinks himself, there only the first draught
Of all the Libyan waters Cato sought.
Why Libyaes air should be infected so
With mortal plagues, what hurtful secrets grow
Mixed with the noxious soil by natures hand,
Our care, nor labor cannot understand:
But that the world, in the true cause deceived,
In stead of that a common tale received,
In Libyaes farthest part, whose scorched ground
The Ocean warmed by setting Sol does bound,
Medusas country lay, whose barren fields
No trees do cloth, whose soil no herbage yields:
Changed by her look all stones, and rocks they grow.
Here hurtful nature first those plagues did show;
First from Medusas jaws those serpents grown
Hissed with forked tongues, and hanging down
Like woman's hair, upon her back, gave strokes
Unto her pleased neck. In stead of locks
Upon her horrid front did serpents hiss;
Her comb combed poison down, no part but this
Safe to be seen about Medusa was.
For who ere feared the monsters mouth, and face?
Whom, that had viewed her with an eye direct?
Did she ere suffer sense of death t'affect?
She hastened doubting fate, preventing dread;
Their bodies died before their souls were fled?
Enclosed souls with bodies turned to stone.
The furyes hairs could madness work alone;
Cerberus hissing Orpheus music stilled;
Alcides saw that Hydra, which he killed;
But this strange monster even her father, who
Is the seas second god, her mother too
Cetos, and Gorgon sisters feared, she
Could strike a numnesse through the sea, and sky.
And harden all the world into a stone.
Birds in their flight have fallen conjealed down.
Running wild beasts to rocks converted were;
And all the neighboring Aethiopians there
To marble statues, not a creature brooks
The sight of her; t'avoide the Gorgons looks
Her snakes themselves backward themselves invert.
She near Alcides pillars could convert
Titanian Alt^s to an hill, and those
Giants with serpents feet, that durst oppose
The gods themselves, those wars in Phlegra field
Her face could end, but showed in Pallas shield.
Thither the son of shower raped Da^ae
Borne on the Arcadian wings of Mercury
Inventer of the harp, and wrestling game,
Flying through the air, with borrowed Harp came,
Harp, whom monsters blood before did stain,
When he, that kept Jove's loved cow, was slain.
Aid to her winged brother Pallas gave,
Conditioning the Gorgons head to have.
She bids him fly to Libyaes Eastern bound
His face averted, or the Gorgons ground.
In his left hand a shield of shinning brass,
Wherein to see the stone transforming face
Of stern Medusa, Pallas bad him keep;
Then laid Medusa in an endless sleep,
But yet not all; part of her snaky hair
Defends her head: some snakes still waking are:
Some ore her face, and sleeping eylids glide.
Minerva does th'averted Perseus guide,
And with a trembling hand directs the stroke
Of his Cyllenian Harp, which quite broke
Her large snake-cover'd neck. How strange a look
Had Gorgons head cut off by Perseus stroke,
And towering blade? what poison did arise
In her black mouth? what death shot from her eyes?
Which not Minerva durst to look upon;
And Perseus, sure, had bin congealed to stone,
Had not Minerva hid that dismal face
With those snake-haires. Now Perseus flies a pace
To heaven with Gorgons head; but in his mind
Considering how the nearest way to find,
Over the midst of Europe means to fly;
But Pallas straight forbids that injury
To Europes fruitful fields, and bids him spare
The people there, for who can in the air
Refrain to gaz, when such a bird he spies.
Perseus converts his course, and Westward flies
Ore desert Libya, whose unfruitful seat
Vntill'd lies open to naught but Phoebus heat;
Who runs his burning course straight ore their heads.
No land then this a larger shadow spreads
Against heaven, nor more the moons eclipse does cause
When straying not in latitude, she draws
Neither to North nor South, but still is found
In signs direct^ Yet this unfruitful ground
Barren in all that is good, a seed could yield
From venom, which Medusaes head distilled.
From those dire drops mixed with the putrid earth
Sols aiding heat did give new monsters birth.
First from that dust so mixed with poison bred
Rose the sleep-causing Aspe with swelling head,
Made of the thickest drop of Gorgons gore,
Which in no serpent is compacted more.
She wanting heat seeks not a colder clime,
Content to live in her own Libyaes slime.
But oh how shameless is our thirst of gain?
Those Libyan deaths are carried ore the maine,
And Aspes at Rome are sold as merchandise.
In scaly folds the great Haemorrhus lies,
Whose bite from all parts draws the flowing blood.
Chersidros then, that both in land, and flood
Of doubtful Syrtes lives; Chelydri too,
That make a reeking slime where ere they go.
The Cenchris creeping in a tract direct,
Whose speckled belly with more spots is dect,
Then ere the various Theban marble takes.
Sand-colour'd Ammodytes, the horned snakes,
That creep in winding tracks; the Scytale;
No snake in winter casts her skin but she;
The double-head; Dipsas, that thirsty makes;
The water-spoyling Newte, the dart-like snakes.
The Pareas, whose way his tale does guide;
The Prester too, whose sting distendeth wide
The wounded's foamy mouth; the Seps, whose bite
Consumes the bones, dissolues the body quite.
The Basiliske, whose hiss all snakes does scarre,
(Hurtful before the venom touch) who far
All vulgar serpents from his sight commands,
Reigning alone upon the emptied sands.
You dragons too, glistring in golden pride,
Who hurtlesse wander through all lands beside,
Hot Affrik mortal makes; aloft you fly
Through the air on wings, and follow speedily
The herds; your strokes the mightyest bulls destroy,
Great Elephants not escape you: all you kill,
Nor need you poisons help to work your will.
This thirsty way among these venomed snakes
Cato amidst his hardy soldiers takes:
Where many losses of his men he found,
And deaths unusual from a little wound.
A trodden Dipsas turning back his head
Did bite young Aulus Ensign bearer, bred
Of Tyrrhene race: no grief, nor pain ensew'd:
His wound no pity found, no danger showed,
But in (alas) did fiery venom deep
Into his ma^row, and scorched entrails creep.
Which quite drunk up all moisture, that should flow
Into his vital parts: his palate now
And tongue is scorched, and dry; no sweat could go
To his tired joints, from's eyes no tears could flow.
His place, nor his sad generals command
Could stay this thirsty man; out of his hand
He throws his Eagle; water runs to have,
Which the dry venom in his heart did crave.
Though he in midst of Tanais did ly,
Padus, or Rodanus, he would be dry,
Or drink the streamer, where ever Nilus flows.
The soil ads to his drought, the worm does loose
Her venoms fame, helped by so hot a land.
He digs, and seeks each vein in all the sand.
Now to the Syrts he goes, and in his mouth
Salt water takes, which could not quench his drought,
Although it pleased. He did not know what kind
Of death he died, nor his disease could find,
But thinks it thirst; and now full feign he would
Rip open all his veins, and drink his blood.
Cato commands them (loath his men should stay
To know what thirst was) straight to march away.
But a more woeful death before his eye
Appeared; A Seps no poor Sabellus thigh
Hung by the teeth, which he straight with his hands
Cast off, and with his pile nailed to the sands;
A little snake, but none more full then she
Of horrid death, the flesh falls off, that nigh
The wound did grow, the bones are bared round,
Without the body naked shows the wound.
His shankes fall off, matter each members fills,
His knees are barred, his groine black filth distills,
And every muscle of his thighs dissolues:
The skin, that all his natural parts involues,
Breaking lets fall his bowels, nor does all,
That should remain of a dead body, fall.
The cruel venom, eating all the parts,
Al^ to a little poisonous filth converts.
The poison breaks his nerves, his ribs does part,
Opens his hollow breast, there shows his heart,
His vitalls all, yea all that man composes,
And his whole nature this foul death discloses;
His head, neck, shoulders, and strong arms do flow
In venomous filth, not sooner melts the snow
By hot South winds, nor wax against the Sun.
This is but small I speak; burnt bodies run
Melted by fire in filth, but what fire ere
Dissolved the bones? no bones of his appear.
Following their putrid juice, they leave no sign
Of this swift death, the palm is only thine
Of all the Libyan snakes; the soul take they,
But thou alone the carcass take away.
But lo a death quite contrary to it;
Marsian Nasidius an hot Prester bit.
Whose face, and cheeks a sudden fire did roast;
His flesh, and skin was stretched, his shape was lost.
His swelling body is distended far
Past humane growth, and vndistinguishd are
His limbs; all parts the poison does confound,
And he lies hid, in his own body drowned:
Nor can his armor keep his swollen growth in.
Not more does boiling water rise within
A brazen caldron, nor are sails more swelled
By Western winds. No limme he now can weild.
A globe deformed he is, an heap confused.
Which ravening beasts did fear, which birds refused:
To which his friends durst do no obsequy,
Nor touch, but from the growing carcass fly.
But yet these snakes present more horrid sights,
A fierce Hamorrhus noble Tullus bites,
A brave young man, that studied Catoes worth.
And as in pouncing of a picture, forth
Through every hole the pressed saff^on goes,
So from his every part red poison flows
For blood; his tears were blood: from every pore,
Where nature vented moisture heretofore,
His mouth, his nose, flows blood: his sweat is red:
His running veins all parts be bloodyed.
And his whole body's but one wound become.
An Aspes sharp bite did Laeuus heart benum;
No pain he felt, surprised with sudaine sleep
He died, descending to the Stygian deep.
Not half so sudden do those poisons kill,
Which dire Sabaean sorcerers distill
From off the falsely seeming Sabine tree.
On an old stumpe a dart-like snake did ly,
Which, as from thence her self she nimbly threw,
Through Paulus head, and wounded temples flew.
It Was not the poison wrought his fate, the blow
It self brought death. To her compared slow
Fly stones from slings, and not so swift as she
From Parthian bows do winged arrows flee.
What helped it wretched Murrus that he did
Kill a fierce Basiliske? the poison slid
Along his spear, and fastened on his hand,
Which he cut off, and then did safely stand
With that hands loss, viewing securely there
The sad example of his death so near.
Who would have thought the knotty Scorpion had
Such power in killing, or a sting so bad?
Her straight stroke won, when she Orion ^^ew,
A trophee, which the constellations show.
Who, small Solpu^a, from thy hole would flee?
Yet the three sisters give their power to t^ee.
So that no rest they found by night, nor day;
They feared the ground it self, on which they lay.
For neither heaps of leaves, nor ^eedes they found
To make them beds but on the naked ground
Exposed their bodies, whose warm vapors steame
By night attracted the cold snakes to them
Whose harmless jaws, whilst nights astringents cold
The poison freez'd, unhurt their bosoms hold.
Nor by the guidance of the stars their way
Can they discern, but often complaining say
Restore, oh gods, to us those wars again,
From which we fled: restore Pharsalia's plain.
Why should we die, whose lives devoted were,
And sworn to war, the death of cowards here?
The Dipsases on Caesar's party are,
And horned snakes help end our civil war.
Oh let us go, where the hot zone does ly.
'Twould ease our grieved hearts, that to the sky
We might ascribe our deaths. In naught do we
Accuse thee, Africa, or nature thee.
For thou this monster bearing country taken
From men's plantation, did for snakes ordain.
This land all barren, where no corn could thrive,
Thou made, that men might from these serpents live.
But we are come into their dwellings here.
Take punishment on us, thou god, who ere
Hating our journey, did the world divide,
Placing the doubtful Syrtes on one side,
The torrid zone on the other, deaths sad seat
Placed in the midst. To thy most hid retreat
Our civil war dares go; to the worlds end
Our ways, through natures secrets prying, tend.
Worse things, perchance, must be endured then this.
The pole declines, the setting Sun does hiss
Drenched in the sea. No land does further ly
This way; then Iubaes woeful monarchy
Known but by fame, we shall perchance again
Wish for this serpents land; the air does contain
Some comfort yet: some things are living here.
Alas, we wish not for our country dear,
Europe, nor Asia* different Suns which see:
Under what pole, oh ^ffricke, left we thee?
'Twas winter at Cyrene when we lay:
Is the years course changed in so small a way?
The South is at our backs* to the adverse pole
Our journey tends; about the world we roll.
We are, perchance, Antipodes to Rome.
Let this our comfort be, Let Caesar come,
Oh let our foes pursue where we have fled.
Thus they in sad complaints unburdened
Their loaded patience. Catoes virtue keeps
Them proof against any labor, who still sleeps
Upon the naked sands, and every hour,
Present at every fate, tempts fortunes power.
Comes at all calls; his presence does bestow
Far more then health, a strength to undergo
Even death it self. Whilst Cato's standing by
They are ashamed impatiently to die.
What power ore him had any misery?
Whose presence grief in others breasts subdew'd,
And what small power can be in sorrow showed.
Some case at last did tired fortune give
To their long sufferings, there a nation live
Marinarian ( d) Psylls, from serpents biting free.
They armed with powerful incantations be.
Their blood's secure, and, though they did not charm,
By touch of poison cannot suffer harm.
The places nature this did justly give,
That serpent-free they might with serpents live.
It Was well, that in this poisonous air they breath;
For peace is made betwixt themselves, and death.
Of their own broodes such certain proofs have all,
That when to ground a newborn child does fall,
Fearing strange Venus has their beds defiled,
By deadly Aspes they try the doubted child.
As the E^gle when her Eaglets are disclosed,
Lays them against the rising Sun exp^s'd;
Those that with stedy eye can view his beemes,
And boldly gaze, those only she esteems,
The ^ther scorns* the Psylls so count it there
Their nations pledge, if infants do not fear
The serpents touch, or freely play with snakes.
They not content with their own safety, take
For strangers care; and following the army then
Against those serpents aided Catoes men
For when the camp was pitched, those sands, that lay
Within the compass of the trenches, they
Did purge with snake-expelling charms throughout,
And med^inable fires made round about.
Their Wall wort crackes and fennel gum does fry,
Thin Tama^iske, Thessalian Centory,
Strong Panace, Arabian Pepperwort,
Sicilian Thapsos burned with Sulphurwort,
Lar^he trees, and Southernewood, which serpents dread
And horns of stags far off from Affricke bred.
So night was safe. If slung by day they were,
That magic nations miracles appear;
For against the Psyl's the taken venom strives;
Marks to the wounded place their spittle gives;
Whose force the poison in the wound does stay.
Then with a foaming tongue dire charms they say
In ceaselesse murmurs. For no time to breath
The danger gives. Approaching speedy death
Admits no silence. Often has poison taken
In th'inmost parts bin charmed away again.
But, when called out by their commanding tongue,
If any poison dare to tarry long,
Then falling down they lick the pallid wound,
And with a gentle bite squeezing it round
Suck with their mouths the poison out, and it
Extracted from the key-cold body spit.
And in their mouths tasting the poison well
What serpent deepest bit the Psylls can tell.
Now ore the fields encouraged by their aid
The Roman soldiers wandered less afraid.
Thus Cato treading sands of Libya
The Moon twice waning, and twice wexing saw.
Now more and more the sands to harden began,
And Affricks thickened ground grew g^e^e again.
Trees here, and there began t'extend their shade:
And cottages of reeds and sedges made*
How great an hope of better ground had they,
When first they saw fierce Lions cross their way?
Leptis was neer'st which quiet harbor lent.
Their winter free from heat, and storms they spent.
Now Caesar with Pharsaliaes slaughter cloyed
Leaving all other cares, his thoughts employed
In the poursuite of Pompey, and was brought
(When he his steps by land had vainly sought)
By fames report to sea, and passed ore
The Thracian straights, and that loue-famed shore,
Where once fair Heroes woeful turret stood;
Where Helles tra^oe^y new-nam'd the flood,
No arm of sea bounds with a stream so small
Asia from Europe, though Propontis fall
Narrow into the ^uxine sea, and from
Purple Chalcedon part Byzanti^m.
Thence goes to see renown'^ Sigaean sands,
The stream of Simois, and Rhaetaean lands
Fa^^'d for the Grae^ian worthye^ tomb, wherely
Great ghosts so much in debt to Poetry.
Sacked Troyes yet honored name he goes about,
To find the old wall of great Apollo out.
Now fruitless trees, old oaks with putrified,
And rotten r^otes the Trojan hou^es hide,
And temples of their gods, all Troy's orespred
With bushes think, her ruins ruined.
He se^s the bridal grove, An^hises lodged,
Hesiones rock, the cave where Paris judged,
Where nymph Oenone played, ^he place so famed
For Ganimedes rape, each stone is named,
A little gliding stream, which Xanthus was,
Unknown he past, and in the lofty grass
Securely trod; a Phrygian straight forbid
Him ^r^ade on Hectors dust: with ruins hid
The stone retained no sacred memory.
Respect you not great Hectors tomb, quoth he!
Oh great, and sacred work of Poesy,
That freest from fate, and giv'st eternity
To mortal wights; but, Caesar envy not
Their living names, if Roman muses ought
May promise th^e, while Homer's honored,
By future t^mes shall thou, and I be read;
No age shall us with dark oblivion stain,
But our Pharsalia ever shall remain.
Then Caesar pleased with sight of these so praised
Antiquities a green turfe-alter raised,
And by the frankincense-fed fire prepared
These orizons not vain; you gods, that guard
These Heroes dust, and in Troyes ruins reign:
Aeneas household gods, that still maintain
In Alba, and Lavinia your shrines,
Upon whose altars fire yet Trojan shines;
Thou sacred temple closed Palladium,
That in the sight of man did never come;
The greatest heir of all Iulus race
Here in your former seat implores your grace,
And pious incense on your altars lays;
Prosper my course, and thankful Rome shall raise
Troyes walls again, your people I Will restore,
And build a Roman Troy. This said, to shore
He hasts, takes shipping, and to Corus lends
His full-spread sails with have to make amends
For these delays, and with a prosperous wind
Leaves wealthy Asia, and fair Rhodes behind.
The VVestwinde blowing still, the seventh night
Discovers Aegypts shore by Pharian light.
But ere they reach the harbor, day appears,
And dimmes the nightly fires, when Caesar hears
Strange tumults on the shore, noises of men,
And doubtful murmurings, and fearing then
To trust himself at land, st^yes in his fleet;
Whom straight Achillas launches forth to meet
Bringing his Kings dire gift great Pompey's head
With an Egyptian mantle covered;
And thus his crime with impious words to grace.
Lord of the world, greatest of Roman race,
And now secure (which yet thou do not know)
In Pompey's death, my King does here bestow
What only wanted in Pharsalia's field,
And what thy wars, and travells end will yield:
We in thy absence finished civil war.
For Pompey here desiring to repair
Thessalia's ruins, by our sword lies slain.
By this great pledge, Caesar, we seek to gain
Thy love, and in his blood our league to make.
Here without bloodshed Aegypts kingdom take,
Take all Niles fertile regions, and receive
What ever thou for Pompey's head would give:
Think him a friend worthy thine arms to have,
To whom the fates such power ore Pompey gave.
Nor think his merit cheap, since brought to pass
With easy slaughter, his old friend he was,
And to his banished father did restore
The crown of Egypt. But why speak I more?
Find thou a name for this great work of his,
Or ask the world; if villainy it is,
The more thou ow'st to him, that from thee took
This act of villainy. Thus having spoke
Straight he vncovers, and presents the head,
Whose scarse-knowne looks pale death had altered.
Caesar at first his gift would not refuse,
Nor turn his eyes away, but fixtly veiwes
Till he perceived 'twas true, and plainly saw
'Twas safe to be a pious father in law;
Then shed forced tears, and from a joyful breast
Drew sighs, and groans, as thinking tears would best
Conceal his inward joy: so quite orethrowes
The tyrants merit, and does rather choose
To weep, then ow to him for Pompey's head.
He that on slaughtered Senators could tread,
And see the blood-stained fields of Thessaly
Dry-ey'd, to thee alone durst not deny
The tribute of his eyes. Strange turn of fate,
Weep'st thou for him, whom thou with impious hate
Caesar, so long pursu'dst? could not the love
Of Daughter, Nephew, not aliance move?
Think thou among those people, that bewail
Great Pompey's death, these tears can ought avail
Perchance thou envy'st Ptolomeys dire fact;
And griev'st that any had the power to act
This but thy self, that the revenge of war
Was lost, and taken from the conqueror.
What cause so ever did thy sorrow move,
It was far distant from a pious love.
Was this the cause that thy pursuit did draw
Ore land, and sea, to save thy son in law?
'Twas well, sad fortune took the doom from thee,
And spared so far a Roman modesty,
As not to suffer thee, false man, to give
Pardon to him, or pity him alive,
Yet to deceive the world, and gain belief
Thou add'st a language to thy fained grief.
Thy bloody present from our presence bear,
For worse from Caesar, then slain Pompey here
Your wickedness deserves; the only meede
Of civil war, to spare the conquered
We loose by this, and did not Ptolomey
His sister hate, I could with ease repay
This gift of his, and for so black a deed
Return his sister Cleopatras head.
Why waged he secret war, or why durst he
Thus thrust his sword into our work? did we
By our Pharsalian victory afford
Your King this power, or license Aegypts sword?
I brook'd not Pompey to bear share with me
In rule of Rome, and shall I Ptolomey?
All nations joined in our war in vain,
If any other power on earth remain
But Caesar now; if any land serve two.
We were determined from your shore to go,
But fame forbid us, lest we should seem more
To fear then hate dire Aegypts bloody shore.
And do not think you have deceived me:
To us was meant such hospitality.
And 'twas our fortune in Thessaliaes war,
That frees this head With greater danger far
Then could be feared, we fought. I feared the doom
Of banishment, the threats of wrathful Rome,
And Pompey's force: but had I fled, I see
My punishment had come from Ptolomey.
We spare his age, and pardon his foul fact;
For let your King for such a deed expect
No more then pardon. But do you enterre
This VVorthy's head: not that the earth may bear,
And hide your guilt; bring fumes, and odours store
To Appease his head, and gather from the shore
His scattered limbs, compose them in one tomb.
Let his dear ghost perceive that Caesar's come,
And hear my pious grief. Whilst he preferrs
All desperate hazards before me, and dares
Rather to trust his life with Ptolomey,
The people all have lost a joyful day,
The world our peace: the gods my prayers denied
That laying these victorious arms aside
I might embrace thee, Pompey and request
Our former life, and love, and think me blessed
After this war thy aequall still to be.
Then had my faithful love persuaded thee
Though conquered to excuse the gods, and make
Thee Rome, to pardon me. Though thus he spoke,
He found no partners in his grief; the rest
Bele^t not his, and their own tears suppressed,
And durst (oh happy freedom) with dry eye
Though Caesar wept, behold this tragedy.
FINIS.
Annotations on the ninth Book.
( a) Whilst the event of the civil war was yet doubtful, and both the
Generals were possessed of their full strengths, Cato was fearful of both
their intents, and hated them both; as fearing that the conqueror would captive
his country; but after the battle of Pharsalia was fought and Caesar had
conquered, he was then wholly of Pompey's side, desiring to uphold the party
vanquished

(b) Pompey the great pursuing Caesar into Thessalia, had left Cato with a
great strength to guard Dyrachium who hearing the overthrow, and flight of
Pompey, marched away to take shipping at Corcyra, and follow Pompey to join
his strength with him.

(c) Cato at Cyrene hearing that Lucius Scipio the father in-law of Pompey the
great was joined in Africa with Iuba King of Mauritania, and that Atius Varus,
whom Pompey had deputed his Lieutenant in Africa, was there also, marched
overland thither, which march being thirty days upon those desert sands, any
with admirable patience, and magnanimity enduring the iourny; forsaking his
horse always, and marching a foot in the head of his army, to teach his
soldiers, rather then command them to endure hardness; he arrived at last at
Iuba's court; where, though the soldiers with one voice elected him General,
he refused the charge* and chose rather to serve under Scipio, then command
himself in chief.

(d) These Psylli are a people inhabiting those parts of Africa fortifyed by
nature with an incredible priveledge against the strength of poison, and
sustain no harm by the biting of serpents. The serpents (says Pliny) are
afraid of them, and when others are bitten, these Psylli by sucking the wounds,
and muttering some charms dee easily cure them. They have a custom (as
writers report) when their children are borne, if the father suspect his wives
chastity, he exposes the infant to all kind of serpents; if begotten by a
stranger, the child dies, but if lawfully begotten, the priveledge of his
fathers blood protecteth him against the venom.

LVCANS Pharsalia. The Tenth Book.
The Argument.
Caesar in Egypt fearelesse walks, and sees
Their temples, tombs, and famed antiquityes.
Before his feet fair Cleopatra kneeles,
Whom to her brother king he reconciles.
With sumptuous feasts this peace they celelrate,
To Caesar's ear Achoreus does relate
Niles ebbes, and flows, and long concealed spring.
Within the palace Caesar, and the King
By stern Achillas are besieged by night.
Caesar to Pharos takes a secret flight;
There from his ship he leapes into the waves,
And his endangered life by swimming saues.
WHen Caesar first, possessed of Pompey's head,
Arrived there, and those dire sands did tread:
His fortune strove with guilty Aegypts fate,
Whether that Rome that land should captivate;
Or Aegypts sword take from the world the head
Both of the Conqueror, and the conquered.
Pompey, the ghost prevails, thy Manes free
Caesar from death, left Nile should after thee
Be by the Romans loved. He goes from thence
To Alexandria armed with confidence
In this dire mischiefs pledge, following along
His fasces. But, perceiving that the throng
Of people murmured that in Egypt he
Bore the Ensigns up of Romes authority,
He finds their wavering faiths, perceiving plain
That for his sake great Pompey was not slain.
Then with a look still hiding fear goes he
The stately temple of the old god to see.
Which speaks the ancient Macedonian greatness.
But there delighted with no objects sweetness,
Not with their gold, nor gods majestike dress,
Nor losty city walls, with greediness
Into the burying vault goes Caesar down
There Macedonian Philip's mad-brain'd son
The prosperous theife lies buried: whom just fate
Slew in the worlds revenge: vaults consecrate
Contain those limbs, which through the world 'twere just
To cast a^road: but fortune spared his dust,
And to that Kingdoms end his fate remained.
If ere the world her freedom had attaind,
He for a mock had been reserved, whose birth
Brought such a dire example to the earth,
So many lands to be possessed by one,
Scorning the narrow bounds of Macedon,
And Athens, which his father had subdew'd:
Through Asian lands with human slaughter strewn,
Led by too forwa^d fates he rushes on,
Driving his sword through every nation:
Rivers unknown, Euphrates be distaines
With Persians blood Ganges with Indians:
The Earth fatal mischief, lightning dire, that rent
All people, and a star malevolent
To nations. To invade the South-east sea
He built a fleet. Not barren Libya,
Water, nor heat, nor Ammons desert sands
Could stop his course. Upon the Western lands
(Following the worlds devexe) he meant to tread,
To compass both the poles, and drink Niles head.
But death did meet his course; that check alone*
Could nature give this Kings ambition:
Who to his grave the worlds sole Empire bore,
With the same envy, that 'twas got before;
And wanting heirs left all he did obtain
To be divided by the sword again.
But feared in Parthia; and his Babylon
He died. Oh shame, that Eastern nation
Then trembled at the Macedonian spear
Far more, then now the Roman pile they fear.
Though all the North, the West, and South be ^urs,
In the East the Parthian King contempes our powers.
That, Which to Crassus proov'd a fatal place,
A secure province to small Pella was.
Now the young King come from Pelusium
Had pacified the peoples wrath: in whom
As hostage of his peace, in Aegypts court
Caesar was safe; when lo from Pharos port,
Bribing the keeper to vnchaine the same,
In a small galley Cleopatra came
Unknown to Caesar entering the house;
The stain of Egypt, Romes pernicious
Fury, unchaste to Italyes disgrace,
As much as Helena's bewitching face
Fatal to Troy, and her own Greeks did prove,
As much Romes broiles did Cleopatra move.
Our Capital she with her Sistrum scarr'd,
With Aegypts base effeminate rout prepared
To seize Romes Eagles, and a triumph get
Ore captived Caesar: when at Leucas fleet
It doubtful stood, whether the world that day
A woman, and not Roman should obey.
Her prides first spring that impious night had bin,
That with our chiefes mixed that incestuous queen.
Who would not pardon Anthonyes mad love,
When Caesar's flinty breast desires could move
In midst of war, when heat of fight raged most,
And in a count haunted by Pompey's ghost?
Embrew'd with blood from dire Pharsalias field
Could he unto adultrous Venus yield?
And mix with warlike cares (oh shameless head)
A bastard issue, and unlawful bed;
Forgetting Pompey, to beget a brother
To thee, fair Iulia, on a strumpet mother:
Suffering the forces of his scattered foes
To join in Affrike, basely he bestows
Time in Egyptian love, a conqueror
Not for himself, but to bestow on her;
Wh^m, trusting to her beauty, without tears,
Though gesture sad, with loose, as if rent hairs,
Dressed in a beauteous, and becoming woe
Did Cleopatra meet, bespeaking so:
If, mighty Caesar, nobleness there be,
Egyptian Lagus royal issued,
Deposed and banished from my fathers state,
If thy great hand restore my former fate,
Kneel at thy feet a queen; unto our nation
Thou do appear a gracious constellation.
I am not the first woman that has swayed
The Pharian scepter: Egypt has obay'd
A queen; not sex excepted: I desire
Thee read the will of my deceased Sire,
Who left me there a partner to enjoy
My brothers crown, and marriage bed. The boy
(I know) would love his sister, were he free:
But all his power, will, and affections be
Under Photinas girdle; To obtain
The crown I beg not, Caesar from this stain
Free thou our house: command the King to be
A King, and free from servants tyranny.
Shall slaves so proud of Pompey's, slaughter be,
Threatening the same (which fates avert) to thee?
Caesar, it is shame enough to the earth, and thee
His death Photinus gift, and guilt should be.
Her suite in Caesar's ears had found small grace,
But beauty pleades, and that incestuous face
Prevails; the pleasures of a wanton bed
Corrupt the judge. The King had purchased
His peace with weighty sums of gold; which done,
With sumptuous feasts this glad accord they crown.
Her riot forth in highest pomp (not yet
Transferred to Rome) did Cleopatra set.
The house excelled those temples, which men build
In wicked'st times, the high-arch'd roofes were filled
With wealth? high tresses golden tables bore:
Nor did carved marble only cover ore
The house; alone th'vnmixt Achates stood,
And pillars of red marble: their feet troad
On pauements of rich Onyx: pillars there
Not coverd with Egyptian Eben were;
Eben was timber there, and that rich wood
Not to adorn, but prop the Palace stood.
The rooms with Ivory glister'd, and each door
Inlay'd with indian shells, embellished ore
With choicest Emeraulds: the beds all shone
With richest gems, and yellow Jasper stone.
Coverlids rich, some purple died in grain,
Whose tincture was not from one Caldron taken,
Part woue of glittering gold, part scarlet die,
As is th'Aegyptian use of Tapestry:
The servitours stood by, and waiting pages,
Some different in complexions, some in ages;
Some of black Libyan hew, some golden hairs,
Tha^ Caesar yields in all his German wars
He nere had seen so bright a yellow hair:
Some stiff cu^l'd lo^kes on Sunburned fore heads wear.
Besides the unhappy strength robbed company
The Eunuch'd youths: near these were standing by
Youths of a stronger age, yet those so young
Scarce any down darkning their cheeks was sprung.
Down sat the Princes, and the higher power
Caesar; her hurtful face all painted ore
Sat Cleopatra, not content alone
TO enjoy her brothers bed, nor Aegypts crown:
Laden with pearls? the read seas spoiled store
On her rich hair, and wearied neck she wore.
Her snowy breasts their whiteness did display
Thorough the thin Sidonian tiffenay
Wrought, and extended by the curious hand
Of Aegypts workmen. Citron tables stand
On Ivory tressells, such as Caesar's eyes
Saw not, when he King Iuba did surprise.
O blind ambitious madness to declare
Your wealth to him, that makes a civil war,
And tempt an armed guest. For though that he
Sought not for wealth by wa^s impiety,
And the worlds wrack: suppose our cheifes of old
Were there, composed of that poor ages mould,
Fabri^ii, Curii grave, or that plain man
That Consul from the Etrurian plowes was taken,
Were sitting at those tables, whom to Rome
With such a triumph he would wish to come.
In golden plate they fill their feasting bords
With what the air, the earth, or Nile affords,
What luxury with vain ambition had
Sought through the world, and not as hunger bad,
Beasts, fowls, the gods of Egypt are devoured:
From crystal ewers is Niles water powered
Upon their hands: studded with gemms that shine
Their bowls contain no Mareotike wine,
But strong, and sparkling wines of Meroe,
To whom few years give full maturity.
With fragrant Nard, and never-fading rose
Their heads are crowned: their hair anointed flows
With sweetest cinnamon, that has not spent
His savor in the air, nor lost his sent
In foreign climes: and fresh Amomum brought
From harvests near at hand, there Caesar's taught
The riches of the spoiled world to take;
And is ashamed that he a war did make
With his poor son in law, desiring now
Some quar^ell would twixt him, and Egypt grow.
When wine, and cates had tired their glutted pleasure,
Caesar begins with long discourse to measure
The hours of night, bespeaking gently thus
The linen vested grave Achoreus:
Old man devoted to religion,
And, (which thine age confirms) despised by none
Of all the gods, to longing ears relate
Aegypts original, her site, and state,
Worship of gods, and what does ere remain
In your old temples charactered, explain.
The gods, that would be known, to us unfold,
If your forefathers their religion told
TO Athenian Plato once, when had you ere
A guest more worthy, or more fit to hear?
Rumor of Pompey drew our march thus far,
And fame of you, for still in midst of war
I leisure had of heaven, and gods to hear,
And the stars course: nor shall Eudoxus year
Excel my Consulship. But though so much
My virtue be, my love of truth be such,
There Is naught I more desire to know at all
Then Niles hid head, and strange original
So many years unknown: grant but to me
A certain hope the head of Nile to see,
I Will leave off civil war. Caesar had done,
When thus divine Achoreus begun:
Let it be lawful, Caesar to unfold
Our great forefathers secrets hid of old
From the lay people. Let who ere suppose
It piety to keep these wonders close:
I think the gods are pleased to be made known;
And have their sacred laws to people shown:
Planets, which cross, and slack the tenth sphaeres course,
Had from the worlds first law their different powers.
The Sun divides the years, makes nights, and days,
Dimmes other stars with his resplendent rays.
And their wil^e courses moderates; the tides
Of Thetis Phabes grouth, and waning guides.
Saturn cold i^e, and frozen zones obtaines;
Mars ore the winds, and winged lightning reigns;
Quiet well tempered air does Jove possess;
The seeds of all things Venus cherishes;
Cyllenius rules ore waters which are great;
He when he enters, where the dog-st^rs heat,
And burning fire's displayed, there where the sign
Of Cancer hot does with the Lion join,
And where the Zodiac holds his Capricorn,
And Cancer, under which Niles head is borne:
Ore which when Mercuryes proud fires do stand,
And in a line direct, (as by command
Of Phaebe the obeying Ocean grows)
So from his opened fountain Nilus flows;
Nor eb^s again till night have from the Sun
Those hours recovered, which the summer worcester.
Vain was the old opinion, that Niles flow
Was caused, or helped by Ethiopian snow.
For on those hills cold Boreas never blows*
As there the natives Sunburnt visage shows,
And moist hot Southern winds. Besides the head
Of every stream, that from thawed i^e is bred,
Swells then, when first the spring dissolues the snowes.
But Nile before the dog^dayes never flows,
Nor is confined within his banks again
Till the Autumnal aequinoctian:
Thence it is he knows no laws of other streams,
Nor swells in winter, when Sols scorching beams
Are far remote, his waters want their end:
But Nile comes forth in summer time to lend
A cooler temper to the sweltring air,
Under the torrid zone, least fire impair
The earth, unto her succor Nilus draws,
And swells against the Lions burning jaws.
And when hot Cancer his Siene burns,
Unto her aid implored Nilus turns:
Nor till the Sun to Autumn do descend,
And that hot Meroe her shades extend,
Does he restore again the drowned field.
Who can the causes of this flowing yield?
Even so our mother nature has decreed
That Nile should flow, and so the world has need,
As vainly does antiquity declare
The West winds cause of this increases are,
Which keep their seasons strictly, and long stay,
And bear within the air continued sway.
These from the Western parts all clouds exile
Beyond the South, and hang them over Nile:
Or else their blasts the rivers current meet,
And will not let it to the Ocean get;
Prevented so from falling to the maine
The stream swells back, and overflowes the plain.
Some through the cavernes of earths hollow won be
In secret channells think these waters come
Attracted to the equator from the cold
North clime, when Sol his Mer^e does hold,
The scorched earth attracting water, thither
Ganges, and Padus flow unseen together:
Venting all rivers at one fountain so
Within one channel Nilus cannot go.
From The Ocean swelling, which beguirts about
All lands, some think, increased Nile breaks out;
The waters loose, ere they so far have ran,
Their saltness quite. Besides the Ocean
Is the stars fond, we think, which Phoebius draws,
When he possesses fiery Cancers claws*
More then the air digests attraced so
Falls back by night, and causes Nilus flow.
I think if I may judge so great a case,
Some waters since the world created was,
In after ages from some broken vain
Of earth have grown; some god did then ordain,
When he created all the world, whose tides
By certain laws the great Creator guides.
Caesar's desire to know our Nilus spring
Possessed th Egyptian, Persian, Grecian King;
No age, but strived to future time to teach
This skill: none yet his hidden nature reach.
Philipp's great son, Memphis most honored King
Sent to the earths utmost bounds to find Niles spring
Choice Aethiops; they trod the sunburnt ground
Of the hot zone, and there warm Nilus found.
The farthest West our great Sesostris saw,
VVhilest captive Kings, did his proud chariot draw:
Yet there your Rhodanus, and Padus spied
Before our N^les hid fountain he descried.
The mad Cambises to the Eastern lands,
And lon^-liv'd people came. His famisht bands
Q^te spent, and with each others ( a) slaughter fed
Returned thou, Nile, yet vndiscovered.
No tale dares mention thine original,
Thou Art sought, wherever seen. No land at all
Can boast that Nile is hers. Yet I Will reveal,
As far as that same god, that does conceal
Thy spring, inspires me. From the Antarticke pole
Under hot Cancer do thy surges roll
Directly North, winding to East and West,
Sometimes the Arabians, sometimes Libyans blessed
With fruitfullnesse thou make, the Seres spy
Thee first, and seek thee too, thy channel by
The Aethiopians, as a stranger flows:
And the world knows not to what land it owes
Thy sacred head, which nature hid from all,
Lest any land should see thee, Nilus, small.
She turned away thy spring, and did desire
No land should know it, but all lands admire.
Thou in the summer Solstice art oreflowne
Bringing with thee a winter of thine own,
When winter is not ours: nature alone
Suffers thy streams to both the poles to run.
Not there thy mouth, not here thy spring is found.
Thy parted channel does encompasse round
Meroe fruitful to black husbandmen,
And rich in Eben wood: whose leaves, though green,
Can with no shade assuage the summers heat,
Under the Lion so directly set.
From thence thy current with no waters loss
Ore the hot zone, and barren deserts goes,
Sometimes collected in one channel going,
Sometimes dispersed and yiedling banks oreflowing.
His parted arms again collected slide
In one slow stream, where Philas does divide
Arabia from Egypt Ore the sand,
Where the red sea by one small neck of land
From ours is kept, thou, Nile, do gently flow.
Oh who would think thou ere so rough could grow
That sees thee gentle here, but when thy way
Ste^pe Catarackts, and craggy rocks would stay,
Thy never-curbed waves with scorn despise
Those petty lets, and foaming Iaue the skies:
Thy waters sound, with noise the neighboring hills
Thy conquering stream with froath grown hoary fills.
Hence he with fury first assaults that I Will,
Which our forefathers did Abatos style,
And those near rocks, which they were pleas'to call
The rivers veins, because they first of all
His swelling growth did show. Hence nature did
His straggling waves within high mountains hide,
Which part thee, Nile, from Affricke; betwixt those
As in a vale thy pent up water flows.
At Memphis first thou runn'st in fields, and plains,
Where thy proud stream all banks, and bounds disdaines.
Thus they secure, as if in peace, a part
Of night discoursed. But base Photinus heart
Once stained with sacred blood, could nere be free
From horrid thoughts. Since Pompey's murder he
Counts naught a crime? great Pompey's Manes bide
Within his breast, and vengefull furyes guide
His thoughts to monsters new, hoping to stain
Base hands with Caesar's blood, which fates ordain
Great Senators shall shed. Fate to a slave
That day almost the Senates vengeance gave,
The mulct of civil war. Oh gods defend,
Let none that life in Brutus absence end.
Shall the execution of Romes tirant be
Base Aegypts crime, and that example die?
Bold man, he makes attempt against fates course,
Nor at close murder aims, by op^n force
A most unconquered Captain he assaults;
So much are minds emboldened by their faults.
He durst the death of Caesar now command,
As Pompey's once, and by a faithful hand
To stern Achillas this dire message send,
Who shared with him in murdered Pompey's end,
Whom the weak King against himself, and all
Trusts with a strength, his forces general.
Thou on thy downy bed securely snort,
Whilst Cleopatra has surprised the court.
Pharos it not betrayed, but given away.
Have thou (though all alone) this match to stay.
Th'incestuous sister shall her brother wed,
Caesar already has enjoyed her bed:
Twixt those two husbands Egypt is her own,
And Rome her hire for prostitution.
Have Cleopatra's sorcerves beguild
Old Caesar's breast, and shall we trust a child?
Who, if one night incestuously embraced
The beastly pleasures of her bed he taste
Clothed with the name of marriage, twixt each kiss
He gives my head, and thine, the gibbet is
Our fortune, if he find his sister sweet.
H^pe we no aid from any side to meet:
The King her husband, her adulterer
Caesar; and we (I grant) both guilty are
In Cleopatras sight, where twill appear
Crime great enough that we are chaste from her.
Now by that crime, which we together did,
And lost: and by the league we ratified
In Pompey's blood, I pray be speedy here,
Fill on the sudden all with war, and fear:
Let blood break off the marriage night, and kill
Our cruel Queen, whose arms so ere she fill
In bed to night. Not fear we Caesar's sat:
That which advanced him to this height of state,
The fall of Pompey, was our glory too:
Behold the shore, and learn what we can do,
Our micheifes hope: behold the bloody'd wave,
And in the dust great Pompey's little grave
Scarce covering all his limms He, whom we fear,
Was but his peer. But we ignoble are
In blood: all one: we stir no foreign state,
Nor King to aid, but our own prosperous fate
To mischeife bring; and still into our hands
Fortune delivers them; see ready stands
Another nobler sacrifice then he;
This second blood appeases Italy.
The blood of Caesar will those stains remove,
Which Pompey's murder stuck, and make Rome love
Those hands she once thought guilty* Fear not than
His fame, and strength, he is but a private man
His army absent. This one night shall end
The civil war, and to whole nations send
A sacrifice to appease their ghosts bestow,
And pay the world that head, which fates do ow.
Go confidently then against Caesar's throat:
For Ptolomey let Aegypts soldiers do it,
The Romans for themselves. But stay not thou;
He Is high with wine, and fit for Venus now.
Do but attempt, the gods on thee bestow
The Effect of Brutus, and grave Catoes vow.
Achillas prone to follow such advise
Draws out his army straight in secret wise,
Without loud signalls given, or trumpets noise
Their armed strength he suddenly imployes.
The greatest part were Roman soldiers there,
But so degenerate, and ( b) changed they were
With foreign discipline; that void of shame
Under a barbarous slaves command they came,
Who should disdain to serve proud Aegypts King.
No faith, nor piety those hirelings bring
That follow camps: where greatest pay is had,
There Is greatest right; for money they invade,
Not for their own just quarrel, Caesar's throat.
Oh wickedness, within what land has not
Our Empires wretched fate found civil war?
Those troops remoov'd from Thessaly so far
Rage Roman-like here upon Nilus shore.
What durst the house of Lagus venture more
Had they received great Pompey? but each hand
Performs that office, which the gods command:
Each Roman hand help to this war must lend.
The gods were so disposed Romes state to rend.
Nor now does Caesar's, or great Pompey's love
Divide the people, or their factions move.
This civil war Achillas undertakes,
A barbarous slave a Roman faction makes.
And had not fates protected Caesar's blood,
This side had won, in time both ready stood;
The court in feasting drowned did openly
To any treason; and then easily
Might they have taken at table, Caesar's head,
His blood amid'st the feasting gobblets shed.
But in the night tumultuous war they fear,
Promiscuous slaughter ruled by chance, lost there
Their King might fall; so confident they are
Of their own strength, they hasten not, but spare
So great an actions opportunity.
Slaves think differring Caesar's death to be
A reparable loss. Till day break light
His execution is put off. One night
To Caesar's life Protinus power could give,
Till Titan show his rising face to live.
Now on mount Casius Lucifer appeared
With hot, though infant day, had Egypt cheered;
When from the wall they veiw'd those troops afar
March on well ranck'd, and marshalled for a war,
Not in loose maniples, but ready all
To stand, or give a charge. The city wall
Caesar distrusts, and shuts the palace too,
So poor a seidge enforced to undergo.
Nor all the house can his small strength maintain,
One little part great Caesar can contain:
Whilst his great thoughts both fear, and anger bear,
He fears assaults, and yet disdaines to fear,
So in small traps a noble Lion caught
Rages, and bites his scorned goal with wrath;
So would fierce Vulcane rage, could any stop
Sicilian Aetnas fiery cavernes top.
He that in dire Pharsalian fields of late
In a bad cause presumed on prosperous fate,
And feared not the Senates host, nor all
The Roman Lords, nor Pompey general,
Feared a slaves war: he here assaulted took
A house, whom Sythians bold dust near provoke,
The Alani fierce, nor Mauritanians hot,
Which fast-bound strangers barbarously shoot.
He whom the Roman world could not suffice,
Nor all that twixt the Gades, and India lies,
Like a weak boy seeks lurking holes alone.
Or woman in a late surprised town:
Nor hopes for safety but in keeping close,
And through each room with steps uncertain goes,
But not without the King; him he retains
About his person still: his life he means
Shall the revenge, and expiation be
Of his own fate; thy head, o Ptolomey,
He means to throw for want of darts, or fire
Against thy servants; as Medea dire,
When her pursuing Sires revenge she fled,
Stood armed against her little brothers head
To stay her Sire. But desperate fate so nigh
Enforced Caesar terms of peace to try.
A courtier from the absent King is sent
To check his men, and know this wars intent.
But there the law of Nations could obtain
No power: their Kings Ambassador is slain
Treating of peace, to add one horrid crime
O monstrous Egypt, to thy impious clime.
Impious Pharnaces Pontus Thessaly,
Nor Spain, nor Iubaes far-spread monarchy,
Nor barbarous Syrtis durst attempt to do,
What here ^ffaeminate Egypt reaches too.
The war on every side grows dangerous,
And showers of falling darts even shake the house.
No battring ram had they to force the wall,
Nor any engine fit for war at all:
Nor used they fire: the skillesse people run
Through the vast palace scattered up, and down,
And use their joined strength no where at all:
The fates forbid, and fortune's Caesar's wall.
But where the gorgeous palace proudly stands
Into the sea, from ships the Navall bands
Assault the house; but Caesar every where
Is for defense at hand, and weapons here,
There wildfire uses. Though besiedg'd he be,
Does the besiedgers work (such strength had he
Of constant spirit) wild fire balls he threw
Among the joined ships; nor slowly flew
The flame on pitchy shrowds, and bords, that drop
With melted wax: at once the saileyards top,
And lowest hatches burn. An half burnt boat
Here drownes in seas, their foes and weapons floate,
Nor ore the ships alone do flames prevail;
But all the houses near the shore assail:
The South winds feed the flame, and drive it on
Along the houses with such motion,
As through the VVelkin fiery meteors run,
That wanting fuel feed on air alone,
This fire a while the courts besiedging stayed,
And drew the people to the cities aid.
Caesar that time would not in sleep bestow,
Who well could use occasions, and knew how
In war to take the greatest benefit
Of sudden chances, ships his men by night,
Surprises Pharos: Pharos heretofore
An Island was, when prophet Proteus wore
That crown: but joined to Alexandria now.
Two helps on Caesar does that fort bestow:
Commands the sea, the foes incursions stayed,
And made a passage safe for Caesar's aid.
He now intends no longer to differ
Protinus (c) death, though not enough severe.
Not fire, nor beasts, nor gibbets reaue his breath,
Slain with a sword he dies great Pompey's death.
Arsinoe (d) from court escaped goes
By Ganymedes help to Caesar's foes,
The ^owne (as Lagus daughter) to obtain,
By whose just sword was stern Achillas slain.
Another to thy ghost is sacrificed
Pompey, but fortune is not yet sufficed,
Far be it, ^ods, that these two deaths should be
His full revenge; the fall of Ptolomey,
And Aegypts ruin not enough is thought:
Nor ere can his revenge be fully wrought,
Till Caesar by the Senates swords be slain.
But though the author's dead, these broiles remain;
For Ganymedes now commander moov'd
A second war, which full of danger proov'd.
So great the peril was, that day alone
Might Caesar's name to future times renown.
While Caesar strives pent up so closely there
To ship his men from thence, a sudden fear
Of war did his intended passage meet:
Before his face the foes well-rigged fleet,
Behind their foot from shore against him fight:
No way of safety's left, valor, nor flight,
Nor scarce does hope of noble death remain.
No heaps of bodies, no whole armies slain
Are now required to conquer Caesar there:
A little blood will serve. Whether to fear,
Or wish for death he knows not. In this same
Sad strait, he thinks of noble Scaeva's fame,
Who at Dyrrachium, when his works were down,
Beseidg'd all Pompey's strength himself alone:
The Example raised his thoughts, resolved to do
What Scaeva did; but straight a scorn to owe
His valor to examples, checks again
That high resolve: great thoughts, great thoughts restrain.
Yet thus at last; Scaeva was mine, 'twas I
Nurtured that spirit: if like him I die,
I do not imitate, but Caesar's ^eate
Rather confirms that Scaevas act was great.
In this resolve had Caesar charged them all
Himself alone, and so a glorious fall
(Slain by a thousand hands at once) had met,
Or else enobled by a death so great
Those thousand hands; but fortune was afraid
To venture Caesar further then her aid
Could lend a famous rescue, and endeare
The danger to him; she discovers near
Ships of his own; thither when Caesar makes,
He finds no safety there, but straight forsakes
Those ships again, and leapes into the maine.
The trembling billows feared to entertain
So great a pledge of fortune, one to whom
Fate owed so many victoryes to come
And Jove (whilst he on Caesar's danger looks)
Suspects the truth of th'adamantine books.
Who could have thought, but that the gods above
Had now begun to favor Rome, and love
Her liberty again? and that the fate
Of Pompey's sons, of Cato, and the state
Against Caesar's fortune had prevailed now?
Why do the powers Caelestiall labor so,
To be unjust again? again take care
To save that life they had exposed so far
That now the danger even in Caesar's eye,
Might clear their doom of partiality?
But he must live until his fall may prove
Brutus and Cassius were more just then Jove.
Now all alone on seas does Caesar floate;
Himself the oars, the Pylot, and the boat;
Yet could not all these offices employ
One man's whole strength, for his left hand on high
Raised, holds up his papers, and preserues
The fame of his past deeds, his right hand serves
To cut the waves, and guard his life alone
Against the Oceans perils, and all darts, which thrown
From every side do darken all the sky,
And make a cloud, though heaven it self deny,
Two hundred paces thus alone he swam
Till to the body of his feet he came,
His ore-ioy'd soldiers shouting to the skies
Take sure presage of future victoryes.
FINIS.
Annotations on the tenth Book.
(a) Cambyses the son of Cyrus, and king of Persia added to his monarchy the
kingdom of Egypt; he intended a farther war against the Aethiopians, which
are called Macrobij by reason of the extraordinary length of their natural
lives. But by reason of the tediousness of the march, and want of provision,
there was in his army a great famine, that they killed by lot every tenth
soldier, and fed upon them.

(b) Achillas coming to assault Caesar had an army of twenty thousand; they
were many of them Roman soldiers, which had served before under Gabinius, but
had changed their manner of life, and corrupted with the riot of Egypt, had
quite forgotten the Roman discipline

(c) Photinus the Kings tutor remaining with Caesar sent secret encouragements
to Achillas to go forward with his siedge, which being discovered by
interception of his messengers he was slain by Caesar.

(d) Ganymedes an Eunuch, and tutor to Arsinoe the yo^ger sister of the King of
Egypt, assaulted Achillas by treachery, and sl^w him, and being himself made
General of the army he continued the siedge against Caesar.

FJNJS.

