A Dream of the Devil and Dives:

Most terrible and fearful to the servants of Satan, but right comfortable
and acceptable to the Children of God.

Plaineley described by way of Dialogue, very necessary to be read advisedly,
and heard attentively, both of Rulers and inferiors, rich, and poor, young
and old, wise and simple, that wish rather to dwell in heaven, then in hell.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Dawson, for Henry Carre. 1589.

To the right honorable Lord, Francis, Earl of Bedford, one of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, grace
and peace with God and man.
THough some (right Honorable) have with no small industry and study set forth
books and pamphlets most false, yea and ridiculous, for the seducing of the
simple, and hurt of many, and also though diverse do daily publish fond and
fantastical books, neither te^ding to the public profit, nor common commodity
of any, but only to feed the foolish fancies of fond heads: yet I, as
Christian charity commands, and as one that detesteth such wicked and
erroneous writing, and vain and unprofitable inditing, have now in this
perilous time, when no good admonition will be accepted, neither any godly
thing practiced, of very zeal, set forth a dreadful dream of the devil and
Dives, to terrify the wicked, to fear the faithless, and to stay the
Atheistes and the sinful worldlings from going to hell, fearing that many are
so diuellishly bent and regard God so little, that they will not be the better
for it, but weigh it rather as a false and foolish dream, (who if there be any
such as I fear there be too many) will wish they had taken warning thereby, if
they come once in hell, and though the book seem little and light, yet the
matter therein contained is of great importance and weight, if our everlasting
salvation and damnation, and the losing of the kingdom of heaven and the
winning of the dungeon of hell, may be so counted: a more curious work and
cunningly contrived I might have penned, but a more necessary book I could
not have published: and as the same is most worthy to be marked and regarded,
even so I thought meet to dedicate it to your honor being a zealous and
worthy personage, trusting your Lordship will not only pardon my boldness
herein (though I so simple a person and unknown of your honor, have so rashly
presumed:) but also that you will respect the gift, not the Giver: the meaning,
not the penning: and the mark that I shoot at, and not my unskillful
shooting, and thus briefly I commit your honor to the living God, whose mercy
is marvelous, whose power is infinite, and whose love does exceed.

Your Lordships most humble and obedient to command. Thomas Lupton.

A Dream of the Devil and Dives, most terrible and fearful to the servants
of Satan, but right comfortable and acceptable to the children of God, plainly
described by way of Dialogue, very necessary to be read advisedly, and heard
attentively, both of Rulers and inferiors, rich and poor, young and old,
wise and simple, that wishes rather to dwell in heaven then in hell.
Theophilus and Eumenides being speakers. Theophilus. I Muse very much why
Eumenides comes hither so sadly, he was wont to be very merry, as other
worldlings as he is, are most commonly, when (God knows) they have most
cause to lament and be sorry: but though he live contrary to the Rule of a
Christian. I will (as charity wills me) give him some godly and comfortable
counsel, (if he will utter to me the cause of his sorrow.) Eumenides, how
chances it that you are so sad? What aileth you man? Is your wife sick? or any
of your children dead? Or are you robbed or spoiled of any of your goods or
treasure? Or have you had any other worldly misfortune? Hide not thy grief
from me, for though you do not greatly care for my company? yet I assure you, I
am much desirous of yours, yea, and I do love you better then you love your
self: for I love you so well, that I wish the endless life and joys, both of
your soul and body in the kingdom of heaven: whereas you only desire the
most vain and short pleasures of your body in earth, A Godly friend.
though it tend to your endless destruction in the dungeon of hell.

Therefore hide not your grief from him that loves you so dearly, and though
I am not able to recover your loss, or amend that is amiss, yet with my good
counsel I hope to comfort you.


Eu. I thank you for this your undeserved friendship. Indeed, as you say, the
loss of goods, the death of children, the sickness of a faithful and loving
wife, and such other worldly calamities, do make worldly men thoughtfull, and
their hearts to be sorrowful. But, to say truly, sickness of wife, death of
children, loss of goods, and other worldly calamities should make us merry and
joyful in respect of other things, that we make no account of.


Theo. I perceive now in you a greater alteration then ever I did: for ever
since I knew you, you have been altogether a right worldling, and so
accordingly, nothing could make you more sorrowful then wordly misfortunes:
and nothing more merry then earthly prosperity: but now it seems that you
are otherwise changed and minded.


Eu. You have hit the truth, for I assure you since you last saw me, I am as
clean turned, as though black should be white, and darkness should be light.


Theo. Of this your godly change none is more glad then I: for I have persuaded
you as much as I might to despise worldly pleasures, to be patient in trouble,
not to lament for worldly losses, not to mourn for the Godly death of your
friends, nor to be careful for any worldly calamity: for I have told you
many a time and often, that neither perfect felicity, not extreme misery, are
to be found in this life: Therefore this your godly alteration makes me
believe, that either you have been in some godly man's company, or at some
learned man's Sermon, which is Gods appointed ordinary means, to win the
wicked.


Eu. Though I am changed, yet it is not by any good counsel, nor by any
preaching or Sermon, as you suppose, for I never cared for that company that
used any virtuous talk, or would give any godly counsel: and as for preachings
or sermons, I cared not much for them, mary sometimes (but that was very
seldom) I went to a Sermon, Why the wicked go to sermons.
rather to seem obedient to my prince, then for any devotion to Gods word, and
for an hypocritical show, then for any desire to learn any goodness: which
might well appear by my fruits that do follow. For when I came home from the
Sermon, the least thing contrary to my mind, would make me fret and fume,
fall out with my wife, or brawle with my servants, though the preacher taught
me to be patient: and though I had great and dainty cheer, yet I never
remembered my poor hungry brother, neither would I give him one scrappe
thereof: though the preacher threatened me with Dives, which therefore went to
hell. My garments made me proud, my wealth made me stout, I disdained them
that were poorer then I, and I envied the prosperity of mine enemy, and (to
say, the truth) I was rather worse after I had heard the Sermon then I was
before. Therefore say what they listed and preach what they would, all my whole
mind was still in getting worldly wealth, pampering my body, and feeding my
fancy, making no account of heaven nor hell, nor of God nor the devil.


Theo. Though you in that case made no account of the devil: yet doubtless,
the devil made some account of you.


Eum. Be sure of that, yet I know certainly he is deceived, but if God had
made no more account of me then I did of my self: the devil had not bin so
deceived of me as he is, nor I so out of his danger as I am: for I was in the
very high way to hell, and none went faster to the devil then I: though you and
diverse other willed me to forsake that way, but all that would not serve.


Theo. Then who caused you to turn back again, or to forsake that evil way
you walked in.


Eu. Who turned S. Paul from going to persecute the saints.


Theo. God, who else?


Eu. Even so it was only God that caused me to turn out of the way to hell.
Therefore me thinks, that they are in a very erroneous opinion, that affirm
they have Free Will: Free Will an erroneous opinion.
yea, and have power of themselves to do such good deeds, as may bring them to
heaven: for if Saint Paul and I, had no power to do that evil we pretended,
which is our natural inclination: then it is far unlike that any should have
Free Will, or power to do well, which is clean contrary to their natural
disposition.


Theo. That is most certain, for who has power to awake, when nature
constrains him to sleep, who can remember all things that he will, and
forget nothing? Who has free will to perform to go to any place and at any
time that he will appoint? who has free will to be healthful and not to be
sick? or to have his wits perfitely and never to be made? Or what healthful
man can fast four or five days, and will not be hungry? None on the earth I
am sure. Now, if we have not free will to do the works of men and earthly
things, then how is it possible that we should have free will to do the
works of God or heavenly things? Mark well.
Therefore I may say that they are rather dolts then Doctors, lewd then well
learned: and wicked then witty, that hold or believe this fond or ridiculous
opinion of the power of man's free will. But I pray you tell me, (for I am very
much desirous to know) after, what sort, or by what other means has God
changed your mind.


Eu. Seeing you are desirous to know, I will not be unwilling to tell you: it
chanced that of late I and a sort of wicked worldlings (that never loved God,
nor feared the devil) did sup altogether, where we lacked neither fine fare,
dainty dishes, plenty of wine, pleasant music, nor any thing else that might
make us merry. If you had seen our unreasonable quaffing, our abominable
talking, and heard our detestable swearing, you would have taken us for devils,
correspendent to my name, in the likeness of men. And when we were in the
mids of our cups, one of our Minstrelles gave us a Song, touching Fasting,
Praying, and Alms deeds, and reproved swearing, drunkenness and other sins:
but he might have sunge it to the wall as well as to us: and then one of my
company said to him that sunge the Song: Sir, this Song is more meet for a
Church then a Tavern, few come to Tauernes to fast, pray, and give Alms: I
mean not, says he, to weaken my body with too much fasting, I will eat
fast, and drink fast, and that is the fast that I mean to fast. Then said an
other, I mean not to wast my goods with giving of Alms, I will not maintain
a sort of idle knaves and Drabs with my goods, I have got it my self, and why
should I not spend it on my self? Let the sermon runners and pitiful
protestants relieve them: marry when I am at the point of death, and when I
see that I can keep my goods no longer, perhaps I will appoint by my will, that
some poor folks shall have half penny dole, or a half penny loaf, but
surely as long as I live, they get none. The^ said the third, you are not so
unwilling to give Alms, but I am as unapt to pray, and (to say truly) what
need a man pray for any thing that lackes nothing: I have health, wealth, and
liberty, what would one have more? Therefore, if I pray, I should pray for
nothing, for I lack nothing: but what mad man will pray for nothing, therefore
least I should be counted a mad man, I will not pray at all.

Then said another of our company, Sir, your Song is against drinking, which
you call drunkenness, but I will not leave driming for all your song: for
drinking well over night makes me to sleep soundly all the night after, and my
sound sleeping makes me have a good memory. Sir (said the Minstrel) you are
happy that such a good commodity comes unto you by drunkenness, which you
count quaffing or drinking, for I have bin drunken diverse times, which I fore
repent, and thereupon I have slept soundly: but I could never perceive that it
brought me any good memory: For I remembered not my sin committed to God
through my drunkenness, which in deed had bin a good memory: for thereby
perhaps might have grown repentance for the same, so that I cannot think
that any such fruit as good memory is, can grow out of quaffing and
drunkenness. How like you this Minstrell (said I) has he not made a good
argument against you: I will have no more such minstrels in my company, (said
he) at my hands therefore he shall fare the worse, and his reward shall be the
less. And now let both Ministers and Minstrels say what they will, I will
quaffe and drink whiles I may: mary some say it will make me blind before I am
half old, but that is no matter: for I were as good drink mine eyes out while
I am alive, as have the worms eat them out when I am dead. Thus every one
said something in comme^ding or allowing the sin that he liked and when we
had thus wasted the time in surfeiting, too much drinking, vain sporting, and
sinful talking, to the hurting of our bodies, and mispending of our goods, to
the evil example of our neighbors, to the grief of the godly, to the
daungering of our souls, and to the high displeasing of God, we every one
took our leave of other. But some (I may say to you) was enforst to be lead
home. And so I for my part went to bed, without either knowledging of God, or
feeling my sin, and so more like a brute beast then the Image of God, I fell
a sleep.


Theo. O what a dangerous case were you in? What if you had dyed before you
had waked, as many have done suddenly? You know that no man can repent,
unless he knowledge his sin, neither can any be forgiven, unless he ask
mercy, neither can mercy be granted without firm faith in Christ, without
al which (by your own saying) you fell a sleep. I assure you the stoutest man
that ever was, never adventured himself in such a danger, though he were
enforced to fight alone, against ten thousand men, and as many monsters,
neither was he in such a hazard, if he were of a perfect faith and put his
whole trust in God (for he did but adventure the loss of his short life in
this world) but you did hazard the loss of your everlasting life in the
joyful kingdom of heaven, therefore it stands us all upon, to watch and
pray, both at our rising in the morning and in our travels in the day time;
yea, and at night before we fall a sleep, and then to remember our sins
past, to bewail the same, and earnestly to ask mercy of God therefore, and
firmly to believe the forgiveness thereof, through the death and passion of
Christ. He that sleeps on this pillow, sleeps safely, though he sleep not
soundly, but he that slepeth on the softest down pillow in the world, without
this, he may sleep soundly, but I am sure he does not sleep safely.


Eu. You say most truly, and I know it most certainly, but if he that
sleeps with out this your precious pillowe one night, be in such danger,
then what danger, have I been in, that have slept without it, I think ten
thousand nights at least: nay, the most part of all my life, But thanks be to
God that has preserved me from such a marvelous danger.


Theo. Did you rise the next day in your wonted order, and did you follow your
former folly?


Eu. No, I thank God, for I had a bridle that did draw me back: and I had a
Bit to chaw on, that made me to stay.


Theo. What was that, I beseech you tell me?


Eu. Forsooth in my sleep I fell into a wonderful strange dream, which was
the occasion of this my sudden change.


Theo. You know that for the most part Dreams are foolish, false, and
fantastical: therefore it is not like that, that was the cause.


Eu. Though many dreams are so, yet all are not so. For Joseph's dream (which
was the Son of Jacob) was neither false or vain, Genesis 38.
neither came of foolish cogitations, nor of vain imaginations, but it was
most true, coming only of GOD and wrought a marvelous effect: for thereby
Joseph became not only a figure of Christ: but also was a great safeguard to
his father and brethren, in the great dearth that did follow, which dearth was
revealed to Joseph by that dream.


Theo. Yea, he was a godly man, and therefore God foreshewed the same to him
by a Dream.


Eu. King Pharaos Butler and Baker were heathen or wicked men, Genesis 40.
or at the least, far inferior to Joseph in goodness, yet they dreamed true
dreams, and according to Joseph's interpretation, the Butler was restored into
Pharaos favor, and into his Office again, but the Baker was hanged. King
Nabuchadnezer was the enemy of God, and hated Gods people: yet he dreamed a
true Dream, which Daniell interpreted unto him, Dan. ^.
whereof the effect did follow accordingly: for he fed seven years like a
beast in the fields, under the dew of heaven, and thus God did bring down
the hawty and proud heart of that great and mighty king, his enemy, to know
that he himself was the mighty king of heaven and earth, whereby he did
humble himself to God, all which was revealed to him through Gods divine power
and wisdom by a dream. Also the four Monarchs were reueiled to him by a
dream, interpreted by Daniell: Daniell. 2.
now if God has vouchsafed to show true dreams to an heathen, a tirant, a
persecutor of his people, a blasphemer of God, and one that despised God, and
took him not for his God, then why should you doubt, but that God likewise
may and has reueiled unto me a true dream that I am baptize a Christian, that
take Christ to be my Savior, and confesses with mouth and heart, God the
maker of heaven and earth, though through the instigation of the devil, I have
denied him in my deeds.


Theo. I must needs grant that you have spoken wisely and truly, I am glade
to hear these words come out of your mouth: but mark this one thing: many a
one have dreamed most wonderful and strange dreams and seen such things in
their sleep, as it were in visions, that had been enough to have made them
repent, and to live godly, but yet for all that they were never the beter, nor
turned from their wickedness.


Eu. I grant no less, yet that makes not, that my dream has not caused me
to turn from my sin, though some seeds are sown among stones, brambles,
high ways, and eaten of birds whereby they are sown in vain, and bring
forth no fruit: yet some is cast in good ground, and brings forth plenty
(as this Dream has taken root in me, and wrought this good effect.)
Wherefore I would not have you to doubt my sayings, for that same God that
caused Joseph, the husband of Mary the virgen and mother of Christ, through his
Dream to fly into Egypt, with Christ and his mother, to save the childs life
from the cruelty of Herod: he (I say) has only enfla^ed my heart through
this dream, to fly from any sin, to save my soul from the cruelty of the
Devil and the torments of hell.


Theo. Now I perceive that God of his merciful goodness has drawn you from
the Devil by this dream. He calls whom he will, when he will, and by what
means he will. But tell me I pray you, were any of your companions that did
sup with you, moved to repentance and amendment of life, as you are? Or had
they any such dream?


Eum. Not that I know, but if they had not, I would to God they had: The one of
them (as I understand) died suddenly in his bed that same night following,
without any token of repentance, or once calling upon God for mercy, and as
for ye other, they are the same men they were before, as far as I know,
neither are they allured through this my yalteration, nor feared with the
sudden death of the other. Oh how much am I bound to God, that has culled me
out from among the rest, and has revealed to me by such a divine dreeme, such
things as have made me of the son of Satan, the child of God. He might have
made me to die suddenly as the other did, and caused him that died suddenly,
to dream as I did, if he had would.


Theo. That is most true, but it may be that he that dyed thus suddenly would
not have turned to God as you do, if he had dreamed as you did: therefore God
works all things for the best, according to his heavenly will, and wisdom.
He sees (like the good husbandman) what ground is apt to bring forth fruit.


Eu. I was as evil ground as could be, I was more wicked then he, and if my
loving God with the dew of his grace, had not moistened and softened my heart,
to make ye dream penetrate into the same, I should have bin no more turned by
my dream, then the rest are changed through the fearful and sudden death of
their drunken companion.


Theo. You speak most truly, what a marvelous change is this, A great
change.
that I now see in you? Yesterday wicked, this day godly: yesterday the child
of the devil: this day the son of God: yesterday as one dead in sin, this
day as one alive from sin. But now as you told me that you are turned by
your Dream, so I beseech you to tell me the manner of your Dream.


Eu. Forsooth my dream was of the devil and Dives, Luke 16.
that is, of the rich glutton spoken of by Christ. Me thought I saw Dives in
great burning flames of fire, making such lamentable moan, that it would have
pitied the hardest heart in the world to have heard him.


Theo. Dives the rich glutton, spoken of by Christ in the gospel, is thought
(by the judgment of diverse learned men) to be rather a Parable then an
History.


Eu. Whether it be a Parable or no Parable, I know not, but my dream thereof
will never out of my mind, which as it is very lamentable, so it is to me
very profitable.


Theo. What were Dives words I pray you?


Eu. He said thus, as follows: woe worth the time that ever I was borne,
woe worth all my goods and riches. I would I had been the poorest wretch on
the earth: for then I should not have bin drowned in such worldly pleasures as
I was: for it was my worldly wealth that wrought all my mischief, and brought
me to these doleful and intolerable torments of hell, little wot they what
harm they procure for themselves, that powle so for worldly prosperity and
wealth: for wealth and riches are snares and ginnes to bring men to the Devil,
Then me thought I saw the devil most terrible, not far from him, saying:
Nay Dives, it was not thy wealth, but the wicked using, or evil spending of
thy wealth, that has brought thee to this.

Oh said Dives, I wanted the grace of God and then how could I use my goods
well: Then said the Devil, thou prayedst not for the grace of God and then how
could thou have it: But if thou had been, ye most poor and miserable
wretch in ye world: yet if thou had not taken thy poverty patiently and
thankfully, and therewithal depended upon Gods fatherly providence and mercy,
thou should have been in as evil a case as thou art, for riches well used
is no harm, and poverty impatiently taken, does no good.

Then said Dives to the devil, thou speak now to me that, whith can do me
nogood, which thou would have been loathe I should have heard, being alive
on the earth, when it might have done me good. Then said the devil to him, it
had made no great matter, if thou had heard it, for there are now on the
earth, many wicked worldlings that are both wealthy, proud, and disdain full,
as thou wast, and that have more teaching and preching then ever thou had,
and yet they are so bewiched with their wealth so puffed up with their
possessions, so proud with their gorgious attire, and so drowned in their
delicate dishes, that they will not hear it, and if they hear it they quckely
forget, and some perhaps prates or prattles of it a little, but practice it
never a whit.

Then said Dives, I was once in the case that they are in, but they were best
take heed least thy come into the place that I am in, else, mark this.
though they have earthly honor for awhile as I had, they shall have endless
horror in hell as I have: for graudy geere on earth, they shall have gnashing
of teeth in hell: for vain same on earth, they shall have shame in hell: for
curtisy and waiting, they shall have curssednes and wailing, for short wealth
endless want, for fine fare continual famishing, for pleasant perfumes most
stinking smells, and for short pleasures on earth, everlasting pains in hell.
Oh if they felt that I feel, they would do as I would do on earth, if I
were there: then said the devil to him, what would thou do if thou werte
living on the earth again?

Then said Dives, I would to God that I were there as I was to prove: for
then I would so repent my sins, and call to God for his mercy in Christ
Jesus, that I would not doubt: nay, I am most assured I should not only escape
this doleful place where I am: but also attain the endless joys of heaven:
from whence I am now excluded for ever. If I were now living on the earth, and
if I were ten thousand times richer then I was, and might live ten times longer
then I did, knowing that I know, and feeling that I feel, I would so frame my
self to exercise the scriptures, and to follow the word of God, that my
flesh should not entice me, the world should not allure me, nor all the devils
in hell should deceive me. Then said the devil, he were a wily fellow that I
could not deceive, I deceived thy first parents. Adam and Eve in paradise, and
caused them to break Gods commandment, spoken to them there, then do thou
think that I could not deceive and allure thee to neglect God and his word,
declared on the earth, if thou were there alive again. Many that God plagues
on the earth daily, Promises to God broken.
do call and cry upon God in their torments and pain, and do promise
vehemently, that if ever they recover or be restored to their health again,
they will turn over a new leaf, they will change their life, and amend their
living, but when they have their health as they had before, or be out of pains
as they were before, then they are as evil, or worse then they were before.
When God has once served their turn, they care no more for him, and then they
are ruled by me, that could not help them: nay, seek their destruction.

Then said Dives, though they that God plagues with vehement sickness and
other pains and torments on the earth, do forget God, and their promise when
they be well: either for that they presume too much on Gods mercy, or else
forget or believe not that there are such everlasting pains appointed for the
wicked, or else assuring themselves to repent, and ask mercy at their death,
which is but a very brickle staff to leave or stay on: yet if I were alive on
the earth, no worldly felicity should tempt me, no pleasure should procure me,
no wealth should win me, nor no delicates should draw me, to forget that God,
that made all things for man, that sent his only son to dye for man, and
has prepared his kingdom of heaven for man, neither to do any thing to
offend God, or danger my soul, that flesh and blood through Gods grace, were
able to refuse. For it is far unlike that they that are alive on the earth,
should be so earnest, and wary in the way to walk to heaven, or to fly
from the way to hell, as I, that have utterly lost these everlasting joys of
heaven, and that feels the fiery flames of hell. But when they are here
where I am, then they will lament as I do and then they would give all the
world, (if it were theirs to give) to be but one hour alive on the earth, to
repent their sins, and to call for Gods mercy in the death of Jesus Christ.
But then alas it will be too late for them, as it is now for me. Oh the greatest
pains on earth is pleasure and joy, in comparison to the torments of hell.
Then said the devil, and the greatest pleasure on the earth are extreme
torments to the joys of heaven.

Then said Dives, why did thou lose the joys that thou hadest. Then the
Devil said, why did thou lose the joys thou might have had: to whom Dives
said, if I had knownes the joys of heaven as well as thou did, and had
been in heaven as well thou wast, I would not have lost heaven as thou did:
then said the devil, I may thank my pride for it: for if I could have been
content with my estate, which was too good for me I had remained there still,
but I presumed to be higher, and therefore I was brought lower: for whereas I
was the chiefest Angel in Heaven, now am I the chiefest devil in hell. And
so have I lost heaven for hell, where I with all my fellows that took my part,
and fell from heaven with me, shall remain in most extreme and endless torments
for ever: whereat I tremble and quake. Then said Dives, even so I by my pride,
and wickedness on earth, have lost God for the devil, heaven for hell, and
endless joys for everlasting pains: but thou wicked Fiend was the cause why
our first parent Adam was cast out of Paradise which was the casting away of
him and all his seed.

Then said the devil, it spighted me so much that man should have my room
yt I lost, that, wilily and subtily, The envy and spite of the devil to man.
I entised him to fall, whereby he did not only loose the favor of God, and
the joys that he prepared for him: but also he and all his seed became the
children of wrath and damnation: and so they should become my companinons in
hell. Then said Dives, but God of his merciful goodness prevented thy wicked
and most envious drift, in making his only son being God, to become man, who
humbled him self to the death of the Cross for ye redemption of mankind which
is a sufficient satisfaction for man's transgression, whereby the godly
repentant sinners that believe in him shall be saved and cleansed from their
sins, and be counted the Sons of God, as though they had never sinned, I
know that too well, said the Devil, which is almost as great a grief unto
me as mine own fall out of heaven. For, whereas before I thought to have all
mankind to bear me company in hell: now I shall lack a great sort of them: but
I am glad of one thing, the greater number will be mine, said the Devil: for
all the heathen, and worshippers of Idolles, are the children of damnation,
live they never so honestly and virtuously in the sight of the world, whereof
the most part of the world does consist.

Then said Dives, that is true, and only the true and repentaunt Christians,
that favor and love the Gospel, and have all their Faith and hope in Christ,
touching their salvation shall be saved, and none else, brag they never so much?
yea, said the devil, that is it that makes me glad, for a great sort of them
that are named Christians, do live worse then the heathen, and dye worse then
dogs, so that they shall be damned as well as the heathen, whom Christ's death
can not profit, and therefore for all Christs-death. Hell will not be empty,
nor heaven will not be full: nay, More shall be damned then saved.
hell shall possess the greater part. That is too true said Dives (the more
to be lamented) for Christ says (which is the very truth it self, and cannot
lie. Matthew. 7.
) Wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat: but straight is the gate, and narrow is the
way, which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. And also be
says: Many are called, and few be chosen. Whereby it appears that there
shall be a far greater number that shall be damned then saved, of which greater and
damned number I am one: woe, woe, to me therefore: but if I were alive on the
earth again, but one half hour, as I was before (which can not be) I would
not doubt, but to be one of that little small number, that should enter into
heaven: Nay, so that I were alive again as I was, A lamentable saying of Dives.
I would not care to be all my life, though I lived five thousand years, in
continual pains and torments: yea, and if it were possible, to be all that
while as a Log at a fire back, continually burning without any ease or
refreshing one minute of an hour, for that cruel bodily burning would once
have an end, but this extreme spiritual torment in hell will never end. Then
the devil answered him again: yea, but when thou was on the earth, thou
would suffer no pain for Gods sake, thou preparedst so for thy vile and
earthly carcass, that no cold should hurt thee, neither any heat might
annoy thee, but thou could suffer Lazarus one of thy poor brethren, and
members of Christ (without all pity and compassion) to lie in the streets,
most miserably in the cold, and to perish through hunger. But thou have gained
nothing by it: and he has lost nothing by it. For he shall have everlasting
joys, and thou shall have endless sorrows. Therefore now he may be called
rich Lazarus, and thou poor Dives. Woe is me, said Dives, therefore, I
disdained him so much, that I thought scorn to look on him, I esteemed my
Dogs better then him: they were in my fine house, and were fed from my
table, but I suffered Lazarus to lie without my gates, and would give him never
a whit, O how pittiles was I, I muse how I could be so hard hearted, Fie on
me wretch, fie on me caitife, would I have bin contented to have bin so used,
if I had bin in his case? No no, I am sure.

Therefore let all earthly persons take heed by me, and do as they would be
done unto, and then they cannot do amiss, and not to pamper their paunches,
but to pity the poor, nay, to spare from themselves, and to give it to the
poor. O how many poor might I have relieved, with that which I have spent in
vain, and what am I the better now for any thing that I did spend on my
self: Therefore I would to God that I had bestowed al my riches, treasure, and
lands, in releeuing the poor, for then I should have been repayed at Gods
hand hereafter: whatsoever is given to the poor is lent to the Lord, What
soever is given to the poor is le^t to God.
and he will repay that truly in the kingdom of heaven, with no small
advantage. But whatsoever we spend in vain on our selves, and on the rich it
is lent to the Devil, and he will repay us again in hell with endless pains
and torments, And for that I have lent my money to the Devil, What is lent to
the Devil.
I look to be paid the same at his hands in the everlasting flames of hell
fire.


Theo. Oh what a lamentable talk was this of Dives, his words do pearce my
heart, his remedelesse case makes my heart to bleed. How happy are we that
may be warned by him, but how unhappy is he that is such a warning to us. He
could be content now to be as a fire log to burn a thousand years on the
earth, for the love of Christ, that he might escape the endless fire of hell:
but now it will not be.


Eumen. Yea, but I think there is not now one among ten thousand, that
willingly will suffer the pains of burning one half hour for Christ's sake to
shun Hell, and thereby to enjoy, the endless joys of heaven. Mark this well.



Theo. Well, as there have been many that have been content to do so, even so
no doubt there are, and will be many that will do so, if they be vrg^^ unto
it, but not without the great comfort and ^ssistance of God. But what fools
are they that ^^^use to do it? These short earthlye pains bring everlasting
joys, and these vain and short earthly pleasures bring endless torment and
pain. But now go forward with your dream I beseech you? For I think your
dream did not end, where I caused you to stay your tale.


Eumen. No, that it did not, therefore now I will proceed with my doleful
dream, Dives furthermore said, O how hapy are they that are on the earth, for
that they have time to repent, and to live, godly, to whom the Devil answered:
yea, but how unhappy are they that will not repent, but lives most abhomiably
and wickedly. Then said Dives, if their hearts were not hardened and their
minds bewitched, they would not do so, they I perceive make little account
of that precious Jewel the Gospel, which teaches them the high way to
Heaven, and so to shune the fiery flames of hell. Oh, if I were a live again,
it should never go out of my hand. Then said the devil many carry it in their
hands but very few in their hearts. Then said Dives, if they that have the
gospel walk in the way to Hell: then it is impossible for them that know it
not, to walk in the way to heaven. But I damned wretch yt I am, (if I were
alive again as they are) would not only daily read it, Note this.
but also in my living practice it. Al worldly affairs are vain in comparison
to it: for the best that one can bring, is but short worldly pleasure: but the
other does bring most heavenly and endless ioys. Then said ye Devil to Dives,
if thou werte on the earth again alive as thou wast, yet I do not believe
thou would do as thou say, thou would play rather as many thieves do
that are condemmned to death, which will promise with vehement oaths that if
they might have there pardons, would live honestly, ciuilly, and observe their
princes laws, but when they have got their pardon, they forget either oath or
promise, Thieves forget their promise.
and do fall to theeuing as fast as ever they did. O no, no said Dives though
they are careless, when they have their pardon.
yet I would be kareful: for they have not tasted of ye death of their body due
for their fault, as I have tasted of the death of my soul, due for my sins:
yea, and if these worldly thieves were as sure to be cast into prison, and to
be hanged for their theift, as I am sure to be cast into the prison of hell, and
to hang their in cruel torments for ever and ever for my offenses to God,
they I think, would leave off their stealing, and would live honestly and
orderly, as I would cease from vice and wickeddesse, and live virtuously and
godly.


Theo. Truly, this your talk makes my heart to morn for the case of Dives
that is without all hope of remedy, therefore it stands us greatly upon to
live warily and virtuously in this life, where the time and place is of the
amendment of our lives, and the hope of our salvation.


Eume. You say true, But how much am I bound unto God, that of his mere mercy
has called me to repentance and amendment of life, by this doleful Dream of
Dives whereby I shall not only avoid (through Christ my savior) the Dungeon
of hell, but also enjoy the endless and unspeakable joys of heaven. And now
mark me well for I will go forward with my dream where I left, Oh said Dives,
if I might live on the earth again, as I cannot, I would be humble of body,
and meek of mind, as I was not, I would speak gentle and mildly, and then
as Christ says, I should be happy and blessed.

Yea, said the Devil, but because thou wast proud in thy apparel, Good to be
humble.
and hawtie of mind, and disdayned thy poor brother Lazarus, now thou accursed
and unhappy, and shall dwell with me for ever in the fiery flames of Hell.
Then said Dives there is no remedy, I must needs do so, woe be to me
therefore.

Oh, if I were alive on the earth again, said Dives as I was, I would be
merciful, Good to be merciful.
and then I should obtain mercy, and so I should be happy and blessed. Then
said the Diuill, but because thou wast a merciless wretch, thinking all to
little for thine own back and bellye, and fared diliciously, and was clothed
sumtuously, suffering poor Lazarus the member of thy christ to dye at thy Gate
for want of food, (who had to little, thou to much of which thy too much, if
he had had but a little, his life might have been saved, and thou the more
healthful,) therefore thou accurssed and exempt from the prescence of GOD, and
shall dwell in my company and my fellow deuiles for ever. How say thou
dives? has not thy merciless mind, thy abundance of fine fare, thy proud
apparel, and thy great riches and wealth, brought thee into a good case? Then
said Dives, if these greedy, pittiles, and merciless rich men now on the earth
knew my case, unless the Devil were on them, they would avoid my case. Then
said the Devil, I am not only on them, but with them, and in them, nay, they
are as thou thoughtst thy brethren were, they must have one come from hell, to
tell them news that thou art here, or else they will not believe. For I have
so hardened their hearts, that they will not believe it, though one should come
out of Hell to tell them thereof. For though Christ had come down from the
cross, at the wicked Jews commandment, yet they would have believed in him
never the more. Thy case is preached unto them daily out of the Gospel, but
they are no more sterred thereat, then a millstone is moved with a blaste of
ones mouth. For when these rich gluttons come from the Sermon, wherein the
preacher does threate them with thy being in hell, for thy unmercifulness to
poor Lazarus, and thundering out unto them, that if they be not merciful to
their poor Brethren, and relieve their needy necessity, they shall with out
all doubt be companions with thee in hell: they for all that, do go
shrinking away, or looking disdainfully on their poor, naked, and hungry
brethren, without giving them one pen or any merciful or comfortable words,
or causing any relief at al to be prepared for them: Which makes me hope
verily, that I shall have them here in hell with thee ere it be long.

Then said Dives, Oh, but if I were in their place and case, I would make no
account of any thing that I should have: al my mind should be in showing
mercy and pity, to the needy. For Christ at the last day, Mercy and pity
most necessary.
when he shall come to judge them and us al, will say: Come my blessed to the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning: for when I was hungry ye gave me
meat, Mart. 25.
when I was thirsty ye gave me drink, when I was naked, you clothed me, etc.
He will not say, you had ritche furred gowns upon your backs, you had goodly
gold Chains about your necks, and you had rich houses, and costly buildings,
and so because you were rich on earch, I will make you richer in heaven. No,
no, it is not money, but mercy, not pride, but pity, not lofttnesse, but
love, nor gay clothes, but charity, that then will serve their turn. For if
honor, wealth, costly building, rich attire, and dainty feeding, would have
brought men to heaven, I should not have gone to hell, for I lackt none of all
that. Nay patient poverty is the thing rather through Christ will do it, as
may appear by poor Lazarus, which has the most greatest pleasure, and
ritchest treasurs that can be wished or desired.


Thoe. Dives said most truly herein which he knows too well by proof, as as
these rich, greedy, and wicked worldlings shall feel themselves in hell
hereafter, if they be not more merciful to the poor then they be, and have
a greater care for them, then they have. But they are so drowned in wealth,
that they had rather die, then to give any part thereof to any good or godly
use.


Eu. Yea, but when their abusing mispending, or hourding of their riches shall
drown them in hell with Dives, and when they shall be tormented with the devils
in ye fire flams of hell for ever: then they will cry out of their riches, then
they will lament the mispending of their goods, and then they will repent that
they hourded their goods, and that they kept it from the poor, as Dives did.
But now I will go on with my doleful dream: then said the Devil to Dives,
Lazarus has got for short pains, endless pleasure: but thou (for thy short
pleasure) have got endless pain, they that are on the earth, may avoid these
thy pains if they will, for they are yet in the place of repentance and
mercy: but thou can not if thou would, for thou art out of the place of
repentance and mercy.

To whom Dives answered, the more doulful is my case. Oh, what bewiched fools
are these wicked rich men, Wicked rich men bewiched fools.
that so little regard their utter destruction of both body and soul. If I
were on the earth again as they are, I would go from house to house to relieve
the poor, I would feed the hungry prisoners, and would releue them that are
in misery, according to my power. I would not banquet the rich nor feed the
flatterers, but the most poor and miserable. wretches. The poor are the best
guestes.
Yea, the lame, the blind, and the sore, that lie in the streets, I would
send for, and they should be my guests, and they should fed on my food, and
if my rich neighbors disdained me for it, yet Christ that is richer then
they, would not mislike me for it. My purse should never be shut from the
poor, and I would always be ready to lend to the needy, and I would be
most glad, that I had it to serve their turn, when they lacked, for that
would be the next way to make God to serve my turn when I lake: if one were
promised to be (...) a duke and to have a Dukes honor and living, at ye end
of two years, would he think much to give Cockleshelles, Oystershelles, or
stones, to them that did ask him, during that time (especially if the not
giving thereof would make him loose his dukedom,) I think not, nay, he would
have such a rejoicing in ye Dukedom, yt he should have at ye two years end yt
he would little regard Cockleshelles, Oistershelles or stones.

Then what fools and noddies are they, The fondnes or folly of worldlings.
that will refuse to give in this short life to them that lack. Silver Gold,
Jewels, or other their worldly goods, seeing they are promised the endless
joys, and kingdom of heaven: the not giving whereof may make them loose that
worthy kingdom, which Silver and Gold of theirs, is more vile without
comparison to the endless kingdom of heaven, then Cockle-shelles, or stones,
are to an earthly dukedom.

Therefore I should, (and so would they if they were wise) have such a joy and
pleasure, that I should have such an endless and joyful kingdom, that I
should regard the giving of my silver and gold, no more to every one that
should ask me: then these rich earthly worldlings do now regard or esteem
cockle-shels, oistershels, or little peeble stones, in respect of a dukedom.

A small regard of the rich to the poor.
Then said the devil, I must needs grant that many have proud hearts, stately
countenances, and merciless minds: for if a cockleshel, or little stone would
do a poor blind or lame man pleasure, that sits by the way as they go, they
would not once stoop to give them one of them, nor yet stay one step therefore.

Then said Dives, yea, but (perhaps) they will stay and stoop to a gawdie
and vain woman, whom God does detest for her pride, and give her some Jewel
or other thing, worth no small piece of money, yea, and that unrequested, and
though they disdain to stoop for a cockleshell, to give the poor, yet
(perhaps) they will not think much, friendly to embrace a flattering varlet,
yea, and to give them three or four pieces of Gold, that shall privily
undermine them, and seek their spoil and overthrow, and though they think
scorn to stay and stoop for a little stone, to deliver to the poor, if it
would do them good: yet (perhaps) they will not only stoop and stay to
some noble man or other, but also give them, if they will take it, an hundredth
or two hundredth pounds, to put a poor man out of his Farm, thereby to undo
him, his, wi^e and children. And if these wicked and stately worldlings will
not stay or stoop to take up an oistershel for the poor (if it would do them
good) yet perhaps they will both stoop and stay to Lawiers, and fee them
largely, to plead against the truth, to hinder the poor man's cause, yea, and
to bribe the Judges (if they will be bribed) to stand against a true matter, or
to delay Judgment of the same, when it is plainly proved on the poor man's
side.

Then said the devil, I like both such giuers and takers, I hope verily to
have them in my kingdom of hell, and then the one will wish they had bestowed
their gifts better, and the other will wish to have refused the gifts.

Then said Dives, they will so, I warrant them, if they once come where I am:
If I were now a Landlord on the earth (said Dives) as I have bin, I would not
rack my rents, or take such fines, as some Landlords do, that now dwell on the
earth, for all the good in the world.


Theo. I think when Dives lived, there was no such racking of rentes, nor
taking of fines as be now, if there were any at all: for some so rack their
rentes now, The pitiful case of tenants through fines and racking of rents.
that the tenants are not able to keep hospitallitie, nor relieve the poor as
they were wont, and their fines are so great, that they are constrained to sell
their stock, which should be the maintenance of their Farm, that during their
whole lease, they are not able to recover the same, and so at the last, when
their lease is expired, they are thrust out of their Farm, for that they are
not able to pay a new fine for their Farm, and so diverse of them, their
wives, and their children, live very poorly, or are driven to beg.


Eu. Yea, and what do these proud and greedy cormorantes with their racked
rentes, and their unmerciful fines, whereby they impourish their tenants? They
consume it in excessive fare, in proud and sumptuous apparel, in playing at
Cards, Dice or other games, and in other worldly vanities: and whether will
all this vain spending thereof lead them? Forsooth to the doleful dungeon of
hell, where Dives is, out of which they can never get out, (if they be once in)
and then they will cry out, that ever they took such rentes or fines. For if
they live as wickedly as Dives did, and undo their tenants, by racking their
rentes and excessive fines, more then ever Dives did: then unless they
speedily repent, how can they avoid the endless fiery flames of hell, where
Dives is?


Theo. I pray you tell me what the devil said to Dives, when he had said,
that he would not rack his rents, nor take such fines of his tenants, for all
the good in the world, as some Landlords do.


Eu. Forsooth the devil then said, no more would they, if they knew the gains
they should have thereby, and the place that it will bring them unto: but I
will say this one thing to them, said the devil, I will be better to them then
they are to their tenants, for where as they will not let a little Farm to
their tenants, for xxi. years, without a great rent, and an unreasonable sine:
The liberality of the devil.
I will give them a whole kingdom (my kingdom of hell) to be their own
inheritance for ever, without paying any rent or fine at all.

Then said Dives, woe worth these rackt rentes, and unreasonable fines, that
shall purchase such a kingdom, I would to God I might change my estate of that
kingdom, with the most vilest and basest Cotage on the earth. When they come
hither, they will cry out and say, woe worth the time that ever we had lands
or living, woe worth the time that ever we rackt our Tenants or took such
fines to impouerish them, Mark well.
woe worth the time that ever we were so greedy of money, and woe worth the time
that ever we consumed the same in gluttonous and excessive fare, in proud and
sumptuous apparel, in playing at Dice, Cards, or other games, and other
worldly vanities: woe be to the time that we made our sons rich, by making
tenants poor. But cursed be the time, that we have made our sons Lords and
Gentlemen on the earth, with the everlasting damnation of our own bodies and
souls in hell. That Proverb may be truly verified in us, which is, Happy
is that child, whose father goes to the devil. This will be their song, when
they do come hither, but the^ they shall be without remedy as I am.

Then said the devil to Dives, I will make so much on them, when they be here
in hell with me, that I will not let them go from hence. And those fine
fellows that are in their furs, and these minsing mynions, that swim in their
silks, and these lofty looks that cannot see the poor as they go, and that
will not once stoop for a little stone to give to the poor, if it might do
them any good, much less will stoop to put their hands into their purse, and
to give the^ a piece of Gold, (such small account they make of heaven, and
such haste they make to hell) and yet they will not stick both to stoop and
stay to Lawiers, and to fee them largely with gold, to plead against the
truth, or to hinder the poor man's cause: yea, and to bribe the Judges (if they
will be bribed) to stand against a true matter, or to delay judgment of the
same, when it is proved: they, I say, thereby shall purchase a hot kingdom
for ever, with me in hell, where they shall burn continually in fiery flames,
and whereas, they were loath to stay a minute of an hour to give one penny to
relieve their poor brother: they shall then for all their Iolytie, A sore
saying.
stay with me in hell for ever and ever world without end, and shall not have
one drop of water to quench their thirst, though they cry and call for it
never so much. This will be their gain for their ouer-looking and disdaining of
the poor, and for their haste-making, and their unmerciful dealing with the
poor. I think they shall not get so much good by the one, as they shall get
harm by the other. And as for these Lawiers that take such fees, for defending
of wrong, Lawiers that take fees to defend wrong
and the hinderance of right, they shall get never a Lawier for any thing at
the last day, that shall plead on their side. But their Gold and their Silver,
wherewith they were so fed, shall plead truly against them, whereby they
shall justly be condemned to my dungeon of hell, there to remain with me in
unquenchable fire for ever, (except they repent and amend) and then may they
not think, that, that was good Gold, and sweet fees, that has brought them
to such a place. And these Judges that will be bribed, A sore saying against
bribed Judges.
or defend a false matter, shall be sure at the last day, to have such a true
and upright Judge, that will not be bribed by any means, and that will judge
them so uprightly, against whom their own oath shall rise, and be a
witness, that they shall be condemned to remain with me in hell fire for
ever: and whereas they delay judgment of true causes found before them,
whereby the parties are deferred of their right, or thereby for want of
execution, obtain not their right: yet Christ will be such a Judge at the
last day, that they shall have their judgment by and by, without any deferring
thereof, whereby presently they shall have execution, in the horrible flames of
hell fire for ever, and so they shall neither be kept from their due, nor
deferred of their right, as they have done to the poor on the earth.

Then said Dives, Ah, woe be to these Fees, and bribes, that shall bring them
to such a doleful place, where repentance will not serve, nor mercy can be
had. Therefore such wicked Lawiers, Good counsel for Lawiers and Judges.
were best to leave taking of such Fees, and to plead in true causes: yea, and
rather to help poor men, in their true suites, without Fees, (wherefore, they
shall have richer Fees, then any on the earth can give them:) and such Judges
were best, to leave taking of bribes, and not to defend or maintain false
causes, and not to defer judgment to the hindering of just execution, or to
avoid thereby any from their right: no, not for fear or friendship of any,
be they never so great (unless they be greater then God, A good warning.
or can do more for them then Christ:) but to repent these their devilish
dealings, whiles they are alive on the earth, least they come in this doleful
dungeon of hell, wherein I am, where is nothing but crying, yelling, mourning,
and weeping, and gnawing, and gnashing of teeth, not for an hour or two, not
for a day, nor a week: no, nor a month, nor a year, nor yet a thousand, nor
for ten thousand years, but even for ever and ever world without end: which to
me damned wretch that I am, is most doleful and horrible, because I am in
endless torments, without any mercy to be had: but to them that are yet on
earth, that may avoid it by repentance, a godly warning.


Theo. Oh these words do pearce my heart, if I were a Lawier, these fearful
words, that now I have heard of you, would make me fearful in taking of
fees, either of the rich, least I should plead therefore in wrong causes, or
of the poorer sort, that are wronged or oppressed, least I should not deserve
my fees. Yet there have bin, and are Lawiers (as it is thought) so greedy of
gold, Evil conscienced Lawiers.
and so careless how they get it, that will take a piece of gold or two, to
plead their Cliants cause, but when the time comes, they neither come to the
bar, neither speak one word in their Clients cause, but are occupied in an
other place for some other, that belike has given them greater fees. Surely,
such Lawiers go about to sell their souls to the devil for gold. But it may
be, that these Lawiers are so busy in an other of their Clients cause, who
received them first, the matter being doubtful and intricate, that they cannot
have time to speak in their other Clients cause, and so they will give their
Client the gold again, they had on him.


Eu. It may be so, but I can hardly believe it, you shall take few Lawiers
with that fault: for many of them are so greedy of gold, that they keep all
fast that they finger, and it is hard to get that from the^ that they have
received: but if they should repay their gold to their Client, yet the case
might stand so, that that were not enough, for suppose that then were the very
peremptory day, for the trying of his Clients cause, and the party through
poverty had no more Lawiers to plead his cause, but he, and so through his
Lawiers absence the matter might go against him: then the poor man should
undo himself, with giving of his own gold. And therefore it is not enough,
always for the Lawiers to give the fees he has received, again to his
Client.


Theo. Then it is too much for a Lawier to receive gold or double fees, of two
or three, and never come to the Bar, and speak never a word for any of them.


Eu. It is not too much for such Lawiers as mean to go to the devil, for the
more they take, and the less they do for it, the better does the devil like
them, and the more willingly into hell he will receive them, and when they are
once there, they will say that they are the dearest fees that ever they took.
But if the Lawiers would take but one fee on a day, which were enough before
God, (especially, according as the fees are, that some do take) then they
should be sure to plead for their Client, and so they should not need to
weary themselves, and run from Bar to Bar, and from Court to court, but
thereby should deserve their fees, or do their worldly duty for their fees.
Mark this well.
Many a poor man, that labors ten times as much as they in a day: (yea, and
that with the sweat of their body and brows,) are well content with two
grortes for their whole days work, whereas some greedy Lawiers, though they
have two Roials for two hours pleading, think they have not sped very well:
yet, if one of these poor laborers, should take wages of two or three men, to
work with them all in one (...) and work with none of them, but one (as
justly, they cannot,) they that he thus deceived, perhaps would cause him to
be set by the heels, although he might perhaps) serve all their turns well
enough afterward, but if one Lawier, that has great abundance, and is too
rich, do take fees of two or three several persons in one morning, more then
he is able to plead for, whereby their Clients may happily be undone, as is
before said, they may not be importunate on them to have their fees again, nor
yet may exclaim of them therefore: for if they do, they may chance be cast in
prison for their labor, or for asking their own. But such Lawiers that
robs thus their poor Clients, as though it were by authority, without
repentance, and Gods great mercy shall be utterly spoiled of the glorious
kingdom of Heaven, and shall be thrown into the everlasting prison of hell,
where Dives is, whose damnable estate is most doleful, as I have told you
before.


Theo. Is your Dream ended, or have you any more to say therein?


Eu. Yea, that I have, therefore mark me well: Dives said further, if I were on
the earth again, as I was: I would do all that I could, to make enemies
friends, and where men were most at debate and contention, I would endeavor my
self to set them at concord and quietness: for Christ said, Matthew. 5.
Blessed be the pearce-makers, for they shall be called the children of God.
And so I should be blessed, and the child of God.

Then said the devil to Dives, if Peacemakers be the children of God, then
peace-breakers must needs be the children of the Devil, Peace breakers the
children of the devil.
and so I am sure, I have more children then GOD has: for there are more
peace-breakers, then peacemakers. A great rabble there is on the earth, that if
they see two love faithfully, then either for spite, and envy, or else to
pick a thank or to get some reward or gift, will invent such spightfull
tales, that the one of them should speak against the other, that they will
set them together by the ears, and so make them greater enemies, then ever
they were friends: and so these peace-breakers, are not only become my dear
and loving children: but also these two friends that were before in peace, and
the children of God, are become my dear darlings, and the curssed children of
the devil: and for their peace-breaking and contention and strife, though God
forsake them, yet I will not refuse them, but they shall dwell with thee Dives,
and me, in my fiery kingdom of hell for ever, and that is long enough: yea,
and these lusty Cutters, Lusty cutters and fighters.
that for every trifling quarrel, standing so in their reputation of their
manhood, will make fraies, fight and kill: (yea, though they be killed or hanged
for their labor) are my Curssed, Dear, and loving children (unless that
fighters be peacemakers) and they shall dwell with me for ever in the fiery
flames of hell, if they proceed on as they do, and there I will tame them well
enough, though now on the earth, they be lusty and lively Laddes.

Then said Dives, it is a straung matter, that they will adventure so
desperately, to obtain the terrible torments of Hell, but they will not
adventure their life: nay, have their finger feel the fire for Christ's sake,
there by to inherit the endless joys of the kingdom of heaven. Mark what
fond fools these fighters be, though they neither kill nor be killed,
neither yet be hurt or maimed, yet they are Peace-breakers, and are in hatred
with their brother, Mark the fondnes of fighters and what gain they get.
and so they are accursed, and are become the Children of the devil, whose
estate is most miserable, horrible, and terrible: but if they be killed, their
spightfull mind has made them loose their life, which they esteemed above any
earthly treasure, but if they died vnrepentantlie (which in their furious
fighting is to be feared,) then their envious mind has wrought the death,
both of their body and soul for ever, in the fiery flames of hell fire.

And if they do kill their enemy with whom they fight, than they are in
danger of hanging, and so they shall loose their life, which is their greatest
earthly treasure, for satisfying their spightfull and envious mind one half
hour: but in that he has fought, being thereby a peace-breaker, he is become
the cursed child of the devil, and if he repent not, and call not to God for
mercy, then shall the be damned for ever in the bottomless pit of hell, with
me and the diuelles for ever. And if either chance too, to be wounded or
maimed, then the pleasure of their short fighting, will not counteruaile the
long grief, or sorrow of their hurt. Therefore, what fools are these envious
and lusty fighters, that for so small pleasures: nay, rather a deuilish
satisfying of their wicked mind, will hazard themselves into such a danger.

Then said the devil, I set them on, I tickle them to it, and I set one or
other to whisper in their ear, saying: sir, you are a lusty gentleman, you are
counted a man of your hands, if you suffer this, you will never be well though
of, therefore, if I were in your case, I would not put it up thus: and and then
the other is on a fire, until he be a fighting: and so many gives wages and
gifts, to set themselves forward to the devil. And thus both peace-breakers
and such sighters, I account as mine own accursed children, but if they once
dye in their peace-breaking trade, and in their envious and furious mind: then
they are my children in deed for ever, and they shall never go out of my
kingdom, nor company. Then said Dives, woe be to them, if they once come to
thy kingdom and company, if I were in the world again as I was, I would by
Gods grace, suffer all injuries, To suffer injury is a blessed thing.
and never resist them, do what they would: whereby I should be ye blessed
child of God and so enjoy the everlasting joys of heaven. Which sufferings,
were they a whole thousand years, are far unworthy thereof, whereas if I
should reuengs mine own wrongs, and bear malice and spite, though they be
my mortal enemies, God would cease to revenge my cause: for he will revenge
no causes, but such as are committed to him, then I should be a peace-breaker,
and so become the cursed child of the devil, as I am already. Therefore, most
happy are they that suffer wrong, and are patient in Christ, for they shall
enjoy the kingdom of Heaven.


Theo. A woeful thing it is to walk in the way to hell, as it may appear by
Dives, wherein such furious Fighters, Quarrellers, Peace-breakers, envious
persons, and breeders of strife, and contention, do walk: yea, and are in
great danger thereof. For if they that say, Thou fool, are in the danger of
hell fire, then they must needs be in great danger of hell that kill men,
Matt. 5.
that are so envious, that desire the destruction of their neighbor, and that
are Peace-breakers, and other such mischievous and malicious persons.


Eu. In-deede you say true, but what say you to them, that think there is no
hell: nay, that say there is no hell?


Theo. Forsooth, I say, it is to be feared that such shall feel that there is
a hell: what do they not think there is a Christ, that said there is a hell?
or do they think that Christ did not make mention in the Gospel, of hell? or
do they think that he lied, when he spoke of hell? If they search the
Gospel, they shall find many places that make mention of hell. And in the
same Chapter, where he says they shall be in danger of hell fire, that say.
Thou fool, he makes mention twice of hell, saying: Matt. 5.
It is better for thee that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole body
should be cast into hell. And likewise immediately in the same place, he says
the like words. So that no wise mand will think, that Christ would have made
mention of hell thrice in one chapter, unless that there had been a hell.
They may as well say, there is never a heaven, as to say, there is never a
hell, Hell mentioned thrsie in one chap by Christ, proves that there is a
hell.
and they may as well affirm there is never a devil. And I fear such think
their is never a God: for if there be never a hell, there is never a heaven,
and if there be never a devil, there is never a God, for the Gospel makes
mension of them all. Indeed, such by their living, show, that there is
neither God nor devil. Heaven nor hell, but let such take heed by doleful
Dives, and repent and amend their life whilee they are lining, or else at length
they shall feel with Dives, that there is a hell, when their ore burning in the
fiery flames thereof, out of which torments they shall never get, do what
they can. I metuaile what devil should move them to say or think there is
never a hell: seeing Christ, which cannot lie, has made so often mention thereof
in the Gospel. But suppose there were no hell (as every good christian does
believe there is one) what harm were it to think there were a Hell, nay, no
harm but good would come thereof: for the fear of hell, Mark this well.
though there were none, might cause us to shun that evil, that otherwise we
should do, and to make us do well: but being a hell, and we thinking there
were none we might thereby without fear work that mischief and wickedness,
which we perhaps would shun, if we thought there were a hell, Therefore it
is a great deal better to think there is a hell, (though there were none)
then to think there is no hell, though there be one, nay, seeing there is
one. For by the one we could have no harm: but by the other we might run
headlong into hell, as they do, I fear that say there is no hell.


Eu. There are many such one earth, (that count themselves christians) that
believe (as I think) that there is no hell or else at least no such hell wherein
are such terrible torments as are mentioned in the scripture: whereof I may
think that deuillish scoffer to be one, that tested at a godly preacher for
threatening the people with hell fire for their wicked living, who said: The
Preacher prattles much of hell, A wicked saying of a naughty man.
I marvel Who shall make the fire in hell.


Theo. O Lord tht ever there should be any such vile wrtches on the earth, it
is marvel (but that the mercy of God is so great) that they sink not where
they so mock and jest at the Preacher, and the holy Gospel of Christ. But I
can tell him this that said so, who soever shall be makers of the fire, in hell,
he, and such as he is, (if they repent not in time) are like to be the
brandes that the fire shall burn one in hell. The Lord keep them from it:
but now I pray you, have you any more of your dream to declare.


Eu. I have not yet done: Dives then did say lamentably, Oh, if I might dwell
again on the earth (as I cannot) I would have such a regard to the sayings
of Christ that I would never swear, nor once to take the name of God in vain,
for he is so full of majesty, and his name so holy, that they can not be but the
great enemies of God, Swearers the enimes of God.
and no regarders of him, that will name him vainly, or speak of him without
just occasion. Neither would I be a drunkard, Drunkards turned from the image
of God, to the children of the Devil.
or drink excessiuely, whereby I should be without sense and reason, far
worse then brute beasts, and so I should transform my self from the image,
and child of God, to the Image and child of the devil. Neither would I
commit adultrie, or join my self to strange flesh, for then I should
dissposes my self of the kingdom of heaven, and insteede thereof obtain the
dungeon of hell, as al ready I have done.

Oh how curssed and wretched are they that polute and defile their bodies with
adultry, whoredom, and fornication? For whereas the Godly and chaste
persons, are the temple of the holy Ghost (for there it pleases his God
head to rest and dwell) the wicked fornicatours, aduouterers, Fornicators and
aduouterers, the devils chapel where he rousteth,
and whoremongers, are the Church or Chapel of the Devil, in whom it lyketh
that foul fiende to rowst and inhabit, and so all whores, harlots, and
aduouterers, through their vile and most wicked lust, are become the Temple of
the devil, and so at the last (without earnest repentance, and the great
mercy of GOD) the doleful dungon of hell, shall be their dwelling place. Then said
the Devil. yea, and when they come theither, they shall pay full deerly for
their swearing, dronkenesse and aduoutry, or whoredom. Mark this
These three vices are so frequented on the earth, that they are scantly,
thought to be sins: for swearing is counted the lively greece of a Gentleman
drunkenness, good feloshippe, and whoredom or aduoutry, a sweet solace but
when they are once in my kingdom of hell, there their swearing grace will be
turned into gnashing of the teeth, their drunken felloship into an unquenchable
drought, and their swet aduouterous solace, into an endless sour sorrow. Then
said dives, Oh how happy are they that are yet in that place, where they may
repent and forsake these their vile and detestable sins: but how unhappy
are they, if they dye vnrepentaunte, and be thrown into hell through their
said detestable sins.


Theo. This is a fearful talk concerning swearers, drunkardes, and
aduouterers, that was between the devil and Dives. But proceed I beseech you
in your dream.


Eu. Then Dives said with many a heavy sigh and groan, if I were alive again on
the earth, as I was once, if any sued me wrongfully in the Law, I would rather
let them enjoy al quietly, then impatiently to to withstand the^, for my
patient loss would gain me more riches in the kingdom of heaven after my
life, Wrong suffered patiently brings great gainh.
then their wroung gotten goods of mine, would pleasure them on the earth,
whiles they were alive. Nay, whereas my patient suffering of the loss of my
goods, having faith in Christ, would make me possess the glorious kingdom of
Heaven: their wroungful having of my Lands or goods, would make them
possess the horrible dungeon of hell. And so I should have to great a
recompense for my goods that I lost, but they should have but a homely gain
for withholding my goods wrongfullie from me, (unless the endless torments)
of hell may be thought to be a good gain?)

Then said the devil to Dives, many thousands most wrongfully are spoiled of
their right, of the rich oppressors by their Law, as they use it, which the
poor oppressed do suffer, not very patiently, but by patience perforce: for
the law on the earth is ended by the weight of the purse, not by the truth of
the cause, The law ended by the weight of the purse not by the truth of the
cause.
and because the rich have the heavier purse the matter goes most commonly on
their side, though it be never so wrong: yea, and that will not be long a doing.

For let a poor man and a rich man go to Law together, ye matter will not be
long a trying, but will be quickly ended, because the one has money at will, and
the other has little or non to fee or feed the Lawiers, nor to pay the fees
of the Courts: but let two rich cobes sue one another in the Law, and let the
case, be like to the poor and rich man's case, it may chance be a dozen year
or more, are their matter be tried and ended. Thus it is plain that money
makes a good matter.

But this I will say unto these my dear children that opres the poor on the
earth at the last and terrible day of judgment whereat I quake ever when I
think on it, as they should do if they were wise) the poor and the rich,
shall stand al before the righteous Judge Christ, and there shall need no money,
neither for the poor nor rich: and there the poor, if his matter be right
(though he have no money) shall be quickly dispatched, Hell fire the gain of the
oppressors of the poor.
and be judged to enter into the kingdom of heaven straight way, and the
rich, if their matter be wrong, for all their oppression and wrong gotten
goods, shall quickly be dispatched, and be judged to enter into hell, there to
remain in fierye flames for ever.

And then they shall see what a gain they have got, by spoiling and opressing
the poor, or any other.

Then said Dives, I know their gain will not be greater, a woe is me that I
knew it so well. But if I were now on the earth feeling, Dives gives good
counsel to oppressors and wrongful withholders.
that I feel, if I had oppressed any or withheld their living from them
wrongfully, I would with all speed restore it unto them again, yea, and
recompense them four foulde, for the wrong I had done unto them: yea, and
meekely ask them forgiveness on my knees, being most glad that I were rid
of such a burden as would weigh me down to hell.

Then said the Devil to him, yea, but many of my dear darlinges and children
that now do oppress the widows, Fatherles, and other freendlesse on the
earth, and these sons that spoil their own loving mothers of their
liuinges, are far from this mind that thou art of, for if they perceive that
they that are oppressed by them, will complain to the higher powers against
them, or else seek some other means to obtain their right, they will find
one surmised matter or other against them, A devilish practice of oppressors
and thereby cast them into prison, and there they shall lie in great misery,
restrained thereby also from their ordinary trade, where by their wife and
family, shall live in great nececessitie. Then said Dives, how far live these
men from the state of christianity? surely, by this it appears, that they
are not afraid of hell. But me thinks that these poor men, or any other,
that are thus oppressed, and wrongfully imprisoned, should through letters and
supplications to noble men, or to such as are in authority, A charitable thing
very necessary to be practiced.
have their causes heard with speed, and the cause of their imprisonment be
boulted out, and so they not only to be releast out of prison, and have their
right awarded unto them: but also that these their wicked oppressors, and yt
have thus wrongfully imprisoned them, should be punished (whosoever they were)
to ye example of other.

Nay, said the devil, that may not be so, the rich may opresse whom they
will, and almost do what they will, A lamentable thing not meet to be suffered.
their gifts and money will tell such a tale against the poor, whom they
opresse and prisonne, that the poor man's complaint shall not be heard, nor
his supplication read, or at the least not waied, nay he shall be made (though
he be never so honest) a trouble some and a naughty wicked fellow, and so he
shall not only have his right or living wrongfully withholden from him, but
also (to mende up the matter) shall be shopt up in prison, and so be kept from
his liberty, whereby he, his wife and family shall live in misery, and thereby
utterly impouerished: but those my dear darlings and most loouing children,
that so oppress and imprisone the poor, ye, and they that are in authority
to whom they complain of their wrong, and will not see that they shall have
their just cause heard, but suffer them most unchristianly thus to be
impouerished, and wrongfully imprisoned, when they come to hell (my everlasting
kingdom, The devils reward to such wicked oppressors.
) I will embrace and cherish them for this their good service they have done
unto me, in most cruel and fierye torments, (which will be a little worse then
the poor man's imprisonment:) for their earthly imprisonment does last but a
while, but their imprisonment in hell shall last for ever.

And whereas they imprisoned their poor brother wrongfuly, making him but to
lose his earthly short living: they shall be sure I will imprison them
rightfully and truly, and thereby they shall lose the everlasting Treasure and
joys of the kingdom of heaven.

Then said Dives, these goods and livings that they so get, will be derely
bought when they come to hell, and their wrongful troubling or imprisoning of
the poor, whose goods or living they withold, will be then very costly unto
them. Therefore, Wrong gotten goods will be dear wares in the end.
now if they be wise, they will restore and repent whiles they may for after
their death they can not restore nor repent, if they would.


Theo, Truly, this talk that you thought you heard between Diurs and the
Devil, is now most wickedly practysed on the earth, by wicked rich
oppressors against the poor oppressed: but they were best leave it, and
repent such their vile wycked-practyses whiles they may: for if the Devil
catch them once into his prison of hell t they shall burn and be tormented in
fierye flames or ever. For there is no raunesome can redeem them, no sureties
can bail them, nor no money nor lamentation can prevail them. But is there
any more behinds of your dream?


Eum. Yea, that there is, Dives said furthermore. Oh that I were but on the
earth alive again, I would neither prowle for riches nor wealth, as I did,
neither would take care for any thing, but only for my soul: for whosoever
has care to seek for w^rldly goods, is altogether careless for seeking of
heavenly treasures, and whosoever has that heavenly care of their soul, God
will have an earthly care of their body.


Theo. Dives did say most truly herein, and therefore it seems that these
worldlings that take so much after riches neither care for heaven, nor yet
regard the words of Christ, whose counsel is the best of all other to be
followed: and these are his words concerning the same which are most
necessary herein to be marked and followed. Ye cannot serve both God and
Mammon. Matt. 6.
Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not
the life more worth then meat? The most necessary counsel of Christ that
bids us not to be careful.
And the body more of value then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, for
they sow not, neither reap, nor yet carry into the Barnes, and yet your
heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not more better then they? Which of you
(though he took thought therefore) could put one cubit unto his stature? And
why care ye then for raiment? Consider the Lillies of the field how they
grow, they labor not, neither spinne, and yet for all that, I say unto you,
that even Solomon in all his royalty, was not araied like unto one of these.
Wherefore, if God so cloth the grass, which is to day in the field, and to
mororwe shall be cast into the furnace: shall he not much more do the same to
you O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying: What shall we
eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? After all
these things seek the Gentiles: for your heavenly father knows that you
have need of all these things. But rather seek ye the kingdom of heaven,
and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto you,
etc. Here it appears that God does, and will take such care for his
Children, that live godly and virtuously, and seek after the kingdom of
heaven, and that make small account of earthly riches, that they shall want
nothing that is necessary for them in this life. Consider the dealing of
worldly fathers with their childeren, if their children aplie their books
study and learning, to bring them selves to preferment hereafter, though their
fathers have no need thereof, do not their fatheres prepare meat, drink,
raiment and all other necessaries in their studying, Consider the provision of
worldly fathers for their children.
for their getting of learning? Then how much more will God our creator and
heaunelye father, prepare for us meat drink, and other necessaries, which
yearly, daily, and hourly doothe increase them on the earth for our sakes if
we live verteously, Mark this
and seek the kingdom of heaven, as he wills us? And yet we shall have the
chief benefyte thereof, and not GOD our Father any white profyted thereby: as
the Scholars have by their learning, and not their Fathers.


Eu. How far are thieves, oppressors, deceiuors, cosoners, insasiable
lawiers, bribing judges, greedy Magistrates extorcioners, false officers,
detestable usurers, and such as heap Farm upon Farm, great fine takers, and
unmerciful rent-rusers, from regarding of this rule, and from trusting of
Christ, that thus does teach and perswad them. But because they seek not ye
kingdom of heaven, neither trust to Gods caring and providing for them, but
seek to prepare for themselves, according to their own fancy, yea, and that
by such means, as God has flatly forbidden, and does utterly detest, therefore
they are not the children of God. And so for that they are not the children of
God, they must needs be the sons of Satan, and seeing they have not sought
for the kingdom of heaven according to Christ's lesson: they have sought for
the dungeon of hell, according to the devils desire, which they are most sure
to find, unless they stay from their journey, and leave of the wicked way
they walk in, and follow the sweet and comfortable doctrine of Christ, before
mentioned, and there with Dives they shall burn in endless torments for ever.


Theo. A most doleful and dangerous way, that such before mentioned do walk
in, these most viperous Usurers that suck and devour at length their
liuinges, Usurers do walk very dangerously.
to whom they do lend their money upon usury, shall not dwell in Gods
tabernacle, that is, the kingdom of heaven: for thus says the spirit of God
by the kingly Prophet David Who shall dwell in Gods tabernacle? he that is
innocent of his hands, and of a pure heart, and has not put out his money to
usury. Thus we see that the Usurers are excluded the kingdom of heaven,
Usurers excluded the kingdom of heaven.
whereby they are sure to be entertained into the kingdom of hell: so that
here it is manifest that usury cannot properly be called lending of money,
but putting out of money. For lending of money is allowed by Christ, but usury
is condemned by the holy Ghost: for Christ says, Give to him that asks, and
from him that would borrowe turn not away. Therefore, lending is where one
does borrow: Usury and lending of money not all one.
and the other lends freely without receiving any thing again, but only
the thing lent: but the easiest usurer that is receives more again then he
lends, and therefore usury and lending is not all one. And forasmuch, as
what soever is contrary to these words of Christ. Matthew. 7.
What soever ye would that men should do to you even so do ye to them: Is
not this the Law of God? then usury is contrary to the law of God, and so
the usurers do against the law of God: for if the usurer himself through great
necessity should be driven to borrowe money, he could be content to borrowe
it freely without paying any thing again, but only the money lent. But he
would be loath if he might have it otherwise, to pay, ten, twenty, thirty,
forty, yea, threescore, or fourscore pound, Lending of money for gain,
proved usury.
for the lone of one hundredth pound, in one year, as many needy have been
driven to pay, and as many devilish Usurers have received. Wherefore because
Usurers do as they would not be done unto: therefore their usury is contrary
to the document of Christ, Usurers proved the devils children.
and then it must needs be according to the doctrine of the devil, and they
that do according to the doctrine of the devil, must needs be the children
of the devil, and the inhabitation of the devils children, must needs be in
hell.

And thus usurers are proved the devils children, and the inheritors of hell.
May not they be glad that have increased, or gotten together such a deal of
money, that they have purchased hell with all? They will say when they are in
hell, woe worth usury, that ever they used it, or knew it.


Eu. Let usurers take heed least they come into hell, where Dives is, what a
great diversity there is between the godly man and the usurer. Mark the
difference between the godly lender, and the usurer.
The intent of the godly man is only to profit his needy brother, with the
lending of his money, but all the drift of the usurer, is only to increase his
own gain and substance: yea though it be with the loss of the lands and
living, and to the utter undoing and impouerishing of his needy neighbor, or
pretended friend. One example I will tell you, to the better proouing of this
my saying, assured that there are more such and to be supposed by common brute,
but too well known and felt by daily trial.

A certain usurer knowing that a gentleman not far from him, had a proper
living, whereat his mouth watered, on whom he faund as a friend, but at length
he found as awe. A crafty and devilish usurer.
Which usurer sent for one to speak with him, as he knew to be very great with
the said gentleman, to whom, when he came, he said: I perceive you are
acquainted with such a gentleman, whom I love better then he thinks, and
(for the good will I bear him) tell him that I have four or five hundredth
pounds to pleasure him withal (if he need) and that within an hours
warning. The man hearing this, gave him hearty thanks in the gentleman's
behalf: and after when he had told the same tale to the said gentleman, he
thinking that all had bin gold that glistred was very glad thereof, and said,
I mean to trouble him for 200. li. shortly: for I think I shall have occasion
to use it. Then soon after the said gentleman went to the usurer, and gave him
thanks for his gentle courtesy offered to him undeserved, and said: Sir, where
you offered to lend me 500. li. I am come now unto you, to desire you to lend
me 200. li. which I hope will serve my turn at this time. Then said the
usurer, forsooth ye shall have it, and more if you will: nay, said the
gentleman, 200. li. will satisfy me, therefore I mean to borrow no more: well,
said the usurer I am content, you shall have it: yea, but said the gentleman,
what interest shall I pay for the having thereof a xii. month? To whom the
usurer answered, I would not have you think but that I lend you my money more
for love then for gain: marie if you will give x.li. in the 100. as the
statute does allow. I will not refuse your gentle courtesy therein. Then the
gentleman said, I will not only give you that and more with a good will, but
also I will put you in two sufficient sureties besides my self, for the
payment thereof: no, said the usurer, I credit you so well, that you shall have
it without any such sureties, and I am loath to take any suerty whereby it should
be known that I lend money upon gain, and that you should be driven to borrow
any money, mary this ye must do, said the usurer (because we are all mortal,
and perhaps they that come after you, will not have that honest and good
meaning that you have) you shall assure unto me and my heirs such a farm,
which lies not far hence, with a condition or prouiso, that if the money be
repaide at the day appointed the said bargame and gift to be void. The
gentleman hearing this, began to pause at the matter, and could not tell what
to answer therein (for the thing that he should have thus assured, was better
worth then a M.li.) Gentleman, said the usurer, I perceive you have me now in
suspicion, I am sorry that you mistrust me, especially seeing I mean so much
good unto you. Then said the Gentleman unto him: Sir, if you were as much my
enemy, as you pretend to be my friend, if I pay unto you your money again at
the day appointed, you can take none advantage of me, neither do me any harm.
You say most true said the usurer, the clause of prouiso in the writing does
bind me from that, this assurance that I desire of you, is to make you
careful to keep your day, and not that you should have any harm, if you
break your day. The Gentleman hearing this, thought no harm, so that the
money was paid, and the assurance was made, sealed, and delivered.


Theo. I think long to hear how the crafty usurer did handle that simple and
well meaning gentleman in the end.


Eu. Homely enough, I warrant you: the simple gentleman thinking no harm, and
taking the usurer to mean friendly, took the less regard of the very day of
payment of his money: so that he came to pay his money two or three days
before the due time, and so tendered it to the usurer: To whom the usurer said:
gentleman, as I have meant truly to you, so I pray you deal plainly with
me: I marvel what you mean to offer me my money before my day and time: I
have of you but x.li. in the hundredth which if I should receive before the
whole year be expired, I should run in the lapse of the law, and in the danger
of usury: therefore, though you mean me no harm, yet I will avoid ye
mischief: what man? your day is not yet this fortnight, said he, but if you
came a fortnight after your day, you need not mistrust me. The gentleman being
so light of credit, and trusting the usurer more the^ he had cause, took his
leave of ye usurer, and returned home with his money: and after he came to
tender his money to the usurer, when in deed his day was past, saying: Sir,
here I have brought you your money: therefore I pray you let the assurance
between you and me be cancelled: Nay sir, said the usurer, you owe me no
money, and therefore I will take none of you, the money is yours, and none of
mine, and the land is mine, and none of yours, your day is past, therefore
fare ye well: Sir, said the gentleman, I trust you will not serve me so: then
said the usurer, I mean to serve you so, and I will serve you so, and if I do
you any wrong, mende it which way ye can: and thus this most devilish usurer
entered on the gentleman's living, and so kept it, and had it to the great
hindrance and almost undoing of the gentleman, his wife, and his children.


Theo. A meet thing for Magistrates to look to
Oh that Magistrates and rulers would busy themselves, to smell and find out
such cut-throts, and redress such unmeasurable enormities: who would think
that such things should be practiced or permitted, especially, in a Christian
common weal? This example does verify my former words, showing to what end
usurers do lend their money, and what difference there is between the godly
lender, and the devilish usurer. Do not you think this, and all such usurers
do travel apace to hell, where Dives is? and that they shall purchase the
doleful dungeon of hell, with the money and good that they get thereby.


Eu. Yes truly, and I fear they run so fast thither, that they will not once
look back until that they be in hell. God of his mercy give them grace (if
it be his will) that they through repentance and restoring such evil gotten
goods, may avoid that doleful and damnable pit here in this life while they
may: and as these devilish usurers are not the children of God, because they
take not God to be their father, in that they depend not upon him to find and
relieve them, Greedy and wicked farmers proved the children of the devil.
but as wicked bastards mistrust his fatherly promise, trusting better to their
own devilish and sinister practices: so greedy Farmers that heap farm upon
farm (not caring whom they thrust out, so they get in) take not God for their
Father, thinking they should be stark beggars if they should not trust to
themselves, but depend upon him. And so being the children of the devil, they
seem to run to hell as fast as the rest: nay, I fear they strive which of
them shall come first to hell.


Theo. Whosoever of them shall come to hell first, will think they come too
soon, and whosoever come thither last, will think they come soon enough.
There are such a sort of greedy guts on the earth, that think (be like) that
they shall not have enough to live on, during their life, though they have
twenty men's livings, and a thousand men's riches, else I think they would not
daily gather so greedily as they do: A fine paid for a farm 140. years before
hand.
yea, and that when they are of such an old age, that they know assuredly they
cannot long live. What say ye to him that was above three score years of age,
that laid out two hundredth pound, as a fine, for the lease of a farm, the
former lease whereof, would not be expired of almost seuen-score year after.


Eu. Mary, I say, he was like to be none of the children of God, but rather one
of the sons of satan: he had bin better to have cast that money down the
channel, for then perhaps some poor body might have had part thereof, for
neither he nor his child, nor yet his childs child is like to enjoy that
lease, neither to have any commodity thereby, for I think few would be so
fond as to buy his interest therein, being so long to come: O what mad men are
they, that pay so much aforehand for such earthly livings, as shall never come
to their hands, and which their children, and childrens children shall never
enjoy, and will not give to the poor one small portion (which they lend unto
the Lord) whereby they shall enjoy an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom
of heaven, the assurance whereof, they are most sure to have immediately after
their death, which perhaps will be within a year, two or three, or not very
long after ye laying out of their money: truly I think the day of judgment
will be before that lease begin, wherefore he paid his two hundred pound.


Theo. Surely I am of your opinion, which I can show by good and probable
conjectures. And though it be not for us presumptuously, or arrogantly to
search or judge when the day of judgment shall be, and though Christ says:
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my
Father only: Yet I hope (if not curiously) we may conjecture by conferences
of the scriptures and times, with other signs and tokens, touching the year
or time thereof, whereby we may make us the more ready against his coming, and
also fear us the more to offend. Besides, if the time be short (as it can
not be very long) it may make us leave building such sumptuous, vain and
costly houses: yea, and not to prepare or lay out so much money for lands or
worldly living, for our children or Posterity, but to employ it to better use,
and upon charitable works that may do us good.


Eu. Then I pray you (if it be not troublesome to you) show me some
conjectures when and how long you think it will be to the latter end of the
world.


Theo. I were very discourteous, if I would not, seeing you have taken pains
in revealing to me such a long discourse of your doleful dream of the devil
and Dives. Coniecturs of the later end or day of judgment.
First, as God created both heaven and earth, and all things therein in six
days, and rested the seventh day, and hallowed it, so it may be gathered, that
Adam and his Posterity shall continue on the earth six thousand years.

And as God rested the seventh day from his labors: so after the six
thousand years, it is like that the children of God shall rest their labors,
from in the endless joys of heaven: now to approve this the better, by the
ancient prophecy of Elias, it appears that the world shall continue but
six thousand years.

In lib. Rabin. Cap. 1.
Two thousand under the Law of nature, or without a prescript law, two
thousand years under the Law writ, that is, the Law given by God to Moses,
and two thousand under the law of Christ, that is, the holy Gospel. And
further, S. Peter seems to agree with the same, who says: 1. Pet. 3.
That one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a theusand years as
one day. So that creating the world in time that is in six days, there by
six days creating of the world, may signify 6000. years continuing of the
world after. And to make it the better appear that Saint Peter wrote this
concerning the continuance and end of the world. Applying every day to the
creation, to a thousand years in the continuation, or until the consumation
of the world, he a little before in his Epistle, does as it were Prophecy
that such mockers shall be in the latter days, as shall jest, and as it were
deride such as speak of the coming of Christ to his judgment, seeming bp
their words as though there would be no such thing. And these are his words
concerning that matter that follows.

This first understand (says he) that there shall come in the last days
mockers, which will walk after their own lusts, and say: where is the
promise of his coming? For since the fathers dyed, all things continue in the
same estate, wherein they were at the beginning. This they know not (and that
willingly) that the Heavens a great while ago were, and the earth that was in
the water appeared up out of the water. But the heavens verelie and the earth
which are now, are kept by the same word in store, and reserved unto fire
against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. And then follow
these words, wherein he compares a day of the Lord to a thousand years:
saying:

Dearly beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, how that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day: the Lord is
not slack to fulfill his promise, as some men count slacknes, but he is
patient toward us, etc.

Here it does seem by the former and following words of Saint Peter, that
every day of Gods creating of the world does signify a thousand years of the
continuation of the world which six thousand years, seems to be the
longest that the world can continue. But that the time shall be shortined, and
not last so long: it is manifest by the words of Christ, who says. But for the
chosens sake, these days shall be shortened. Matthew. 24.
Now let us consider of likely conjectures concerning the shortened time.
Christ sath in the same Chapter, As the time of Noe was, Matthew. 24.
so shall the coming of the son of man be: for as in the days before the
flood they did eat and drink, marry, and were married, even until the day
that Noe entered into the Ship, and knew of nothing till the floode came, and
took them all away. So shall also the coming of the son of man be, etc.

Now as the people in manners and wickedness, in the latter end before the
fire, will be like in their manners and doings, to the people at the time of
the floode: so it may be coniectured, that the first time to the flood, and
the last time to the fire, in quantity of years may likewise agree: as thus,
there was a first Adam, by whom all the world was lost and perished: also there
is a second Adam (which is Christ) by whom all the world (they that believe)
are saved: now as it was a 1^60. and six years, and from the first Adam, by
whom all the world was lost, until the destruction of the world with water:
so it is not unlike, but that there will be the like time, that is, a 1650.
and six years, from the second Adam, Christ, by whom they that believe shall
be saved, until the destruction of the world with fire: this conjecture is
no very unlikely. Mark also, how near an other conjecture does agree unto
this, Christ being our head, dwelled here on the earth, until his death,
thirty and three years and three months, or more, that is, as much as from
Christmasse, the time of his nativity, until the Easter following, the time
of his Passion or death.

Now as Christ being our head, remained thirty and three years on the earth,
and something more until he ascended into heaven: then it is not unlike, but
that we being his members, shall remain thirty and three years and
something more here on the earth, from the birth, of Christ our head, until
we shall come to that glorious kingdom of heaven. And thus if we account the
thirty and three years that Christ remained here on earth to great years,
called of some Anni Apoctolici, every year signifiyng fifty years, then we
may easily perceive, that the same does amount to a thousand, six hundred,
and fifty years, for three and thirty times fifty, is sixeteene hundred and
fifty, and the odd months may be applied to the other six years. So that
this latter conjecture does not much disagree in time from the other. Which
conjectures, if they be true (whereof there are many more to be gathered) then
the end of the world is not very far off, and so from this year 1583. it
seems not to be past threescore and fourteen years to come.

And if this be the time that Christ said should be shortened, then the time
threatened or presaged this year of 1583. by the great conjunction in April
of the two mighty and highest Planets Saturn and Jupiter, may be a great
warning to us.

Daniell does describe the four Monarchs of the world, and shows the
Roman Empire to be the fourth and the last Now as there was a great
conjunction between these two Planets in the latter part of Pisces, a watrie
triplicitie, about the time that Pompeius and Julius Caesar did strive for the
Diadem, or for the chief imperial rule: and as the first coming of Christ
was within five or six years after that great conjunction: so this great
Conjunction, being in April aforesaid, in the latter part of Pisces, the last
of all the twelve signs, and a watrie triplicitie, may likewise presage the
end of the fourth Monarch, or chief imperial rule of the world.

And as the first coming of Christ was within five or six years after that
said great conjunction: Read Haruies astrological discourse of the said great
Conjunction.
so the second coming of Christ may likewise be within five or six years
after this said conjunction. which Joan de Regio Monte by his verses, or some
other learned man that wrote them before him, does think will either happen
about the year of our Lord 1588. (Which will be five years after this
great Conjunction) or else that in the same year or about the same time there
will be some great alteration, and as it were al things turned vp-side down.


Eu. Though Julius Caesar got the emperial victory about the great
Conjunction, and though Christ was borne within five or six years after, yet
that makes not that at this great Conjunction (though it be in the same place)
shall be the end of the Roman emprie, or fourth Monarch neither that the
second coming of Christ, shall be so soon after the same For it may be at
their next Conjunction in the same place, as well as this.


Theo. Nay, that it cannot, for there will be no such conjunction in that
place again of 700. years, and to almost 800. years, so that if it should
be so long before the second coming of Christ, then the world should
continue a great deal more then six thousand years, and so the time or
years seem to be lengthned (and not shortened) and also thereby the former
conjectures should be of no force. And besides all this before mentioned, if the
signs and tokenes that Christ said should be before the end of the world,
may be a testimony to us, then surely the end is not far off, for Nation
does now rise against Nation, Matt. 24.
and Realm agaynest Realm, there have bine and is daily, great Pestilence,
Hunger, and Earthquakes: Noy, straung moving of the Earth out of his place:
yea, and rayning of Corn or Wheat, such as has not commonly been heard of,
with other wonderful strange signs and tokens showed unto us daily: yea, I
think more then was ever in any age before. And was there ever more treason
or treachery under pretense of freendship, then now? And does not every one
almost hate one another? yea, and wickedness does so abound, that charity
waxes cold: nay, is almost quite froson? Besides all this, Matt. 24. Read for
better instruction herein the book of the latter end, or second coming of
Christ.
the pure Gospel of Christ does begin merueilously to spread by preaching,
almost thorough the whole world, which is an infallible token, that the last
end does draw near. For Christ says. And this glad tidinges of the
kingdom, shall be preached in all the world, for a witness to all nations,
and then shall the end come.


Eu. This that you have told me, is sufficient to put us in mind, that the
terrible day of judgment is not far off, a joyful day for the godly, but a
fearful day for the wicked, yet many wicked and vain earthly worldlinges,
do neither regard it, nor believe it.


Theo. You say true, for the most of our liuinges do show it, and some with
their tongue do affirm it. A certain man being above fourscore years of
age, Make the fondness of an old man,
chanced to be in company where this matter was debated and talked upon, which
when he heard, he called them fools, and said, they pratled and talked they
wist not what: it may be a thousand years hence (says he) for any thing that
the wisest of you all do know, and I warrant it will be a good while before
that day does come. To whom one answered, Father, I pray you tell me how
old are you, mary, said he, I am above fourscore years of age, how long do
you think you shall live, said the other? Forsooth, said he, I am so
crooked and evil, that I think I shall not live at twelue-month, I look
every day when I shall dye. Then said the other again, seeing you shall dye
so soon, then what need you stand in the defense that the day of judgment is
so far off, you are not like to see it, and therefore you shall be never the
beerer, though it be never so far hence. For if you die the seruante of God,
as you do hope, then you will not care soon it should be: then said the
old man, you say true I pray God, said he, I may die in the faith of Christ,
and repent my sins, and then the sooner it comes, the better for me. Well
sir, I will now trouble you no more, if you have have made an end of your
dyeame.


Eu. Nay, sir though I have almost done, yet I have not al done, Then Dives
said further. If I were on earth again, I would not wear such curious and
rich cloths as I have worn, neither regard to go in any gaudy gear: for
they are but inticers to iniquity and pracures of pride, Gaudy gear inticers
to iniquity and procures of pride.
(as they that wear them, know in their consciencies well enough) let me see
if they that use to go gaudily, and that were new devised garments every day,
if they can tell or remember what fashioned and colored garments they did wear
a dosen years since: (I might appose some with 7. or 8. months since: then
how made and fond are they that for such vain toies that last so small a
while and that are so soon out of their memory, will hazard themselves
thereby to wear the terrible and dreadful garments of Gods curse, imbrodered
with the inquenchable flames of hell fire, which they can never put off, nor
never forget. Oh what if they had bestowed the one half thereof upon needful
garments for the poor, should they not have had good garments enough to
wear? Yes I trow, yea and some of them should have more then they should
need, yea and more then ever should do them good. Whereby Christ, as his
blessed children, would have bid them go into the kingdom of heaven, whereas
the bestowing all vainly upon themselves (without great repentance and
amendment of life) shall bid them go into hell as the cursed children of
the devil. Yea, said the Devil, thou can give them good counsel, Dives a
hellish child, because he went proudly and dained poor Lazarus.
where they cannot hear thee, but thou could not follow this counsel, when
it might have done thee good. Wherefore as thou art one of my hellishe
children, because thou wentest so proudly, and did give nothing to poor
Lazarus: therefore they shall also be my hellishe children, unless they
repent, because they go proudely, and regard not the poor, yea and so
peacokly, and with such broad monstrous and disguised ruffes, one of which
ruffes, does cost them more then would by twenty good and sufficient shirts
for the poor, Great ruffs whereof one woule buy twenty shistes for the poor.
which ruffes I will willingly give them leave to wear as long as they live,
but they will do them no good when they are in hell, unless they make the
fire greater to put them to more torments and pains. Then said Dives, I was
meruellous proud, and wore very sumptuous attire when I was alive, and many more
besides me. But I never knew that any did then wear any such ruffes, as it
seems now the people do wear. The money that some one of these ruffes do
cost, would I perceive clothe a man that would be satisfied with sufficient,
from the top to the toe. Then said the Devil, nay some of their bands and
ruffes that are neither Lords, Knights, nor Esquires, no nor has the living
of a Gentleman, do cost so much, that three or four poor men might be
sufficiently clothed therewith. Then said Dives, Oh what shall become of that
neck, that has more bestowed on a ruff for it vainly, then would serve 2.
or 3. for their whole bodies, needefully, honestly, and decently? Truly,
unless they repent and amend, and cry God earninestly mercy for these
their great monsterous ruffes on the earth, they shall have the skines of their
necks scorched and gather together, H fore saying against such wearers af ruffs
bespanged with the burning and fiery flames of hell fire, from which, their
monsterous ruffes (though they be never so thick nor broad) cannot defend
the^, nay, they will be a manifest witness against them.


Theo. If Dives were alive again, I think he would wear no such ruffes, but
proceed on.


Eume. Then said Dives, if I were on the earth again as I was, I would bestow
no thing on my self, neither wear any thing but that should be very
needeful. It may be so, said the devil, but I cantlye believe thee, but though
thou should do so, thou sholdest hardly or never bring thy wife to do so,
for she would have that that must please her fancy, as well as that that must
satisfy her necessity. Oh there be many fine curious Dames on the earth,
whose fingeres being dashed full of Gold ringes, Curious dames that have their
fingers dashed full of gold ringes.
must needs now and then dash their maids on the lips withal, to let their
teeth bleed, or to make them wear their mistress mark on their face. If
there be any other commodity in the wearing of their ringes it is to puff them
up in pride, and to have a vain glory in themselves, whereby they become my
diligent servants. But if one of these dainte dames (that were so many
needless ringes on their fingers) do see a poor silly soul lying naked in
the street shyuering with cold, and almost dead with hunger, they will rather
suffer them most miserabelly to die with hunger, then they will give him one of
the worst ringes they have or wear: nay, rather some of them will turn their
faces from him, or look disdainefully on him, and so goo their way without
giving him one penny or any succor at all, nay perhaps they will chide him,
though they give him nothing. Then said Dives, A wise saying of Dives.
what fools are they, their fingers would be well enough and warm enough
without ringes, but the poor soul in the stret is not well enough and warm
enough without food and raiment. So yt the giving of one of these needelesse
ringes to their poor brother, would help him, not hurt them, feed him, not
famyshe them, clothe him, not unclothe them: and warm him, and not make them
cold, and perhapes might save his life, and thereby procure the favor of God:
Mark.
whereas their uncharitable keeping of these one vain and needless ringes,
may work the death of their poor brother, and bring to them selus the great
indingnatio^ of god and so the loss of the kingdom of heaven. And then they
will say, woe worth these ringes that ever we did wear them and woe worth
these ringes that ever we saw them. Then said the devil well Dives well,
though thereby they loose the favor of God and the kingdom of heaven, yet
thereby they shall get my favor and the dungeon of hell, where they shall be
tormented for ever in unquenchable fire, there they shall be sure of gnawing and
gnashing of teeth enoughe. Note this well.
Then they shall see that their vain, proud, and uncharitable wearing of their
ringes on the earth, did not so much please them: but their everlasting burning
in hell fire will as much displease them, and their vain turning and fidling of
their ringes about their fingers on the earth, did not feed their fond fancy
so much: but their howling and crying in endless torments of hell will
discomfort them as much.


Theo. Truly it greeueth me to se that the people should be so vainly minded,
and to have such a pleasure in the wearing of their gold ringes (as Dives
said) to their endless destruction. Such wicked worldlinges are they, both
carlesse of heaven, and feareless of hell, that keep and hoord their gold and
money in their coffers purposely to bury them worshipfully withal, Careful
keepers of their money to bury them withal.
or rather for a vain ostentation after their death. being of no great
calling, but rather of a high mind, then of a heigh degree: suffering their
poor needye neighbors to loose their commodity, or to live in misery,
rather then they will give, nay lend them (yea, though it be upon good
assurance) a small portion thereof, which would neither hurt nor hinder them,
if they should never have it again (unless it be a hurt or hinderance to lack
alitle of their vain glorious funeralles, whereby God knows their poor dead
carcass has neither pleasure nor profit) which money if the thief chance to
catch, and go a way withal (as such a hoorder for their burial has been once
served at the least) then it is well enough, so that the poor have none of it
to do them good with all, and yet while these vain persons are alive they must
be counted neither proud nor pitiless, Mark.
but they that have a care to be counted worshipful by their burial, and are
desirous to have glory when they are dead: then it cannot sink into my head
but that they are both proud and stately minded, when they are alive.


Eum. That is most true, but these are, far from the following of Christ: for
if they that are careful of their morrowes meat (which is necessary for
them) do contrary to Christ his word: then they that are careful of glory
at their burial, and keeps their gold in their chestes for that purpose, are
far from following the word of God.


Theo. No doubt of that, how full is the world of such vain headed persons
There are some of so proud a heart, and disdainful a mind, that no poor body
may trample in their houses, or scant be suffered to sit in their porch:
Disdaineful and proud persons that must not have the poor sit in the porch of
their houses.
yea, and some mystresses are so proud and disdainefull, that forsooth the
friends or kinsefolkes of their servants may not come into their houses to
talk with their servants, (much less with themselves) for they must be mewd up
in their chamber, as ar unworthy to be in their company, or else to talk with
them, yea, though their said servants friends be better borne, and keep better
houses then they and some are so statly hearted, and disdainfully minded, that
they will not give a little fire or water. nay what will you say to such
disdainefull women, that are so clean bereaved of good nature and charity,
Proud and disdainful persons that refuse or forbid fire and watter to their
poor neighbor.
that forbid their own sisters to fech fire or water at their houses which are
two of these elements which God has generally given throughout all the
world, both to poor and rich, which most necessary elements, if God should
with hold them from these proud and disdainefull persons but a small while,
they could not be able to live: and yet like merciless wretches they can be
content to deny or with hold the same from their neighbor, or their own
natural sister.


Eu. Mary I say that such proud and disdainful persons that deny a little
fire or water to their neighbor or sister, do not use commonly to give pieces
of gold to the poor hungry, and naked souls, whom they see sitting, or
miserably lying in the streets, But their proud hearts and disdainefull
minds (when they come into hell into the Devils handling) will be plucked
down well enough. And whereas they are churles of their fire on earth, the
devil will not be a churl to them of his fire in hell. And whereas they are
niggardly of the earthly water, to their poor neighbors on earth: God will
be as niggardly to them of his heavenly water, when they are in hell. Nay they
shall not have one drop of his merciful water to quench the fire or burning
heat of their tongue, be their moan never so great, or cry they out never
so much. But now mark the end of my dream-


Theo. I will give ear unto you with a very good will.


Eume. Then Dives said, how happy was Lazarus estate on earth, Pore estate
of Lazarus most happy
for all his poverty, hunger, and payneful sors? and how unhappy was my
estate on the earth for all my riches, wealth, and prosperity.

His poor and beggerlye estate througe patience, has brought him to be now
full of heavenly riches, and my rich and sumptuous estate through my pride and
unmercifulness, has made me now full of hellish pouertye. Yet the earthlye
worldlynges think that there is nothing worsed then beggrye or pouertye:
Worldlings think nothing worse then poverty or beggary.
and nothing better then worldly wealth and prosperytie. But I have found it
otherwise, and clean contrary. Mark the madness and fondness of these
worldlynges, they can be content to be very poor and very beggeres for that
space of three or four years or rather more, to be an earthlye Lord or a
Duke all their lives after, which cannot last long, and whose estate cannot be
without grief and other troubles: but they cannot be content to be poor
and in a beggarly estate for the term of this short life, to have a most
joyful Kingdom in Heaven, for ever, where is nothing but felicity, pleasure,
comfort, mirth, and more joy, then man's heart can think: If Christ had
thought the rich-mans state to be best, Christ would not have been so poor if
he had best to be rich.
he would not have been so poor as he was nor have such poor beggarly men
about him as he had, neither would he have bid the rich young man to sell
all that he hade and come and follow him. Nay he thought it was a most
dangerous and perrilous estate, or else be would not have said. It is as hard
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, as for a cable to go
through a needles eye. Then said the devil. Yea, but all preachers on the
earth can not make the rich believe it neither can make them sell half of
their goods and to give it to the poor.

And if they should sell all that they have and give it to the poor, and
thereby become poor themselves, if they live as impatiently, enuiously, idely,
and sinfully, as do the most part of the poor especially the most beggarly
sort, they may hap to be shut out of heaven from poor Lazarus, and be
thrown into Hell with thee Dives. It may be so said Dives but if the poor
could consider it, their state is very happy, The poor estate most happy-
and most necessary for them. For their hunger might make them call to their
heavenly father for food, their nakedness might make them pray to him for
clothes, their greefes and sores might make them call to him for health and
help or for the gift of patience therein, their lying in the street without
houses might make them to look up to heaven, where they have houses prepared
for them, and earnestly thank God therefore and their poverty might cause
them to rejoice that they have their riches laid up in heaven, and so by this
their patient poverty, (if they repent their sins, and believe that they
shall be saved only by the death and passion of Jesus Christ) they are sure to
possess the endless kingdom of heaven, Mark well.
and to avoid this most doleful dungeon of hell where I am. Therefore if I
were on the earth again as I cannot, I would have a poor estate to choose,
for riches procure pleasure, and pleasure increases sin, and sin brings
Gods vengeance, and Gods vengeance brings damnation, and damnation brings
hell. Therefore they that are rich, unless they be plentifully endued with
that fear and grace of GOD (as many great and rich men have been) are in such
a dangerous estate as they little think off. Then said the devil, and many
of the poor and beggarly sort, (considering their impatiencie, spite, envy,
and malice) are in a more dangerous case then they think of. For their
poverty and pain makes them impatient, their want makes them weep, their
hunger makes them houle and cry, and their misery makes them mourn, and so
through this their worldly care I grant, many of them do clean forget God,
and take not him for their father, and do not only wish themselves out of the
world, but also do rid themselves out of the world, by cutting their
throats and hanging themselves, and by diverse other means, which is no small
joy unto me. For through this their wicked living and desperate deaths, they
are mine own dear children, and none can take them from me when I have them
once in hell: then said Dives, Note this.
belike they think that all their cares, poverty, misery, and trouble is
ended, when this their life is ended, but that is not so, (but only to the
godly and faithful children of God,) for whosoever dies impatiently,
impenitently, unfaithfully, sinfully and desperately (whether they be poor or
rich) though their earthly troubles, miseries, and calamities do end yet then
their everlasting sorrow, care, woe, grief, and most extreme torments in
hell do begin. So that whereas they think by their death, they go from
pain to ease, they go from a sweet short comfortable sorrow, to a most
terrible and insufferable endless woe and torments. Therefore they that be
alive on the earth, may rejoice and be glad, though they have never so great
poverty, trouble, misery, or calamity, for that is but short, and can last
but a while, but if they once come hither to hell where I am, then their most
intolerable pains shall never cease, nor the fire that shall burn them can
never be quenched.

O that my torment and pains, said Dives, might have an end, A doleful
saying to be well regarded and wayed of al men.
or be ended in time, then I should think my self most happy: O that I
might be in hell but so many years as the greatest barn in a country
would hold corns of Wheat, nay rather then fail, mustard seeds: for then
at length (though it would be unreasonable long first) I should come out and
be released, but always to be burning in the fire of hell, and never to come
out, what a thing is it, and what a doleful case am I in? Ah woe is me, woe
is me, that ever I was borne, fie on all my earthly riches, fie on my earthly
prosperity, fie on all my earthly joy and pleasure, woe be to the time that I
was unmerciful to poor Lazarus, which has brought me to this endless woe in
the fiery flames of hell, where my pains shall never cease, and my torments
never end.

These are the last words that me thought Dives did speak. And so I have
declared to you my whole dream of the devil and Dives.


Theo. The dolefullest dream that ever I heard, they that do hear it as I
have heard it, I hope will fear hell, as I mean to fear it.


Eu. I thank God, which made me to dream it: for ever since I detest all
sin and wickedness, and as for worldly riches, pleasure, honor,
possessions, and promotions, I do not regard but all my care is to please
God, and that I may end my life repentantly and faithfully, and to trust only
to be saved through the merits of my savior Jesus Christ, whereby I may
attain after this life to the joys of heaven, where poor Lazarus and al
other the children of God shall rest and reign for ever.


Theo. I thank you most heartily for telling me this your most strange and
true dream, I was wont to teach you, but now you have meruellously instructed
me, thinking verily through your telling me this your dream, that I shall
despise this world the more, and offend God the less, and furthermore fear
to come to that terrible place of hell, where Dives and the reprobate shall be
in most extreme torments for ever.


Eum. The Lord keep us from it.


Theo. Amen.


Imprinted at London, by T. Dawson for Henry Car, dwelling in the old Change,
at the sign of the Cat and the fidle, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Blazing Star.


