EMBLEMS OF RARITIES: OR CHOICE OBSERvations out of worthy Histories of many
remarkable passages, and renowned actions of diverse Princes and several
Nations. WITH Exquisite Variety, and special Collections of the natures of
most sorts of Creatures: delightful and profitable to the MIND.

Qui mores hominum multorum vidit, and Urbes.

Virgil. Collected by D. L.

LONDON: Printed by N. Oaks. 1636.

TO THE Worshipful, and truly Generous Captains: Capt. NICHOLAS CRIPS. Capt.
JAMES SLADE. AND Capt. SAMVEL CARLETON, all Happiness here, and hereafter.
Noble Commanders,
REligion, Wisdom, and Valor, are Jewels and Ornaments to your Heroyicke
Profession of Arms: And I am glad that this Kingdom and others by one of you,
and this honorable City by all of you, can justly maintain my asseveratio^ to
be free from flattery. It i^ no small Honor that God an^ this Kingdom has
laid upon your shoulders, in making yo^ so Eminent in Office, Worth and Wealth,
my self havin^ real experience of your Nobl^ Dispositions and Vertuou^
Qualifications, have ma^^ bold to discharge some part (...) my Duty by a fair
Present^^tion of these my labors to you^ worthy protections: And I d^^ not
adventure upon this without some grounds and Reasons.

First, as Virtue is alway^ coaspicuous, so it is attractiv^ as an Adamant.
Secondly, I have a long time been amongst ^ur Armies abroad, and do ^ruely
honor the Professors of Arms, and have had expe^ience of both fortunes, both
in Leaguers and in Garrisons: In which places (to the Ho^our of the Commanders
be it) found loving and noble re^^ect. Thirdly, I stand in^^aged unto your
Worships, in a ^leepe bond of Respect and Ser^ice, for your real expressions
^f kindness unto me. Fourth^y, I heartily desire that your Names may be known
through (...) the corners of this Land, to (...) as excitements to others of
virtuous undertakings, being such Lights, it is fit they should shine round
about.

But not to presume too much, accept I pray your Worships, this Myte of my
Service, my disability confined my Will, I desire to express more, but yet I
cannot: when Time shall lend enablement, my heart shall not want readiness of
expression of it to your Worships: Thus praying the Lord of Hosts to bless you
the Captains of his Armies, at home and abroad with happiness, I humbly
commend your Worships unto his protection, resting

Your Worships bounden Donald Lupton.

To the Gentle Reader.
THE outward Senses of men chiefly delight in varieties: the Eye takes pleasure
in sundry and various objects, the Ear with several and changeable sounds:
the Sense of smel^ing delights in sundry Odours: the Taste best relishes
diversity of Cates, the Touch affects change and variety of matters. Herein
indeed being lively Emblems, expressing the inward qualities of the minds of
Men; for it is truly said, Natura hominum novitatis avida: The inward
faculties of the Soul delighting almost as much in changing varieties, as in
their beings: the memory retains in her closet, several, sundry, manifold,
and almost innumerable passages: the Judgment is not tied to one, but
determines mani^old cases: the Affections Proteus like, mutable and variable in
the choice of pleasures or profits: and the will it self is as desirous to
have new matter to choose, or refuse, as any of the other Weighing therefore
with my self, what contentment is afforded to the minds of men, by affording
them variety of subjects to contemplate and peruse, I have with great labor,
and no less faithfulness striven to my utmost, to give my loving Countrymen
of this Nation, contentment in this point, presenting to them this Book, as full
of variety of matter as of leaves, every leaf almost bringing to their eyes a
new subject: which I hope will afford them as much pleasure and profit in the
perusing, as they did my self in the collecting: passages there are in it,
that are worthy to be reduced to memory; and with all diligence to be kept
from the dark Cell and Grave of oblivion; and indeed I suppose it a supine
negligence, and a careless respect to the honor of renowned History, to let
those worthy and admired passages to be drowned in one age, which are, and may
be useful and pleasant to posterity for ever.

-- Quis nosset Homerum?
Ilias aeternum, si latuisset Opus?
It is certainly an injury to our predecessors to suffer their memories and
labors to perish, who took such great pains and travailes for the benefit of
us, and succeeding generations: I have therefore in this book selected many,
and those special observations, out of Authentic Authors, famous for their
writings, and approoved for truth in all ages, containing the acts of many
Emperors and Princes, the Solemnization of their birth-dayes, with the
Triumphs and Pompes that were then used, as also their Funerals, the
destrunction of many Cities, especially of Jerusalem: they contain also many
Customs, Rites, Conditions, manners of many strange Nations, and describing
the properties and natures of sundry Creatures, as Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and
also of Mettalls, and Minerals, as Gold, Silver, Lead, Quicksilver, Iron, and
the like; as also remarkable things of the Sybils, and their Prophesies, with
the Orders of Knighthood, that are now the most famous through the world: the
beginnings and invention of many Mysteries and Arts, as of Printing, and the
invention of the great Bombards, and such like, which I doubt not but will
yield satisfaction to all that are addicted to these kinds of studies. Now
there will not want those that will be readier to accuse, then to encourage my
labors in this kind, objecting that it seems to be needless to read them
here, when as they can have them in the proper Authors: I answer, though some
few may be so well stored with Language and Books, yet there be thousands
that neither are furnished with Books, nor yet with the Languages the Authors
writ in, and so are altogether deprived of this benefit. Howsoever, I have
labored, and I repent me not; for this Book will be beneficial to all that
shall without prejudicate opinions read it, and herein they have the choycest
flowers, picked and culled out of many Gardens for their benefit, and what more
is, they may in less time, and little charges obtain their desires by this,
which they cannot by many Books: For reading with a strict collection,
(considering the difficulty of Translation) is known to all men of judgment
to be difficult, tedious, and troublesome; yet I weigh none of these, so that
my Labors may afford any profit to the perusers of them. The serenity of my
Intent is a Bulwark sufficient to comfort me against the too too usual darts
of a malign tongue, and if any shall cast aspersion upon it, I wish them to be
wiser, and not ^o show their disease in public, ^ut (gentle Reader) I do wish
^^ee as much pleasure in the ^eading of this work, as I had (...) compiling
i^, and as for those ^ho dislike it, I think the fault (...) not in the dish,
but in their ^^rrupted stomachs; so not fea^^ng their censures, but respect^y
love, I leave:

Thine in hearty friendship, D. L.

The Table of all the Heads that are contained in this BOOK.
OF the Temple of Ephesus. page 3 A relation of Marcus Curious. p. 6 Of the
wars and manners of the Turks. 8 How the Turks do believe, and how they
worship God. 13 The opinion of the Turks upon the world to come. 21 Of the
miseries that Jerusalem suffered, during the siege of Vespasianus and Titus. 24
How Jerusalem was taken and fired. 25 Of the fasting and meats of the Turks.
29 Of the Circumcision of the Turks. 32 What execution of Justice the Turks
have, what kind of marriages, what manner of apparel and living. 38 Of the
nature of Gold and Silver. 46 Of spirits appearing in Mines. 49 The signs of
the destruction of Jerusalem. 50 Of the description of Ireland. 56 A brief
description of England and Scotland. 57 Of an I Will in Spain named Gades 60 A
description of Seneca, the Schoolmaster of Nero the Emperor. 61 To diverse
nations in ancient times were objected diverse vices and deformities. 63 Sugar
grows in a part of Italy. 65 A mountain always casting forth flames and
smoke. 66 The properties of the Eagle. 69 A description of a Raven. 72
Certain Rites and Laws of the old Romans. 74 The lively and quick wit of
Adrianus, the Emperor of Sardinia. 79 The making of Sugar at Palerm^ in
Sicily. 80 Of the mountain called Aetna in Sicily. 84 The Election of the King
of Goths. 87 Fear and care hinders man's growth. 88 The rare Art and mystery
of Printing found out amongst the Maguntines. 87 The invention of great Guns.
92 A notable History of a thing done at a town in Germany called Binguam. 96
^f the Bathes called Badenses in Germany. 98 ^ description of a Herneshaw. 100
^ monster born nigh unto Worms in Germany in the year 1495. 102 ^ow scrupulous
the Jews be to do any thing on their Sabbath day. 104 ^^e Famine of Jerusalem.
106 ^ wild Bulls in Prussia. 111 ^iscription of Iseland. 112 ^f the Country
called Laponia. 118 ^escription of Whales. 119 ^ow a mavelous horrible Dragon
was destroyed in Polonia. 120 ^ strange History of a King devowred of Mice. 122
^f the Treasure that was found in the Temple of Jerusalem, by the soldiers of
Vespasian. 134 Lycurgus Laws. 336 The ceremonies of the burialls of of the
Kings of Lacedemonia. 144 Laws of cruel Draco. 146 Laws of Solon. 147 Of
Dame Flora. 151 of the Ieat stone. 152 Of the burials of the Turks, and of
diverse observations and customs. 152 How the Christians taken of the Turks in
War, be handled and tormented, and how they are made free. 159 With what
burden and exactions the Christian Princes are charged and oppressed, being
overcome of the Turks. 269 The besieging of Samaria. 176 Of King Tantalus. 179
Of Artemisia the wife of Mausolus. 181 ^f Sardanapalus K. of Assyria. 183
people called Amazons. 184 ^f Hearts in Cyprus. 187 ^f the Date-tree. 190 ^f the
dead sea. 191 ^f a Sand transforming things into Glass. 193 ^ Fish called a
Purple. 193 ^he City of Babylon. 195 ^f the Phaenix. 197 ^escription of the Ram
that Titus brought before the Walls of Jerusalem to destroy it. 199 ^f Mahomet
the false Prophet of the Saracens, of his original, and perversity. 201 The
manner of the Assyrians. 217 The manner of the Persians. 219 Of the Panther and
Tiger. 223 Condition and nature of the Parthians 227 People of Carmania. 230
Property of sundry Nations. 232 Several ways that the Romans put any offender
to death. 233 Of the Tartarians. 239 Sibyls prophecy of the destruction of
Babell. 247 Of the twelve Sibyls. 249 Of the Country of India. 260 Of the
Brachmans. 268 Of the Elephant. 272 Garments used by the Highpriests of the
Jews. 277 Of the Dragons in India and Aethiopia. 279 Of the Griphin in India.
283 The notes and signs of a good Horse. 284 Certain monstrous people in
India. 287 Of the Ants of India. 292 Of Indian Apes. 293 Of the Diamond-stone.
295 The ten persecutions under the Roman Emperors. 297 Of Calechut, the famous
Mart in India. 300 The end of the Jews answerable to their lives. 309 The 7
wonders of the World. 311 The six Ages of the World. 317 Several bridges that
are in Singui. 321 Certain Illusions of Devils about Tangut. 322 Of the
Cockatrice. 324 Of the Crocadile. 326 The twelve Apostles with their
Martyrdomes. 328 The seven Wisemen of Greece. 335 Young fowls hatched, and
brought forth without their dams or females. 335 Rites and ceremonies of the
Egyptians. 337 The Seven Saxon Kingdoms that England was once divided into.
342 The four Monarchies of the world. 346 How the Turneyments and Iust^^ began
first in Saxony. 350 The eight Parliaments of France 35^ Of the Estridge. 360
Of the Empire of Cathay. 36^ The thirteen Cantons of Swisse^ land. 36^ The
twelve Peers or Pairs (...) France. 36^ The 4 parts of the World. 37^ The
eight times that Rome hat^ been taken. 37^ Six Orders of Chivalry which
continue at this day among^^ Princes. 379 Of the Cannibals. 394 Of the Lion.
399 Of the people called the Nigrits and other Nations. 399 Of Prefter John's
Land. 405 Of the Mice upon the Alps. 409 Description of a Unicorne. 414 The
three several Crowns that the Emperors of Rome are crowned with. 416
Septem-viri, or the seven Electors of the Emperor of Germany. 417 The oath
that the seven Electors take before the choosing of the Emperor. 419 Of the
birth of Alexander, and of the Macedonian feasts. 422 ^everall Trophies of
worthy Captains. 424 ^he birth of Mahomet. 430 ^f the inauguration and
anointing of the great Duke of Muscovia, with the ceremonies at their
Coronation. 431 The Nativity of Christ. 441 ^trange ceremonies at the election
of the Prince of Carinthia. 443 The manner of the funeral pomp of the
Grecians. 349 The great pomp and solemnity at the inauguration of the Pope
Rome. 4^^ The funeral pomp of the Rom^^ Emperors. 4^^ Of the inauguration
and coron^^^^on of the Kings of Persia. 4^^ Manner and order of the India^ in
celebrating the Nativitie (...) their Kings. 4^^ Nativity of K. Cyrus and of
(...) Persian feasts, for joy thereof. 4^^ The birth of Minerva. 4^^ The sacred
Anointing of (...) Kings of Israel. 4^^ Funeral pompes of the Aegy^^tians. 4^^
Funeral pompes of the Thra^^^ans. 4^^ Of the solemnity on the birth-(...) of
Prince Aratus by the Ach^^^jans with their Feasts and S^^crifices. 4^^ Of the
birth of Xerxes and of t^^ solemn feast thereof. 4^^
EMBLEMES OF RARITIES: OR, KQVISITE OBSER^ATIONS DELIGHTFVLL TO THE MIND.
THE Great Creator has so done his admirable Works, that they ought to be had
(...) Remembrance, says that ^rthy Prophet David: I ther^^^e did confirm my
self in (...) one Resolution, to search (...), and revive afresh with (...)
diligence, and faithfulness, many rare and exquisite acts of Ancient times,
performed in the several parts of the World, to^ many of which have, and do^
almost lie buried in Oblivio^ and so intend the communication of the benefit of
them, an^ my labors to this Island, where in I received my first breath doing
neither wrong to the sacred esteem of History, nor ye^ burthening my own
conscienc^ with unjust undertakings, (...) carrying my self by the balla^ of
truth, and steering my labo^^ by the rule of Equity; I profe^^ no other thing,
but a brief (...) a true expression, and digesti^^ of many special and
remarkab^^ passages, making the memori^ of many of them, and the ben^^fit of my
Countrymen, t^^ whole scope and aim of this (...) travail and labor.

And because Method is the guide of studies, (for who undertakes any action of
consequence without it, builds but without a Foundation, or travels in a Wood
without a way) not perfectly knowing where he is, or how to get forth, that I
may not be unjust or offensive to your memories, or to the worth of the
subject, nor show my own disability to the world, I do intend to lay down
the subjects I treat of distinctly, as I have gathered them, both for the
Readers benefit, and contentment, and first:

Of the Temple of Ephesus.
IN the Country called Ionia, there is the noble City of Ephesus, which was
built in the 32 year of the reign of King David, by Androchus the ^on of Codr^^
King of Athens. The Amazons did erect in it in the honor (...) Diana a noble
Temple, the like whereof was not then in all the world; and therefore it was
accounted amongst the 7 wonders of the world: it was 215 years in making, and
that of all A^ia, and set in a miry ground, for the avoiding of earthquakes;
there were 127 pillars in it, made of their kings one by one, which were in
height 60 foot; whereof 36 were carved with marveilous workmanship. The length
of the whole Church was 425 feet, and the breadth 220.

All that took this Church for Sanctuary, had great immunities and
privileges: there were also so many gifts and monuments given to this Church
from all Nations and Cities, that none in (...) world might be compare (...)
wealth. St. Paul preached at Ephesus 3 years, and converted many to the faith.
St. John also the Evangelist dyed in this City.

But this sumptuous Temple was destroyed, and set on fire in the reign of
Galienus the Emperor, by one Erostratus, who doing many notable feats in
War, and otherwise, when he perceived that he got no reward nor renown
thereby, to leave a continual remembrance of his flagitious and horrible act,
did with great fires and monstrous flames consume this fair Church, and
brought it to ashes, thinking thereby to be remembered in perpetuity: and yet he
was deceived, for there were general Edicts and Proclamations made, that no
man upon pain of death should presume once to put his name in any writing or
Chronicle, to the intent that he might have been buried with everlasting
oblivion.

M. Curious.
THere was in Rome about three hundred years before Christ's time, a strange
and horrible gaping of the earth; even about the midst of the market place,
with so vaste (...) depth and infinite hollownesse that it might well have
been compared to the gaping of hell mouth, the spectacle continuing thus for a
time, made great terror amongst the people, a^ the length the Southsayers by
their interpretations, persuaded that this horrible depth might be stopped, if
the most precious things in the City were cast therein* Whereupon diverse of
the Matrones of Rome, of their own free will cast in diverse goodly Jewels, but
all was in vain. Wherefore M. Curious a Knight of Rome, coming of a noble
house, being decked and adorned with his warlike furni^ure and ornaments, rid
head^ong into that horrible depth and hollownesse of the earth, and so
immediately it closed together again and was stopped. Some say that he
demanded this one thing before he would grant to ride and and leap into that
depth, that for a whole years space it might be lawful for him, every night
to lie with what woman he would choose, and that then of his own mind he cast
himself suddenly down headlong into that den, and so the earth closed again.

Of the wars and manners of the Turks.
THe Turks have a mavelous celerity in doing, a constancy in dangers, and
observation of the Empire. They will swim over very deep and dangerous
waters, they pass over strange hills, and being commanded, they go through
thick and thin headlong, having no regard of their lives, but of the Empire.
Most apt and ready to suffer fasting and watching. There is no sedition amongst
them, no tumult. They use horrible sounds and not outcries in War: in their
Tents in the nightime, there is ^uch diligent silence, that they ^ad rather
suffer their prisoners ^o escape, then to move any tumult.

The Turks of all kind of people, are said at these days to (...) most
lawful fighting, so that (...) is no marvel why their Com^on-wealth continues
so long, and increases so much, that ^^eir Nation is almost invin^^ble, except
they be destroyed ^y some plague or pestilence, ^r civil discord. The
Souldi^rs have an honest kind of ap^arrell: In their saddles and bri^els there
is no curious superflu^y. No man goes armed but (...) the time of War: their
wea^ons are brought after them in ^urdens; they use no banners ^or standerds,
but in the tops of their Javelins they have certain ^hreads of diverse colors
hanging, where one Captain known from another.

They use the Drum at the Fluite to call and moo^^ men to fight. They pray
f^^ their soldiers in every congr^^gation and solemn meetin^ but rather for
such as have dye for their Country, calling the happy and blessed, that they
d^^ed not at home in the lamenta^^^on of their Wives, and Children but abroad
amongst their en^^mies weapons, and terrible no^ses. They write and describ^
the victories of their ancesto^ they sing and extol them bei^^ written; for
they think the soldiers minds to be mu^^ encouraged by these meane^ They
do so abhor picture and engraved Images, that upon such causes they call the
Ch^^^stians Idolaters. They have (...) Bells, nor yet do suffer the Christians
abiding amongst them to have Bells. They never play for money, or any other
^^ing, but such as be found ^laying, be grievously slandred (...) every man's
mouth. No man ^f what state or degree so ever ^e be, desires to sit on a
bench, ^ut they lie down and sit on ^^e earth like Children, with a ^ery
comely folding of their ^^rments under them.

The table whereon they feed ^^r the most part, is prepared of ^n Ox hide, or
an Hearts skin, ^ndressed and rough with hair ^^ill, having the roundnesse of
^oure or five hand breadthes. No man enters into any house, Church, or other
place where^n they must sit, unless his ^hooes be off; because it is acounted
an unhonest, and undecent point, for any man to (...) with his shoes on his
feet, an^ therefore they use a kind of sho^^ that may easily be put on and
(...) The place were they sit, eith^^ at home or in the Churches, strewed and
covered either wi^^ tapestry clothes, or broad clot^ or rushes, and sometimes
for (...) moisture and uncleanness (...) the place, they have bodies a^^
tables.

The garments both of m^^ and women, are large and lo^^ enough, open in the
form part. They have great car^ emptying the Belly, and mak^ Urine, that they
turn not the faces toward the South, whi^^ way they are always wont look
praying. They take so great heed, lest any (...) should see their filthiness
discharging nature. They ^^^taine from Wine, as their laws do command them;
because ^t is a provoker of all unclean^esse and vice, and yet may ^hey
lawfully eat Grapes. They ^bstaine also from swines blood and flesh, and from
all flesh that dies of the murraine. All other meats they do eat.

How the Turks do believe, and how they worship God.
THe Turks confess one God, which has none like or equal to him, whose
faithful Prophet they account Mahomet. Five times a day they pray with their
faces turned into the South, and before they do this, they provide that they
have a most perfect cleanness of body in every part: hands, arms, mouth,
ears, nostrills, eye^^ hairs, washing their feet mo^^ decently, after
carnal copula^^^on, and natural evacuation, e^^cept they have been sick,
(...) travailing abroad. If they wa^^ water to do this, which is se^^dome
seen, because in eve^ City they have baths continu^ally flowing, then they
wip^^ and rub them otherwise.

Every year they fast a whol^ Month and a Week mo^^ straightly, in the day
time nei^ther eating nor drinking any^thing, nor yet having any con^junction
with women, but afte^ the Sunne-set, until the Sun-ri^sing the next day, they
fill them selves with meat, and drink, and venerous pleasure: in the end o^
this solemn Feast, they celebrate the Feast called the Pas^h^ in remembrance
of Abraham Ram, which appeared in^tead of his Son at the Sacri^ice, and of
a certain night wherein they suppose the Alco^an was given from Heaven.

Their Priests do not much ^iffer from the Laity, nor their Churches from
common hou^es. It is sufficient to know the ^ooke which is called Alcoran, and
such things as appertain to ^rayer and observance of the ^aw. They lack not
their rea^ings, and studies of Arts and Sciences. They have no care ^f
Churches, nor souls depar^ed: they have no Sacraments, ^or observation of
relics, ho^y vessels, nor Altars, but they are attent and diligent in looking
to their Children, their Wives, and Family, to tillage of the ground, to
merchandise, to hunting, and the like exercises, wherewith life is maintained.
They be free from servitude and exactions, these Priests be honored of every
body, as men that know the Ceremonies of the Laws, have the government of
Churches, and can instruct others. They have many Schools and places of
exercise, wherein such politic Laws are taught, as have bin made by their
Princes for the administration of the Commonwealth, and defense of the
Country, wherein they that profit, some of them are made Rulers in
Ecclesiastical matters, and some be secular Magistrates, there be also in that
sect many and diverse religious sorts, whereof some living in woods, and
solitude, utterly refuse the company of men, some keeping hospitality in
Cities, do relieve ^he poor strangers with hospi^ality, if they have not to
refresh themselves withal; for they themselves also live of begging and alms,
many of them wan^ring about Cities, carry good and always fresh water in
cer^aine bottels, of the which they ^ive to every one demanding ^or the same,
freely and gladly, ^or the which dutiful good will and work of mercy, if any
thing ^e given, they take it, they co^et nothing; they make so great (...) show
and ostentation of Reli^ion both in their deeds and say^ngs, and also in their
manners and gesture, that they rather ^eeme Angels then men, such is ^^e deceit
in men's eyes.

The Turks cease from all la^our on the Friday, and keep (...) with as much
Religion and de^^otion as we do the Sunday. But the Jews do marvailously
observe the Satturday. In every City there is one principal Church, wherein
they meet together after noone every body, and after their prayers solemnly
done, they have a Sermon. They have large and sumptuous Temples, which are
called in their tongue Me^chit, where in they have no Images at all, but it is
foun^ written every where: There (...) no God but one; and Mahomet hi^ Prophet.
One Creator, and the Prophets equal. And also There is none so strong as God.

There be in their Churche^ a great number of burni^^ lamps with oil. All
the Church is white, the pavemen^ is laid with mats and other things, and above
many clothe^ of tapestry, and arras be han^^ed. There is a great turret a^out
the Church, on the top ^hereof, their Minister when ^^rvice time is, stands,
and ^utting his fingers in his ears, ^ith an high voice in his own ^ongue he
repeateth these ^ords thrice: One true God. When this cry is heard, the ^obles
and the meaner sort ^ommeth to the Temple, only ^ntent to devotion, and the
Mi^ister prays with them, and that he ought to do four times ^etweene day
and night by his office, and they which come ^o the Prayers, ought to wash
their hands, and feet, and secret parts. They must put off their ^hooes, and
leave them before ^he Church gate, and thus, some enter barefoot into the
Church, and some with very clean and fair shoes. The women sit together in a
secret place from the men, so that the men (...) neither see them nor hea^
them, albeit they come not (...) often to the Church. In the prayers they
cruciate and afflic^ their bodies marvellously wi^^ continual agitations and
vo^^^erations, so that often tim^ they sown and faint in min^ and strength.
They think it a horrible thing and most wicke^ that a Christian man should be
present at their ceremonies an^ Sacrifices; having this opinion that their
Temples are conta^minate and defiled of unclean^ and unwashed men, their
M^^nister gets him into the P^^^pit, and there about two hour^ he preaches,
and when (...) sermon is done, two children ascend thither, which sing the^^
prayers sweetly, after this their ^^ister begins with all the ^^ple to sing
in a low voice, (...) his body on every side; (...) his words are nothing but
(...): There is but one God. They (...) thursday also as a festi^^^ day, albeit
the Friday is (...) devoutly, and most religi^^^ly hollowed of them, be^^^se
they have an opinion a^^ngst them, that Mahomet, (...) borne upon the Friday.

The Opinion of the Turks upon the World to come.
^HE Turks attribute so (...) much to Mahomet and his (...), that they
assuredly (...) everlasting happiness (...) such as keep their Laws, (...)
is to say, a Paradise of plea^^^^, a Garden having most pleasant and sweet
waters, set in a pu^^ and temperate air, where^^ they should have whatsoev^^^
they would, as all kind (...) dainty dishes for satiety, sil^ and purple
apparel, young an^ beautiful maids at their own will and pleasure, with Go^^
and Silver plate, and Ange^^ serving and ministering un^^ them like Butlers,
bringi^^ milk in goulden plates, a^^ red wine abundantly in Silv^^ cups,
Contrary wise to tho^^ that break these Laws, the^ threaten the danger of
(...) and everlasting destructio^^ This also they believe, th^^ how great
offenses soever a man has committed, if he will believe only in God a^^
Mahomet, when he dies (...) shall be safe and happy.

Some of their Religion ha^ ^is opinion, that the Law pro^eth nothing; but the
Grace of ^od whereby a man must be sa^ed, which without merit or ^aw is
sufficient to get salvati^n. There be some as it were ^ccessours of the
Prophets and ^athers, alleging and affirming ^^e traditions of the Elders,
which teach, that men by merit ^ay be saved without the Law and Gods grace, so
that they ^e earnest in prayers, in watch^^g and meditations. There be others
again that affirm every ^an to be saved in the Law that ^s given of God,
because those ^awes are equally good to those that keep them, and one ought
^ot to be preferred before another. So you may see where Christ is not, how
inconstant ^indes waver in diverse errors, ^he which thing also may appear
amongst some Christian^ as such as seek for salvation o^ any other then of the
Saviou^ only.

Of the miseries that Jerusalem suffered during the siege thereof by
Vespasianus and Titus.
THe Roman Eagle displayed it self before the Town, with all other Engines
and warlike instruments, Titus himself being then in person, to take view
as well of his own soldiers valor, as of the ground, about the City to
entrench in, as also to try the courage of the Enemies: He set before it with
his Army in the year of the world 4034, being after the Death of Christ 72:
and when upon his first approaches he was repulsed by the Citizens, yet taking
^ourage, with the diligence of ^is old Soldiers, he had made a firm wall in
three days space ^ound about the Town, of 39 Furlongs compass, besides 13
Forts, every one of them being ^lmost 2 miles in compass, so that in the space
of one year and less, this populous City by Fire, Sword, Sedition, and
Famine, was stripped of 11 hundred thousand people: It has ^eene taken,
besieged, and burnt ^7 times, as you may read in the ^escription of Canaan.

Jerusalem taken and fired.
THis place so remarkable for strength and multitudes of people, supposed to
be im^regnable, was by the just hand ^f God, and the valor of the Romans,
taken in the year of the World 4034, and after Christ 72, being the eighth of
September, by Titus, after chosen Emperor: in which Action many fearful
passages may be viewed, as the daily slaughters, rapines, and cruelties, but
especially the burning of the whole City, the Temple, in which alone perished
60 thousand of the Jews, also the burning of the Councell-house, in which were
consumed all the Rolls and ancient Records of that Nation and not less then
30 thousand o^ men, women, and children. But especially lamentable was the
burning of the Temple, which in greatness, beauty, workmanship, costlinesse,
and plenty of all delights, far exceeded all works that ever the World had,
nay, it struck pity and remorse even in the heart of the Roman General who
strived to hinder it, and desired to have ^eene it in its beauty, nay, he
admired that part which he beheld before the fire had taken it, and confessed
he never saw the like: And to add to the miseries of the Jews, the Ray of the
fire was not greater, nor more terrible to behold, then was the cryings of the
people of all ages slaughtered there, fearful to hear. But most remarkable
is it, that upon the just revolution of such a prefixed time, upon the same day
of the same Month, that the Chaldaeans spoiled it before, I say, upon the same
day was this latter Temple, which Haggaeus rebuilded, utterly burnt down by
the Romans, so just is God in sending deserved punishments upon a people in his
due and determined time: to shut up this with this one Observation, that though
it was not builded without the help of thousands of Laborers, and great
expenses both of moneys and time, yet it was destroyed in a moment of time by
one firebrand, cast out by the hand of one Soldier, (as some have related)
whose name was Pisolus, of the fifth Roman Legion. No place nor person, though
never so great or beautiful, can be privileged from punishment, if they be
full of sin and impiety.

Of the Fasting and meats of the Turks
THe Turks are wont to fast one month and one week every year, but they do
not allwaies keep one prefixed time; for if this year they fast in January,
the next year they will do it in February, the third in March, and so orderly
of the rest, and when they do fast, they taste and eat nothing all the whole
day, not so much as bread or water, but when stars appear, it is lawful for
them to eat all things, saving things which are suffocate, and Swines flesh.

They have Vineyards, the fruit and commodity whereof they use diversely. The
Christians make Wine, and the Turks do so prepare Honey and Raysons, that they
appear always fresh, both in taste and sight; they have three manner of
drinks, the first of Sugar or Honey mixed with water. The second of raysons sod
in water, the stones cast away, and then Rose Water is added unto them, and a
little of the best Honey. The third is made of Wine well sodden, and
represents a kind of honey both in taste and sight, this is tempered with
water, and given to servants to drink. When they should eat any thing, they
strew their floores and grounds with mats and other things, then they lay
Carpets and Tapestry work or cushens, and some sit down upon the naked earth;
their table is of some skin, (as I said before) it is drawn at large, and
shut together again as a purse, they sit not down after our manner, nor yet
as the people of old were wont to do, leaning on their elbows, but with their
feet folded together in the forms of this letter X. like to the manner of
botchers; and before they take any meat they have their prayers or
thanksgiving. They eat greedily and hastily with great silence; but all their
Wives keep themselves in secret. Those which are captive women never go
abroad, nor can get license, but with oath Turkish women, when they go to wash
in Bathes, or in any other place out of the City for recreation sake, into
Gardens or Vineyards, but always keep home at their work, and it is not
lawful for other women to be conversant with their captives.

Of the Circumcision of the Turks.
THe Turks use Circumcision not in the eight day after the manner of of the
Jews, but as soon as the child is past seven or eight years, and can speak
the tongue well, the which thing is a mystery with them, for the words of
confession which are required before Circumcision, and the child for this is
not brought into the Temple, but is Circumcised at home in his parents house.
There be assembled at this notable feast all their friends, and commonly
amongst the richer sort, they kill an Ox, and therein they include and put in
a Sheep exenterate and ready dressed, in the which sheep there is a Hen, in the
which Hen there is an egg, which are all roasted together for the solemnity of
that day; then at supper time in their banquet the child which must be
Circumcised is brought in, whose yeard and privy member the Physician opens,
and apprehends the folded skin with a fine pair of pinsons, then to take
all fear away from the child, he says that he will make the Circumcision
the next day, and whilst he uses those words, he suddenly cutteth the prepuce,
which is the skin that covers the head of the yeard, laying a little salt on
the wound. They do not give names to their children in the day of circumcision,
but in the day of their nativity: after 3 days space he that is circumcised,
is led with great pomp unto the Bath, when he comes home again, he is led
throughout all the gests, which offer unto him their prepared gifts, some give
silk garments, some silver cups, ohers present him money or Horses. If any
Christian man of his own accord confessing Mahomet, will suffer himself to be
Circumcised, which thing chances very often times, for the grievous exaction
and burden of tribute, such one is led throughout all the Streets and Lanes of
the City, with great honor and triumph of the people, for joy playing on the
Drums, and to him many gifts are presented, and afterward he is made free from
their payment and tribute. Yet the Turks compel no man to the denial of his
religion, although they be commanded in ^he book of Alcoran, to ex^ulse the
adversaries and gaine^ayers: whereof it comes to pass, that so many and
diverse ^ects of people are found amongst the Turks, all which do reverence
and honor God after their peculiar rites and customs. Their Priests do
little differ from the Laity, and there is no great Learning to be required in
them, it is enough if they can read the book of Alcoran, but those that can
interpret the same Book according to the text, are esteemed as most cunning,
because Mahomet gave his precepts not in the vulgar Turkish tongue, but in the
Arabicall tongue; and they think it a wicked and unlawful thing to have them
interpreted or set forth in the vulgar tongue: these Ministers have their
stipend and reward o^ the Prince for their pains, they have wives and
apparel eve^ as secular men: if the stipend b^ not sufficient for the
multitude and ^umber of their children then may they practice and use all
manner of Arts, crafts, and Trades that other men do, but yet they are free
from exactions and other impositions, and are greatly esteemed of the common
sort. They have diverse livings solitary like unto Monks, which under the
color of Religion, inhabit the Woods and desert places, utterly renouncing
men's company: and some of them have nothing of their own, but they go almost
naked, saving that their privy parts be covered with Sheepe-skinnes: they
travail and wander throughout Countries, asking alms as well of the
Christians, as of the Turks. Some of them go seldom abroad, but continue in
Temples, having in the corners of Churches little cottages, their heads
uncovered, their feet without shoes, their bodies without garments, bearing
about them nothing but one shirt: they fast many days, and pray that God would
reveal unto them things to come, and the Prince of the Turks is wont to ask
counsel of them whenever he goes about any Wars.

What execution of Justice the Turks have, what kind of marriages, what manner
of apparel and living.
THe Turks do execute Justice most exquisitely, for he that is guilty of
slaughter or bloodshed, is always punished with like vexation and torment.
He that is taken with a woman in adultery, is stoned to death without mercy or
tarrying. There is also a punishment appointed for those which are taken in
Fornication: For whosoever is apprehended for it, he must suffer eight hundred
lashes with a whip: a thief for the first and second time, is so many times
scourged also, but if he be taken the third time, he loses his hand, at the
^ourth time his foot. He that ^oth any damage to any body, ^s compelled to
make satisfaction according to the estimate of the loss.

They admit no witnesses but very meet and allowable persons, and such as may
be believed without any Oath. It is not lawful for any man that is full of
age, to live out of matrimony, they may be married to 4 lawful Wives, and
those whomsoever they will choose, except their Mother and Sisters, having no
respect at all to the propinquity of blood: they may have as many illegitimate
and unlawful Wives as they please and be able to keep: the children both of
lawful and unlawful wives, are equally heirs in their Fathers goods, so that
they observe this order, that 2 daughters shall but match and be e^quall with
one son. They keep not two or more wives in on^ House, or in one City, for fear
of often contention and un^quieting, but in every City the^ keep one: the
husbands have thi^ liberty to put them away thre^ times, and to take them
again^ thrice; those Wives which ar^ put away, may, if it please them* continue
and abide with suc^ men as receive them. The women are very decent and honest
in their apparel, they use on their heads a kind o^ Linen like unto young
damsels* and they have vailes over the same, the folding whereof is so decent,
that the top of it hangs over the left or right side, wherewith if they go
from home, or come into their husbands sight, they may quick^y cover all their
face saving the ^yes: the women may never ^e seen in the company of men, ^or to
go to market, nor to buy ^r sell any thing; in the Chur^hes they have their
places se^arate from the men, so closely that no man may peep into them, nor
by any means enter unto them, and yet it is not ^awfull for every woman to
en^er in thither, but for noble ^ens wives, and never else but ^n Friday at 12
of the clock ^nely, they use their Prayers, ^he which is a solemn time with
them; the talking of man and woman openly, is so rare, and against common
custom, that if you should tarry a whole ^eare with them, you should ^cantly
see it once. It is ^hought a monstrous thing that ^ man should openly talk
with a woman, or ride in the comp^ny of any. They that are ma^^ried together,
do never use an^ wanton toies in the sight of o^thers, they never braule no^
chide, because the men do ne^ver omit their gravity toward Women nor Wives;
their reve^rence toward their Husband^ great Lords that cannot always be with
their wives, have Eun^^ches deputed to the custody o^ them, which do so
diligent^^ observe, mark, and watc^ them, that it is unpossible for a^ny other
then their Husbands (...) speak with them, or for the^ to do amiss, and
otherwise the well. They contract marriag^ without any oath, they take (...)
sums of money with the Wives, but are almost ensfor^ced to buy them, contrary
(...) the Romans fashion, where the ^one in Law was wont to be ^ought, and not
the sons Wife. The Wife has no orna^ent nor decking upon her bo^y, but that
she is driven to get ^f her Father. A cause of de^orce with them, is either
bar^nesse, or intolerable manners, their Judge is privy to these things. The
women use most ^^mple apparel, showing no ^inde of excess in the world, ^hey
never come with open face unto the sight of their Husbands ^r other men. The
Turks de^est our Hose and great Bree^hes, with their Cod pieces because they
do too lively ex^resse and show the privy parts. Their heads be covered with
Linen, having a top like un^o a turret, and comes near ^o a Pyramidall
form. They ^se bread not of the worst sort, both black and white bread,
saving that they cast a certain kind of seed upon new bread, which brings a
great pleasantness in eating. They have diverse artificious ways in preparing
meats and variety of sauces, a solemn kind of meat with them, is a kind of
pottage made with Rice, so thick, that it can hardly be divided with hands:
From Fish they abstain marvellously, they use all kind of flesh, saving
Swines flesh. There be no common Taverns, nor Innes for guests and Strangers,
nor common victualing-houses, but in the streets diverse kinds of meats are to
be sold, and other things necessary for life. The townsmen cause their ^ields
to be tilled by their servants, and they pay tith to their Emperor and Ruler.
Crafts^men maintain them with their ^ciences; they that do love idle^esse, do
perish with Famine, ^hey exercise merchandise most ^iligently, they pass and
tra^aile into Asia the less, Ara^ia, and Egypt, and they have their
peregrinations also to the Venetians. If they make water, ^hey wash their yard
after it, if ^hey empty their bellies, they make all clean afterward. In like
manner do the Women, whom their servants and bondmen do follow, bearing
vessels full of water, the manservant following the master, and the maid the
mistress. They have one kind of Judge, as well Christians as Turks: and this
Judge is bound to minister equally right to every body.

Of Gold and Silver.
GOld through heat and fire is resolved, but not consumed or wasted. For of
all kind of mettalls it loses nothing of his magnitude and substance, but the
more often and longer that it burns with heat, or is altered with fire, the
better, and more pure, and excellent it is made. And therefore has it always
bin accounted the most precious kind of metal: The weight of it neither is
diminished, or eaten away by any sharp things, as Salt, Vinegar, Nitrum, and
the juice of unripe Grapes: It is not deformed, nor made worse by rust, nor in
handling of it, or hands do gather any filth or ^ncleannesse as in other
kinds of mettalls; the which things may easily prove Gold far to ^urmount all
other mettalls. ^t is more flexible and soft ^hen Silver, whereby it is less
^raile, and not so soon broken: being beaten with a Mallet, it may be driven
so thin, and so much dilated, that of every denary of it may be made fifty,
or more thin leaves or rays of Gold. It may be framed and wrought as small
as thread, as it appears in Gold Wyre and Gold twist. And sometimes it is
woven and wrought with Silk, Wool, and sometimes without. Of it many and
goodly ornaments be made, and for many uses, as Rings, Bracelets, Chains,
Crowns, Tablets, Jewels, and diverse kinds and fashions of Plates, and such
like, yea (that which is scantly honest to be spoken) of Gold some have made
vessels to receive the superfluous burden of the Belly, Heliogabalus had his
Chamberpot of Gold.
the which thing Heliogabalus the Emperor, being a Monster and spectacle of
all beastliness, is reported of diverse authors to have used.

Silver will melt and be resolved with fire, but if it remains any long time
therein, it loses some thing of his substance. Sharp things also have power
to waste and eat it, and therefore it is not so precious as Gold: but yet it is
of an harder substance then Gold. And that kind of Silver which is more
flexible and soft, Silver.
is the better, because it is not so easy to be divided, and to be broken, it
is less ponderous then Gold, and cannot so well be dilated. Gold of all other
metals is the most weighty; then Silver, and the next Quicksilver, then
Brass and Copper, then Lead, and last of all Tin.

Of spirits appearing in Mines.
IT is not unknown to such as have been occupied in deep diggings of Mines,
that a kind of sprites does frequent and haunt in many Mines, whereof some do
no harm nor damage to the laborers in Mines, but wander in the dungeons, and
wherereas they do nothing indeed, yet they seem to exercise themselves in
working, sometimes in razing and digging the Mine, sometimes in gathering
together that which is dug up, and many times they seem to turn the
instruments which draw up the metal from the Mine, and diverse times a man
would think they did urge and excite the laborers, and drive them to work.
And this do they especially in such Quarries and Mines wherein much Silver is
found, or else where some good hope is of finding it. There be some of these
spirits very hurtful, as that which in the Mine at Anneberg, was so noisome,
that it destroyed a dozen Laborers* wherefore the said Mine was utterly
forsaken and left, notwithstanding the wealth of it.

The Signs of the destruction of Jerusalem.
SOme men cannot prevent destiny, though they foresee it* It happened in the
year 4034, that Almighty God gave his ancient people the Jews, signs and
^okens to beware of the destruction of their City, but they were a
stiff-necked people.

The first sign or prodigy was a blazen Comet, like unto a Sword, which they
interpreted to be good for them.

The second was, that a bright ^ight shined at midnight about ^he Altar and
the Temple, which they that were ignorant, conceived to be convenient, because
they were in darkness.

The third prodigy was a Hei^er, that was brought for Victime or Sacrifice,
being at a Festival or full Moon, and being ^t the Altar ready to be killed,
^rought forth a Lamb in the midst of the Temple, before ^he peoples face.

The fourth was, which is worth noting, that at midnight, when all the whole
City was at rest, the East End having a gate made all of massy Brass, and
was usually to have twenty men to shut or close the Gates together, and then
being locked and bolted, besides other Bars of Iron which went a cross,
about the first hour of the Morning, or just after 12 of the Clock, the said
Gate flew open of its own accord, which the Magistrates hearing of, went
presently to see, and all of them with their greatest power could hardly shut
them again: the vulgar interpreted it, and affirmed that God opene^ unto them
the Gate of his blessings.

The fifth, Chariots and armed men seen in the Air, shooting as it were one
against another with arrows and darts, all of them just over the City.

The sixth was at the celebration of the full Moon, at the day called
Pentecost, when the Priests all in their vestments, adorned for their wonted
Sacrifice, at first felt the ground to quiver or shake under them, and then a
voice which said, Let us depart hence.

The seventh, which is most wonderful, being one of their own Country men,
but a devout man, and having a great desire to celebrate the Feast, which they
call the Feast of Tabernacles, and being present among the assembly, on a
sudden tried out a voice from the East, ^ voice from the West, a voice from the
four winds, a voice against the Temple and Jerusalem: and thus crying against
al men and women, and all manner of people of what degree soever, continually
cried thus night and day in the streets of Jerusalem: which some of the
Nobility heard, disdaining any misfortune whatsoever, seized upon him by their
command, and their servants holding him with Chains and cords, till other
Magistrates that were then in office, did pronounce some punishment upon him,
for his foretelling them of the destruction of their famous City and Temple,
they stripped him, and beat him very sorely, yet he persevered in his crying:
O Jerusalem, woe, woe, unto thee, Albinus then being his Judge, which
pronounced his former punishment, was in amazement at his words, which
continually spoke, for that the stripes were laid and afflicted on him still;
and thus they suffered him to cry for the space of 7 years, and almost 6
months (and none took it to heart) his voice neither waxing hoarse nor weary,
till the time of the siedge, still saying, woe, woe to this fair City: and at
last presaging his own death, cried out, Woe to my own self: and as some
report, a stone being conveyed from an engine, smote him on the forehead; but
some relate that it was a dart flung from an envious hand, which had often
heard him cry with tears, and say, O Jerusalem, woe, woe. This Albinus, as it
is reported, was one of the first that was taken prisoner, and after put to
death by Titus, some six days after the east end of the Temple was fired.

Of Ireland.
THE earth in Ireland is so fruitful, and so good of pasture, that their
cattle, except they be restrained sometimes from pasture in Summer, are like
to be in danger through satiety.

No venomous beast in Ireland.
There is no hurtful thing nor noisome beast: no Spider, no toade, nor such
like, either breeds there, or else being brought from other Countries
thither, continues or lives there. The earth of this Country cast in powder
upon any dangerous beast or venomous Serpent of any other Country, destroys
and kill them.

There be no Bees in this Country, the temperatenesse of the air is
mavelous, the fertility and fruitfulness of the Country is notable: the
people of the Country be void of hospitality, they are uncivil and cruel,
and therefore not unapt for warlike affairs; they attribute great honor to
Martial acts, and knightly prowess. The Sea betwixt Ireland and England, does
rage almost continually, so that there is no safe passage but at certain times.

Of England and Scotland.
IN England there be no wolvs and it any be brought thither, they do not
continue, and therefore their herds of Cattle keep well together, without
any great attendance of men. The Sheep have horns contrary to those of other
countries.

In Scotland there be certain Trees which bring forth a fruit folded and
wrapped up in the leaves, Barnacles coming of a tree.
and that fruit when in convenient time it falls into the water running by
the tree, it reviveth and takes life, and is transformed into a living foul,
which some call a Goose of the tree, or a Barnacle. This tree also grows in
the Isle of Pomenia, which is not far from Scotland, toward the North. The
ancient Cosmographers, and especially Saxo the Grammarian, makes mention of
this tree likewise, and therefore it is not like to be any feigned or devised
thing of late writers.

Aeneas Syluius writes of this tree in this manner. We heard say there was a
tree in Scotland, which growing upon a bank, and by the waters side, brings
forth fruit much like in form to Ducks, and the fruit of that tree when it is
ripe, does fall of it self, some upon the land, and some into the water, and
those that fall upon the earth, do putrify and rot, but those that fall into
the water, straight ways with life to swim out of the water, and to fly in the
air with feathers and wings: of the which thing when we made more diligent
search, being in Scotland with King JAMES, a wise, sad, and grave man, we
learned to fly from wondering and making such things miracles as were common,
and that this famous tree was not only to be found in Scotland, but also in
the Isle called the Orchades.

Of an Isle in Spain, named Gades.
THere is a little Isle in Spain called Gades Erythraea, the the pastures
whereof do feed cattle so well, that they cannot draw or sever any whay from
milk, but they must needs power water, when they will have their milk to
curd. Their cattle also be like to dye at every thirty days end, except they
be let blood, and so lose some quantity of their blood. The grass whereon
their sheep feed, is somewhat dry, but yet it increases a mavelous fatness
both in their flesh, and also in their milk.

Seneca the Schoolmasters of Nero the Emperor.
SAint Hierom says, that he was a man of most continent ^ife, and therefore
he accoun^eth him in the number of holy men, but especially for the often
letters that he wrote to Saint Paul, and Saint Paul to him. This Seneca being
the Schoolmasters of Nero, was of great power and authority, he wished
himself to be in the like degree with his Countrymen, that Paul had amongst
^he Christians. Among diverse of his excellent gifts and properties, he had so
singu^ar and notable a memory, A singular memory.
that he could rehearse two thousand men's names in the same order that they
were told him, and also he was able to rehearse 2 hundredth Verses, being said
of 2 hundred Scholars, from the first to the last most perfectly. It is
written that Nero his cruel and cursed scholar, in recompense of his pains
and teaching, put him to death two years before the martyrdom of Peter and
Paul. When Seneca waxed old, Nero calling to remembrance the punishment of the
rod, wherewith Seneca corrected him in his childhood, admonished and commanded
him to choose what kind of death he would dye, whereby Seneca understanding the
Emperors will and pleasure, desired that he might be set in warm water, and
that his veins might be cut and opened in it, An easy kind of death.
and so they were, and he bled until all his vital spirits issued out of his
body, and thus he desired to finish his life, because he thought it an easy
kind of death, to lose his life in cutting of his veins.

To diverse Nations in ancient times were objected diverse vices and deformities.
ENvy to the Jews, disloyalty and unfaithfulness to the Persians, craftiness
to the Egyptians: Deceitfulness to the Grecians: Cruelty to the Saracens:
Levity and lightness to the Caldeans: Variety and changeableness to the
Affricans: Gluttony to the French men: Vain glory to the Lombards: Unmercifull
severity of the Hungarians: The uncleanness and and filthiness of the
S^evians: The foolishness of the Saxons: The hardiness of the Picts: the
luxury of the Scots: the drunkenness and vinolency of the Spaniards: the anger
of the Britains: the rapacity and greediness of the Normans.

And as those vices were noted in these kinds of Nations severally, so diverse
virtues and honest properties were attributed to them severally: As Prudence to
the Hebricians: Steadfastness to the Persians: Subtilty and wittiness to the
Egyptians: Wisdom to the Grecians: Gravity to the Romans: Sagacity to the
Caldeans: Wit to the Assyrians: Strength and Fortitude to the Frenchmen:
Faithfulness to the Scots: Subtle sophistry to the Spaniards: Hospitality to
the Britains: Mutual partici^ation to the Normans.

These properties were of an^^ent writers ascribed to diverse Nations in old
time, the which ^ow in these our days seem to ^e much changed, and to have
^ad great alteration.

Sugar grows in a part of Italy.
IN Calabria, which is a part of Italy, there grows Sugar, which is a kind
of Honey gathe^ed out of great canes, or reeds. first of al it is like unto a
kind of narrow resolved into liquour which some call white gum, a thing easy
to be separated and ^ivided, and afterward this li^uor being boiled and sodden
after the manner of Salt, is re^olved into a spume of froth, ^ntill at the
length that which (...) good, falls to the bottom, and then the corruption
and dregs may be clean taken away by the froth.

A Mountain always casting forth flames and smoke.
THe Mountain called Ves^vius Mons, being nigh unto the great water Sarnum,
not far from Naples, sends forth continually flames of fire and smoke like
unto Aetna in Sicily. This Hill in the Reign of TITUS the Emperor, being
broken in the very top, did cast forth so great flames, that it set the
Countries adjoining on fire. The Writers of Histories say, such abundance of
ashes and hot imbers to have been thrown out of this Hill, that the fields
round about have been filled with the said ashes, even to the tops of the
trees.

It is also found in ancient writings, that Pliny the second, being a very
grave and wise man, in the Reign of Traianus the Emperor, was suffocate and
destroyed with the flames and ashes of this Hill, when that for the desire he
had to see and note the nature and motion of it, he presumed to go too near.

This Mountain also burned with flames of fire, when T. Vespasian and F.
Domitian were Consuls, and breaking out in the top, first it cast forth stones
aloft, after that so great flames of fire followed, that through the fervent
heat thereof two Towns were consumed with Fire: the smoke thereof was so
thick, that it took away the light of the Sun, and in the day time made the
darkness of the night, casting forth Pumice stones, and diverse other kind of
black stones. Last of all, ashes sprang out so thick, and such a multitude,
that the Countries hard by were covered therewith, as it were with Snow, and
these ashes were driven by the force of the winds, partly into Affricke, and
partly into Egypt and Syria. The which outrageous burning, as the elder Pliny
did contemplate and behold, the smoke did so obstruct and stop his winde-pipe,
that in the restraint of respiration, he was suffocate and strangled.

The properties of the Eagle.
IN Italy there be many Eagles, this foul is a rapacious, cruel, and a
devourer of flesh, she is so much given to greediness, and to her prey, that
she does not only seek for preys in necessity of food, but also when she
has enough, she seeks for superfluities: she does greedily invade and set
upon Hares, Hearts, Geese, and Cranes: the eyes of the Eagle be so sharp and
quick of sight, that being in the very highest part of the Air, she can
easily see what falls on the land. Amongst all fowls only, the Eagle can
move her self straight upward and downward, perpendicularly with her flying
without any collateral declining. The Egle is commended for his faithfulness
toward other birds, when he has gotten meat or feeding; for he does
familiarly communicate the same unto such Fowls as do accompany him, and when
he has no more to make distribution of, then he attacheth his guest, and
dismembreth and devoureth him. All Foul tremble when they see the Eagle,
having as it were some understanding of his tyranny against them. He loves
his young with great affection, so that the Eagle puts his own body in
danger for them, bearing his young on his back, when he perceives them to be
assaulted with Arrows. When he labors to drive the Heart headlong to ruin,
he gathe^eth much dust as he flies, and sitting upon the Hearts ^ornes, he
shakes the dust ^^to his eyes, and with his ^ings beats him about the ^outh,
until he brings him to all down headlong.

He has great conflicts with the Dragon: and the Dragon most greedily
coveteth ^he Egles Eggs, and for this ^ause they fight wheresoever ^hey mee^e.
It is said that ^he Eagle of all kind of Fowls ^an keep the sharpness of
his ^ight, and his eyes steadfast against the Sun beams, and that he is
never hurt by light^ing.

A Description of the Raven.
THe Raven is a foul give to rapacity and devo^^ring of flesh, great of body
slow in flight, sharp in sight, and frequenteth much in Italy, in the Alps,
in Spain and in Egypt And this is to be understood o^ the great kind of
Ravens. The skin of the Raven is prepare^ and dressed artificially of the
white tawyers, with the feathe^ remaining upon it, and that (...) laid to a
stomach not well (...) sickly, Stomach digestion.
does marvellously help^ digestion. This Foul do^^ greatly above all other
cov^^ men's carcases, and by a singula^ wit and natural gift, it under^standeth
of man's death, pres^^ging it few days before. With his sharp eyesight also
it perceives a far off his most desired food. There be some that writes
mavelous things of this Foul, that in the time of War, seven days before
hand, it smells and perceives by scent, the place where the battle shall
be, and common^y does associate it self to that part which it perceives
shall perish with the sword. And therefore in ancient times Princes had their
South-sayers, and beholders of birds, that did most diligently behold the eyes
of the Ravens, and mark to what part they turned their eyes, and which side
they did presage to perish in battle* S. Ambrose writes, that a Raven
conceiueth without the seed of the male, and to have generation without
conjunction of males and femals, and that they live exceeding long, so that
their age is full complete with an hundred years, and when they come to
extreme old age, that then the upper part of their bills does so over grow the
lower part, so that it hinders and restrains it, that they cannot open their
bills to take food, and therefore are compelled to dye by famine, for he does
not sharpen this bill against a stone, as the Eagle is wont to do.

Certain Rites and Laws of the old Romans.
Romulus made a Law that the wife should be equal fellow with her Husband, in
money and other things, in holiness and sacrifices, and that she should live
according to the manner of her Husband, and as he was Lord of the house, so
should she be Lady of the family, that she should succeed her husband dying
without issue, and that with her children she should have her equal portion.
If the Wife were convict of Adultry, that then her husband and kinsfolk might
punish her with what kind of death they would. It was not lawful for the women
of Rome to drink wine, Wine forbidden to Women.
and this was observed many years, whereof was invented an instrument of
dower, in the which the Husband promised the father of the wife, as often as
she brought forth children, that he should give her as much wine to drink the
first 8 days, as were decent and covenient, and also so long as she was
sick, that she should have Wine by the council of the Physician, and that
upon every solemn Feastivall day, she might lawfully recreat her self with
one draught of Wine.

Cato the Censor made a decree, that they which were of propinquity to the
wife, might kiss her, whereby they might learn if she savoured of wine, and
that seemed to be done by the example of Egnatius Metentinus, Kissing.
of whom it is said that he slew his wife with a clubbe, because she drunk
wine from the barrel, and that Romulus pardoned him of her death: and this
grew to such a custom amongst them, that whenever the husband returned home,
he would kiss his wife and his daughters, marking by the odor and scent of
their breath, if they had drunk wine or not. They were very severe against
women surcharged with wine, because they did perceive that drunkenness was the
original cause of corporal corruption. Sobriety.
Romulus permitted and gave to the Parents all power over their children, that
by their own judgment they might compel them to any kind of duty, whether
they would restrain, beat, or keep them bound to rusticall works, or sell them,
or kill them: Numa made a law that prohibited any lamentations or mournings to
be made, for a child if that he died within 3 years of age, but if he were
past 3 years of age, that then he should be lamented as many months as he
had lived years, and many other strange orders they had, the which be at large
set forth by other authors.

The lively and quick Wit of Adrianus the Emperor.
ADrianus was the fifteenth Emperor of Rome, of whom it is said, that he would
at one time both write and declare his mind, and hear others, and talk with
his friends.

Sardinia.
IN the Country of Sardinia, there is a certain beast which they call Muflo,
the like whereof is not in all Europe beside. It has the skin and hairs
like unto a Dear or Heart, horns like unto a Ram, not long but crooked and
bending backward about the ears, in bigness he may be compared to a Bucke, it
feeds upon grass only and herbs, and keeps most about Mountains, very
swift in running, and his flesh is good to be eaten.

There be no Wolves in this Country, nor no hurtful kind of vermin, Foul,
or Beast, beside the Fox; which of all foure-footed beasts there, is most
hurtful, being of like bigness to other Foxes in Italy. In Sardinia a Fox
will kill a very strong Weather or Ram, a Goat and a Calfe.

Some write that in this Country there is no Serpent or any venomous thing,
but pestilent air, which comes through corrupt puddles and waters. Also
there is found in this Country a certain herb like unto a Baulme gentle,
whereof if any man shall eat much, he shall perish, and dye laughing. Some say
that there is a Fountain and Spring in Sardinia, whose waters do reprove
thieves and robbers after this sort. If a thief swears that he has not
committed the theft, and washes his hands or eyes with the water of that
Fountain, by and by he is made blind, and so he may be known; but if he has
not done the Felony, his eyes are made more bright and clearer then they were
before: the notice of this famous Spring is grown out of memory in this our
age.

The making of Sugar at Palermo in Sicily.
IN the fields about the City of Palermo, grows great plenty of sweet Reeds,
of whose juice being well boiled, Sugar is made. First, they dung well their
Fields, being not much distant from the Sea, and then do they make Furrows and
ranges somewhat high and eminent: Afterward in the Month of March they take
the highest knots of the sweet Reeds, made bare and void of leaves and
rindes, the which they do set and plant, that they pierce through the sides of
the ranges with three or four, having double knots even at one dinte, and so
do they fill all the ranges of the field: the earth is watered in Summer, and
is kept from rankness daily, about the Winter Solstice, only the roots left
for another planting (for it lasts the space of two years) the Reeds are
broken and taken away, of whose ripe and sweet joints and knots divided and
knit into small parts, by the same artificious means that oil is made, the
juice that comes thereof is purged and purified in one Caldron of three which
are set in a stew, and afterward is strayned through a course cloth, then they
take a part of the juice so strained, and put it in another Caldron (for so
they make it boil again) and out of this straight ways they power it again
into the third Caldron, and they beat it, and stir it boiling, whereof a
kind of Sugar somewhat black is drawn and made thereof, the same being sodden
again three times more, and after that once again boiled, will be most fine
and white Sugar. The other harvest which comes of the roots of the Reeds,
except the field be dunged in May month, will hardly come up to any profit.
This kind of Reed is full of knots in the stalk, as our common Reeds be, but
yet not so empty within as they are, for it is full of spungeous matter like
unto a Bulrush, it has a thin bark and is full of sweet juice, which is
pressed out in this manner. They cut the body and stock of it into many small
parts, and then put it in the press, and the juice that is pressed thereout,
they power into a very clean Caldron, and set it up in earthen pots, and so
when it is waxen cold, it is congealed into a very commendable Sugar.

The mountain called Aetna in Sicily.
Aetna is a mavelous hill for continual burning with flames of fire, because
it is full of Brimstone matter. It has been often times set on fire with
terrible flames, as Munster makes mention: the flames of it are in the night
time horrible to be seen, because it shines not as other fires do. In the
day time it burns obscurely much like to the flame of Brimstone, whereof the
Hill has great store. The ancient writers have uttered many strange things of
this, and especially Strabo, who says, that he was in the top of the hill,
and there marked all things diligently. In the very top they ^ffirme to be
mavelous muta^^ons and changes, for sometime (...) casts forth great store
of (...), and sometimes great flames and obscure smoke. And it is to ^e wondered
at the heat of the (...), because it cannot be tem^ered with any cold, nor
could ^e dissolved through that heat. The higher part of the moun^aine is full
of ashes, which in winter are covered with Snow: ^he very top of the hill is
plain, and is in compass about 20 fur^ongs. In the night time fire may
plainly be seen in the ^ill top, and in the day time a certain obscure smoke
rises up: Many times continual thundering is heard, being a terror to ^he
people, and black and burnt ashes are dispersed into diverse places, and the
air is made noisome with a most terrible smok. The Philosophers assign a
reason hereof, because this Isle is in his inferior parts full of caverns and
Brimstone, of Alum, fire and water, and such like, that are able to feed and
nourish fire. And fire cannot be without some vent or respiracle, but it will
lift up it self, and therefore many hot bathes be found in Sicily.

The air also entering into the pores and caverns of the earth, stirs up a
flame, which seeking for issue and eruption, vomiteth and casts forth smoke
and fire, and in many places searches for venting holes and respiracles.
Sometimes in the inward parts of the earth, such i^ the violence of the fire,
that it expels and casts forth with flames, burnt stones, and sand, and
the heat which is in^luded does marvellously shake and move every side of the
pri^y holes and caverns.

Election of a King.
THere be, that writes the Goths to have made this decree and caution: that
none should be chosen a King amongst them, except he were gross and fat of
body. Contrariwise the Saracens would not choose any to be their King, except he
were of a tall and lean body. The Carthaginians always in the election of
their King, did attend only his virtue and magnanimity, and not his Nobility
nor propernesse of body.

Fear and care hinders the growth.
FOr to be void of fear and care, it is a great help to maintain the
stature, it does corroborate the strength, and confirms the sinews: For fear
and unquietness of mind in youth, does much enervate and weaken the strength
of the body, and a sad and heavy spirit dries the bones too much* so that such
a body cannot take his just increase.

The Rare Art and Mystery of Printing, first found out amongst the Maguntines.
FIrst this noble Art to Print with Letters of Tin, Lead, and other mixed
metal, was in^ented and found out almost in ^ur age, not above 200 years
^gone: a divine and heavenly in^ention truly, and a thing me^orable and worthy
to be re^embred, and no less worthy ^f great admiration: but truly it ^ould
have been a great deal ^ore mavelous, Common things be not strange
if it had not ^hanced to be so common. It (...) strange and scarcely credible
(...) be spoken, but yet more true ^^en truth it self, that one Prin^er may
print so many Letters in ^ne day, that the swiftest Scri^ener or Writer is not
able to ^oe so much in two years. This is an Almaine invention, which was at
the beginning in ^reat admiration, and of no less ^cre and profit. The
inventor and first deviser of this, was John ^utenbergius, a man of worship,
equal with a Knight, and at Magunce. The thing was first taken in hand with
more boldness and confidence then hope* about 16 years before it began to be
common in Italy. The first beginning was at Magunce, the Germans being the
authors, with small and little principles and foundations, but shortly by the
industry of man's wit, it grew to that perfection, that now in our time it has.
Truly it had gone ill with all good discipline in these latter days, (if it
were now to have his beginning) seeing that all are given to their bellies
almost, and to unsatiable covetousness, for now they will scantly take up very
good books in the highways, which in times past they could scantly buy for
great sums of money. And of a truth, before the invention of this Art, when
they began to abject and neglect good Authors, all good Discipline might
have perished with the Authors thereof, if this Art had not been found out in
convenient and happy time. By this all kind of Learning has increased, and
the noble Acts of all Nations are manifest to all the world: In like manner the
memory and remembrance of ancient antiquity is restored hereby, and the divine
Wisdom of the Philosophers, and whatsoever has lain hidden in few written
Copies these many ages in a few places, is now by this set forth to all
immortality.

The Inventor of great Gunnes.
THe great Gunnes came first in use in the year of our Lord 354, and the first
author and inventor thereof was one Bertholdus Schwartus a Monk. Surely this
man found out a mavelous work, and that so many sharp Wits could not find
out before in so many hundred years: the which divine and necessary invention,
many have thought, and judged it to be a devilish and most pernicious device:
the Arguments on both sides be these: It is evident that for covetousness,
malice, and want of charity, in the end of the world, the evil people cannot
be kept down by Laws, nor that a man may safely travail whithout some danger
of injurious people: for before the invention of Guns, the seditious tumults
and factions of wicked and mischievous men, did spoil and destroy the labors
of good men in many places, and no man was able to assault and batter the forts
and holds of such rebels and robbers where they did enclose themselves,
without the help of such Guns and great Ordnance: therefore they do not well
that condemn the inventer of these Gunnes, without the which neither good
could live in safe^ard, nor yet Cities could be ^f any force, and keep their
ri^hes, nor Merchants could ex^rcise their Merchandise and S^afick, who are
indeed the spe^^all parts of mighty and ^^eat Cittyes. Wherefore let the
enemies of Bombards and great Gunnes, cease to contemn the gifts of God,
except a man will imagine the gaping mouth of a Dog, and his teeth made for to
bite, and so to be condemned; and the horns in a Bull, or an Ox, not to be
the good work of the Creator.

But no wise man will condemn these parts of nature given in the stead of
weapons: let them reject the abuse as in an Ox and a mad Dog, it is better to
lack both horns and teeth. For there is no kind of creature the which evil
men will not abuse. Some detest this as a plain devilish devise, and that
nothing could be more wickedly devise^ under Heaven, because all flagiti^ous
and wicked nations, as the Turks and Tartarians, being the co^^mon plagues and
scourges of the world, do occupy them for the destruction and consuming of
good men: in this case no manhood, no fortitude, nor strength of body, no
warlike policy, no weapons nor instruments, no strong holds, nor Towers of
stone, can profit or do good. For these torments which shoot stones and Iron
pieces, and great flames of fire, do waste, destroy, and overthrow all things,
and bring them to nothing. One shot destroys an hundredth, or two hundredth men
in an army, be they never so well harnessed. The^e be many kinds of Bombards
and great Gunnes, which are to ^ee learned nominately of them that for warlike
have employed great pains in the use and and experience of such things.

A notable History of a thing done at a Town in Germany called Bingium.
NIgh unto the town of Bingium, almost in the middle of the water of Rhene, is
a certain Turret called the Tower of Mice, the name whereof was attributed to
it upon this event. In the year of our Lord 914* when Otto the great had the
Empire and rule, there was a certain Bishop of Magunce, named Hatto, who was
the abbot of Fulde^ before, in whose time there was great famine in that
country: this Bishop when he perceived the poor to be oppressed with great
famine, did congregate and gather together, a great number of the poor into
one great Barn, and set the Barn on fire, and so burnt them: For he said that
they did not differ from Mice, which consume and waste Corn, No h^mane policy
can with stand Gods just judgment.
being profitable for nothing: But God suffered not so great tyrany unrevenged,
for he commanded the Mice by great flocks, and with a multitude to invade this
Bishop without pity, and to afflict and vex him both day and night, and to
devour him quick. But this Bishop flying into this Tower (that I spoke of
before) for refuge, thinking himself to be safe in the midst of the water of
Rhene, and free from all gnawing and bi^ings of Mice, was much decei^ed, for
all this profited him no^^ing, because the Mice came without number over the
water ^hen, swimming and ready to execute the just judgment of God. The which
thing the miserable Bishop perceiving, at the length yielded and gave up his
life amongst the Mice. There be^ some that write moreover o^ him, that the Mice
did gnaw and eat out and utterly extinguis^ his name from the walls and
hangings. The like and more horrible history, you shall find in Polonia, where
the King and the Queeene and their children were consumed of Mice.

The Bathes called Badenses in Germany.
THe waters of the Bathes Baden, have this property that feathers of Fowls
bei^^ boiled in this water, may (...) clean taken away from t^^ skin, and
Swines hairs from their skins, whether they be cast living into this Water,
or chafed with it being dead. These waters have the property of Alum, Salt, and
Brimstone: therefore they be good for such as have hard fetching of their
breath, and stopping of the breast, which things rise of cold fluxes of the
brain; they be medicinable for moist eyes, and hizzing and ringing of the
ears, for trembling parts and astonished, for the crampe, and other diseases
touching the sinews, which come of cold humidities: they be good for such as
have a cold stomach, moist and ill of digestion, and those that suffer grief
of the liver and spleen through cold. Also for such as are troubled with the
dropsy, or have any griping in the guts, they help such as be troubled with
the stone, and women barren and unfruitful, they take away the grief of the
mother, and do repress the evils of the womb, and the inflation of the
thighs, they heal scabs, wheals, and scars, and have a very good property in
helping the gout. See the third book of Munsters Cosmography, for the nature,
virtue, and wholesome properties of the Bathes in Valesia.

The Hernesewe.
THE Hernesewe is a Foul that lives of the water, and yet she does abhor
rain and tempests, in so much that she seeks to avoid them by flying on
high. She has her nest in very high trees, and shows as it were a natural
hatred against the gossehauk and other kind of Hauks, as the Hauk contrariwise
seeks her destruction continually: when they fight above in the air, they
labor both especially for this one thing, that the one might ascend and be
above the other, if the Hauk gets the upper place, he overthrows and
vanquisheth the Hernesewe with a marvellows earnest flight, but if the
Hernesewe gets above the Hauk, then with his dung he defiles the Hauk, and
so destroys him, for his dung is a poison to the Hawk, and his feathers do
putrify and rot after it.

A monster borne nigh unto Worms in Germany, in the year 1495.
A Woman was delivered of two female children, whole and perfect in bodies, but
in the top of the Forehead they were joined, and grew together unseparably, so
that they must needs behold one the other. They were compelled by force of
this natural conjunction to go both together, to sleep and rise together,
and when one went forward, the other went backward: their noses did almost
touch together, their eyes did not look straight and forward, but only
side-wayes, because a little above their eyes their foreheads cleaved, and did
stick fast together; they lived until they were ten years of age, and then
when the one of them dyed, and that was cut away from the other living, she
that lived, died also within alittle after, of a wound that (...) took in the
head, by cutting away of her fellow, or rather by a corruption in the brain,
which came of the stink of the wound and putrefaction.

The occasion of this monster was thought to be this. Two women talked
together, where of the one was with child, the third woman coming suddenly
upon them, and unlooked for, thrust the heads of those two which were talking
together, so that they dashed and touched each other, whereof the woman that
had conceived already, being made affraide through strong imagination, gave,
and printed the sign of the rushing of their heads in her two children.

How scrupulous the Jews be to do any thing on their Sabbath day.
IT chanced that at Magdeburg in Germany, about the year of our Lord 1270, a
certain Jew upon the Saturday fell into a Jakes, out of the which he could by
no means deliver himself: he cried therefore pitifully for the help of his
fellows, at the length some of his companions came, and they with lamentable
voices showed that it was their Sabbath day, and therefore not to be lawful
for them to use or exercise the labor of the hands. Whereupon they exhorted
him patiently to bear the thing until the next day, that it might be lawful
for them to travail in the helping of him out. This matter at the last came
unto the ears of the Bishop of that place, who was nothing favorable to the
Jews. The Bishop understanding that the stubborn Jews for the scrupulous
observation of their Sabbath day, would not help their brother out of the
jakes, commanded upon pain of death, that they which did so curiously observe
their own Sabbath day, should in like manner as religiously observe and keep
with the like solemnity the next day after, being the Christians Sabbath day.
This was an hard case; what should they now do? upon pain of death they must
obey. In the mean time the miserable Jew in the jakes was enforced to abide
two days and two nights in great filth and stink, and danger of his life. The
like History you shall find in Fabians Chronicle.

The Famine of Jerusalem.
SVch was the Famine that this famous City and her people did endure in the 72
year after Christ's time, that an infinite multitude perished within the walls
through Famine; and so many perished for food, that they were not to be
numbered: for in every place where any Corn, or other victuals was heard, they
presently resorted thither, and by force of Arms assaulted their dearest
kindred and friends, and fought with them, to take the food even from little
infants, even like mad Dogs greedy of meat, and in that insatiate manner,
that they gathered together such things to eat, as the most filthiest living
creatures in the world would have loathed: They did eatte he hides of Horses
boiled in a little water, to make the skin a little tender; their shoe soles
they did eat, and their Belts and Girdles from their Loins they took, and
likewise the skins that covered their Targets or Shields, did they mince and
cut to satisfy their greedy stomachs: A little bottle of Hay was sold, weghing
twelve pound, at four pieces of Silver: But great and fearful is it to
relate, of one Mary dwelling beyond Jordan, the daugter o Eleazer, of the town
or village of Vitezotia, and by interpretation the house of Hysop, descended of
noble and rich stock, flying with her Friends into Jerusalem, for fear of the
enemy Titus, who besieged the City: And in length of time she wanting her
natural food, was compelled to do that which nature abhorred, and then through
extreme want, took her son, whom she loved dearly, which lay smiling on the
bed, and with tears in his eyes like Diamonds, glittering to see his Mother,
which he no way could relieve, bewayling her hard f^^tune, said, My dear, but
oh miserable child in this war, famine, and sedition, for which of these shall I
reserve or keep thee? for if the Romans overcome us, thou then art a slave,
yet famine will prevent bondage, or else sedition; worse then them both: She
being then resolved, took a Faulchion, and struck off her sons head, and
said, Be thou food for me, which have formerly fed thee in my womb, therefore
now thou shall be meat for me: a terror unto the seditious, a tragical story
to be related of by posterity, and that which is only yet unheard of amongst
the calamities of the Jews: And after these words she cleav'd his body in
twain, and did sees or boil the one half of him, and did eat of it; the
other part she reserved in obscurity. The soldiers smelling the sent of that
execrable meat, came to her house, and threatened her with Death, unless she
would relieve them as she had done her self, or show them the way or means
how they might come by some victuals to satisfy their hunger, she presently
and in a trembling manner, told them, she had kept a good portion thereof for
them, and on a sudden uncovered the other part of her sons dead body which
she had uneaten, at which sight they were stricken with amazement and horror:
But the woman said, This is truly my son, and mine own act or doing; taste of
it, for I my self have eaten sufficiently thereof: Be not more effeminate and
childish then a woman, not more merciful then a mother: and if Religion or
your Conscience cause you to refuse this my sacrifice, I have with a good
appetite eaten of it already, and will eat the rest. Then the seditious
soldiers departed from her, and bruted abroad in the City this heinous crime,
and every man having before his eyes this execrable fact, ^rembled, as though
himself had done the deed: and now all that were vexed with this scar^ity and
famine, hastened their own deaths, and cast lots daily who should be the next
to be sacrificed, accounting himself most happy, that dyed before he felt this
famine.

Of wild Bulls in Prussia.
THere be wild Bulls in the Woods of Prussia, like unto the common sort of
Bulls, saving that they have shorter homes, and a long beard under the chinne.
They be cruel, and spare neither man nor beast, and when any snares, or deceit
is prepared to take them, or they be wounded with arrows in the Woods, they
labor most vehemently to revenge their wounds upon them that gave them, the
which thing if they cannot do, rushing and stumbling on trees, they kill
themselves. They be of such bigness, that 2 men may sit betwixt their horns.

Of Iseland.
IN this Country from the 10 of June, for a month space or more, they have no
night at all, and about the tenth of December they have no day at all. The
people live in Dens and hollow places in hills sides* with them Mountains and
Hills are instead of Towns, and spring waters for delicate drinks.

An happy Nation whose poor estate none does envy, and so much the more that it
has received Christianity. The Merchants of England and Denmark, do not
suffer them to be content with their own but, by ^eason of the great fishing
there, ^hey repair thither oftentimes, and with their Merchandise ^hey carry
thither their vices and enormities.

They have learned now of ^ate to brew with malt, and have ^eft the drinking of
plain wa^er. They have also Gold, and Silver in admiration, as well as other
Nations. The King of Denmark, that rules also Norway, makes a ruler among
them yearly, all things be common amongst them saving their wives: they esteem
their young cattle as much as their children, and of the poorer sort you may
sooner ob^aine their Child then their Cattle. They honor their Bishop as a
King, to whose will and pleasure all the people has great respect, whatsoever
he determines by Law, Scripture, or by custom of other Nations, that they do
curiously observe: and yet now the King has compelled them to take a ruler.
They have so great store of fish in this Isle, that they make their sales of
them in piles as high as houses: they live most commonly there by fish; for the
great penury of wheat and corn, which is brought unto them from nations, that
with great lucre and and gains, carry away fish for it.

There is a notable Hill or Mountain called Hecla, not far from which he
Mines of Brimstone, A strange hill.
the singlar Merchandise of that Country: For diverse Merchants load their
ships with it: when this Hill does rage, it thundreth terrible noyses, i^
easteth out stones, it belcheth out Brimstone, it covers the earth so far
round about with the ashes cast forth, that unto the twentieth stone it is
unhabited: they that desire to contemplate the nature of so great flames, and
therefore adventure more nigh unto the Hill, are suddenly swallowed and
consumed with some inorable gulf or vorage, for there be many such blasts so
covered and hidden with ashes, that none can sufficiently beware or take heed
of them, and there comes out such a fire from that Hill that consumes Water;
but stubble or st^aw it does not burn. This place is thought of some to be the
prison of ununclean souls: For the Ice being divided and broken into many
parts, swimmeth about the Isle almost eight months, and being broken and
bruised with rushing upon the banks, with the beatings and noise of the
cracking against the banks and rocks, gives so horrible a sound, almost
representing the miserable lamentation of humane voice and weeping, that it
makes the ^uder sort, the more simple and unwife, to believe that men's souls
be tormented there in cold. The inhabitants use instead of bread (whereof they
lack store) fish dried, made hard, and ground to meal: and yet out of diverse
Countries Wheat is brought unto them, but not so much as may suffice. There
be spirits commonly seen, showing themselves manifestly in doing such things
as belong to men, but especially they appear in the forms of such as have
been drowned or ^estroyed by some other vio^ent chance, and thus do they
^ppeare commonly in the com^any of such men as have had fa^iliar acquaintance
with the de^arted, and do use them so in ^ll points, that they be taken many
times for the living persons in deed, of such as be igno^ant of their deaths,
offering their right hands for acquain^ance: and this falsehood and ^rroneous
sight cannot be per^eived, before the spirit it self ^anisheth out of sight,
and con^umeth away: being required of their familiars to come home, and to see
their Friends again, with great sighs and weeping ^hey answer, That they must
go ^o Hecla the Mountain, and so ^uddenly they vanish out of ^ight.

Of the Country called Laponia.
IN Laponia the people be of a mean stature, but they be of such agility of
body, that being girded and prepared with a sheafe of arrows and Bow, they
will suddenly pass through (...) hoope or circle, whose Diameter is but half
a yard.

They be taught the Art of shooting from their childhood and a Boy there shall
have no meat before he can touch his mark with his arrow. When the Sun goes
down after the Equinox in September, they have one continual night for three
Months, almost all which time they have no other light, but as it were a
twiter light, and when the Sun comes to them before the Equinox in March,
they celebrate that day as a festival day with much solemnity.

Of Whales.
THere be great Whales as big as Hills almost, nigh unto Iseland, which are
sometimes openly seen, and those will drown and overthrow Ships, except
they be made afeard with the sound of Trumpets and Drums, or except some
round and empty vessels be cast unto them, wherewith they may play and sport
them, because they are delighted in playing with such things. Sometimes many
cast their anchors upon Whales backs, thinking them to be some Isles, and so
become in great danger. Many in Iseland of the Bones and Ribs of such monstrous
Whales, make posts and sparres for the building of their houses.

Munster says this is a good remedy against such dangerous Whales, to take
that which the Apothecaries call Castoreum and temper it with water, and cast
it into the Sea, for by this as by a poison they are utterly driven and
banished to the bottom of the Sea.

How a mavelous horrible Dragon was destroyed in Polonia.
IN Graccovia a City of Polonia, there was a mavelous horrible and huge
Dragon, which consumed and devoured all things, and was the cause of great
damages, for when he came out of his den under the mountain, he did rape
and snatch all kind of cattle, and men wandering uncircumspectly, devouring them
with his horrible jaws. Gracchus being very sad and lamenting this matter,
commanded three several bodies to be cast unto him every day: for being
contented with those, he would look for no more. The which thing although it
was grievous, yet he persuaded, that three, either of sheep, or of some other
cattle should be offered him every day, wherein Brimstone and some fiery
powder, or device of flame, should be included, hidden, and mingled with wax,
and pitch privily, for so that beast and Dragon being provoked with natural
greediness, or with a rapacious famine and hunger devouring without respect or
choice the offered prey, by little and little was weakened and extinguished.

The like example is read in Daniel the Prophet.

A strange History of a King devoured of Mice.
THere was in Polonia a King named Pompilius, who was wont in all his
execrations and and curses to say, I pray God the Mice may devour me. Tr^ly
with evil luck and forespeaking evil to himself and to his for the Mice
devoured his son, who was also called Pompilius after his Father This son
after the death of his father, being left in his childhood, his Uncles
administered and governed the Kingdom, until he came to man's years, and was
married, then suddenly as he was in the midst of his ^easts overcharged with
Wine, being adorned with Coronates and Garlands, dawbed with his ^yntments,
oppressed with luxury and surfeiting, a great number of Mice coming from the
carcases of his uncles, did invade him, the which he and his wife ^he Queen
did destroy: but they came forth so fast, and in such a multitude, assaulted
and set upon this Tyrant in his banquets, and his Wife and his Children with
most cruel gnawings, and bitings, so that a great ^and of Soldiers and
harnissed men could not drive them away, because man's help being defatigated
and made weary; yet the Mice remained strong without any weariness both day
and night. There was therefore devised and built burning and hot Furnaces and
Ovens, and in the midst of them this Pompilius was placed with his wife and
children, but the Mice came thither, also passing through flames of fire, not
ceasing to gnaw and consume this Paricid. At the length was devised another
means, by another element. This Pompilius a murderer of his own uncles, was
conveyed in ships, with his children and his family into the midst of a
deep water, and yet the Mice most earnestly without ceasing followed him, and
did gnaw and byte both those that were carried away, and their ships, in so
much that the water entering in at the holes gnawne by the Mice, did threaten
and signify danger of drowning, and therefore the shipmen fearing suffocation
in the water and drowning, brought the ship to the bank on the land, where
another great of Mice meeting with the other, did more vehemently vex him then
the first: these things being openly seen and known, they that a^ore were
defenders of him and his children, perceiving this to be GODS punishment and
revengeing fled away

Now Pompilius being without al such as may comfort and help him, went into an
high Tower in Crusnicza, where the Mice clyming up with most swift course, did
consume and devour his two Sons, his wife, and the flagitious body of
Pompilius. Behold and mark, there is no counsel or power can take place
against God the Lord of all: little small vermin, weak and timorous mice did
miserably destroy Pompilius, as Lice being a very little and small vermin, and
of lesser force then mice, did bring to ruin and destruction Arnolphus the
Emperor, eating and wasting his flesh, An Emperor eaten with l^ce.
his marrow and guts, so that the Physicians could do no good at all, the
whole substance of the body being so eaten, that there was nothing but
gristles, and only bones left.

A Bear seeking for honey, was the cause of delivering a man out of an hollow
tree.
IN Muscovia there is found great store of Honey in hollow trees, and that
which is old honey, is left and forsaken of the Bees, so that in the stocks of
mavelous great Trees, the dilligent searchers may find wonderful plenty of
honeycombes. Demetrius sent as Ambassador to Rome, declared there before a
company of learned men, that a year or two before he came out of the country
to Rome, a poor Countryman being a Farmer in the next Village by him,
searched the Woods and Trees for the gain and profit of honey, and espying at
the length a very great hollow tree, climed up into the top of it, and lept
down into the hollownesse, so that he sunk, and did stick fast in a great
heap of Honey, even to the breast and throat almost, and so remained fast in
that sweet poison, that all hope of any deliverance was clean gone, when he
had continued two days, and fed and maintained his life only by Honey,
considering that with himself that he was now so restrained from the liberty
and help of his hands and feet, that with them he could make no shift to get
out, and if he should cry out with open mouth and full voice, that this could
nothing prevail in such a solitude and v^st place of wood and trees, because
it was not possible that the sound of his voice and cry, could go far out of
the hollow tree, so that it might come to the ears of travailers and passers
by: all these things when he had deliberated in his mind, now destitute of
all help and consolation, he began utterly to despair: and yet by a
mavelous and incredible chance he escaped, being delivered and drawn out by
the benefit of a great Bear, when that by chance this Bear very desirous and
searching for honey, most hastily scaled that tree, and let her self down
into the hollownesse thereof, with her hinder feet first downward, aftermans
fashion, about the Raines and Loins of the which beast, the man clasping and
taking fast hold, moved and stirred the said Bear to leap out, and violently
to enforce her self out of the Tree, being driven so to do for very sudden
fear, and for the strange handling and holding about her, and also through the
great outcryes and noyses that he made. And thus the Bear by violence
delivered her self, and the man also from the hollow tree, and from great
fear.

Of Bears.
IN the country of Muscovia there is great plenty of Bears, seeking and
preying every where for Honey and Bees, not altogether for the filling of their
Bellies, but also for the helping of their eyesight, for their eyes wax dim
and ill oftentimes, for the which cause they do especially desire the
Honey-combes, and that their mouths stung and wounded of Bees, might ease the
heaviness of their heads in bleeding. The head in Bears is very weak, the
which in Lions contrariwise is most strong. And therefore when necessity urges
that they must needs tumble from some high rock, they tumble and role down
with their head covered between their claws, and oftentimes by dousts and
knocks in gravel and sand, they are almost exanimate and without life. They
scale trees backward: they molest and vex Bulls, with their claws hanging
about their mouths and Horns. A Bear brings forth her young according to
Pliny, after thirty days past, and that commonly five. The young Bear at the
first coming forth as it were a white piece of flesh, without form or shape,
somewhat bigger then a mouse; it is without eyes or ears, only nails and
claws do appear outward. But the she Bear never leaves licking this rude
and deformed young flesh, until by little and little, she brings it to some
form and shape: when she goes to the den that she has closen for her, she
comes creeping with her belly upward, least the place might be espied
through her steps, and there she being with young, remains fourteen days
without any motion, as Aristotle faith. But without mea^e she continues 40
days, only being sustained with the licking of her left foot, then after
this when she chance^ upon any meat or food, she is filled beyond measure,
and this satiety is helped by vomiting with eating of Ants, the young for
fourteen days space days space is oppressed with such heavines or sleep,
that they cannot be awaked or stirred up from their drowsy heaviness,
neither with pricking, nor with wounding; and in this mean space of sleeping
they wax fat maruellously. After 14 days space they awake from sleep, and
begin to lick their former paws, and so live they for a time: and it is not
manifest with what kind of meat they should live until the spring time, but
then they begin to run abroad, and feed of the young springs and trees, and
soft tender herbs, meet for their mouths. In this Country of Muscovia, there
is great store of the best furs and skins, and that this is their chiefest
merchandise in that Country.

The treasure that was found in the Temple of Jerusalem by the Soldiers.
THe Temple being consumed with fire, the Soldiers put all the Jews that they
found about it to death, and carried away all they could find, sparing neither
old nor young, infant, or Priest, Magistrate or Senate whatsoever^ And
afterward the Roman soldiers thrusting forwards one another, being greedy of
gain, sought where to get into the Temple, where the fire was aslaked, entered
the Treasure-house where the sacred money was kept, by which means a great
part thereof was stolen away by the soldiers, and Sabinus by name, to all men's
knowledge which stood by, carried away 400 Talents. The soldiers beholding the
gates of the Temple, and of the Treasure-house to be of massy Gold, were
confident that there was nothing else but Gold, and in great plenty, which they
possessed without any denial, and bore, and carried away upon their shoulders
an infinite treasure of money which we cannot value: and great was the loss
and spoil of their Cups and Challices, being all of Gold, which were broken
and defaced, which the Priests did offer their coin to their Gods in, beside
the Table which was of 2 Cubits high, and 4 Cubits in length, all of Gold;
likewise the covering, and rich habits and vestments, and the two silver
Trumpets which the Priests wore at the time of their Sacrifices, were all
consumed by the fire; thus by their Enemy and their own incrudulity was their
Temple burnt, their City defaced, and their treasure consumed, which was the
glory and renown of the whole world.

Lycurgus.
LYcurgus was a noble Philosopher of Sparta in Greece, who erected a civil
estate of the City with his noble institutes and Laws, whereas before times
of all the Grecians, the Lacedaemonians were worst nurtered. Lycurgus taking the
matter boldly in hand, did ^brogate all their Laws, insti^utes, and old rites
of living, and ^id erect a great deal more ci^ill ordinances and more
co^men^able. First, there were 28 Seg^iors elected, which should pro^ide that
the popular estate should not grow out of frame ^ltogether, and also that they
which had the rule, should not ^oe about any tyranny. He ^ooke away utterly
all use of Gold and Silver, and brought ^n money of Iron, and then was ^ll
occasion of Felony taken away. The Iron whereof he made his money, being as red
^s fire, he put out in vinegar, that it might be meet for nothing afterward
through his ^oftnesse. He cast out of the City all Arts as unprofitable or
that purpose, and yet most part of Artificers, when the use of gold was taken
away departed from thence of the^ own accords, seeing that (...) money was not
in use among^^ other Nations. Then that (...) might the better take away (...)
luxury and rioting out of the City, he appointed common meetings at banquets
and feast^ that poor and rich indifferently might meet together (...) their
feasts, and feed all upon the same kind of banquet* Hereby there was in^lame
great anger of those that were wealthy and mighty, and they falling upon
Licurgus with gre^^ force, caused him to lose one (...) his eyes with the blow
of a (...) Wherefore a law was made that the Lacedaemonians should no more enter
into their feasts with a staff. Every one gave yearly to this feast one
b^^shell of flower, eight gallons of wine, five pound of cheese, five pound and
a half of figs. Children did frequent this as a school, or exercise of all
temperancy and civil discipline; ^here they did learn to accustom themselves
in civil talks, and to use honest pastimes, and to jest and be merry without
knavery. Their Virgins were exercised with running, wrestling, barriers comely
mooving, and gesture with quaiting, casting of the bowl, hammer, or such like;
so that idleness and effeminate delicatnesse taken away, they waxed the
stronger to tolerate and suffer the pain of Childe-bearing. Children after
they were seven years of age, had their exercises with their equals, and of
necessity did learn letters; they were noted and shorn to the very skin,
they went barefoot ^^ 12 years of age, they might put on one coat after the
Country fashion, they neither knew bathes nor fomentations, they took their
rest in beds made with reeds, they might go to the Feasts of their elders and
betters, and there if they did steal any thing, and were taken with the theft,
they were corrected with whips, not because it was unlawful to steal, but
because they did it not privily enough with craft and subtilty. Lycurgus
removing all superstion, permitted the dead bodies to be buried in the City,
and also to have their Monuments about the Temples.

It was not lawful to ingrave or write the name of the man or woman upon any
Grave, but ^uch as dyed manfully in war. The time of lamentation for the ^ead
was prescribed about 11 days. It was not lawful for Citizens to make
peregrinations, Peregrinations.
for fear they should bring ^n strange manners into the City. But those which
came from strange Countries thither, except they were profitable and meet for
the Commonwealth, were excluded the City, lest that foreign nations might
taste of the Lacedemonian discipline.

Lycurgus would not suffer young men to use one vesture all the whole year,
nor any to be more deeked then another, nor to have more delicate banquets then
others. He commanded all things to be bought not for money, but for exchange
and recompense of wares. He commanded also Children toward 18 years of age, to
be brought into the field, and not into the Marketplace, or Judgement-hall,
that they might pass over the first years, not in luxury, but in all kind of
labor and pains, they must not lay any thing under them for to sleep the
easier: And their lives they were driven to pass without ease, and not to come
into the City before they were men in deed.

Maids he would have to be married without any dower, or rewards given by
their Parents. That Wives might not be chosen for money sake, and that the
Husbands should keep their Wives more straightly, because they should receive
nothing in Marriage with them. He would have the greatest honor and reverence
to be given ^o old aged men, and not to rich and noble men: he granted unto
Kings the power of the wars, ^o Magistrates judgments and yearly
succession, to the Senate the custody of the Laws: ^o the people the election
of the Senate, or to create what officers they would. These Laws and new
institutes because they seemed hard and straight, in comparison of their loose
customs and Laws before used, he fained Apollo of Delphos to be the author
of them, and that he had them from thence. At the last, to give eternity and
perpetuity to his Laws, he bound the whole City with an Oath, that they
should change none of those things which he had enacted and prescribed, before
that he did return again, saying, that he would go to the Oracle at Delphos,
to ask counsel what might be changed or added to his Laws.

He took his journey to the Isle of Crete, and there lived i^ banishment. He
commanded also dying, that his bones should be cast into the Sea, left that the
Lacedaemonians if they were brought to Sparta, should think themselves absolved
and discharged of their oath that they made, for the not changing of his Laws.

The Ceremonies of the burials of the Kings of Lacedemonia.
THE Kings of Sparta when they be dead, Knights and Pursevants declare the
death (...) the Prince throughout all the whole Country, the women going round
about the City, do beat and ring upon basins and pots. And when this
chances, it is meet that out of every house, two which are free, the male
one, the female the other, should make a show of lamentation and mourning, and
for the not doing thereof great punishment is appointed, and the lamenting and
crying out with miserable outcries, say that the last King ever was the best:
whatso^ver King perishes in war, when they have set forth his picture and
^mage, they bring it into a bed very fair and well made, and they consume ten
days in the Funerals of him: and there is no meeting nor assembly of
Magistrates, but continual weeping and lamentation; and in this ^hey agree
with the Persians, that when the King is dead, he that succedeth, discharges
from all debts, whosoever owes any thing to the King or the Commonwealth.
Among the Persians he that was created King, did remit to every City the
tribute which was due.

The Laws of Draco.
ALL the Laws which Dra^^ made, appointed death almost for a punishment to
every offense. He made a Law tha^ they which were convict of idleness and
slothfulness, should lose their lives. In like manne^ that they which stole
herbs o^ fruit out of other men's grounds that they should dye for it. Th^^
same Law of paracides: whereupon Demades was wont to say that the Laws of
Draco we^^ written with blood and not wi^^ (...)

The Laws of Solon.
SOLON made a Law, that those which were condemned of paracide, and of affected
tyranny, should never be received into any office, and not only these he
excluded from all kind of dignity, but such also as would follow neither part
when any tumult or sedition were in the City, thinking it ^o be the part of an
ill Citizen when he had provided well for his own safety, to have care or
^espect of common affairs: this ^lso was a strange decree of his making, that
such women as had husbands nothing meet for ve^erous acts, should take one whom
they would choose, of their husbands kinsfolks without danger. He forbad
lamentation and mourning in another funeral, and that the son should not
give any help or refreshing to his Father, if so be that he caused him not
to be brought up in some art necessary for the use of life, and that there
should be no care betwixt the parents and them that were born bastards and in
unlawful matrimony.

For he that does not keep himself chaste from the company of harlots, does
plainly declare that he has no care of the procreation of children, but of
libidinous pleasures, and does deprive himself of his just reward. He would
have a common adulterer taken in adultery to be slain scot free without any
danger. Whosoever did violently misuse any maids or virgins, he would have
them mulcted o^ amerced with ten grotes, the which was a great sum of money in
his coin.

Whosoever had brought a wolf by him overcome, should have five groats to be
gathered of the communalty, and if it were a she Wolf, he should have but one
groat. It was a custom among the Athenians, to persecute that beast which was
as well hurtful to their cattle as to their fields. He commanded that the
children of those which perished in War, should be brought up and taught of the
common charge, wherewith many being encouraged, did stoutly fight in battle:
and whosoever lost his eyes in battle, should be kept of common charges. He
made a law also, that he should not have the wardship of the child, to whom
the inheritance might come after the death of the child. And that whosoever
thrust out another man's eye, that he should lose both his for it.

Another Law of his was, that no man should take away that which he laid not
there, and if any did the contrary, it should be judged a capital offense. If
the Prince were taken or found drunken, that he should dye for it. He
permitted honey and wax to be carried into other Countries. He thought no man
meet to be free of a City, but the crafts-man which came with his whole
family to Athens, or else was banished from his own Country.

Of Dame Flora.
THe Lady which the Poets call Dame Flora, was a notable and common harlot, who
when she had gotten great Riches by common ribaudry, made the people of Rome
her heir, and left a certain sum of money, with the yearly use, whereof
the day of her Nativity should be celebrated in the setting forth of goodly
plays, the which thing because it seemed detestable to attribute a certain
solemn dignity to a dishonest thing, they feigned and surmised her to be a
Goddess, that had the rule and government of Flowers, and that it was meet
she should be reconciled with Ceremonies, that through her help Fruits and
trees might flourish and prosper.

Of the Ieat stone.
IN some part of England and Scotland, there is great store of the best
Ieat-stone. If any body drinks the powder of this stone in water, if the same
body be contaminate with libidinous acts, the same body out of hand shall be
enforced to make urine, and shall have no ability to keep it back. But if a
Virgin drinks of it, there is no power to make urine follow.

Of the Burialls of the Turk, and of diverse observations and Customs.
WHen any dies amongst the Turks, they wash his Carcass and cover it in very
fair linen clothes. Afterward they carry the body out of the City into some
place; for they think it an heinous thing to bury one in the Temple. Their
monks go before the Hearse with Candles, the Priests follow singing until they
come unto his Sepulcher or grave: if it be for a poor man that is dead, they
gather money in every street for the labor and pains of the religious, and
that they offer unto him. The friends of the dead comes oftentimes to the
grave weeping and bewailing, and they set the Sacrifice of their meats for the
dead upon the monument; as bread, flesh, cheese, eggs, milk, and the feast is
of nine days space after the manner of the Ethnicks, and all this is eaten for
the soul of the dead, of the poor, or else of the Fowls of the air, or
Ants; for they say it is as acceptable unto God, to give and offer alms to
bruit beasts and Fowls needing it, as unto men, when it is offered for the
love of God.

There be some that set Birds at liberty to fly, which were restrained and
shut up, giving money according to to the value of the birds. Some cast bread
to fish in the water for Gods sake, saying, that they shall get of God a noble
reward for such bounty and pity toward those that need it. The Turks have
also three diverse manners of washing them, the first is a sprinkling of all the
whole body with Water, and that this should not be in vain nor frustrate, they
shave the hairs from every part of their body, saving only the beards in men,
and the hairs upon women's heads. And yet they wash them very curiously and
kembe them often, therefore in the more famous Cities there be Bathes which
they use continually. Where there be no such, they have some secret place
prepared to wash them in houses, that they may be well clarified with water
before they go out of the house. They have another kind of washing nothing
necessary, as when they ease nature of superfluities. For then in some secret
place they wash their secret parts, there is none seen standing or upright
when he delivers nature of superfluous burdens. The third kind of washing
is to purify the instruments of senses wherein they wash both hands and arms,
even to the elbowes, then their mouth, their nostrills, and all their face.
Both men and women do make a scraping of filthy places every month twice or
thrice, but especially when they frequent the Temples, otherwise they should be
burnt as violaters and prophaners of a sacred place. They use such severity in
war, that no soldier dare take away any thing unjustly, for if he does, he
shall be punished without mercy: as you shall read in this discourse of the 3
several deaths that the Romans and the Jews punished their offenders withal.

They have ordinary keepers and defenders of those things as be in soldiers
ways, the which are bound to maintain the Orchards and Gardens, with their
fruits, about high ways, so that they dare not take an apple or such like,
without the license of the owner. For if they did, they should suffer death for
it.

Of this writes one Bartholomew Giurgevitus, that was captive thirteen years
in Turkey, after this sort. When I was in the Turks army in his expedition
against the Persians, I did see a certain Horseman headed, with his Horse and
Servant also, because his Horse being loose entered into the fields of another
man. None of the Princes or Dukes possesses any Province or City, as
rightful inheritance, nor they they cannot leave any such thing after their
death to their children or successors, without the consent of the king and
supreme governor. But if any Duke desires to have any certain possessions,
it is granted to him upon this condition, there is a certain note of the
price, and of the rents, and revenues of those possessions. The Turk knows
also how many soldiers may be kept with that yearly revenue, and so many
soldiers he enjoyneth him to keep, the which ought always to be in a
readiness at every commandment, other- the Lord shall lose his head, if he
did not answer his duty and office.

How the Christians taken of the Turks in war be handled, and tormented, and
how they are made free.
THe Emperor of the Turks, when he makes is expedition against the
Christians, he has always waiting upon him a company of Butchers, and sellers
of Boys to abominable uses, who carry with them a great number of long
chains, in hope of bondmen and captives, wherein they link and bind 50 or 60
easily by order. The same men do buy also of such as have booties or preys, as
many as have not perished with sword, the which thing is permitted them upon
this condition, if they give unto the Prince the tenth or tithe of their
bondmen, prisoners, and captives. The other it is lawful for them to keep to
their own use and merchandise, and there is no better nor more plenteous a
Mart amongst them, then of bondmen.

The Emperor does so separate the old men and the youth of both kinds which
comes to him in the name of the tenth or tithes, that he sells them of ripe
age for the plough and husbandry: Young maids and young men he sends away to
a certain place, to be instructed in certain Arts, that he might use them
afterward more commodiously: and first they go about this to make them deny
their Christian Faith, and then to have them circumcised, and when they are
once entered into their Ceremonies, according to every man's disposition and wit,
he is appointed either to study the Laws of their Nation, or else to practice
feats of War, if more strength appears in the body, than in his wit: they
are so instructed in the principles of warlike affairs, that for the weakness
of their strength, first they use an easy Bow, afterward as their strength
increases, and they have more exquisite knowledge, they have a more strong
Bow, until they be meet for War. There is a Master which calls severely
upon daily exercise, as often as they swarve from the mark, so oftentimes are
they whipped. Others are made meet and cunning to fight with staves. But they
in whom there is a greater grace of beautiful form are so mangled, that no
manliness appears in their bodies, they have been so abused with great
danger of life, and if they do escape, they be meet for nothing else but for
ministers of most flagitious voluptuousness: and when their beauty waxes old,
they are deputed into the office of Eunuchs, to observe and keep Matrons, or
else they are addicted to the custody of Horses or Mules, or to kitching
drudgery. Maidens that are very comely and beautiful, are chosen to be their
concubines, those of the meaner sort are given to Matrons to wait upon them,
where they have such filthy fervices and functions, that they cannot be named
with honesty, for they are compelled to follow them with a vessel of water
when they go to discharge the belly, and those parts. Other be kept at maidens
work, as spinning and baking.

When the Turks have gotten any young prisoners, they urge them with
threatenings, promises, and flatterings, that their new bondmen would be
circumcised, and when any has admitted that, he is used with a little more
humanity, but all hope of return^ng again into his country is utterly taken
away, and if he once goes about it, he is in danger of burning.

These because they are thought more steadfast, and less given to run away,
they are preferred of their Lords to warlike affairs, their liberty is then
due unto them, when they being unprofitable for years, be rather rejected of
their Lords, than dismissed, or else where their Lord has given them liberty
in war for the danger of death that he has escaped by them. Matrimony is
permitted unto them, but their children are taken from them at the Lords will,
the which causes the wiser sort to abstain from marriages; they use other
extremely, that refuse Circumcision. They have a very hard life, that have not
learned any art or craft: for such are in great estimation, as are cunning
craftsmen. Wherefore the Noblemen, the Priests, and the learned sort, which
pass over their lives in quietness and idleness, whenever they chance into
their hands, they are thought most miserable of all, for the Merchant seller of
them, cannot abide when he sees no profit to come of them, nor any good sale
to be made.

These go with their feet and head uncovered, and for the most part with naked
bodies through the snow, and upon the stones; both Winter and Summer they are
enforced to travail, and there is no end of these miseries, before that either
they dye, or else they find a foolish Lord in the buying of ill merchandise.
No man is so happy, of what condition soever he be, or of what age, beauty or
art he be, that they will lay him, being sick in his journey, at any Inn or
lodging-house: For first he is compelled to go with stripes, and if he cannot
so do, he is set upon some young beast, and if he cannot sit, he is bound with
his body flat, even like unto a pack or a burden, if he dies, they take away
his clothes, and cast him into the next ditch or valley for Dogs and Ravens.
They keep their captives not only in chains, but also with gyves upon their
hands; as they lead them, the distance between them is about a yard, lest they
should once spurn and hurt another, and this do they for fear their bondmen
hurl stones at them. For where as every one that is a common Merchant and
seller of men, leads a great number of bondmen, so that ten of them
oftentimes have five hundred in chains, they fear the force of such a great
multitude, if their hands should be at liberty to throw or cast any thing. In
the nightime they make their feet sure with chains and irons, and lay them
upon their backs, open to the injury of the air: the women are used with more
humanity, they that are able, do go upon their feet, and they that are less
able, be carried upon young cattle, and those that are so weak, that they may
not suffer the shaking of the horses, or asses, or such like, are carried in
hampers and panniers, like unto Geese and Swans. The night is more heavy unto
them, for then either they are shut up in strong holds, or else are compelled
to suffer the filthy lust of those that have bought them, and great lamentation
is heard both of young men and young women, suffering much violence, so that
they spare not them of six or seven years of age in this misery, such is the
cruelnesse of that filthy Nation, against nature in the rage of
voluptuousness. When the day comes, they are brought forth into the market
as sheep and goats to be sold, when they that would buy them come, the price
is made, if the captive pleases him, all his apparel is cast off, that he
might be seen of his master that shall be: all his parts and members are
viewed, touched, searched, and tried, if there be any fault in his joints or
not, if he pleases not the buyer, he is rejected again to the seller; and
this is as often done as any does cheapen or go about to buy: If the buyer
likes the bondman; he is carried away to a most grievous servitude, as to be
either plowman or shepherd, that he might not remember the more grievous
sciences. If any be taken with his wife and children, noble men will buy him
gladly, and make him ruler of his villages, and him charge of his grounds,
vineyards, and pastures, but his children must be bondmen, if they persevere
and continue in Christian Faith: they have a determinate time to serve, the
which being past, they are made free, and yet their children except they be
redeemed, continue in servitude and bondage at the will and pleasure of the
Lord.

With what burden and exactions the Christian Princes are charged and oppressed
being overcome of the Turks.
WHen the Turk has taken any Christian prince, he takes all their goods, as
well moveable as unmovable as a prey and booty, he puts away nobility
clean, especially of the Kings stock: the clerks and Clergy he kills not,
he spoileth them of all wealth and dignity, and makes them very mocking stocks
in beggary. The Turks take also out of the Christian Churches al Bells,
Organs, and other instruments of Music: and after they have profaned the
Churches, they consecrate them to Mahomet. They leave poor and small Chapples
to the Christians, where they may do their holy service, not openly but in
silence, the which if they fall by any earthquake, or be ruinous by any
sudden fire, it is not lawful to repair them again, (...) through great
sums of money given.

They are forbidden to preach or teach the Gospel* and it is not lawful for
any Christian man, to bear any rule in the Commonwealth, or to bear weapons,
or use like vesture with the Turks. If any contumelious words be spoken of
the Christians, or of Christ, he must suffer ^t, and hold his peace, but if the
christian speaks any thing un^everently of their religion, he shall be
circumcised against his will, but if any whisper any thing against Mahomet, he
shall ^e burnt: the Christians give ^he fourth part of all their fruit, and
commodity, both of the ^rofit of their Fields and Cat^^ll, and also of the
gains of their Arts, and Crafts: there is another charge also, where they ^ay
for every one in their Fa^ily a ducate, and if the parents be not able to pay,
they are compelled to sell their children to servile offices: other bound in
chains, do beg from door to door, to get their Fees to discharge the
exaction, and if they cannot by these means pay it, they must be content to
suffer perpetual imprisonment. Those captives that go about to fly away, if
they go into Europe, they have the easier flight, seeing that nothing can
hinder their passage^ but certain waters which are passed over easily: and
this do^ they most attempt in Harvest time, because then they (...) hide them
in the corn, and liv^ thereby: In the nightime the^ take their flight, and
in the da^ time they hide themselves ^ woods and puddles, or in the corn, and
had rather be (...) of wolves, and other beast then to be sent again to their
old masters. But they which into Asia take their flight, go first to
Hellespont, betwixt Callipolis and the two towers which were of old called
Seston and Abydon, but now they are named Bogazassar, the Castles of the
Sea-mouth, and with them they carry both an axe and ropes to cut down wood,
and to bind them together, whereof they make boats or little ships to pass
over the Sea, carrying nothing but salt with them, and in the nighttime they
convey themselves into the Ship in the water. If the Wind and the Ocean be
mild and favorable unto them, they pass over in three or four Hours, but
if the troublesome Sea be against them, either they perish in the violent
water, or else be cast again to the Coast of Asia.

When they are gotten over the Sea, they seek unto the mountains, and
beholding the Pole, they take their journey toward the North. In their hunger
they refresh themselves with salted herbs.

If many run away together, in the night time they invade shepherds and slay
them, and take away all such meat and drink as they find: but yet many times
they themselves be slain of the shepherds, or else taken of them, and so
delivered to their old masters, to all kind of servitude: and the greater
number is consumed with dangers, for few escape free and safe, because they
perish either by shipwreck, or by devouring of beasts, or by their enemies
weapons, or else by Famine, when as it chances, that they after their running
away make any long abode in the Woods. Many kinds of punishments are prepared,
devised, and appointed for Fugitives, and such as run away: For some being
hanged by the feet, are most cruelly tormented with whips, and they that commit
homicide or murder, have the soles of their feet cut with a sharp knife in
many slices and cuttings, and after they are so cut, the wounds be rubbed and
sprinkled with Salt: and some have a great iron collar with a gallows of Iron,
which they must bear for a long time both days and nights.

The besieging of Samaria.
SAmaria was a goodly City, and abounded in all things whatsoever, in a great
length and breadth: It was besieged by King Adad, in the year 3050 before
Christ: at that time King Ioram fled into Samaria for succor, being
over-matched by the Syrian Army, trusting and putting his confidence in the
fortification and strength of the Walls thereof. But Ioram in length of time
being destitute of convenient food, and all other necessaries, that an Asses
head was sold in SAMARIA for 80 pieces of Silver, Every piece 12 pence.
and a measure of Pigeons dong at five pieces of silver, 7 pintes.
which they used insteede of Salt: the Famine increased so much, and the
cruelty of the Enemy in detayning those that would have gone out, in policy to
make the Famine the greater, and the sieged sooner to mutiny; which fell out
too true. And it happend that a certain woman cried out to the KING, spying
him upon the Walls of the City, saying, have mercy one me O my Sovereign: he
increased with wrath, and supposing that she had asked him for some relief or
sustinance, began to threaten her, and to tell her, that he had neither
graunge nor press whereby he might supply her necessity: The woman told the
King that she had no need of meat, but that she came only to require justice,
and to determine a debate betwixt her and another of her neighbors; the King
gave her audience, and bad her speak: hereupon she said, that she had made a
condition with another woman her friend, that since the famine was so increased,
that they should kill their Children; (for each one had a son) and in this sort
should nourish one another every day: and I have strangled mine yesterday, and
she has eaten with me, and now this day denies me hers, and breaks the
accord betwixt us. Whereby may be seen the great extremity that this City was
brought unto by War: But after the siege, Samaria was taken by Salmanasar King
of the A^^yrians, and made entrance into the City, and it was taken by force,
in the 7 year of his Reign, and before Christ's birth 746.

Of Tantalus.
TAntalus was a King of Phrygia exceeding covetous, whom the Poets feign to
have bid the Gods to a banquet, and he being desirous to make a trial of their
deity, when they appeared at his house in men's likeness, did slay his own son
Pelops, and set him before them to be eaten as meat, giving the flesh another
name unto them, who understanding his horrible act, did not only abstain from
eating thereof, but also gathering the parts of the Child together, brought
him to life again. For this offense Jupiter cast him into Hell, and enjoined
him this punishment: that he should continue in most clear water, and stand
up in it even to his nether lip, and that most goodly Apple Trees bearing most
sweet and redolent fruit, should hang over him, and touch his mouth almost, the
which things as soon as he should go about to taste of, they should fly from
him, and so they did; that between the Apples and the water, he consumed with
famine and thirst, and was tormented with great penury even in present plenty.
Whereof a Proverb has sprung, to call it Tantalus punishment, when as they
which have goods enough, cannot use them.

Of Artemista the wife of Mausolus.
IN the City called Ha^icarnassus, Artemisia the Queen erected a sumptuous
Tomb in the honor of her husband Mausolus, which was done with such a pomp
and magnificency, that it was numbered as one of the seven Wonders of the world.

This woman marvellously lamenting the death of her Husband, and enflamed with
incredible desire and affection toward him, took his bones and ashes and
mingled them together, and beat them to powder with sweet spices, and put it
in water, and drunk it off, and many other strange signs of incredible love
are said to have been in her: After this, for the perpetual remembrance of
her husband, she caused to be made a sepulcher of mavelous workmanship in
stone, which (...) been famous, and much spoken of all men till our days, and
this was in height 25 Cubits, and compassed with 36 goodly pillars. This vain
comfort could not take away out of the Queens breast, the conceived grief and
sorrow of her Husband, but that shortly after she her self yielded her Soul
and Life, as unmeete to tarry after he had ended his days.

Sardanapalus.
SArdanapalus was King of the Assirians, whose Epitaph had these words in the
Assirian Tongue: SARDANAPALUS, the son of ANECENDARASSIS, erected in one day
Anchiala and Tarsus, a goodly Cities, eat, drink and play.

These words as Cicero says, might have been written upon the Sepulcher of an
Ox, and not of a King. He was a most effeminate man, given to all kind of
luxury, and was not ashamed to spin amongst common harlots, and in women's
vesture and attire, to excel all others in lasciviousness. Wherefore the
Assyrians disdaining to obey, and subject themselves to such a feminine Prince,
rebelled, and made war against him, who being overcome, went into his Palace,
and there making a great fire, cast himself and all his riches into the fire,
and so ended his life.

The people called Amazones.
PEnthisilea, the Queen of the Amazones, which were women abho^ring men, and
practicing all warlike affairs, did noble deeds of manly prowess at the
destruction of Troy. Some say, that they had their beginning of the Scythians
after this sort. Certain Scythians being driven from their Country with their
wives, and remaining in the coasts of Cappadocia, using to rob and spoil the
borderers, were destroyed at the length by conspiracy and deceit. The Wives
that followed their Husbands; and seeing that they were left alone, took
weapons and defended their borders, and also moved war against their
neighbors, they had no mind at all to marry with their neighbors, calling it
a servitude and not Matrimony: a singular example to all ages, they increased
their Commonwealth without husbands, and that one might not seem more happy
then another, they slew such husbands as remained at home.

At the length when they had gotten peace by force of arms, they used the
society of men in the Countries by them, lest their whole Nation should perish
for lack of procreation, and if any men-children were borne, they destroyed
them, and their young women and maids did not use spinning and carding, but
hunting and handling their weapons, so that every Female Child's breast was
seered and burnt away, lest they might be hindered thereby in shooting, whereof
they took that name and were called Amazons. They conquered a great of Europe,
and did occupy many Cities in Asia: they had two Queen, Marthesia and
Lamped^, which dividing their Army into two parts, kept their battles with
great wealth and strength, defending their borders stoutly. They did build
Ephesus and Smyrna in Asia the less, and did inhabit the chief City in
Cappadocia. Some say that in some places amongst them, they had Husbands, and
that the women did bear all the rule and did all common business and that the
men did keep charge at home like women, obeying the women in all things.

Of Hearts in Cyprus.
IN the Isle of Cyprus Hearts are commonly seen to swim in flocks over the
Sea in a straight order, laying their heads upon the buttockes of those that go
before, and thus they go by course. They see no land, but yet they swim in
the savor of it; the males have horns, and of all kind of beasts every year
at an accustomed time in the Spring they lose them: therefore that day that
they lose them, they go into desert places and hide themselves, as things that
have lost their weapons in eight months the females bring forth young, they
exercise their young with running, and teach them to think upon flying away.
They lead them to hard and unaccessible places, and show them how to scip and
leap: but yet it is a simple beast, and astonished at the marvelling at every
thing, so that when a Horse or a St^^^e comes near, they do not mark the
man that is hunting at hand, or else if they perceive a man, they wonder at is
bow and arrows. They bear signs of their age in their horns, and for every
year they have the increase of a branch in their horns, until they be six
years of age, and after that time the like does spring up again. And after
this their age cannot be discerned, but old age is known by their teeth. The
horns do not fall away from such as are gelded, nor do not spring again if
they be gone.

The Hearts have a natural conflict with the Serpent, they search their
caverns, and with the breath of their nostrils draw them out against their
wills. Hearts horn against poison.
And therefore the savor of Hearts horn burnt, is good to drive away Serpents,
and against their bitings a singular remedy is made of the ruin of the Hind
slain in the Belly. The Hearts live along time, as an hundred years and more;
the end of the Hearts tail has poison in it, and therefore it is thrown
aaway; powder scraped off the Hearts horn and drunk, kills the worms in the
stomach, it is good also against the Jaunders.

Of the Date-tree.
THere is no Country that brings forth more fruitful Date-trees then the
H^lyland: there be Date-trees in Italy, but they are barren: About the
Seacoast of Spain there be fruitful trees, but it is an unpleasant Date: In
Africa there is a sweet kind of Date, but it lasts not: In the East part of
the World they make Wines of them, and some use them as bread, and some give
them as meat to their cattle. Here of be the dry Dates most plentiful in
juice and meat, and of them Wines are made very hurtful for the head: and as
there is plenty of them in the East, so are they a great deal better in Jury,
and especially in Ierico. It grows in a light and sandy ground, it is bushy
altogether in the top, and has not ^he Fruit as other trees amongst the
leaves, but amongst his branches. The dilligent searchers of Nature say, that
there is both Male and Female, the Male has flowers, the Female springs
without flowers, much like unto a thorn.

Of the dead Sea.
THe dead Sea which is nigh unto the water of Jordan, is so called, because
nothing can live in it; the Lake of it self is smoky, and the air causes
rustinesse to Brass and Silver, and all bright things.

This Lake receives not the body of any living thing. Bulls and Cammels swim
in it, and men that have no knowledge of swimming, if they go into (...) unto
the Navell, they are li^^ up. There is no ship can sail^ into it. If you put
any living thing into it, it leapeth out. A candell burning will swim above,
the light being put out, it will be drowned, the water of this Lake is always
standing still, and is not stirred with the wind, it is mavelous dangerous,
and hard coming to it for strangers, both for wild beasts and Serpents, and
also for a barbarous Nation that keeps there about, and troubles the places
thereby with often robberies.

Of Sand transforming things into Glass.
IN Sydon there is a water that has Sand of easy alteration into Glass.

This Sand whatsoever metal it takes, it changes into into Glass, and that
which is made Glass, if it be cast into the Sand, returns again to Sand. And
this is a strange thing at Sydon.

Of the Fish called a Purple.
THere be that write, the Purple to have her color by reason of the
propinqui^y of the Sun* Wherefore in Africa they have as it were a violet
color, and at Tyrus a red color. This Purple is a fish of the kind of a
shellfish, whereof a juice is gathered most necessary for the dying of
Garments. This fish has this juice to color and dye Garments, in the midst
of her mouth and jaws: it is gotten and gathered in the spring time, for at
other times she is bar^e^, and lacks this juice. She loses her life with
the loss of this juice, for she lives no longer then she has any of this
juice, and therefore it is good to ta^^ them alive. She is a great devourer of
little shellfish, out o^ the which the liqour is taken wherewith silk is dyed
Purple. She has a long tongue a^^ i^ were the length of a finger, (...) which
she is always mooving by her tongue she gotteth (...) prey that she
desireth^^ In (...) they discern true Purple (...) counterfeit, by pouring
oil upon silk, for if it leaves any spots it is counterfeit, but if the
silk garment has no fault after the oil, is is good and allowable Purple.

The City of Babylon.
SEmyramis a Noble woman, and of great prowess, erected and built the pompous
City of Babylon, the walls whereof were made of brick, sand, pitch, and
plaster, of a mavelous length and grossness. The Walls were in compass
three hundred and threescore furlongs, with many and great towers beautified.
The breadth of the Wall was such, that six Carts might go together thereon.
The height was thirty and two foot, the turrets in number were two hundred and
fifty. The breadth and length thereof was equal with the Walls. She made a
bridge also of five furlongs in length, with pillars in the depth by mavelous
art of stone, iron, and lead, joined together.

When Ninus her husband was dead, she took the administration of the
Kingdom, and reigned 24 years. For although she had a Son called also
Ninus; yet she considering his young years unmeet for to rule, feigned her
self to be King Ninus son, the which was easily credited, for the great
likeness of nature that was in them. This woman was of so noble courage, that
she had a singular emulation to excel her husband in glory: of whom it needs
not now to speak any more, because diverse authors have so largely renowned and
set forth her noble Acts.

Of the Phoenix.
THe Phoenix is a noble bird, and is but one in the World which is not much
seen. Coruelius says, that the Phoenix did fly into Egypt, when as Plaucius
and Paupinius were Consuls.

It is said that she is as big as an Eagle, having a glittring brightness like
as Gold about her neck, in other parts Purple, an^ Azured tail with Rose
colors: her head with a plume and top of Feathers: Manilius says, that no man
has seen her feeding. She lives six hundred and threescore years: when
she waxes old, she makes her nest of Cassia, and branches of a
Frankinsence-tree, to fill it with odours, and so dies upon it: then of her
bones and marrow, thereof there springs first a little worm, which afterward
is a young Phoenix. This Bird, as Pliny says, is commonly in Arabia, where are
found goodly Pearls, and of great estimation. Cleopatra.
Cleopatra gave for one Pearl that was brought out of this Country, Pearl.
two hundred and fifty thousand crowns. The goodness of Pearls is judged by
the whiteness, greatness, roundnesse, plainness, orient brightness, and
weight.

The Description of the form of the Ram that Titus brought before the Walls
of Jerusalem.
A Ram is a huge beam like the maine Mast of a Ship, whose end is armed with
a strong massy iron, made in the form of a Rams head, whereupon it takes
its name, because it butteth with his head: It hangs on another beam with
ropes, like the beam of a pair of balances: the beam it hangs on, lying a
cross, is held up with two props, which being drawn back by force of many
men, and then jointly with all their forces shooved forwards, it strikes the
wall with the head of iron: and there is no Wall nor Tower so strong, but
though it abide the first stroke of the Engine, yet cannot it abide or hold out
long.

The General of the Romans thought good to use this Engine to take the City
by force, and when they saw that none of the Jews durst come upon the wall,
they then applied the Ram unto them, which* so shook the Walls beyond
thought, that the Jews cried out, as though the City had been already taken:
they to prevent the force of the Ramm^ let down sacks of wool and chafe, to
hinder the powerful beating of the Ram, for it was of that force and
strength in the running, that is past belief* yet this policy and invention
did help for a while, and did preserve the Wall whole and sound. For where
this policy was not used to prevent the force of the Engine, it did overthrow
and batter down the Walls suddenly and furiously: yet though it was of that
force and strength in those times, it is now quite out of use, and almost of
knowledge, but only for the name.

Of Mahomet the false Prophet of the Saracens, of his original and perversity.
MAhomet was the Prince of all impiety and superstition. Wherefore it is not to
be marvelled, if he has set the feeds of all evil, and such as will not be
rooted out. Some say, that he was a Cyrenaic in Nation, some that he was an
Arabian, others that he was a Persian. He was borne in the year of our Lord
597: A man of an obscure family, and of no great wealth, nor strength, nor
manhood: some say that his father was a worshipper of devils* and that
Ismaelita his mother* was not ignorant of the Laws of the Hebrews. Wherefore
the Child being distract and made doubtful, because whilst that his Father
teached him one kind of religion, his Mother suggested another, so that he
followed none of them thoroughly. And thus being trained up in two several
manners, he received and kept none of them at his full age: but he being
brought up amongst the good Christians, being of a subtle and crafty wit,
invented and devised of both Laws a most pernicious and detestable sect for
mankind. After the death of his parents he was taken of the Sarracens, which
were accounted notable amongst the Arabians in theft and robberies, and was
sold to a Merchant of the Ismael kind. He being a crafty fellow, rapacious,
dishonest, subject to all vice, a notable dissembler, and deceiver; was at the
length made the ruler of their Merchandise and Wares. He did drive Camells
throughout Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and other strange places, with the often
travail in which places, he using the company as well of the Jews as of the
Christians, many times studied, and went about not to learn, but to deprave the
old and new Testament, being taught diverse sects of his Parents: to this he
added the gains that came by theft, and daily imagined how to deceive his
Master. Wherefore being suspected of his Master, and hated of others, of an
obscure Servant and slave, he became a notorious thief and robber. And being
made more famous with his continual theft and robberies, he got daily a great
number of companions of his unthrifty doings. These things were also a great
help unto him, his strange and horrible countenance, his terrible voice, and
his desperate ruffenly boldness, greatly to be feared. Thus coming by little
and little in admiration of a barbarous Nation* he got unto him no small
authority, so that that his Master being dead without Children, he married and
took to wife his Mistress, being a widow of the Ismael stock, and fifty
years of age, having great wealth and riches, who also brought him up. This
pestilent man being puffed up with his Wives riches, applied his mind to all
kind of detestable acts, through his corrupt and depraved wit, being of
himself otherwise prompt and given to all kind of presumptuous boldness, his
temerity and malapertnesse was also increased by the unconstancy and
unfaithfulness of one Sergius a pestilent Monk, so that in a short space he
came to such estimation amongst the Arabians, that he was called and believed
to be the great messenger of God and the great Prophet, and this in every man's
mouth. This Sergius being a Nestorian Archheretick banished from
Constantinople, fled into Araby, and associating himself unto Mahomets
familiarity, an ill master and governor with a most filthy and abominable
scholar was soon united together: He was a prater, and full of words, bold,
rash, impudent, subtle, crafty, and in all things agreeing with Mahomet, who
now was waxed mighty, and could help at a pinch; and whose name began to be
famous, and so at the length the runnagate found a filthy privy and dungeon of
all wickedness. Whom his unhappy master taught Nestorians madness, and
persuaded him to expulse and remove the Christians, and their Priests from
Damascus, Syria, and Arabia, and so to corrupt the Judicial law, and to
deprave the Christian Faith: It cannot well be rehearsed, by how many crafty
and subtle means this most unfaithful Apostata, and runnagate has deceived
and seduced the people.

Now Mahomet being taught all kind of ungraciousnesse of his detestable
master, through intemperate living and continual drunkenness, Mahomet had the
falling-evill.
fell at the length into the Falling Sickness, the which his wife could not
well suffer for the often coming thereof. Wherefore the old dissembling knave,
to deliver himself from that infamy, does hide and cloak his disease: saying
it to be the mavelous brightness of Gabriel, the Angel and Messenger of
God, of whom he being put in that trance, did receive and learn most secret
and strange things, and that he was not able to abide the presence of him with
a manifest lie he affirmed it. O my dear and wel-beloved wife he says,
marvel no^ that this comes to me, when I conceive the spirit of GOD
himself, who suggesteth in me things to come, and to make me privy of many
matters, he comes often to me. The ^ame hereof was spread abroad immediately,
and he was openly called the Prophet of God, the which opinion be increased
with a new art and craft by the instruction of his Master Sergius. For he
accustomed and taught a Dove to be fed, A Dove.
and fetch meat at his ears, the which Dove his most subtle and crafty
master called the Holy Ghost. He preached openly, and made his bragges ^ike a
most lying villain, that his Dove did show unto him the most secret counsel
of God; ^s often as the simple foul did ^y unto his ears for nourishment. His
Wife being now ^ead, left him her heir, and ^ll that she had, so that he
en^reased in wealth and authority ^ayly, and began to make (...) new Law by
the help of ^is master Sergius, and cer^aine Jews that were his compa^ions,
borrowing some things ^f the Hebrews, and some things ^f the Christians
discipline: He ^id write in a certain volumne ^ll the Laws of his new sect,
^he which books name is Al^oran: that book not many ^eares ago has come
into Print: And that he might the more craftily deceive his people and Nation,
given wholly to the belly and to sleep, he brought up and fed a certain
Bull, which was used only to take food from the hands of Mahomet, he bound a
book^ betwixt his horns, and the simple people looking about* with an high
voice he called the Bull out of a secret place, A Bull.
and when he with his babbling tongue had utred many things concerning his
laws, sudden^ly the Bull started forth, and o^verthrowing many in his
com^ming, he lays down the Boo^ in the hands of Mahomet, as (...) had been a
gift sent from Hea^ven. The which he receiving with much honor, did
immediately interpret many things out of it to the people, and with his forged
and subtle device, he named himself a Prince, and Serius a Prophet. For the
Dove brought ^ paper about her neck written with Golden letters, in this
manner. Whosoever shall put ^he yoke on the Bulls neck, ^et him be King.
Sergius brought ^he yoke and gave it to Ma^omet, who did easily put it on the
Bull, and by and by ^ee was called King of the simple people, thinking these
things to be done by Gods providence, and that he took the book no
otherwise. In this book they are commanded to be circumcised, not for any
Religion, but for mere superstition: or else as some say, that no filth should
remain under the skin of the yard when they did wash and bath them. There
was also commanded abstinence of wine and flesh, Wine.
that he might the more easily cloak his disease, who felt himself oppressed
with Wine of late, for Wine taken more excessively and intemperately in
stopping the passages of the brain, that no respiration might be had, does
breed and nourish the falling sickness, and Swi^^ flesh makes gross humour^
wherewith obstruction of the brain comes quickly, and many other diseases
springe^^ thereof. The book of Alcor^^ commands also the fasting of one
month, wherein a man may eat all the night long, so that daily abstinence is
recompensed with night 4urfeiting* Mahomet appointed also, because he would
have his law disagred from Christians and Hebrews, that the Friday should be
consecrated as Holyday, because he was made King upon that day, and also would
not agree with any other ^ect. For the same cause do ^he Turks also turn
them into ^he South at their prayers, against the manners of other Nations. He
has also granted ^o every man four wives of his ^wne kindred: but concubines
and ^ond-women bought, it is law^ull for every man to have as many as he can
keep, so that ^hey may forsake them, and make a devorce as often as they ^ist:
and this was done, to draw ^he common sort and rude mul^itude unto him more
easily. He ^aught also that the pleasures of ^he body did not hinder the hap^y
life to come, and he promised to the observers of his law, a Paradise, and
garden of all pleasures, wherein they should use their most desired joys, and
all kind of pleasures, as Maidens most beautiful adorned, and the embracings
of Angels, and all other kind of pleasures that any man would desire, with the
which subtle craftiness; he led the people flexible of their own nature
whither he would, because he promised all kind of libidino^^ pleasures.

He reprehended the Jews, for that they denied Christ to be borne of the
Virgin, seeing that the Prophet through divine inspiration did prophecy the
same. He reproved the Christians of foolishness, because they did believe
JESUS to be borne of the Virgin, and to have suffered all contumely and
punishment of the Jews patiently: for as much as that body conceived by Gods
inspiration, was made unpassible, and also seeing that Christ did ascend into
the Heavens, and Judas was crucified in his place.

The Turks admit only three Prophets, Mahomet their Lawgiver, Moses the
Prophet of the Hebrews, and Christ whom they deny to be God. Mahomet made a
cursed Law, that if any man should dispute against his mysteries, that he
should suffer death for it: in the which Law he has manifestly taught, that
there is no sincere or good thing in Alcoran, the which he goes about to
defend by the sword only. Thus with Sergius he made his book full of
wickedness, and corrupted the true Scriptures with counterfeit
interpretations, and that he might be accounted the Prophet and conservatour of
both (...)

The manner of the Assyrians.
THe Assyrians feed upon Dates, whereof they make both Wine and Honey. They
keep their hair long, and bind it up with hair laces and fillets. They
anoint themselves with fine ointments before they go abroad.

Of their Laws that they used, this one is memorable, that their Maidens and
Virgins being ripe for Men, were brought unto some open place, and there were
set to be sold yeare^y for them that would marry any Wives, and first of all
the most beautiful were set to sale: ^hey which had not so comely ^eauty, that
no man would buy them, nor scantly take them freely, were bestowed in Matrimony
with that sum of money which was gathered of selling the fair maids.

They had no use of Physicians, but there was a Law among them, that if any did
fall sick, h^ should ask counsel of those that had been visited and troubled
with the same sickness. Some say that their sick folks were carried abroad,
and that by the Law, they which had been sick at any time, should visit such
as were now sick, and teach them by what means and remedy especially they
were delivered from their sickness. They had for their Priests, men of great
knowledge in Astronomy, who could faithfully interpret dreams, and monstrous
things, and these were not taught nor learned abroad, but the children took
their discipline and learning, as inheritance from their parents. With long and
ancient observation of the Stars; they did prognosticate to mortal men many
things to come; they did attribute great strength to the Planets, but others
especially to Saturn. They therefore told many things to Princes, as to
Alexander his victory, which he had against Darius, and to diverse other in like
manner.

The manner of the Persians.
THe Persians would not wash them in any river, nor never make Urine in the
water, nor cast any Carcass therein, nor so much as spit in it, for they did
most religiously reverent the Water. Their Kings they always created of one
Family, and he that did not obey the King lost his head, and his arms, and
was cast away unburied: they had many Wives for the increase of their stock,
and many Concubines also, they gave great rewards to them that had gotten many
Children in one year: the Children after the were borne, came not into their
Fathers sight for five years space, but were kept amongst, Women: for this
cause, if any dyed in the bringing up, that the Father should take no grief of
the loss: their Marriages were solemnized about the tenth day of March. From
five years of age, until they were twenty four, they learned to ride, to
cast the Dart, to Shoot, and especially to speak well. They did practice to
pass over brooks and waters, to suffer heat and cold. They continue in
harness and in moist garments, they feed upon acorns and field-peares, after
their exercise they had very hard bread, and water for their drink. Their beds
and cups were adorned amongst the common sort with Gold and Silver. They never
consulted of any great matters, but in the midst of their banquets, thinking
that to be a more surer consultation, then that which was had of sober men. A
drunk^n parliament
Familiers and such as were of acquaintance, when they meet, they kissed
together: they which were of a baser calling, did worship him that they met
withal. They buried dead bodies in the ground, enclosing them in wax. They
thought it an heinous offense to laugh or spit before the Prince. Some say,
that they carried their dead bodies out of the City, and there laid them in
the fields to be devoured of dogs, and Fowls of the air. They would not have
the bones of dead bodies to be buried or reserved: and when any dead body was
not immediately consumed of Dogs or wild beasts, they thought it an ill sign,
and that he was a man of an unclean mind, and therefore not to be worthy to
be in Hell, and his next Friends did marvellously lament him, as one that had
no hope of happiness after this life, but if he were quickly devoured of
beasts, they thought him happy.

The Emperor of the Persians is at this day called Sophy, who with his noble
acts gets great empire and glory.

Of the Panther and Tiger.
THe Panther is a beast like unto a Lybard, he has variety of colors, and is
very fierce and wild, so that some call him a Dog-wolfe, and yet he is gentle
enough if he be filled. He sleeps three days, and after the third day he
washes himself, and cries out, and with a sweet sent that comes from him,
he gathers all wild beasts together, which are led and moved with his
favor: and he is friendly to all wild beasts saving the Dragon and the
Serpent. The she Panther is said to be a beast differing from the male,
because she is cruel, and full of spots. Some say that all beasts are
marvellously delighted with the sent of them, but by their horrible looks,
they are made affraide, and therefore hiding their heads, they take and catch
other beasts allured with the pleasantness of them, as Goats and such like;
which being taken with a fond desire of their pleasantness, comes nearer and
nearer, but the Libard leaping out of her Den, flies upon them.

In Caria and Lybia the Panthers be of a good length, and somewhat timorous,
and not so full of agility in leaping, but they have so hard a skin, that you
can hardly pierce it, the Female is more common to be found. The Tygre is a
beast of a wonderful swiftness, it brings forth many young, the which many
do steal away upon Horseback very swift: But when the Female sees her young
gone, (for the Males take no care of the young) she runs headlong searching
by smelling: the taker of her young hearing her coming near with raging,
casts down one of the young, the which she takes away with her mouth, after
that she returns again with mavelous celerity, so that she gets
another, and so the third time, and until that he has gotten into a ship,
and then she seeing her fierceness frustate, rages on the banks. Saint
Austine says, there was a Tygre made tame at Rome in a Den. Strabo says,
Magesthenes writes, that in India amongst the people called Prasij, the Tigre
is of double bigness to the Lion, and of such strength, that one being led
with four men, if he should catch a Mule with his hinder claw, he were able to
draw the Mule unto him. Some say when she has lost her young, she is
deceived, and mocked in the way with a glass, set there by the stealer of her
young: for she following with her smelling and swift running, and finding the
glass thinking her self to have found her young, tarrieth so long in vewing
the glass, that he which took her young, has time enough to escape.

The conditions and nature of the Parthians.
THe Parthians have their armies commonly of the greater number of Servants and
Bondmen, as every man is more wealthy, so does he find a greater number o^
horsemen to the King for his War. They have many Wives for the avoiding of
lechery, and they punnish no fault more grievously then adultery: Wherefore the
Women may not come to the feasts of men, nor in their sight. They eat no other
flesh then such as they get by hunting, they be always on horseback, they ride
to their banquets, and to War, they do merchandise, they common together,
they do all common and private affairs sitting on Horseback, their dead
bodies are open preys for Fowls or Dogs, they have a special care of
worshipping the Gods, they have fearful wits, seditious, prattling, and
deceitful.

Florus writes, that the third battle that the Romans made against the
Parthians, they sent a notable strong Army, whereof Marcus Crassus Consul was
Lieutenant, a man of wonderful avarice, and unsaturable cupidity of Gold, who
warring unfortunately against the Parthians, lofing eleven Legions, as he was
flying was taken and flaine, his head and right hand was cut off, and brought
to the King of the Parthians, where in contempt and mockery Gold was melted
into his mouth, because he being so desirous of booties and preys, refused
peace being entreated. Some say, the Parthians when they powered in the melted
Gold into his mouth, said: Now drink Gold, thou that have always thirsted for
Gold, and as yet could never be filled with Gold. The which saying is also
rehearsed of Tomyris the Queen of the Massagets in Scythia, Tomyris.
who warring with Cyrus, Cyrus.
the mighty King of the Persians, deprived him of life in the revenging of her
sons death, whom he deceitfully killed being sent aforehand. Wherefore she
being in a wonderful rage after the victory had against Cyrus, caused his head
to be cut off, and put in a vessel full of blood, saying these words, thou
have sucked the blood of my Son and also thirsted after mine Cyrus, but I
will fill thee with blood, drink now, and fill thy self therewith.

Of the people of Carmania, and those which are called Icthiopagi.
IN Carmania no man may have a wife, before he have brought the head of his
enemy cut off to the King. The King cutteth the tongue thereof into small
parts, and mingleth it with bread, and afterward gives it to be eaten to him
that brought it, and to his familiars, and he is accounted a notable fellow
that brings many heads.

The Icthiophagi be so called, because they eat fish most commonly, and so do
their cattle, and they drink rainy and wellwater. They feed their fish with
beasts flesh: They make their Houses of Whales bones and Oyster-shels, of their
fish being dried they make bread, putting a little Wheat unto it, for they
have small store of Wheat.

It is read of this Nation, that many of them going naked all their lives, have
their Wives and Children in common like unto beasts, that have no difference of
honesty and dishonesty.

Of the property of sundry Nations.
THe Tauroscites be contentious people, inhabiting the woods, doing sacrifice
to the devil. Such enemies as they take, they cut off their heads, and set
them upon an high pole in the tops of their houses. There be also in this part
of Asia certain people, that have their women in common, and some so rude and
beastly, that they eat man's flesh, obeying no Laws. There be others called
Agrippaei, which are bald from their nativity, as well men as women. And
another kind of people also called Issedones, with whom the use is, when any
man's father dies, all his kinsfolks bring cattle, and kill them, and cut and
mingle the flesh of them with the flesh of the father of him that receives
them to this banquet, and so they make a Feast with these sundry kinds of flesh
together: they scour and make clean the head of him that is dead, and use it
as an Image, offering sacrifice and ceremonies unto it yearly: this does the
son to the Father, and the Father to the Son.

Of the several ways that the Romans put any offender to death.
Several Nations have had several kinds of death for malefactors, the manner
of the death usually being proportionable to the nature of the offense. The
Romans chiefly in their Judicatures for capital offenses punnished these three
ways: By strangling, beheading, or stoning: Amongst some Authors, and those
not of mean esteem, it is said, that Pisol^^ the Soldier, that set the
Temple in Jerusalem on fire, being called to a council of War, was by Titus
and other officers, adjudged for the same fact, to have that hand cut off, that
threw the firebrand into the Temple: and presently to show how highly Titus was
displeased at the heinousness of the fact, he made him examplary to all the
company for his disobedience, by strangling him to death upon a scaffold,
erected for the same purpose, in the view of the whole Army, and stayed
himself in person, to behold the full execution of the party. The second sort
of death was, that they used to strike off the heads of such offenders as
mu^ined, or committed any Rapes upon Virgins or Women, in the taking of a
Town, contrary to express charge of Mar^iall discipline, especially of the
Romans; they being the strictest in this kind of any Nation whatsoever. It is
said that CAIUS POSTHVMVS VEGELIVS a Cohort of a great esteem for his Valor,
upon several occasions under the conduct of POMPEY the great, in the taking of
a Fort, upon conditions deflowred a maid, and afterward ravished the Mother,
(so furious is lust if not kept under) was presently by the General called to
account, and checked with this speech, that the Romans ought to punnish vice in
others, not commit it themselves, for which purpose he was there with his Army;
because therefore (said he) thou have had no care either of the honor of the
Virgin, nor her Mother, nor thy self, nor yet of thy Country, I will have as
little care of thy life, and so committed him, notwithstanding his office and
experience (...) valor, into the hands of the executioner, to have his Head
cu^^ off in the same place where he acted his villainy, which was speedily done
to the satisfaction of some, and the example of all.

The third kind of death was that of stoning, as some suppose, borrowed from
the Jews, and this they inflicted principally upon such as were robbers of
Temples, or mockers either of their Priests, or their Gods.

Thus Lucius Publius, one that before this Fact, had deserved ^ell of the
Commonwealth, ^eing the Priests of Mars sa^rificing in their Temple, laugh^d
at their seeming foolish Ce^emonies as needless, was at^^ched, and presently
commit^ed to dye at a stake, by being ^astned to it, and having stones ^ast at
him in the open streets, with these words spoken by the ^rincipall executioner,
So let ^ll deriders of the Gods deservedly perish.

They did exercise, and indeed invent a fourth kind of death, and that was the
fastening of the party to a Cross made of wood, and thus the Savior of the
World, was the first that endured this punishment and shame under Tiberius,
then Emperor of Rome, and Pontius Pilate being his Viceroy for Jury, he was
made to carry his own Cross, upon which he was to suffer, till being wearied
with the weight of it, they compelled one Simon to carry to the place of
Execution, upon which his hands and feet being nailed to it, he gave up the
Ghost: and upon his suffering a soldier named Longinus, standing by thrust a
spear into his side, from which issued water and blood: who upon the act was
struck blind immediately: yet repenting of his Fact, had his eyes touched with
the blood upon the spear, and recived thereby his sight again, and so proved
a famous member of Gods Church, and was made Bishop of Cappadoria: Thus have I
expressed to you in ^riefe the manner how the Romans punnished any with death.

Of the Tartarians.
THe Tartarians are most deformed of all men, their bodies are but small, their
eyes be gross and bolstring out, their faces be broad and without hair,
saving that in their over lip and the chinne they have thin and moisie hair,
they be common-small in the middle, they shave their heads from one ear to
another, by the top of the crown to the hinder part, keeping long hair like
unto a woman, whereof they make two folds and windings, and bind them both
behind the ears: and so be all other shaven that tarry amongst them. They be
good Horsemen, and ill Footmen, and therefore none goes afoot, but rides
either on Horseback, or upon some Ox. They have a glory to hang good sounding
Bells about their Horses necks* When they drink, Drunkenness taken for a glory.
they power it in until they be drunken, the which is a great praise amongst
them. They have no bread, nor use any baking, nor tableclothes, nor towells,
they use no handkirchifs, nor never wash their hands, body, nor apparel. They
eat no pot-herbes nor pulse, but only the flesh of all kind of living
things, as Cats, Dogs, Horse, and all kind of great Mice. They roste the
bodies of such as they take in War, to show their cruelty, and desire of
revenging: and where many meet together in the eating of them, they tear them
with their teeth like Wolves, and drink the blood thereof, which they reserved
before in cups, otherwise they drink Cowes milk. One of them eats the lice
from another head, saying, thus will we do to our Enemies. It is an heinous
thing with them to suffer any drink to be lost, or any meat, and therefore
they cast no bones to Dogs, before that the marrow be taken away, and many
other things are reported of them, which Munster sets forth more at large.
In War they have swords of a yard in length, their Horsemen are very skillful
in shooting, their Princes never enter into War, but standing a far off, they
cry unto their own company, and exhort them, if they see any thing needful:
they carry their wives and their children, because their Wives be attyred like
men, and also images of Men, on Horseback to their Wars, that they might
seem a great number, and more terrible to their Enemies. They think no shame
nor ignominy in flying if it be necessary and expedient so to do. If they get
the victory they spare none, neither Women nor Children, nor old folks; they
slay al saving craftsmen and artificers, whom they reserve to their uses. They
are very incontinent, and therefore they take as many Wives as they will, and
may sustain, and they except none, but the mother, the daughter, and sister,
and yet they be much given to the Sodomiticall sin.

They do not make account of any Woman as of their Wife, nor yet think her
worthy of dower, before that she has brought forth a Child, and therefore
they may refuse her which is barren, and take another: they which are taken in
adultery, both Men and women are put to death by the Law. Every Wife has her
mansion, her own Family, and lives very chastely.

This Nation observes many superstitions: No man makes urine in his Mansion,
but if he does, he is slain without pity: if necessity compels him, then
his tent and all things therein are purged with fire after a curious sort. When
they choose and elect their Prince, they meet together in a fair field, and
then they set him in a Golden throne and Chair, to whom the Kingdom is due,
either by succession, or by election, and falling down before him, they cry all
after this sort, with one consent and a loud voice: We beseech, we will and
command, that thou bear rule over us. He answers, If you will have this done
of me, it is necessary that you be ready to do all that I shall command: when
I call, to come, and whithersoever I send, to go, and to commit, and put the
whole rule into our hands. When they have answered, we be ready: He says
again, Therefore my word shall be my sword, and all the people clap their
hands with great rejoicing. Then the Noblemen take him from the regal seat,
and make him to sit softly upon a cushin, or a cloth laid upon the ground,
saying thus: Look up, and acknowledge God, and look downward to the cushin
whereon thou sit, if thou do well govern and rule, thou shall have all
things according to thy desire: but if thou do ill rule us, thou shall be
brought so low and so bare, that this small cushin whereon thou sit, shall
not be left thee, at the which saying they adjoyne unto him his dearest and
best beloved wife, and lifting them both up with the cushin, they salute him
Emperor of all Tartarians, and her the Empress. Then to such as be present of
other Nations, he commands gifts to be given out of hand. There is also all
the treasure and jewels which the late deceased Emperor left, wherewith this
new Emperor rewards every Nobleman, and that which remains, he commands
to be kept to his own use. In his hands and power all things be, and no man
dare say, this is mine, or his. No man ought to tarry in any part of the land,
but where he is assigned. His Seal that he uses, has these words engraved:
God in Heaven, and Chuithuth Cham on the land, the strength of God and Emperor
of men. He has five great robust armies: Five Dukes, with whose aid he
invadeth all that withstand him. He himself speaks not to strange
Ambassadors, nor they come at any time into his sight, except that they and
their gifts be purged before hand of certain women deputed to that purpose.
He gives his answer by other mean persons, to whom, when and how long soever
he speaks, they ought to give care upon their knees bowed, and so attend,
that they err not in any one word. It is not lawful for any man to change the
Emperors words, nor to go or do against his mind and sentence by any means.

The Sibyls prophecy of the destruction of Babell.
THE place where this Tower was built, is at this present day called Babylon,
by reason of the confusion of tongues and languages that first began in that
place: For Babell in the Original or Hebrew-tongue signifies Confusion: Of
this Tower and of the diversity of Languages Sybilla has made mention in these
words: At such time as men used one kind of Language, they built a most
stately rich Tower of that height, that they meant by the same to mount or
ascend up to Heaven of their own pleasure: being at that time full of pride
and ambition, and did not reverence the Divine power: but the Gods sent down
fire and winds, and overwhelmed this high Tower, and made it level with the
ground, and gave every one his distinct and several Language, from whence
sprung the cause that their City was called Babylon: their Kings name was
Balthazar, who was taken prisoner, and the whole City overthrown, in the
year of the year of the world 3425, and before Christ's time 539, by Cyrus
King of the Persians, whose Army consisted of 100000 fighting men, and now
remains under the command of the Sophy or Shagh of Persia.

The 12 Sibyls.
THe first was of Persia, called Samberta, or Persica, which among other
prophesies said, the womb of the Virgin shall be the salvation of Gentiles.

The second was of Libya, called Libyca: One of her prophesies was, The day
shall come that men shall see the King of all living things, and a Virgin Lady
of the world shall hold him in her lap.

The third was Themis, surnamed Delphica, because she was borne and prophesied
at Delphos: A Prophet shall be born of a Virgin.

The fourth was Cumaea, born at Cimeria, a City of Campania in Italy, who
prophesied, that God should be borne of a Virgin, and converse among sinners.

The fifth was the famous Erithrea, borne at Babylon: who especially Prophesied
a great part of our Christian Religion, in certain verses recited by Eusebius;
the first letters of every which verses being put together, make the words,
Jesus, Christ, Son of God; Savior, These verses are translated into Latin
by Saint Austine. Lib. 18, and 23, de civitate dei: the substance whereof
follows. The Earth shall sweat sign of judgment: from Heaven shall come a
King which shall reign for ever, that is to say, in humane flesh, to the end,
that by his presence he judge the world, so the unfaithful as well as the
faithful, shall see God with their eyes aloft among his Saints; and in the end
of the world, the souls of men with their bodies shall appear; whom he shall
judge, when the roundnesse of the Earth untilled, shall be full of clods of
Earth and grass, men shall cast away their Idols, and all their precious
jewels, the world shall be consumed with fire, he shall pierce the inferior
parts, and break the gates of Hell; then to the flesh of Saints shall be given
free and clear light, and the evil shall be burned with eternal fire: all
secrets shall be opened, and every one shall know the secret of his negihbour,
and God shall discover the Consciences and hearts of all men: then shall there
be lamentation and gnashing of teeth, the Sun and Stars shall lose their
light, the Firmament shall be dissolved, and the Moon shall be darkened, the
Mountains shall be thrown down, and the Valleys shall be made equal with
them; there shall be nothing in the world higher or lower then another,
Mountains and Valleys shall be made plain, all things shall cease, the
earth shall be dried unto powder and dust, the Fountains and Rivers shall be
burned likewise: then shall a trumpet sound from Heaven in woeful and horrible
manner, and the opening of the Earth shall discover confused and dark Hell,
with the torments and pains of the miserable condemned, and here before the
Judge shall come every King: A River of fire and brimstone shall fall from
Heaven. Diverse other things were prophesied by this Sibyll: and because they
were obscure, and therefore not to be comprehended by the Gentiles before they
come to pass, she said of her self these words: they shall think me a
false and blind Prophetess, but when they shall see these things come to
pass, they will remember me, and call me no more a false Prophetess, but a
Prophetess of the Almighty God.

The sixth was called Samia, borne in the I Will of Samos, which said: He being
rich, shall be borne of a poor Maid; the creatures of the Earth shall adore
him, and praise him for ever.

The seventh was called Cumana, because she prophesied at Cumas, a town of
Campania in Italy: she prophesied that he should come from Heaven, and reign
here in poverty: he should rule in silence, and be borne of a Virgin. She is
affirmed to have written Nine books of the Sibyls: they were all presented by
an old woman to Tarquinius Superbus, but he not willing to pay so great a sum
of money as was damanded, denied them: whereupon the old woman burnt three of
them, requiring as much money for the other six, as for all; which being
denied, she also burned the other three, asking as much for the three
remaining as for the rest, which Superbus amazed, gave, and the old trotte
vanished. These books contained manifest prophesies of the Kingdom of Christ,
his Name, his Birth, and Death: they were burned by the Archtraytour Stilico,
so that those Prophesies which are now extant, are only such as are extracted
out of others writings.

The eight was called Hellespontica, borne at Marmisea, in the Territory of
Troy. A woman shall descend of the Jews, called Mary, and of her shall be
borne the Son of God, named Jesus, and that without carnal copulation: For
she shall be a Virgin before and after his Birth, he shall be both God and
Man, he shall fulfill the Laws of the Jews, and shall add his own Law
thereunto: and his kingdom shall remain forever.

The ninth was of Prygia, and prophesied in the town of Ancire: one of her
sayings were: The Highest shall come from Heaven, and shall confirm the
counsel in Heaven, and a Virgin shall be showed in the valleys of the deserts.

The tenth was Albunea, surnamed Tiburtina, because she was borne at Tiber, 15
miles from Rome. The invisible Word shall be borne of a Virgin: he shall
converse among sinners, and shall of them be despised. Lactantius Firmianus
rehearses diverse of their prophesies; without making any particular mention of
them: they are to be referred specially notwithstanding (as it should seem)
unto Sibylla Samberta, who wrote 24 books in verse, chiefly entreating of the
coming, miracles, and life of Christ, whereunto the sayings of all the other
Sibyls are conformable.

S. Austine likewise in the 23 Chapter of his 18 book D^^civitate dei,
recites these Prophesies as follows. Then he shall be taken by the wicked
^ands of the Infidells, and they shall give him buffets on his face with their
sacrilegious hands, and they shall spit upon him with their foul and accursed
^outhes. He shall turn unto them his shoulders, suffering them to be
whipped; yea, he shall hold his peace without ^peaking ere a word, to the end
^at none shall know from ^henee his words proceed. ^ee shall also be crowned
with ^hornes; they shall give him ^all to eat, and Vinegar to drink: Behold
the feast that ^hey shall make him: in so much that thou ignorant and blind
people shall not know thy God ^onversing among men: but ^hou shall crown him
with ^hornes, mingling for him gall and vinegar: then the veil of ^he Temple
shall rend, and at midday it shall be dark night for the space of three
hours So the just shall dye the death, and this death or sleep shall continue
three days: and when he shall have been in the bowels of the earth, he shall
rise again, and return to life.

Lactantius moreover, Lib. 4. Chap. 15. rehearses these P^^phesies of them. He
shall raise the dead, the impotent and lame shall go, and run nimbly, the
deaf shall hear, the blind shall see, the dumb shall speak free^ly. And a
little before that, says with five loaves and two fishes he shall nourish in
the Desart^ 5000 men, and the fragment thereof shall be sufficient to satisfy
many more. Many other things were foretold by the^^ Sibyls, as well of the
ruins o^ great States, as of Christ.

The eleventh called Epyrotica: some hold her to be the same that Phrigia was,
she came from Troas to Dodona, where she prophesied, and was as well as the
other denominated from the place: but the most hold that she was diverse from
the other, and was called Phaenni, so writes Johannes Tsetses: she prophesied
that the pure word should come from a Virgin, how he should willingly come
down from heaven, and seem poor to the world: yet should govern all things,
whose rule and kingdom should never cease, and that he should be both God and
Man, and that this his kingdom should principally reside in the souls of men,
whom he would govern, and save to another life, thus Laelius Cleopassus, and
others affirm.

Colophonia Lampusia the twelfth, she came out of Greece, from Colophonia a
City of Ioni^, she prophesied of the changes of Kingdoms, of Inundation,
Earthquakes, and of Wars* she told that God was only to be adored, that he
was angry at vice, and punished it; that he did delight in holy and upright
men: she told also, that the whole World should be burnt, and wished men to
adore that God while they lived here, which would punish them so severely
hereafter for their contempt.

Of India.
IN the Country of India they have two Summers, their air is most gentle, and
pleasant, and temperant, great fruitfulness of the soil, and plenty of
waters, and therefore some ^^ve 130 years, especially the Musitanes.

There be others whose lives ^re longer: there be mavelous ^reat beasts bred
in that Coun^rey, and trees of such height, that a man cannot shoot to the ^op
of them, this comes by ^he fertility of the soil, tem^eratenesse of the
Air, and ^lenty of waters. Their reeds ^re of such bigness and length, that
the space betwixt every ^not, may bear three men, ^ometimes in a little River.
^here be store of Parrats: It ^ringeth forth Nard, Cinnamon, Pepper, Calamus
Aromaticus, and other spices, and also diverse Pearl and precious stones. Pliny
says, that in the Country of India, all things are bredde of a greater
magnitude then in any other Country, as men, beasts, and trees. The people
have a bushy hair, and a special decking with precious stones, they are very
diverse (...) apparel, some wear woollen garments, and some linen, many go
naked, and some cover their privy parts only: the color of the body is
commonly black, being in their Mother^ womb such, through the disposition of
their Parents, they be of a good tall stature, and strong.

They bethrifty in living, and very continent from theft: they know no Letters,
but do all things by memory, and for their simplicity and thriftinesse all
things have prosperous success, they drink no wine but in Sacrifice, they
make drink of Rice and Barley, their meat (...) commonly rice-pottage, they
^^ve no prerogative to their old ^ge, except they excel in wise^ome. He that
is reprehended ^s a false witness, has the tops ^f his fingers cut off, he
that ^epriveth any man of any mem^er, has the law Talio, that is, ^o lose the
like member, and al^o his hand is cut off. And if a^y man puts out the eye,
or ^utteth away the hand of an Ar^ificer, he loses his life for it. If any
woman kills a drunken King, she has her reward to be conjoined with his
successor: There be seven special orders amongst the Indians: the first is of
Philosophers, which being few in number, were preferred before the rest in
honor and dignity, they are free from all works, and neither serve any body,
nor govern or rule, they take such things of private foll^^ wherewith they do
Sacrifice, and they have a care of the dead, and especially know what is done
in Hell, and therefore many gifts and honors are bestowed upon them: they
profit much to the life of the Indians, for they meet together in the
beginning of the year, and foretell drought, rain, winds, diseases, and
other things, the knowledge whereof is profitable: that Philosopher which
foresheweth any thing that is false, has no other punishment, but to keep
silence for ever. The second order is of Husbandmen, which exceeding the rest
in multitude, being free from Wars and other work, do only bestow their time
in tilling their ground, no enemy offers any injury to them, because they are
thought to be occupied about the common profit, they live in the fields with
their Wives and Children, and come not into the City, they give tribute to the
King, the fifth part of their profit. The third order is Shepherds, which
neither in^abite in Cities nor Towns, but have their tabernacles, and their
nets, and things for hun^ing, and these keep the Country from the danger of
beasts and fowls. The fourth degree ^s of Artificers, whereof some makes
weapons, some other things meet for the country: and other profitable things,
^hese be free from tribute, and have their Corn from the Prince. The fifth
order is of soldiers, exercised in warlike affairs, and they and al their
horses and Elephants be maintained by the Prince. The sixth is of
superintendents, who seeing all things that be done in India, make relation
thereof to the King. In the seventh order, be those that have the rule of
common counsels, being but a few (...) number, and such as most excel in
nobility and wisdom: for o^ these some be chosen to the King's council, and
to the admi^nistration of the Common^wealth, and to be judges (...) doubtful
cases, Dukes also an^ Captains be chosen of them.

Thus India being distributed into these parts, it is not lawful for any order
to marry with the men's wives of another order nor to change his trade of
li^ving; nor for the Souldier^ to play the plough-man, no^ the Artificer to
meddle in the Philosophers office. And because India is so great a Coun^rey,
there be many Nati^ions discrepant in form and ^ongue, and manners, for some
^nhabiting about rivers and lakes, do eat raw fish, and others ^aw flesh, and
when any fal^eth sick, his friends kill him, saying, that if he should wither
and pine away with sickness, that his flesh should be corrupt, and although
he denies himself to be sick, yet they kill him, and make a banquet of
him: ^o he that lives in perfect health to his old age, is slain and
devoured in like manner. And therefore few of them ^ome to extreme old age.
There be some of the Indians that never kill any living thing, nor plant, nor
sow any thing, nor erect any Houses, but lives only with herbs, amongst whom
when any falls sick, he goes into a desert place, and there dies, no man
taking care either of him dying, or being dead: they use natural conjunction
together openly like unto brute beasts.

Of the Bragmans.
THe people called Bragmans, lead a simple life, and are not led with any
inticements; they desire no more then very Nature does require: they have
plenty of all things for life, the which their earth brings forth without
tillage. Their tables be furnished with wholesome dishes, and therefore they
neither know diversities of names in sickness, nor their kinds, but they have
good health very long. One desires no help of another, for they live in
common, amongst those that are equal, there is no place for envy, seeing that
none is superior; they have no judgments, because they do nothing worthy of
correction: their only Law is not to do any thing against nature, which
nourishes labor* exercises no covetousness, and flies from filthy
idleness. This Nation hurts it self in the Sun, it gets moisture in
the dew, it extinguisheth thirst with water. The ground is instead of beds,
carfulness breaks no sleep, nor pensiveness troubles not the mind:
their habitation is in dug Caves upon the Mountains sides, they feel no
rage of winds nor tempests, they think themselves better defended in a cave
then in a house, from the injury of weather, because their cave has two uses,
one for a mansion place, another for a Sepulcher or grave when they dye. They
have no precious garments, but they cover their members with a thing like
paper, rather for shamefastness then otherwise.

The women be not trimmed as they please, but they are ignorant how to increase
beauty more then Nature gives: the man and the woman use natural conjunction,
not for libidinous pleasures, but for love of procreation. No Parent follows
the Funerals of his child, they have no Sepulchers in Churches for the dead,
but in vessels made of precious stones, they lay up the ashes of the dead.

Their best remedy in Physic is abstinence and sparing, which does not only
cure their griefs, but also prevent those which might come* they have no
common plays nor games* but when they assemble together, they read the
Monuments of things done, wherein if they hear any thing to be laughed at,
they weep, they are not delighted in old fables, but in the goodly disposition
of natural things* they learn no Eloquence, but have a simple kind of
speech, only commanding not to lie.

Of the Elepha^^.
THere be Elephants in India, which be very wild and fierce, but they are
easily made tame after this manner, They compass some clean place with a
deep ditch of four (...) five Furlongs, they make the entry into it with a
very straight bridge* then set they in thre^ or four Female Elephan^^, which
are tame, and they themselves lie privily watching in cottages: in the day time
the wild Elephants come not, but in the night time they enter, the which place
of the entry the Hunters shut and stop privily: after this they bring in of
their strongest tame Elephants to fight with them, besides that, they do
punish them with famine and lack of meat, and when they be weary with
fighting, they which are bold carterly fellows, privily gets under the
belly of the Elephant, and so suddenly steals under the belly of the wild
Elephant, and by these means do chain and fetter them: and after this they
move their tame Elephants to beat the wild until they fall to the ground,
and when they are down, they bind their necks with the necks of the tame
E^ephants, with such thongs and bindings as Oxen be bound with, and this do
they, that ^hey should not cast off such as sit them: Moreover, they cut their
necks about with Raysings and Scissures, and lay ^he Chains thereon, that for
pain they should give place to their chains, and go q^^etly, of such as are
taken they chose out such as are unprofitable, either for old age, or young age,
and the rest be led into the stables, and they* being bound both feet and
necks in a pillar, to be tamed with hunger. After that they be refreshed with
grass or green weeds, then they teach them to be obedient, some with words,
some with singing, and some with drums be made gentle. The Elephant is the
greatest amongst all beasts, and comes nearest to humane sense, he ha^^ some
understanding (as Pli^^ says) of his country talk, an^ especially a
remembrance and obedience of such duties as he has learned. If the Elephant
by chance kills any of the^^ keepers in a rage, they have so great a desire
of him afterward, that some for sorrow abstain from meat, and some do pine
themselves to death. This beast is accustomed, when he is full of feeding, to
go to sleep, and leaning to a tree he sleeps, for he cannot bend his knees
as other beasts do: the inhabitants perceiving the tree which is worn and
made filthy with the Elephants leaning, cause the same tree to be cut hard by
the ground, so that it may not fall without thrusting and enforcing, then they
put away the signs of their own steps, and depart quickly before the Elephant
comes to sleep: the Elephant coming in the evening to his accustomed place
of rest, and leaning to the ^^ee with all the weight of hi^ ^ody, falls down
straig^^ way with the tree even to the earth, so he lies with his belly upward
all night, for he cannot lif^ up himself, then comes the inhabitants in the
morning, and s^aieth the beast without danger.

The Elephants have such (...) kind of shamefastness, that the male never
covers the female but i^ secret, and that when the male is five years old,
and the female ten years of age, they bring forth as Mares do, and most
commonly about the Spring. Many of them live almost two hundred years, they
have great pleasure in good Waters, they be most impatient of cold, the two
teeth which hang outward, are so big in the greater Elephants, that they are
used oftentimes as Posts. And many other things be written of them, which I
thought good to leave out for rediousnesse.

Garments used by the high Priests of the Jews.
ALL Nations have ever had great respect and reverence toward their Priests;
and such as sacrifice to their Gods, and thereupon have usually allotted them
excellent Rayments, and decent Vestures: yet in this kind, the Jews high
Priests excelled all others, having indeed direction from heaven, even for the
manner and matter of their Vestments, in the performance of their several
services. Their upper Garment was of dainty fine Linen, that did decipher
their purity of life: from their middle they were girded with a veil to the
midst of the thigh, and under that a pure linen garment which went to the
ground: above it a round garment of Violet-colour, all fringed at the skirts,
which was hung full of Bells and Pomegranats all of Gold: upon his breast he
wore a Garment of five colors, viz. of Gold, Purple, Scarlet, Silk, and
Violet: he also had adornments on his Head, a Miter of Silk crowned with
Hyacinth, and upon it was a Crown of Gold, containing the four sacred letters
of the name of God: He likewise had a Rochet which was very rich, and buttoned
with two golden buttons, made in form like two Aspes, set richly with great
Sardonix-stones, bearing the names of the twelve Tribes engraven in them: then
had he 12 precious stones hanging by them by three in a rank, in every one of
which was one of the names of the twelve Tribes written: So that you may see
that he was not only decently, but also richly apparrel'd, when he appeared
before the congregation of Israel. I could have enlarged this point much more,
but it is fully mentioned in sacred Writ, and also amongst many Authors.

Of the Dragons in India, and Ethiopia.
THe Dragon is the greatest of all Serpents, and has sharp teeth set like a
saw-fashion, he has greater strength in his tail then in his teeth, and has
not so much poison as other Serpents have, if he windeth his tail about any he
slays him, and the Elephant with all the bigness of his body is not safe
from him, for the Dragon lurking about common paths where the Elephants use to
go, does wind and knot his tail about the Elephants legs, and kills him by
suffocating. He is bred in India and Ethiopia. Pliny says, in Ethiope there
be Dragons of 20 foot in length, they are wont 14 or 15 together with their
heads erected, to fly over the Sea, and great waters, for some better food:
the Dragons poison is only in his tongue and gall. Wherefore the Ethiopes cut
away the tongue and eat the flesh. Pliny says, that through the strength of
poison his tongue is always lift up, and sometimes through the heat of poison
he inflameth the air, so that he seems to breath fire out of his mouth, and
sometimes when he hisseth with his contagious blast, he infecteth the air, so
that the Pestilence comes thereof many times. He is sometimes in the waters,
and lies often in his Den, he sleeps seldom, but watches almost
continually; he devoureth beasts and Fowls, his eyesight is very sharp, so
that in the Mountains he sees his prey a far off oftentimes.

Betwixt the Elephants and the Dragons there is continual war, for the Dragon
claspeth about the Elephant with her tail, and the Elephant overthrows the
Dragon with her feet and snowt, the Dragon with the folding of her tail,
twisteth her self about the Elephants legs, and so makes him to fall.

The Elephant seeing a Dragon under a tree, goes about to break the tree to
give the Dragon a blow, the Dragon leapeth upon the Elephant, and desirous to
bite between the nostrils and to make him blind, sometimes the Dragon gets
behind him, biting and sucking his blood with the los^e of which blood, the
Elephan^ ^eing weakened, after long (...) falls upon the Dragon, and so dying
slaieth (...) own murderer the Dragon (...) very desirous of the Elephants
blood, for the coldness of it, wherewith she desires to be cooled. And many
other strange Serpents are in India as Scorpions with wings, and such like, of
whose natures I omit to write, because their forms be not known unto us.

Of the Gryphin in India.
SOme say there is in India a Gryphin, which is a kind of beast with four
feet, having Wings, and as might in strength as a Lion, with crooked talants,
black one the back, and in the forepart purple, his wings somewhat white, his
bill and mouth like an Eagles, his eyes fiery, hard to be taken, except he be
young; he makes his nest in high Mountains, and fights with every kind of
beast, saving the Lion and Elephant, he diggeth up Gold in desert places, and
gives a repulse to those that come near him, he makes his nest of such Gold
as he finds, and some say, that it cannot be taken away, without a thousand
or two thousand men, and that as well with danger as with gain. Thus much
Aelianus writes.

The notes of a good Horse.
THere be some that write, that an Horse should not be broken nor tamed before
two years of age. But that he is to be rubbed and chafed with flattering, and
gentle words, and that his stable should be laid with stone, and to use him by
little and little to go on the stones, that his feet might be made strong. At
the beginning let not him that shall sit him or break him, be too rough, nor
weary him with running; let him prove him with turning gently on both sides,
and not so much with spurs as with the stick he must touch him. The Horse
should be of one color, of a thick maine, and standing up, of strong loins,
of a short head, his neck must be erect and standing up, his ears small,
according to the proportion of his head, abroad breast, a mean belly, short
hips, a large tail, and somewhat curled, straight legs, equal knees, steadfast
hoofes and gross, not big nor small, that they be not worn: his legs must
be well stuffed with bones, and not with flesh, the notes and signs of years
in horses, are changed with their bodies.

When a horse is two years and a half old, his middle teeth both above and
beneath do fall, when he is three years old, he casts those that are like
unto Dogs teeth, and brings forth new: before six years of his age his
upper double teeth do fall, at the sixth year he supplieth those that he
wants, at the seventh year all are supplied equally, from that time he has
hollow teeth, and therefore it is hard to discern their ages: at the tenth
year their temples begin to wax hollow, and the brows sometimes wax gray,
and their teeth stick out. Mares have their full increase in five years, but
Horses in six years. Xenophon teaches these properties to be observed in an
Horse.

First, to know his age, then if he will take a bridle or not, after this if
one may sit him, then if he will cast him that sits on him, and if he will
fly or run away being let loose, or if he may be soon taken, or if he being
smitten with a stick, will go the swifter or not.

Of certain monstrous people in India.
MAny are found in India, both men, women, and beasts full of hair, and with
leaves and moss on them, which comes of the great heat that there is. Pliny
says, that the inhabitants of this Country be colored with the Sun, and
thereby come to certain blackness like unto the Ethiops, not because they are
outwardly so black through the adustion of the Sun, but naturally in their
blood there is an inclination to blackness, the which the heat of the Sun
does seem to double.

Our Ancestors have feigned many monsters in this Country, as people with
Heads like unto dogs, armed only with nails, clothed with (...) and
skins, having no kind of man's speech, but only a kind of barking. There
be some that live at the fountain of Ganges, which take no benefit by meat,
but live only by the savor of wild Apples; and when they go far, they
carry them for their maintenance, and live by the smell and savor of them. If
they come into any filthy or stinking air, they must needs dye; and it said,
that some of them were seen in the Tents and Army of Alexander.

We read also, that there be certain people with one ^ye in India; and some
to have so great ^ares, that they hang down even to their feet, and many to
have but one foot, and that so great, that when they lie down on their backs,
and would keep them from the Sun, the shadow of that only leg does
comfort them. It is read also, that there is a Nation which has gray hairs in
youth, the which in age wax black, and also men say, there is another kind of
women which conceive at five years of age, but they live not above eight
years: there be some that lack necks, and have eyes in their shoulders: there
be wild men also with heads like unto Dogs, with a rough and hairy body,
which make a terrible hissing, but these and such like are not to be credited,
and taken for truth, except great reason can persuade that such may be, and
experience can prove the same. It is also thought, that there is a certain
people called Pygmeis, which be never in peace, but when the Cranes (with whom
they have continual wars) fly into other countries. These Pygmeis are short
men of stature, inhabiting in the extreme part of the mountains of India,
where is a wholesome and good air, who exceed not twenty seven inches in
stature. For Pygme is as much to say as a cubite. These Pygmeis fight with
Cranes, but they have the foil: the report goes that they sit upon the backs
of Rams or Goats, and have arrows for their weapons, and so in the Spring time
with a great Army they come to the Sea, and there consume the Cranes eggs and
young ones, and that this expedition is made in three months, for otherwise
they were not able to resist the Cranes: their Cottages be made of clay,
feathers, and eggeshells. But of the nature of Cranes the authors write in this
manner. When the Cranes take a flight, they consent together, and fly very
high, for to mark and behold: they choose a captain and guide whom they
follow; in the latter end of the company they have those that may cry, and may
lead the whole flock with their voice, they have their watches every night by
turn, which hold a stone in their feet, which falling from those that are
weary for lack of sleep, argues and reprooveth their negligence by sound:
the other sleep with their bills and heads under their wings standing upon each
feet by course, the guide looks forthwith his neck straight forward, and
fore-sheweth things to come. When they are mad tame they wax lascivious, and
run, and fly in round compasses with shaking their wings.

Of the Ants of India.
MEgasthenes writeh of the Ants in India after this sort, there is an Hill of
three thousand furlongs in compass in India, and many Gold mines therein, the
which are kept with Ants as big as Foxes, getting their living with a
mavelous celerity in hunting, Ants as big as Foxes.
they dig and scrape the earth that brings forth Gold, and heapeth it up at
the hole of their Dens; the which, Merchants do privily steal away, laying
flesh for a bait to stay the Ants, if perhaps they should mark them. This is
thought of many to be a fable, and therefore I leave it at large to judge of
it as you think best.

Of Indian Apes.
ABout the mountain called Emodij, there is a great wood full of great Apes,
the which as the Macedonians did see standing as it were thick together upon
the Hills, and having weapons like men of War; (for that kind of beast
comes as near to humane subtilty as Elephants do) they would have set upon
them as enemies, had not the inhabitants of that Country been present, and
showed to Alexander, that it was nothing else but an assembly of Apes, which
contend to imitate such things as they see, and so that battle was turned to
laughing. Apes are taken after this manner: they that hunt Apes, set dishes
full of water in the sight of the Apes, and therewith they anoint and wash
their eyes, and suddenly with as privy speed as they can, they take away the
water, and set pots with birdlime, and such like stuff instead thereof: the
Apes perceiving them anointing their eyes, being given to follow all things,
come down immediately from the trees and thinking to do as the men did, they
dawbe and anoint their eyes and mouths with birdlime, and so are they easy
to be made a prey, and taken alive.

They use also another trade to take them: they take buskins and put them on in
the sight o^ the Apes, and so depart, leaving others anointed inwardly with
birdlime, and such like, and somewhat hairy, that the fraud might not appear,
the which the Apes plucking upon their legs, are so snared and entangled with
it, that they cannot escape the hands of the Hunters.

There are in India also dogs of such courage, that two of them can master a
Lion.

Of the Diamond-stone.
THe Diamonds be found amongst the metals of India, Aethiope, Araby, Macedony,
Cyprus, and many other places. The Indian Diamond shines with a more
Orientnesse then the others. There is one kind of this stone that is somewhat
of an iron color, and differs not much from a crystal color, for commonly
it is somewhat white, but it is harder then Crystal; so that if it be laid
upon the Smiths Anvile, and most vehemently beaten with a hammer, rather the
anvile and the hammer will break asunder, then that will be divided in parts,
and it does not only resist the blows of iron, but also the heat of the fire,
so that it will not melt, nor give place thereto. For if we may give credit to
Pliny, it will never wax warm, and that because it cannot be more purer then
it is, for it is never contaminate. But yet the strange hardness of this stone
is made so soft with the warm blood of a Lion, or of a Goat, that it may be
broken. In scalding Lead it takes such heat, that it may be dissolved: But
this hardness is not in every Diamond: for that which is of Cyprus, or called
Syderites, may be broken with a Mallet, and pierced through with another
Diamond. The Diamond does deprehend and detect poison, and makes the working
thereof frustrate, and therefore it is desired of Princes, and had in great
price and estimation.

The ten persecutions under the Roman Emperors.
THe first began in the 13 year of the reign of Nero, in such sort, that
the Christians were feign to hide themselves in caves of the earth.

The second began in the 12 year of the Reign of Domitian, who caused St.
John the Evangelist to be put in a vessel of burning oil, whereof he received
no hurt.

The third began in the tenth year of the reign of Tratan, which ceased
afterward by the pity and means of Pliny Second, Prefect of the Empire.

The fourth began under Marcus Antonius, and Aurelius Commodus Empire.

The fifth began at the commandment of the Emperor Severus.

The sixth began at the indignation of Maximinus, who especially persecuted the
Clergy*

The seventh began under the Emperor Docius, and continued cruelly.

The eighth began under the Emperor Valerius, who though at the first he were
a Christian, yet afterward being corrupted by certain Heretics, he became a
most cruel persecutor of Christ his Church.

The ninth began under the Emperor Aurelianus.

The tenth began by the commandment of the Emperors Dioclesianus and
Maximianus Herculeus: this persecution was far more cruel and general then
any of the rest: insomuch that Dioclesianus in the orient, and Maximianus in
the occident, destroyed all Churches, and tormented the Christians with all
strange torments.

Of the Calechut the famous Mart of India.
THE compass of the City of Calechut is the space of Six Thousand buildings,
which be not joined together as our houses be, but are separate a good space
asunder: the length of the City is a thousand paces, their houses be very low;
so that they are not above the height of a man on horseback from the ground,
they be covered in the top with boughs and branches of trees commonly.

Their King is addicted to the worshipping of devils: He does not deny God to
be the maker of Heaven and earth, and the first cause and Author of things: but
he says, that GOD appointed the office of judgment to an ill spirit, and to
do right to mortal men, and this spirit they call Deumo. The King has the
picture of this devil in his Chapel, sitting with a Diadem on his head, like
unto the Bishops of Rome, but his Diadem has four horns about, and this
picture gapeth with a wide mouth, showing four teeth: It has a deformed nose,
grimme and terrible eyes, a threatening countenance, crooked fingers, with
tallants and feet much like unto a Cock: they that look upon this horrible
monster, are suddenly afraid, it is so loathsome and terrible a thing to
behold. About the Church are painted devils, and in every corner Satan is made
of brass sitting, with such workmanship, that he seems to cast flames of
fire for the consuming of souls miserably, and in his right hand the picture
of the Devil, puts a soul to his mouth, and with his left hand it reaches
another. Every morning their Priests do cleanse this Idol with Rose Water, and
other sweet waters, and they perfume it with diverse sweet things, falling
down and worshipping it. They put the blood of a Cock weekly in a Silver
Vessel, filled with burning coals, and a great number of sweet perfumes, and
taking ^ Censar, they make it redole^^ with Frankincense, and have a little
Silver bell ringing all the while. And the King eats no meat before that 4
Priests have offered to the Devil somewhat of the Kings dishes. The King at
his dinner sits on the ground, without any cloth under him, and the Priests
stands round about him as he sits, never coming nearer him, then within
four paces, marking the Kings words most reverently: when he has done eating,
the Priests offer the relics of the Kings meat to young Crows and Birds to
be eaten, which Foul is an heinous thing to kill, and therefore they fly
every where in safety. When the King marries a Wife, he uses not to go to
bed unto her, before that his new married wife has been defloured of the most
worthy Priest. For this Whoredom, the KING gives him as a reward five hundred
Crowns.

The Priests are in the first order of estimation with them, then Senators
which bear a sword and a buckler, a bow and a javelin, when they go abroad.
Thirdly they esteem Artificers. Fourthly fishers* Fifthly Merchants for Wine,
and Pepper, and Acornes. Last of all such as sow and gather Rice. They have no
great respect o^ Apparel, but to cover their privy parts: they go barefoot
and bare-head. When the King is dead, if there be any Males alive, either
children, brethren, or brothers children, they succeed not in the Kingdom, but
the sisters son by their law must have the Scepter: and if there be no such,
then he succeeds in the Crown, which is nearest of consanguinity, and this
is for none other cause, but because their Priests have defloured their Queen.

When the King goes forth into some strange country, or to Hunt, the Priests
keep the Queen company at home, and nothing can be more acceptable to the
King, then that they should be acquainted with the Queen in venerous acts, and
therefore the King knows for a certainty, that those children which he has
by his Wife, cannot be accounted his children; but he takes his sisters
children as most near unto him in lawful consanguinity, and takes them
heirs to the Crown.

The Merchants keep this order, such Wives as they have, they man change them
in the color of a better conjunction; and that one says to the other, Change
of wives,
seeing the you have bin my best ^riend, let us change our wives, upon that
condition that you may have mine, and I may have yours: then says the other,
say you so in earnest? ye says he by Pollux. Then says his fellow, let us go
home to my house; whither when they are come, the one claymeth another Wife,
saying, come ^^ther Woman, and follow this man, because from hence forth he
shall be thy Husband: then the Woman says, do you spea^ in earnest? to whom
her first Husband says, I do not mock; then the woman says, gladly I will
follow him: And this i^ the way of changing their Wives. There be some Women in
this country that may marry seven Husbands, and lie wi^^ them every night by
course, and where she is delivered of ^ Child, she may choose t^ which of
her Husbands she will father her Child, so that the man may not refuse it by
any means. Many other strange things is rehearsed of this Nation, the
rehearsal whereof were very tedious here. There is much Pepper growing in
this Country of Calechut, the stalk of Pepper is but weak, somewhat like to a
Vine stalk, so that it cannot grow without a prop: it is not much unlike to
Ivye, for it windeth and creeps as that does, and with a more deep clasping
it windeth about the tree: this has many branches three handful long. They
gather it in October and November, being green as yet, and lay it on tiles in
the Sun to be dried, where in three days space it waxes black, even as we
have it.

Ginger grows in Calechut, but much is brought out of Cravonor thither.
Cynamon is in the Isle of Zaylon, fifty Germain miles beyond Calechut. Pepper
grows in the fields of Calechut, but great store is brought out of Crimucoll,
12 miles beyond Chalechut. Cloves are gathreed in a place called Meluza, a
little from Calechut. Nutmegs grows in Melaccha, which is a great way from
Calechut. Mus^ or Castoreum comes from the Country of Pego, which is an
hundred miles from Calechut. Pearl and Precious stones are found about the
City of Ormus* and sent to Calechut, the general Mart of all the East parts.
And many other Spyces, Silks, and strange things, are brought from these
Countries into ours.

The end of the Jews answerable to their lives.
Seldom has it been known, but always a wicked life has had a shameful
end, and this without searching any further for examples, may evidently be
seen in the Nation of the Jews: their lives being odious toward God, proved
as shameful to Men: they generally exercised inhumanity to strangers, despised
the Prophets, and mocked their Priests: they were given to fearful oppression
and usury: they did not honor their Magistrates, nor parents: they practiced
contentions, and seditions: they profaned the Sabbath of God: they were
extremely unthankful, and as extremely disobedient to God, in a word, they left
not any notorous sin unpractised, and for the prosecution of these lewd
courses* it pleased Heavens Justice to make them a shame, a curse, and an
astonishment to all the world and themselves: for as they sold Gods Word and
his Sacrifices, so in Vespasians time they were publicly sold for slaves, to
the number of thirty seven thousand persons at once: as they dealt with
strangers, so to this day are they used by all strangers, as they cared not for
their Priests, so are they now deprived both of Country, City, Temple, and
Priests: As they used oppression, so are they now to this day oppressed, and
mis-used by all Nations without pity or remorse, nay, even their own curses,
which they wished might fall upon them, are indeed fallen justly upon them and
theirs: What ^eed I be tedious, it is most manifest to all men, that they ^re
as justly miserable and con^emned, as they were unjust in their impieties, so
that they who did refuse to be vessels ^or mercy, are deservedly made ^essels
of Justice, that although GODS Will was not done ^y them, yet it is done upon
them.

Discite Iustitiam moniti, and non tomnite Divos. The seven Wonders of the
World.
THe first were the Walls of Babylon, built by Semiramis, of stone joined
together with a strange kind of slimy and gluish mortar, which grows in the
Mines of those Countries, an^ especially in the Lake whe^^ stood in time past
Sodom an^ Gomorrah, now called Asfalti^^ These Walls according to t^^ Town,
were built in quadrangle and contained in circuit (as sai^^ Pliny in the twenty
sixth Chapter of his sixth book) 60 miles so that every square was si^teene mile
long; they were (...) foot high, and fifty foot thick and to build these Walls
were hired by Semiramis, out of di^vers Countries for a long spac^ 300000 men.

The second was the Pillar o^ the Sun, offered by the Gen^tiles unto Jupiter.
This Pilla^ stood in the I Will of Rhodes, an^ was made of Iron in the form of a
man, of incredible great^nesse, in so much that a man might scarce fadome the
great ^inger thereof. After it had stood 56 years, it fell down by reason of
an earthquake, and so ^ay till the Island was won by ^he Souldan of Egypt;
who car^yed so much metal away, as ^oaded 900 Camels.

The third, were the Pyramides of Egypt: among the which ^here is one
especially noted, a^out the City of Memphis, now ^alled grand Caire: this
Piramid ^overed about 40 acres of land, ^t the foot or foundation there^f, it
was all built of Marble^tone, and in the building ^hereof were employed
conti^ually for the space of 20 years, ^600000 men; and for the suste^ance of
these workmen, was ^is burst in radish, and such other ^oots 1800 tallents,
which ac^ording to our reckoning, is the sum 1880000 crowns: this might seem
incredible, were it not that it is affirmed by so many Authors of authority.

The fourth was the Mausol, of Mausolus King of Caria, and husband to Artemisia
so called: this Woman for the great love she bare to her Spouse, burned his
dead body, and drank the powder thereof, thinking no Sepulcher so worthy as
her own body; and the rest of the powder she buried in this famous tomb, the
stone whereof was of an excellent kind of marble, it was 411 feet in circuit,
and 25 cubits high, and was environed about with 36 Pillars of stone,
wonderfully well carved.

The fifth was the Temple o^ Diana, builded by the Amazones: it was 455 foot
long, and 220 foot broad, and in it stood 127 marble pillars, each of them
being 70 foot high: the work thereof was so wonderful curious, that it was
220 years a making.

The sixth, was the Image of Jupiter Olympius, in Achaia; all of Porphyre, an
infinite number of little pieces joined together: this Image, besides the
excellency of the work, is especially noted for the greatness thereof, and
was the more famous, by reason of the game called Olympiades, there kept.

The seventh, was the Tower Pharos, nigh unto Alexandria in Egypt; builded by
Ptolomeus Philadelphus; King of Egypt, to direct the passengers which came to
take haven thereabouts, by burning of pitch, or other like things in the top:
this Tower was of a mavelous height, and singular workmanship; the building
whereof cost according to our money 480000 crowns, Some Authors put for the
seventh wonder, the Gardens and Orchards upon the Walls of Babylon. Others put
the Obelisque of Semiramis; which differs in nothing from a Pyramid, saving
that it is all one stone: the Obelisque, Semiramis caused to be wrought, and
taken out of the Mountains of Armenia: it was a hundred and fifty foot high,
and every square was four and twenty foot broad at the bottom; so that it
contained in circuit 96 foot.

The six Ages of the World.
IN the dividing of these Ages there is great contrariety of Opinions among
Writers; for that some follow the computation of the 72 Interpreters, and some
follow the Hebrews, and the common Text of the Bible. The first Age from the
creation of the world till the universal Flood, endured according to the
Hebrews, 1656 years, which agrees with the saying of S. Hierom, Bid, Phil^,
and the common text of the Bible. The 72 Interpreters, and Eusebius hold that
it endured 2242 years, and Saint Austine is of opinion, that it endured 2272.
Of this age few, or no things are recited worthy of memory: except the birth of
the first man Adam, and the creation of all things.

The second age from Noah's flood till the birth of Abraham, endured according
to the 72 Interpreters, Eusebius, and the greatest part of writers 942, and
according to the Hebrews, but 292 years: Saint Austin counts 172 years. In
this age was builded Babel, the Tower of confusion: the Empire of the Assyrians
began, and the great City of Ninive was builded, which contained in circuit
three days journey.

The third age from Abraham to David, endured by the agreement of all Authors
941 years. During this age was the peregrination of Abraham: the beginning of
the Amazones, Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed: Joseph was sold to the
Egyptians: Moses passed the red Sea: Job the just lived: Jason conquered the
golden Feece: the destruction of Troy: the Latins began to reign in Italy.

The fourth age from the beginning of the reign of David, till the leading of
the Jews captive into Babylon, endured 485 years: During this age the Empire
of Assyrians was translated to the Medes, the Olympiades of the Grecians began:
Carthage was builded by Dido, and Rome by Romulus: Byzance was also builded:
the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and thereupon the calamity of
the Jews.

The fifth age from the transmigration of Babylon to the coming of Christ,
endured by the agreement of all, 589 years. During this age Cyrus began the
Monarchy of the Persians: the 70 year of this age the Jews returned to their
Country: Consuls began to rule in Rome: Xerxes invaded Greece with an Army
of 1000000 men: Plato, Aristotle, and Demostenes flourished with many other
worthy Philosophers: Alexander won the Monarchy of the World: the destruction
of Carthage by the Romans: C^^sar usurped the Empire of Rome.

The sixth age began at the birth of our Savior Christ, which yet endures,
and shall endure to the end of the world.

Of the bridges of Singui and Quinsai.
THere be numbered in the City of Singui, about six thousand bridges of stone,
having so large Arches, that ships may pass through without bending of the
Mast. There is another City called Quinsay in Asia, which contains in the
circuit of it, above an hundred Italian miles, which make 25 German miles; it
is thought to be the greatest and most notable City in the World. It has 12
thousand bridges of stone, so high and large, that a ship may pass upright
through them.

Of certain illusions of Devils about Tangut.
THere is seen and heard about the Deserts of Tangut in the day time, and more
commonly in the night, diverse illusions of Devils: therefore travailers that
way, ought to take good heed, that they ^ever not their companies, and least
any coming behind might hinder them, for otherwise they shall soon loose the
fight of their companions, for the hills and mountains: there be heard the
voices of Spirits and Devils, which going solitarily, will call other by their
names, feigning and counterfeiting the voices of their companions, the which if
they can by any means, do lead men out of the way to destruction: there be
hard sometimes in the Air, the consents and harmony of musick-instruments:
there be many worshippers of Idols, and they attribute much honor to the
Devils, When their Wives have a son, they commend him to some Idol, and in
the honor of it, that year the Father keeps up a Ram, the which after the
nativity of the Child, at the next feast of that Idol, he offers with his
son, and many other Ceremonies. When the Sacrifice is done, they bring the
flesh which was offered to some secret place, and all his kinsfolks gathred
together, do eat of that with great devotion, keeping the bones reverently in
some vessel. In this Country is found a Serpent called Salamandra, Salamandra.
which lives in the fire without any damage, those Serpents are used for the
making of such cloth as may suffer the fire without any corruption or harm, or
else when any spot comes to any Garment made of the hairs of a Salamander,
Garments that will not be consumed with fire.
it may be cast for an hour in the fire, and all the spots will be gone, no
otherwise then if they had bin very clean washed.

Of the Cocatrice.
THere is in Afric a kind of Serpent called a Cocatrice, which has a white
spot on his head, having the fashion of a Diadem. His head is very sharp, his
mouth red, his eyes somewhat black in color, as Pliny says, with his hissing
he drives away all kind of Serpents. He destroys with his breath young
trees and plants, consumes herbs, breaks stones, infecteth the air where he
tarrieth, so that a bird cannot fly over that air or through it, without
danger of death. Yet it is said, that the poison of a Weasell is his
destruction. Aelianus says, that he has so sharp poison, that exceeding not
in length a man's hand, yet he extinguisheth every great Serpent with his only
breath. There is not a more hurtful or more pestilent beast upon the earth,
for this lying in his den, may destroy a whole City by infection.

Of the Crocodile.
THe Crocodile is found commonly about the water of Nilus and Ganges in India,
and waxes of a little thing to a very great beast. For his eggs are much like
unto Goose-egs, but the young which comes of them, takes increase to sixteen
or eightee^^ cubits in length: he lives almost as long as a man, he lacks
a tongue, his body is ma^^vellously defended of nature for all his back is
full of scales and wonderful hard, his (...) is long, he has many teeth on
both sides of his mouth, whereof two do especially hang out, he does not only
devour man, but also other earthly beasts coming near to the water, he
dismembreth them with his nails, which he has sharper then any weapon. His
biting is cruel and sharp, and he so rendeth with his teeth, that it can
never be healed: there is great store of them about Nilus, because they are
very fruitful of themselves, having young every year, and also they are
seldom taken. It is a fearful beast, flying from those that persecute him,
and persecuting those that fly from him. It is said, that when he goes about
to devour a man, that he begins to weep, whereof has sprung this
Proverb, The tears of a Crocodile: that is, when one does weep with his eyes
without compassion, and not with his heart and mind.

Pliny says, that this beast only in his biting does move his upper jaw, he
lives in the day time upon the land, and in the night time in the water, his
eyes be very dull in the water, and his sight is mavelous sharp out of the
water. Some say, that he grows and increases as long as he lives.

The Twelve Apostles with their Martyrdomes.
James the Son of Zebedee, called mayor, for that he was chosen to be an
Apostle, was sent to convert Spain, from whence by reason of the obstinacy of
the people, (for he converted in all but nine persons) he returned shortly
again to preach in Judea, where by the envy of a Jewis^ Bishop called
Abiathar, he was accused and beheaded by the consent of Herod Agrippa. His
body was conveyed by his Disciples first to Jerusalem, and from thence to
Spain, where it yet remains in Compostella, a famous pilgrimage.

James, the son of Alpheus, called minor, for that he was last chosen; he
was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and that by the space of thirty years: and
then as he was preaching in the Temple, he was thrown headlong down by the
Pharisees, and by them stoned to death. He was buried by the Temple.

Simon, by Christ called Peter, through the indignation of Nero, because he had
overcome Simon Magus, was crucified with his head downward, according as he
desired.

Saul, after his conversion called Paul, after he had endured and escaped many
dangers and torments, as beating with rods, and put in the stocks by Philippus,
stoned in Lystra, delivered to wild beasts in Ephesus, bound and beaten in
Jerusalem, and many others: lastly came to Rome, where by the commandment of
Nero, he was beheaded, (because he was a Roman borne) the same day that Peter
was crucified. Paul instead of John, because he ended not his life with
Martyrdom.

Philip, after he had preached through the whole Country of Scythia, and
converted a great part thereof, in the space of twenty years, was at the last
in the City of Hierapol^^ (when he had there extirpe^ the Heresy of the
Hebeonites) fastened to the Cross, and so dyed.

Bartholmew went to preach in India, and afterward came to Albania, a City of
Armenia the greater, where he converted the King of that City, and destroyed
the Idols. wherefore by the commandment o^ Astiagus brother to the King
Polemius, whom he had converted, he was flead alive. His body was afterward
brought to Italy, and is, as some say, at Rome.

Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, went first to preach in Achaia, and afterward
preached in Scythia: but lastly he was taken at Patras, a City of Achaia; by
Egeas, Proconsull of that Province: who, because he had converted his Wife
Maximilla, cast him in prison, where he was sore beaten, and lastly stretched
out, and bound on a slop^ cross, to augment his torment, and so dyed.

Thomas preached the Gospel to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Hyrcanians,
Bragmans, and converted a great part of India* He was by the Infidells throw^
into a burning Furnace, and came out unhurt. Finally, because he prayed God to
destroy the Idol of the Sun, which the Infidells would have compelled him to
worship, he wa^ by them thrust through with spears and swords.

Matthew, after he had preached much in Judea, he went into Ethiopia, and there
converted the greatest part of tha^ country. Finally, having newly ended his
prayers, and lifting up his hads to Heave by the Al^ar, certain spies came
behind him, and ran him through with their swords: which was ^one by the
commandment of a King of those Coun^ries.

Judas, called also Thaddeus, after the ascension of our Lord, was sent by
Thomas to heal A^agar King of of Edissa: afterward he preached in Pontus,
and Mesopotamia, and converted ^any cruel and barbarous people. Lastly, he
came to Persia, there for confounding of their ^dols, he was suddenly run
upon, and murdered by the Pa^^n Bishops of that Country. ^e is buried at Netre
a City of Armenia.

Simon, called Cha^aneus, bro^^er to Thaddeus, and James the ^^sse; after he
had preached in ^^ypt, returned to Jerusalem. whereof by the consent of the
Apostles, he was made Bishop after the Martyrdom of his brother James. As
touching his death and Martyrdom some say, that he suffered with his brother
Judas Thaddeus in Persia, others, that he was through t^^ envy of Heretics,
accused to (...) a Christian before the Consul^ Atticus, and therefore
crucified as his Master was.

Mathyas, after the ascension (...) Christ, chosen by the Apostle^ to supply
Judas room, wa^ borne at Bethlehem, and descended of the Tribe of Judah: He
preached altogether in Iud^^ where lastly he was accused b^ his enemies of
perjury, or ra^ther blasphemy; and therefore he was condemned to be stone^ to
death by two men: duri^^ which torment, one smote hi^ with a hatchet, and so
he suffered martyrdom.

The Seven Wise men of Greece.
BIas borne in the Haventowne of Pri^ne, in the Country of Ionia.

Solon borne in the Island of Salamine: Chilo borne in Lacedemonia: Cleobulus
borne at Lindus in the I Will of Rhodes: Pi^ta^us borne at Mitylene in the I Will of
Lesbos: Thales borne at Mi^eto in Greece: Periander King of Corinth.

Young fowls hatched, and brought forth without the dammes and females.
FOElix Vlmensis and Britenbachius write in their books of common
peregrination and travail, that in Alexandria and and in Egypt, there be
Ove^^ made full of holes, wherein are laid three or four thousand eggs, some
of Geese, some of Hens, some of Pigeons, some of Ducks, and that they are
hidden and covered in dung, and that hot coals are set a far of about the
dung, so that through the temperate heat of these things, the eggs by little
and little wax warm in the dung, even as it were under the Hen* And at length
the young are hatched and brought forth, so that they come by flocks out of the
dung, and from thence are taken, and led abroad to be fed at liberty.

The rites and manners of the Egyptians.
THe Egyptians were almost the first in the World, whereof other Nations
learned, and took their laws, wisdom, manner, and living: and we read that
for learning sake, Homer, Dedalus, Solon, Plato, and many other went thither.
Foralthough they were Gentiles, and not be^eeving on God, yet they studied much
for honesty and goodness: and with their honest conversation, did allure
strangers and good men to come unto them, and to learn that which they ^ould
not find in other pla^es. Their women in times ^ast did use Merchandise and
^ll things which appertained ^o Chapmen: the men did weave and spinne within
the house, and carry burdens on their heads, the which the women did use to
bear on their sholders: the men did make Urine sitting, but the woman did
contrary: They did discharge their bellies at home, but their banquets they
kept in high ways, they molded bread with their feet, and stirred their clay
with their hands. They did use to write after the Hebrewe fashion, beginning
their letters on the right hand.

When any of them met together at Dinner or Supper, before they departed, there
came in one that brought a picture of a dead man, upon a staff made o^ Wood,
of a Cubit length, (...) somewhat more, and shewet^ it to every one of the
guests* saying, behold, and look upon this, drink, and be refreshed with
pleasure, for such a one shall thou be after thy death. Their laws were such,
that perjured men lost their lives, as though they had been guilty of two
offenses: the one of violating piety toward God, the other of breaking faith
and promise amongst men, which is the surest knot of humane society. If any
travailer found any man beaten of thieves, and would not help him if he could,
he should be found culpable of death; if he were not able to help him, he
was bound to detect the thieves, and to follow the action against them: and he
that did neglect to do this, was punished with certain stripes, and kept
without meat for three days. If any Father killed his son, there was no
punishment of death appointed, but for 3 days and nights, continually he was
commanded to be about the dead body; for they thought it no just thing to take
away life from him, that gave life to his children, but rather that he should
be punished with continual pain and repentance of his fact, that others
might fear to do the like. Paracides they caused to be burned upon an heap of
thorns: and such as uttered any secrets to their enemies, they caused their
tongues to be cut out: And they that did counterfeit or clip money, had both
their hands cut off; so that with what part of the body the offense was made,
with the same he should tolerate punishment. If any had violated a free
woman, his natural parts were cut off, because in one fault he committed three
heinous things, that is, an injury, corruption, and confusion of children. He
that was taken in voluntary Adultery, had a thousand stripes with rods, and the
woman was mangled upon the nose. The Priests could have but one Wife, but the
laity as many as they could keep.

The bringing up of their children was with small cost, for it came not unto
the charge of twenty groats the whole Education of their full age: and and this
is not to be marvelled at, because Egypt is a hot Country, and therefore they
live naked without any kind of Garment; and they feed upon roots, the which,
they eat sometimes raw, and sometimes roasted in Imbers. The Priests did teach
their children especially Geometry, and Arithmeticke. They did drive away
sickness either with fasting or with vomit, the which they used every third
day. Their opinion was, that all diseases came of superfluity of meats, and
therefore that to be the best cure, which took away the matter and causes.

The seven Saxon Kingdoms that England was once divided into.
THe first was the Kingdom of Kent, which had his beginning of the Saxon
Hengist, in the year of our Lord 476, and the fifth year of Vortiger King of
Britain, his last reign, (for he had been deposed) the Kingdom continued
342 years, till that Egber^ King of Westsaxons, vanquished Baldred last King
thereof, and joined it to his own Kingdom.

The second Kingdom was of Sussex, or Southsaxons, which began by the Saxon
Ella, in the year of our Lord 482: and the second year of Aurelius Ambrosius
King of Britain. This Kingdom continued not above 112 years.

The third Kingdom was of East Angles, or East-Englishmen, and contained
Northfolke and Suffolk: it was first begun by the Saxon Vffa, about the
year of our Lord 492: and the 11 year of Aurelius Ambrosius King of Britain.
This Kingdom continued 376 years; the last King whereof was Saint Edmond,
martyred by the Danes.

The fourth was the Kingdom of Westsaxons, containing the West-countrey of
England, and had his beginning by the Saxon Cerdicus, the year of our Lord
522: and the fifth year of Arthur the great King of Britain, and endured from
the first year of Cerdicus, to the last of Alured, the term of 378 years.
The Kings of this Country subdued at length all the other six Kingdoms,
which Egbert began, and Alured finished, making all the South part of this
Island one Monarchy.

The fifth was the Kingdom of Northumberland, containing the Countries betwixt
the river of Humber and Scotland, had his beginning of the Saxon Id^, King of
Brenicia; the year of our Lord 547: and the second or last year of the reign
of Aurelius Canon, King of Britain. This Kingdom of Northumberland was at the
first divided into two Kingdoms, the one was called the Brenicia, which bended
toward the North, and the other Deyra (about) the Country of Durham: and this
Kingdom continued some-while under one King, sometime under two, the term of
409 years: first under the Saxons, and then under the Danes.

The sixth Kingdom was of the East Saxons, or Essex, which began by the Saxon
Sebert, the year of our Lord about 614, and continued from the beginning of
the reign of Sebert, till the eighth year of Edward the elder, 293 years.

The seventh Kingdom was of Mercia, containing Huntingtonshire, Hertfordshire,
Glostershire, and others: and was the greatest of all the other, taking his
beginning of the Saxon Penda, in the year of our Lord 626, after the coming
of Hengist 126 years: during the reign of Cadwan King of Britain, and
continued from Penda, till that Edward the Elder chased out the Danes, about
280 years. These 7 Kingdoms of the Saxons, beside that of Wales and Scotland,
were all contained at once in this Island of Britain, and continued a long
space.

The four Monarchies.
THe first Monarchy was of the Assyrians, founded by Ninus, about the year of
the World 2220, augmented by the Queen Semiramis, and after it had endured the
term of 1300 years, it was translated by Arbactus unto the Medes: and there
having endured 350 years, it was lost by Astyages, and conquered by Cyrsu.

The second Monarchy was of the Persians, founded by Cyrus, the year of the
World 3425, which after it had endured 191 years, was lost by Darius, and
subdued by Alexander the great.

The third Monarchy was of the Grecians, founded by Alexander the great, in the
year of the World 3634, and before Christ, 320 years; after whose death it
was divided among the Prefects, which in his lifetime he had appointed in
diverse Countries: by which division Seleucus was King of Syria, Ptolomeus of
Egypt, Antigonus of Asia, Cassander of Macedonia and Greece: all which
Countries were after subdued by the Romans.

The fourth Monarchy or Empire was of the Romans, founded by Julius Caesar, in
the year of the World 3914, after the building of Rome 706 years, and before
Christ 47 years. This Monarchy flourished about the space of 470 years, till
that after the death of Theodostus the great, it was divided by his two Sons
into two Empires: Arcadius was Emperor of Constantinople, which Empire endured
(though afterward much diminished by the invasions of barbarous Nations)
until the year of our Lord 1453, and then was quite lost by Constantine, and
conquered by Mahomet second King of Turks. Honorius was Emperor of Rome,
which Empire shortly after, in the year of our Lord five Hundred Seventy five,
and about the ninth Month of the Reign of Augustus, was utterly ruinated and
spoiled by Othacar King of Goths. And long after, in the year of our Lord
Eight Hundred and one, it was restored by Charles the great, and by him united
to the Crown of France; and by his successors translated into Germany, where
it yet remains as a shadow only, or representation of the greatness and
majesty of the ancient Roman Empire.

How the Torneyments and Iustes began first in Saxony.
The Torneyments were first invented in the time of Henry Auceps, the 2
Emperor of Germany in the year of our Lord 934.
HEnry Duke of Saxony, in the year of our Lord 931, being assaulted and
incombred much with Infidels, and Heathen Nations, made an assembly of a great
multitude of the Nobility, to assist him in his Wars against the Saracens,
wherein he had so good success, that triumphantly he had the victory over them.

Thus after he had given the repulse to the Infidels, considering what a
number of the Nobility he had, daily exercising themselves in Martial acts,
thought it meet, that after the end of his long and great Wars, to recreate
them with ^ome honest and pleasant exer^^se: He had compassion over them,
because some of them ^^habiting amongst Citizens, should be occupied with
civil ^usinesse, and not in the exer^^se of noble and honorable pa^imes,
meet for such persona^es as they were: and therefore ^e prescribed certain
articles, according to the which they should live, and if they did trans^resse
them, that they should be ^unished in the open Tornia^ent: these articles were
twelve ^n number.

The first, whosoever of the Nobility, should say or do a^y thing against the
Holy faith, ^^e should be restrained from the Torneyment, and if under ^he
color or excuse of the Nobleness of any of his ancestors, any does presume to
enter the lists or the Torneyment, let him with shame be driven away.

The second, whosoever coming of noble blood, does attempt any thing against
the royal Majesty of Caesar, let him be punished openly in the Torneyment, and
of this article was the Author Conradus, a Prince of Palatine.

The Duke of Franconia was the Author of the third, which is this: Whosoever
coming of a noble house, betrayeth has Lord, or forsakes him, or exciteth to
fly away in an Army, without any necessary cause, or slays his innocent
companions, let him have punishment in the open Torneyment.

The Duke of Sueneland made the fourth after this sort: Whosoever coming of
Noble Parentage, does violate or defame by words or deeds, Virgins or Women,
let him be openly corrected in the Torneyment.

The fifth Article the Duke of Bavaria made in this manner. If any of the
Nobility be apprehended or reproved, to have corrupted or falsefied the Seal,
or to have violated his Oath, or has been noted of infamy, let him as
unworthy be kept from the Torneyment.

The sixth is, if any Nobleman did either secretly or openly slay his wife or
bedfellow, or had helped by his counsel or deed to the destroying of the
Lord, the law of the Torneyment should take place against him.

The seventh, if any did spoil and rob Churches, Chapels, Widows, or Wards,
or kept by force that which was theirs, from them, whereas they were rather to
be helped and mainta^^ned, that he should be duly corrected for it.

The eighth, If any noble man were become an enemy to another, and did not
maintain h^^ cause by lawful order, or by martial law, but would (...) his
adversary by robberies, (...) by destroying of his goods, especially his Wines
and Corn, whereby the Commonwealth is endamaged, let him be tormented in the
Torneyment.

The ninth, If any did presume to make any alteration, or s^^ any heavy burden
upon others, otherwise then of ancient times were used, howsoever it were done,
etc. that he should have his correction in open Torneyment.

The tenth, If any were convict of Adultery, etc. in like ^anner let him be
amended.

The eleventh, Whatsoever Nobleman does not live as a Nobleman should do,
etc. in ^^ke manner let him be puni^hed.

The twelfth, He that will ^e at the Torneyment, not com^ing of noble
parentage, or cannot prove his Nobility in ^ure descents, he may not ^nter
into the exercise of the Torneyment.

Thus in a brief sum you ^ay see the manner of the Tor^eyment in Saxony.

The eight Parliaments of France.
THE chief and generalle^ Justice of the Realm (...) France, is continually
kept (...) eight Cities, wherein are Pala^ces made expressly for the pu^^pose:
and this general kind o^ Justice is divided into eig^^ parts, according to
the eig^^ Cities, and every of them a^^ called Parliaments, which diffe^ very
little from our Tearm^^ but whereas these are but fou^ times in a year, those
are con^tinually kept, each of them ha^ving instead of our Lord Chan^celour a
chief President.

The first and chiefest of these Parliaments is that of Pari^ called the Court
of the Peere^ of France: and to the equit^ and judgment of this Parlia^ent,
many foreign Kings and ^rinces have submitted them^^lves in matters of
greatest im^ortance, as to the most vene^ble and chiefest Senate of Ju^^^ce in
the world. Such were ^^e Emperor Frederick the se^^^nd, called Barberossa,
King (...) both Scycils, when he sub^itted himself to the judgment (...) this
Court of Parliament, as ^uching all the controversies (...) his Empire and
Kingdoms, which he had against Pope In^^cent the Fourth: Philip Prince (...)
Tarente, and the Duke of ^urgundy, who submitted them^^lves to this Parliament,
for ^^e controversy betwixt them ^^on the expenses of the reco^ery of the
Empire of Constan^^nople. The Duke of Lorraine ^bject to the Empire, and the
Lord Guy of Chastillon, who submitted themselves to the judgment of this
Court, as concerning the limitation of their lands and possessions: the
Daulphin of Vienna, and the Earl of Sav^y submitted themselves to the
judgment of this Parliament, concerning the suite betwixt them, for the homage
of the Marquisat of Saluces. Moreover, without the consent of this Parliament,
it has not been seen that the Kings of France have done, or passed any
matter of importance touching the state of the Realm, so much is it respected
both within the Realm, and abroad. This Court of Parliament was first ordained
by Philip the fair, King of France.

The second Parliament is at Bordeaux, for the Countries of Guyen, Gascoine,
Zaintonge, Perigort, part of Poictou, and others; and was first ordained by
Charles the seventh.

The third Parliament is at Roven, for the Dukedom of Normandy, first made
exchequer by Philip the fair, and afterward continual Parliament by Jews
the twelfth.

The fourth Parliament is at Tholouze, first ordained for certain times in the
year by Philip the fair, and afterward made continually by Charles the
seventh, for the Country of Langue^oc.

The fifth Parliament is at Grenoble, for the Country of Daulphine, instituted
by Jews the eleventh.

The sixth Parliament is at Dijon for the Dukedom of Burgundy: it was likewise
ordained by the said Jews the eleventh.

The seventh Parliament is at Aix, for the Earldom of Provence, appointed by
Jews the 12.

The eight Parliament is at Renes in Britain, ordained by Henry the second. Of
all these Parliaments Paris Parliament is the chief; and certain cases are
reserved to be judged only at the Parliament of Paris.

Of the Oystridge.
THE Oystridge is found especially in Africa, his head is covered with small
hairs, his his eyes be gross and black, his neck is long, his bill is short
and sharp, his feet has as it were a by partite hoof. Pliny says, that he
exceeds the height of a man on horseback, and that his Wings help him
little. But with his Nails which are like Hoofes, he takes stones, and
throws against those which persecute him: He does digest whatsoever he
devoureth, be it never hard. He is of a mavelous foolishness, for if he
has once hidden his head under a bush, he thinks himself safe and not to
be seen. It is said to be a simple and forgetful thing, and that as soon as
it has brought forth eggs, it forgets them, until the young comes forth,
which is thought to be easily done, because they leave the eggs in the warm
sand, so that the young may soon be hatched, the which the males do feed and
cherish when they are brought forth.

When he sees that he cannot avoid taking, he casts stones against his
followers, and many times hurts them. His Nest is commonly found in the Sand,
well made with Bulwarks and Banks, to keep away rain from the young.

Of the Empire of Cathay.
THE Empire of Cathay is ruled by the great Cham. With this Nation one man may
have many Wives, and when the Husband dies, every wife pleads her own cause
before the Judges, and shows her merits, so that which of them soever is
adjudged to have been the most officious and dearest wife to her husband, she
in her best apparel and all her Jewels, as though she had gotten the victory
of the other, goes willingly and merrily unto the heap of Wood, where her
husband shall be burnt, and lying down by his carcass and embracing it, the
fire is kindled, and so she is burnt with her husband: the other of his wives
after this, live in great shame and obloquy. They match not together for Wealth
or Nobility, but for excellency of beauty, and procreation sake. The people of
Cathay have this opinion, that they think no other Nation to see with both
eyes, but themselves; they are persuaded also, that they excel all other in
subtilty of Arts and Sciences. It is a white kind of people, without beards,
of small eyes, and lacking true piety and due obeisance to God: for some of
them worship the Sun, some the Moon, others certain Images of metals,
and other some an Ox, so that they be full of monstrous superstition. The
Emperor keeps his Court at his City called Cambalu, which is the noblest
Mart in that part of the World: for there is almost never a day throughout the
year, but that a thousand Cartloads of Silk almost are changed, and brought
there amongst Merchants. The Emperor keeps in his Court twelve thousand
Horsemen to keep his body. Their order of watching is thus: One Captain with
three thousand gardeth the King within the Palace for 3 days, and so does
another other 3 days following, and thus they keep their courses. When the
Emperor sits down to meat, he has his principal and greatest Queen on
his left hand, and his children which be of royal blood, on his right hand, in
a lower place. No Man that ^itteth down in this Hall, drinks, or is served
in any other vessel but of Gold: the Princes and Noblemen that serve the King
at his meat, cover their mouths with most fine silk clothes, lest they should
breath upon the Kings meat or drink, and when the Emperor takes the pot to
drink, all the Musicians begin to make great melody, and the other ministers
bend their knees.

The thirteen Cantons of Swisserland.
THe inhabitants of Helvetia or Swisserland, after they had emancipated
themselves from the yoke of the Empire, and expelled the Nobility of the
imperial faction, began to make Leagues and Confederacies one town with
another, to fortify themselves by that means against foreign invasions, if
any happened. And in process of time, within little more then an hundred
years, are increased to the number of 13, which they call Cantons, by which
the whole Country of Swisse is governed and defended. And here (according to
their antiquity) I place them the first that confederated together, and gave
example to the rest, were Vri, Swits, Vndervard, Villages; and these three by
little and little, have drawn to their Faction all the rest that follow,
Lucerne, Zurich, Cities; Glaris, Zug, Villages: Berne, Fribourg, Soulleurre,
Baste, Schaffouse, Cities: Appensel, Village, whereof 7 profess the Romish
Religion, viz. Vri, Swits, Vndervard, Zug, Lucerne, Fribourg, and Soulleurre,
the rest are Zuinglians: which diversity of Religion has caused dissension,
and mortal Wars of late years among them, although they be all sworn
together to defend their Liberty against Strangers.

The twelve Peers, or Paires of France.
IN the Realm of France, to be a Peer is the greatest dignity under the King,
for that in many things they have almost equal Authority with Kings, for Peer
in the French tongue signifies equal. But because it may be too prolixe a
matter to speak of their Prerogatives, it shall suffice to number them, and
each of their offices at the sacring or coronation of a new King. These ancient
Peers are twelve in number, whereof six are of the Clergy, and six are
Laymen: the six of the Clergy with their Offices at the Coronation, are the
Archbishop and Duke of Reins, which has his accustomed charge to oynt and
consecrate the King: the Bishop and Duke of Lacon, whose office is to bring the
holy Ampoule, or divine water, wherewith the King is anointed; the Bishop and
Duke of Langres, whose office is to bring the Scepter, and the hand of Justice;
the Bishop and Earl of Beauvais, brings the Kings cloak, the Bishop and
Earl of Chaalons, brings the Kings Ring; the Bishop and Earl of Noyon,
brings the Kings Girdle. The six temporal Peers with their offices at the
Coronation, are the Duke of Burgundy, Deane or chief of the rest, whose office
is to bring the Kings crown^: the Duke of Guyen brings the first square
Banner: the Duke of Normandy brings the second square Banner: the Earl of
Toulouse brings the Kings spurs: the Earl of Champaine bingeth the Kingly
Banner, or the Standert of War: and the Earl of Flaunders brings the Kings
sword. And although the five first temporal Peeredomes be united to the Crown,
and the sixth be subject to another Prince, yet at the Kings coronation, there
are other Noble men appointed to supply their room and offices. These be the
twelve ancient Peers, although since their creation others have been made,
which though they have like authority to judge in the Court of Parliament, yet
they want offices at the Kings Coronation, and bear not that majesty that the
other Peers do, for that they are not of so great antiquity.

The four parts of the World.
EVropa so called from Europa, daughter of Agenor King of Lybia; and of the
Phoenicians brought hither (as Poets feign) by Jupiter, in the shape of a
Bull: but as Historians write, by a Cretan Captain named Taurus, is separated
from Asia, as is hereafter shown; and from Africa by the Mediterranean sea. It
is in length 2800, and in breadth 1200 miles.

Asia so called from the daughter of Oceanus and The^is, Wife to Iapetus, and
Mother to Prometheus; or as some say, of Asia the son of Manae, King of
Lydia; is separated from Europe by the river Tanais, now called Duina, by the
Sea called in time past Palus Meotides, now Mare de Zabache: and by Pontus
Euxinus: now Mare maiorica; and by part of the Mediterranean Sea: and from
Afric by the River of Nile, the Red Sea, and the Egyptian Istmus* It
stretches in length 5200 miles, and in breadth 4560 miles.

Africa, which some say, is so called of one Affer, of the line of Abraham, is
separated from Europe by the Mediterranean Sea, and from Asia by the Red Sea,
and the River of Nile. Africa is in length 4155, and in breadth 1920 miles.

America or West India, so called of Americus Vespusius, but first found out by
Christopher Columbus of Genua, the year of our Lord 1492: It is like an Island
round about environed with the great Ocean: but the length and breadth no man
knows. Africa is greater then Europa, Asia then Africa, and America bigger
then all.

The eight times that Rome has been taken.
ROme was first taken by the Gauls, under the conduct of their Captain
Brennus, the year of the Foundation of the City about 365, and the year of
the world 4835, and the year before Christ 364. This Brennus is by the
Britain and English Chronicles reported to be a Britain, and brother to
Belinus, King of Britain; but neither the Chronicles of Rome, nor of Gaul, do
speak of any such matter.

Rome was secondly taken by Alaricke, King of Goths, after he had held his
siege to it the space of two years, which befell the year of the Foundation
of the City 1164, the year of our Lord 412, and the 25 year of the Empire of
Honorius. It is written in the Chronicles of Constantinople, and in other
places, that as Alaricke (being a Christian) marched with his Host toward
Rome, a certain Monk, of holy life and great authority, came unto him, who
having audience, admonished and counseled him to break off that evil
purpose, and to remember that he was a Christian, and that for Gods sake he
would moderate his wrath, and that he should not take pleasure in the shedding
of Christian blood, since that Rome had not in any respect offended him: Unto
whom Alaricke answered, Thou must understand man of God, that it proceeds not
of mine own will, that I go against Rome: but contrarily I assure thee, that
every day there comes unto me a man, which constrains and importuneth me
thereunto, saying unto me, Hasten thee, go against Rome, destroy it utterly,
and make it desolate. At which words the religious man being astonished, durst
not reply, and so the King followed his enterprise.

Rome was thirdly taken by Gensericke, King of Vandales, the year of the
Foundation of the City 1208, the year of Christ 456, who sacked and burned in
it many places, which befell in the Empire of Marcian.

Rome was fourthly taken by Totila King of Goths, who because he could not
obtain peace of the Emperor (...), commanded the Citizens to avoyde the
City, and afterward burned, sacked, and destroyed almost all the City,
Walls, and the Capitol, and made it altogether desolate, in so much, that
never since it could be repaired according to the first form, although a while
after, Bellisarius peopled and repaired a great part thereof* and calling
again the old inhabitants, fortified and strengthened much the Walls. This
desolation happened the year after the foundation the City 1300^ after Christ
548, and the 21 year of the Empire of Justinian.

Rome was fifthly taken by the same Totila King of Goths; after that
Bellisarius had repeopled and repaired it.

(...) Rome was ^ixtly taken by (...) and Saracens, followers of Mahomet his
Law, which in great multitude came into Italy, and in the year of our Lord
333, fitting in Rome, Gregory the fourth, and governing the Empire Jews the
first, besieged, took, and sacked Rome, profaning the temple of Saint Peter:
which done, they returned to their ships, charged with prey and prisoners.

Rome was seventhly taken by Henry the fourth of that name, Emperor of
Germany, sitting in Rome Gregory the seventh: this time Rome was most cruelly
destroyed, by reason that both the armies of the Pope and the Emperor
skirmished, and fought long within, the City, and the Capitol, which had
been before destroyed, was now again repaired, which befell the year of our
Lord 1082: Authors write, that Rome was never so much endamaged at any time, as
at this, by reason of the lamentable destruction that was done by the Normans
on the Popes side, and Germans for the Emperor.

Rome was last taken by Char^s the last Duke of Bourbon: who being slain as
he scaled the walls at the first assault, and by that chance the Soldiers
being in liberty, and without a Head, pitifully destroyed the City, and
committed all kind of enormities, and barbarous cruelties, saving that they
burned not the Churches, although they spoiled and robbed them to the
uttermost: For a great part of the army were Germans, and most of the Germans
Lutheran. This adversity happened ^o Rome the year of our Savior 1527,
sitting at Rome Clement the Seventh, and governing the Empire Charles the Fifth.

Six Orders of Chivalry, which continue at this day among Princes.
THe first and ancientest of these Orders of Chivalry or Knighthood, is the
Order of the Garter, instituted the year of our Lord 1348 in Bordeaux, chief
City of the Dukedom of Guyne in France, by Edward 3, King of England, and
then possessor of that Dukedom: which Order he consecrated, and dedicated to
Saint George: though the motive of the institution thereof, proceeded of the
loss of a Garter, which he supposed to have bin the Countess of Salisburies:
but I refer the Reader to the Chronicle. And it happened in this manner: As
one day he was entertaining her with pleasant talk, a Garter chanced to
unloose and fall down, the King endeavoring to take it up, wittingly caused
such a jest, as moved the Noblemen to laughter: the Countess there at
blushing, and blaming that more then seemly familiarity of the King, for that
he had caused such a jest among the Assistants, said sharply to him, and the
rest, Honi soit qui mal y pense: which Englished, is, Evil to him that evil
thinks. And the King in recompense of his rashness, said forthwith, that
before it were long, those Noble men which had made a jest and laughing at the
Garter fallen down, should esteem themselves much honored to wear it for a
mark of Honor and Chivalry, and thereupon ordained the said order, and
dedicated it to Saint George, and made thereof 26 Knights, and ordained that
they should wear their Clokes of Violet-colour Velvet; their hoods of red
Velvet, lined with white Damask* their Bases of red Velvet, and under the left
knee a blew Garter, buckled with Gold, garnished with precious stones, and
about it wrought ^hese words of the Countess of Salisbury; HONI SOIT QVI MALY
PENSE, and a color of Gold, full of red and white Roses, with an Image of S.
George hanging thereon: and about these Roses are written those words which are
in the Garter. There are of this Order 26 Knights, of which the Kings of
England are Sovereigns: and it is so much desired for the excellency, that ^
Emperors, 22 foreign Kings, 20 foreign Dukes, and diverse Noblemen of
other Countries have been fellows of it. About their neck they wear a blew
Ribbond, at the end of which hangs the Image of Saint George, upon whose day
the Installation of the new Knights is commonly celebrated, being the three and
twentieth of April.

And although it was first ordained at Bourdeaux, yet the said King Edward the
3, would that the siedge and place of the solemnizing thereof should be at the
Church of Windsor, here in England; where at the same (...) he founded Canons,
or a ^^nonry, for the better pro^perity of the Knights of the Order.

The second order in antiqui^y, is the Order of the Annun^iation, instituted
Anno Dom. ^356, by Amede the sixth of that ^ame; Duke of Savoy, and sur^amed,
the green Knight. The Knights of this Order, wear a great collar of Gold,
made winding with three laces, which are called of Love, wherein are enterlaced
these words, FERT, FERT, FERT, every let^er importing his Latin word, thus, F,
fortitudo, E, ejus, R, Rhodum, T; tenuit: that is, His Force has conquered
Rhodes: and at this Collar hangs an Image of our Lady, and of an Angel
saluting her; and for that occasion is called the Order of the Annuntiation.
The colla^ is of 15 links, to show the 15 mysteries of the Virgin, each linke^
being inter-woven one with the other, in form of a true Lovers knot. The
number is fourteen^ Knights, the solemnity is held annually on our Lady Day, in
the Castle of Saint Peter in Tu^rin. This Earl ordained this Order in memory
of Ami^^ the great Duke of Savoy, which succored the Knights of Saint John,
when they conquered the I Will of Rhodes upon the Turks, in the year of our Lord
1310.

The third in antiquity is the Order of the golden Fleece, founded upon the
Fable of the golden Fleece, that Jason with the other Argonautes went to seek
in the I Will of Colchos, which is to say, that he went to the Mine of Gold; or
in Analogy to Gideons Fleece, as some will, and ordained by Philip the second,
surnamed the good Duke of Burgundy, in the year 1430: the complete number of
which Order were at first 25 Knights, and raised afterward by the said Philip
to 31. Charles the fifth raised them to 51: and now there be as many as the
King of Spain will invest with ^t. They wear a Collar of Gold, interlaced
with an Iron, seeming to strike fire out of a Flint, the word ex ferro flam^am,
and at the end hangs the Fleece, or Toison d'or: Their Clo^ks and Hoods are of
Scar^et, guarded with Embroydery ^^ke flames of fire. Philip ap^ointed for the
celebrating of that Order St. Andrews day, be^^g the 30 of November. But the
Emperor Charles the fifth, (heir of the house of Burgundy, and chief of that
Order) changed their apparel, and ordained that their Cloaks should be of
Crimson Velvet, and their Hoods of Violet color Velvet, and that underneath
they should wear a Cassocke of cloth o^ Silver.

The fourth in antiquity is the Order of St. Michael the Arch-Angell,
instituted by Jews the II of France, the first day o^ August, in the year
14^9: an^ ordained that of that Orde^ there should be 36 Knight^ which
afterward were augmen^ted to 300, Gentlemen (...) name and of Arms without
^^^proach, of whom he himsel^^ was chief and Sovereign, an^ after him his
successors King of France. And the brothers companions of this Order were
bound, at the receiving thereof, to forsake and leave all other Orders, if any
they had, either of a Prince or any company, only excepting Emperors, Kings,
and Dukes, which beside this Order, might wear that Order whereof they were
chief, with the agreement and consent of the King and brotherhood of the said
order: and in like manner the said King of France might wear beside his own,
the Order of other Emperors, Kings, and Dukes. And for the connoissance of
this Order, and the Knights thereof, he gave ^o every of them a Collar of
Gold, wrought with Cockle shells, enterlacing one another with a double
pointing Ribbon of Silk, with golden Tagges, ^he word, Immensi Arenor Oceani.
which King Francis the first, because his name was Francis, changed into a
white Friars of Franciscans Girdle, made of a twisted coarde; and hangs on
that Collar a tablet of St. Michael upon a Rock, conquering the Devil. Of the
institution of this order, is made a book, containing 98 Articles, wherein are
set down the things whereunto the Knights of this Order are subject.

The fifth Order is that of the Holy Ghost, instituted by Henry the 3 King of
France, on New-yeares day, in the year 1579 it was called by the name of the
Holy Ghost, because this Henry was on a Whitsonday chosen King of Poland. Of
this also is written a Book, containing the Article whereunto the Knights
thereon are bound. Among the which I have principally noted one, that is, to
defend and sustain the Clergy: for the King does give to every of them the
rent of certain Abbeys, religious Houses, or other spiritual lands, whereof
they shall allow a certain stipend, to the entertaining of a certain number of
religious persons in every religious house under him; and for that benefit are
sworn at the entering into the said Order, always to defend the Spirituality,
and maintain the Clergy in their privileges; but how they keep their Oath,
it is well seen in every place of their spiritual possessions: and thereof my
self have oftentimes had oeular experience: for travailing in that Country,
and passing o^tentimes by goodly religious hou^ses, I have sometimes for
recre^ation (having well tried the courteous demeanor, that commonly Religious
men use toward strangers that come to view their houses) entered into sundry of
them: where I have diverse times been sufficiently informed by the religious,
how the King had given the rents and possessions of their houses to the Knights
of his Order, with the conditions already rehearsed, which Knights allow them
such bare exhibition, that by reason it is not sufficient to entertain the
fourth part o^ the number by them appoyn^ted, almost all of them a^ constrained
either to forsak^ their houses, and beg, o^ else there to starve: through
which occasion, many go^^ religious houses are of late fallen in decay for want
of reparation, trimming up, and inhabiting, and will do more and more without a
redress. And this have I learned in diverse Religious houses beside the common
murmuring of the Clergy: and so we may see, how these Knights, called of the
Holy Ghost, for to defend and maintain the spirituality, do under pretense
thereof, rob, and prodigally wast the spiritual possessions: so that it may
seem only to be a policy (under the correction of better judgment) put in the
Kings head, to diminish spiritual livings (which in that Country are
wonderful great) and satisfy his prodigal mind, in rewarding by that means
his flatterers; because through his exceeding lavishnesse, he is scarce able
otherwise to reward them. The Bishop of Rome considering what dismembring of
Church Lands, and decay of Gods service comes through this Order in the
Realm of France, will not grant the confirmation thereof, although the King
has been instant for the same: but notwithstanding the Popes misliking
thereof, the Order is maintained, though to the great weakening of the Religion
in that Country: Yea, at the last celebration thereof, which was on New-yeares
day even, 1581, I saw three Bishops were admitted into that Order. The Collar
is of Flowers de lys, and flames of Gold, with a Cross, and a Dove on it
pendant, representing the Holy Ghost, wrought in Orange-tauny Velvet, garnished
about with silver beams, which the Knights of that Order wear upon their
Cloakes, before their heart. Their robe is a black Velvet Mantle, poudered
with Lillies and flam^s of Gold and Silver. None are admitted to this Order,
who cannot prove their Nobility by 3 descents at least.

The sixth Order is of the Bath, brought first into England 1^99 by Henry the
Fourth: They are created at the Coronation of Kings and Queens, and the
installation of the Princes of Wales: Their duty is to defend true Religion,
Widows, Maids, Orphans, and to maintain the Kings rights.

Of the Cannibals.
THe Cannibals are wild people, feeding upon man's flesh, which is a very
sweet kind of flesh. If they get or find any children within the age of 14
years, they feed them, and cram them as we do Capons, but those which are
beyond 14 years of age, they kill them out of hand, devouring their hot guts
immediately and the other parts of their bodies they salt, and lay up as we do
poudred flesh: they eaten women, but keep them onel^ for the bearing of
children, (...) we do Hens for eggs.

If any for age is past child bearing, she does all drudge^ry like unto a
bondwoman they have no houses, but the erect many trees together, and so
combine them in the top that it serves for lodging. Their beds be made of
Silk and Hey, they have no Iron, but they use bones instead of Iron, they
dress their meat in earthen pots, mingling the flesh of Parats, Geese, Ducks,
and man's flesh together. They are now come to more civility then they had in
times past.

Of the Lion.
Lions live in many Countries, in Africa they have a cruel and terrible
look, and thin hairs. Pliny thinks that his especial valiancy is, when
his maine covers his neck and shoulders. In Africa for the scarcity of
waters, many wild beasts meet together at some one puddle, where males and
females of diverse kinds use natural conjunction whereof comes monstrous
young. Aristotle says, that the she Lion has at her first generation five
young, and that every year-after, she brings forth less by one, until she
wax barren, and that her young are without shape or fashion, about the bigness
of a Weasell. Herodo^us and Gellius thinks the contrary, that she brings
forth one every year. Democritus says, this beast only, is bred and brought
forth with open eyes, and that he is given to little sleep, as it may appear,
because his tail is often wagging as he sleeps. The Male Lion makes urine
like unto a Dog, which is strong in savor. The Lions drink seldom, they
feed every other day, after satiety they be without meat for 3 days, they
devour such things as they can wholly: they live long. The Lion only of al
fierce and cruel beasts, shows clemency toward the humble: for he spares
the prostrate, and when he rages he uses his violence rather against Men then
Women. He never utters his Force against infants and children but being
driven with great Famine thereto. His tail is a note of his mind and
stomach, (as the ears be in a horse) for if his tail stirs not, he is
gentle and peaceable, the which is a rare thing, for he is most commonly angry.
He keeps his desire of revenging long, against any that hatve hurt him, being
wounded, he does note and mark him that gave the wound, and in a great
multitude will invade him. His bones are sound, and not hollow, whereof some
write, that out of his bones fire may be stricken as out of stones, and
therefore sometimes he is so raging with anger, and in such a burning heat,
that he dies presently.

He is never exasperate or moved, but either by famine or hurt. This one thing
is to be noted in so cruel a beast, that wheels runned about, and empty
Carts, and the combs and singing of Cocks does make him afraid, but especially
he is afraid of fire.

Of the people called the Nigrites and others.
THere is a kind of people nigh unto the confines of the west Arabians, called
Azanagi, whose color is betwixt black and ash color: they live with Barley
and Dates, and Camels milk, and because they are near unto the Nigrits, they
feed sometimes upon diverse kind of pulse: they be no great feeders, for the
scarcity of victuals makes them to suffer and tolerate much famine. The
Portugals use merchandise with them in these our days. They cover their heads
with a linen roller, whereof one part hangs down by the Forehead, so that
they cover al their mouth therewith. For they are almost as much ashamed to
show their mouths as their privy parts, and therefore they keep their mouths
close, never opening them, except it be to take meat, and that because they
would not let any filthy air and vapor to slip out thereby. They do greatly
esteem fat and corpulent women, and such as have large and fair breasts and
dugges. Within this Country the travail of six days journey will bring a
man to a place called Tagaza, from whence is brought much plenty of Salt, the
which is carried away upon Camels backs into diverse places, and especially to
the Kingdom called Melli. The people called Mellitae be somewhat beyond the
Equinoctial, and have most fervent heates, and therefore at certain times in
the year their blood is infected, so that if they had no remedy by Salt, they
could not live by any means: their Salt is divided into such lumps, that one
salt stone is enough to be borne upon one man's shoulders. But when they come to
the Country called Melli, they load one Cammell with two salt stones, as for
the poorer sort, that are not able to have Cammels, they carry their Salt upon
their shoulders, and some upon their heads, and that in such a company, that
they seem almost in multitude like unto an army of men.

This Salt they bring unto a great water, where every one discharges his
burden of Salt upon the Land, and make great Hills thereof, leaving a certain
sign for the true knowledge of every man's heap, this done they depart: and
then comes the Nigrits, who will not be known, nor yet talk with any other
kind of people, they come near with their ships* and where they see and
perceive the heaps of Salt, they lay great store of Gold neigh unto every heap
of Salt, even as they think it convenient for the Merchandise, and agreeable
to equity for the exchange, and then they depart, leaving the Gold and Salt
together. The Nigrits which went a far off return again, and every one
looks upon his own heap* and if the Gold that was left by it, pleases him,
and seems sufficient for the exchange, then he takes the said Gold away*
leaving the Salt behind him and not minding to return again. If the heap of
Gold does not seem unto them sufficient for the exchange of the heap of Salt,
then they leave both still, and depart again in some secret place, minding to
come again within a little after. But those Nigrits which cannot abide to be
known, come again to the said place, and take away such heaps of Salt, as
they see the Gold to be taken from; or else they add a little more Gold to
the heap that was left before, or otherwise they carry away their Gold,
leaving the Salt still, if the bargain please not them. And thus do they use
their Merchandise, so that the one sees not the other, and that by an old
custom. It is a great labor with these Nigrits to carry their salt upon their
shoulders, because they lack all manner of beasts meet for that carriage
almost, the which comes through the unfruitfulnesse of the earth: for they
have very little store of Grass, and that which they have is pestilent also;
and therefore they daily drink water, wherein a little salt has bin resolved,
and this is their greatest remedy and most especial medicine. They never have
rain but in August, September, and October. But these men that come after this
sort, and exchange Gold for Salt, without any talk of bargain or sale, are
thought to be mavelous black, having their lower lip hanging down to the
breast somewhat red, and within excoriate and chapped, so that blood comes
out, but the upper lip is small like unto ours* and for this cause all their
teeth may be seen, which are a great deal bigger then ours: their lips are
also thought to putrify many times for the heat of their Country, for the
remedy whereof they use the benefit of salt.

Of Prester John's land.
THE rule and dominion of Prester Ihon is large, and of great compass, this
Country excels in Riches, in Gold, Silver, and precious Stones. Some say,
that the Aethiopes living under Prestor John, are very good Christians, and
that fourteen Kings do homage and obeisance to the Emperor Prester John,
whereof some be tributary also to him. The great almner of Prester John
promises himself to fight for the Holy^land. It is written, that Thomas the
Apostle was buried in the Kingdom of Aethiope. There be beasts also in this
Country, that have seven Horns in their Foreheads. There be white Camels
and white Bears, and Horses with two horns: It is also said, that there be
Birds or Fowls in this Country, which with their tallants and nails, will
carry away an Ox or an Horse to feed their young.

In some part of this Country it is thought that there be men with horns,
and such as have but one eye before them, and two behind them; and some people
that feed upon man's flesh, and devour their own parents, and slay, and eat
those that are aged. And another kind of people that has Feet like un^o
horse-feete, and very round. Their Women dwell severally, and have three
Kingdoms. The ^hree Queens of Amazones set ^orth, and make preparations to
Wars with 300000 soldiers of women.

The Pigmeis in Africa be good Christians. The King of the Pigmeis war
against the fowls which destroy fruit, and his people drives them away with
their voices.

It is said also, that there be certain Monsters, which above the loins are
seen formed like unto men, and beneath the loins unto horses. The Aethiopians
have an artificious way to take Lions and Unicornes. There have been seen in
times past, Giants of three score and ten cubits in compass: and now in
these days it is said, that many great Giants be there seen o^ thirty and
five cubits in height. The bird which is called a Ph^^nix, and lives three
hundred years and more, is said, to be set on fire, and burnt through the
heat of the Sun, and that of her ashes, there springs another young one.
There is great store of Pepper gathred in the woods, which are full of Serpents
and Scorpions. And men having heads like unto dogger, are said to be very
cunning in fishing. Other people there are which have their faces in their
breasts, they be strong and swift runners, and great searchers of Gold and
Silver. Many other such trifles and incredible things the Jews do fable upon
the land of Prester John, which are so far beyond all credit and likelihood of
truth, that I thought it better to omit them, then to occupy the reader in idle
spending the time about them.

Of the Mice of the Alps.
THere is a kind of Mice about the Alps almost as most as big as Conyes,
and not much unlike unto Conyes, saving that their ears are shorter, and their
tails be long, almost 8 inches in length, their ^ore-teeth be long and
sharp, and if they be provoked they ^ite cruelly, their thighs be ^hort, and
very hairy under the ^elly; they have feet somewhat ^^ke unto bears, with long
claws, wherewith they dig and under^ine, and make very deep ca^erns and holes:
they will eat ^f bread, flesh, fish, apples, or ^ard eggs, and when any such
thing is offered unto them, they take it with their former claws, and sitting
on their buttocks after the manner of Apes they feed and eat. They be
delighted much with white meats, as Milk, Cheese, and butter, and if they get
any bread dipped in milk, they eat it up every bit, and making a noise with
their chaps like unto Swine, when they feed upon sosse. When they play
together they bark and jarre like unto whelps. They be much give^ to sleep,
and when they are waking,, they be always given either to play, or to do
som^^thing, as to gnaw with the^^ teeth, or to scrape with the^^ claws; or
else they carry (...) their mouths something from place to place, especially
su^^ soft and tender things, as may good for their nests, as Hay, Straw,
Linen, and such like, and they fill their jaws so full therewith, that they be
not able to receive any more. If the cloth which they carry be of greater
proportion then their mouths can hold, then they drag it behind them on the
ground. Some of them have gray hairs, and some have red. When they live thus
wild upon great hills and mountains, and are minded to go seek their prey
and food, one of them stands in an high place, to warn them that be abroad
seeking their preyes, if any fear or enemy be at hand, and if he perceives
any body coming, then he barketh, at whose noise, all the other catch as much
hay as they can, and come running away, and this is strange which they use.

Sometimes one and sometimes another lies down upon his back, and as much Hay
as may be laid upon his Breast and Belly, he claspeth and keeps fast with his
feet, and then another of his fellows gets him by the tail, and draws
him with his prey into his nest, and this provision they make for their nests
to sleep the better in Winter. When they see a man or beast pass by the
mountains, they bark and jarre, and straight ways all the other take that for
a warning to run to their nests. About Autumn^ they hide themselves in their
nests; the which they make so close, that no Air nor Water may scarre them:
they lie hidden, and sleep all the whole winter, yea, six or seven month^
without any meat, rowlin^ themselves round like unto a Hedgehog; the
inhabitants observe and mark the place of their nests, and dig the earth,
until they come unto them, where they find them so oppressed with deep
sleep that they carry them and their nests to their houses, and there do they
not wake from sleep, if it be Winter, except they be heat by some great
fire, or warm beams of the Sun. There be commonly found in one nest, 7, 9,
or 13. Where any of them be kept tame at home, and be restrained from scraping
and under-mining the earth, there ^hey heap up and carry to their nests every
rag, or piece of garment which they get, and there^n they wrap themselves up
and ^leepe all the Winter. Their ^lesh is much desired of women great with
Child, and of those that have pain and griping in the guts, and of such as
desire to be provoked to sleep. And many that have been troubled with the
collicke, anointing their bellies with the fat and grease of this Mouse, have
found great ease.

Of the Unicorn.
SOme say the Unicorne is like unto a Coalt of two years and a half old: In
his forehead there grows an horn which is black, in the length of two or
three cubits: his color is tawney like a Weasell, his hea^ like an Heart, his
neck not long his maine very thine, hangin^ only upon the one side, h^ shankes
be small and thin, the hoofes of his former feet be d^^vided like an Ox, and
almost representing a Goats foot. Of his hinder feet his outward part is hairy
and rough. The King of Ethiope has some store of these beasts, this beast is
not commonly taken alive.

Some travailers have examined these Countries of the Unicorne, but never saw
any; only there is a beast which very much resembles him, and most think it
only to be a beast which is commonly called a Rynocheros, which has been
seen.

The three several Crowns of the Emperors of Rome.
THe first Crown is of Silver, when he is crowned at Aquisgrane, for the
Realm of Germany, and is kept at Aix the Chapel. The second Crown is of
Iron, when he is crowned at Millain, for the Realm of Lombardy, and is kept at
Modene, a little town not far from Millain. And the third is of Gold, when he
is crowned at Saint Peter's in Rome, for the Empire of Rome, where it commonly
remains, being kept with 3 several keys, by the 3 several Archbishops, and
the keys one of Iron, one of Silver, and the other of Gold.

Septem-Viri, or the seven Electors of the Emperor of Germany.
THe election of the Emperors of Germany is in this sort, the seven Princes
Electors, called septem Viri, meet early, about six of the clock in Romaneo,
there they consult until nine, from thence they go in solemn order into St.
Bartholmews: whereof there be 3 Ecclesiastical, and 4 Temporal; the 3
Ecclesiastical, that is to say, the Archbishop of Ments, called the
Arch-chancellor of high Germany, being the first, next the Archbishop of
Collen, called the Arch-chancellour of Italy: and then follows the Archbishop
of Tryers, called the Arch-chancellor of France, all in their state be-fitting
so great a Majesty: Then the four temporal, that is to say, the Marquess of
Brandenburg, great Chamberlain of the Empire, with a massy key of Gold: then
the Duke of Saxony Lord high Marshall, bears the Sword before the Emperor^
then the Count Palatine of Rhine Carver to the Emperor; and likewise
Arch-sewer in carrying the Plate to the table: then the King of Bohemia.
Taster, or else Cup Bearer to the Emperor for the triumph: These are the only
Electors of the Emperor and after some other Ceremonies; they descend from
their seats, and there before the audience take a solemn oath, one after
another, in these words following.

I Do swear upon this Evangelist before me, that with all my faith which I
owe unto God, my diligence and care which I owe unto the Empire, without former
reward, or future hope of greater Honor, that I will choose with all Faith and
truth a just and a fit man for the Kingdom of ROME, as much as in me lies.

After this oath is ministered unto the 7 Princes Electors severally one after
another, they return to their seats: where they sing most solemnly with Organs,
Shalmes, and other Music, (...) Creator.

Then they withdraw themselves into the Council house half an hour, (the
door being locked) they call the Peers of Germany unto their Council house,
as messengers unto the Emperor, to signify their Election, and to desire the
Emperor, in name of the Electors of his good will herein, and if his Majesty
would vouch safe to come to the Church of St. Bartholmews at Frankford, a place
as Westminster is in England. or St. Dennis in France.

If the Emperor come he is received by the Archbishop of Ments the Duke of
Bavaria, and the rest of the Electors at the Church door according to their
custom, and there with solemnity they bring him into the Council house in his
Imperial robe, and his Diadem on his head to accept of this Election: and from
thence they come forth into the Church: the Emperor unto his Imperial seat:
the new elected King lead between the aforesaid 4 Bishops unto the Altar,
according to the wonted rites of their Elections, they set the King, and there
he is crowned King by the Electors.

Te Deum etc. is sung, then the Trumpets, Bells, Gunnes, and all kind of
sounding is there, and after all this is done, they lead the King unto his
Royal seat, provided in the midst of the Church, and there proclayme him
KING of the Romans, and heir of Augustus. Thus shortly have I laid down the
manner of the Election of the Emperors of Germany.

Of the birth of Alexander, and of the Macedonian Feasts.
THe Macedonians likewise upon the birthday of the great Alexander, by the
decree and commandment, first of Philip, Alexanders Father, who during his
life kept solemnly a most royal Feast for 3 several days. The first and the
greatest Feast was for his son Alexanders birth: The second cause was, for
that his Lieutenant General Parmeni^ had gotten a noble triumphant victory
over the Acaians. The third cause was, for that his horses and Chariots wan the
Garlands at the games of Olympia: this happened all in one day, on which day
Alexander the great was borne. The same very day the great Temple of Diana was
burnt by Herostratus, to become thereby famous, at what time the Priests of
Diana cried out, Magnum Asiae malum nasci. This Feast Triplicia was long time
after Alexander, observed by the Macedonians, and yearly solemnized in memory
of Alexanders Nativity, with great triumph and pomp, upon the day of his
birth, called Laeta and fortunata Macedonum dies: on which day the Macedonians
used to wear the picture of Alexander about their necks in Jewels, and on
their fingers in Rings.

This day they used sacrifice, and celebrated plays and diverse kinds of games.
Argiraspides* Alexanders chief soldiers, celebrated the Feast of Alexanders
nativity as long as they lived, and disdained to serve under King Antigonu^, or
any other King after Alexander died: Even so H^motimi, chief soldiers under
Cyrus, refused to serve under Cambises: and so of Achilles Myrmidons: and of
Pyrrhus Dolopes. I may speak of others who refused (after renowned and valiant
Kings) to serve wicked Princes, and cruel Tyrants.

The several Trophies of worthy Captains.
BEfore Rome had grown to any greatness, the first Kings triumphed on foot into
the City, as Romulus, who, though he triumphed over King Achron, whom he slew
in a combat challenged, yet he carried upon his shoulders the rich spoils of
the same King, being set in order upon a young green Oak, as trophies of
triumphs. So did Cor. Cossus, who slew (fighting in field hand to hand)
Tolumnius, General of the Tuscans; and so did Marcellus, who likewise slew
Britomarus, King of the old Gauls, before they were called Frenchmen: this
honor happened to none of the Romans beside, for Rome yet was scant heard of:
but afterward their triumphs grew unto such a pomp, that some were carried in
triumphant Chariots, drawn with huge Elephants, as Pompey the great in his
triumphs over Africa: some were carried with their triumphant Chariots drawn
with tamed Lions, others drawn with tamed Hearts, as Aurelianus: others drawn
with great Tigers, as Heliogabalus: others drawn with monstrous Mares,
Hermaphrodites, and others, drawn with huge large dogs: so that the Romans
far excelled all Kingdoms in their triumphs; especially in their last
Dictators and and Consulls before their Emperors time: for Pompey the great,
in his three triumphs over Africa, Asia, and Europe, carried Captives 339
Kings Children, Princes, Peers, and Noble men as prisoners, to stand pledges
in Rome: among this number, he brought Aristobulus, King of Judea, and
Lygranes, King of Armenia, five sons and two daughters of King Mythrydates.

Others brought in their triumphs, the Images and Statues of the Kings which
were slain, or otherwise dyed before they could be taken Captives, as
Lucullus brought the stratue or picture of Mithidates, set out and painted very
lively in Ensigns.

Scipio carried in his triumph at Carthage, the Image of Asdrubal, Hanibals
Brother.

So Augustus brought the Image of Cleopatra to Rome in his triumph, after she
slew her self, to bear company with her friend Marcus Antonius.

Others brought in their triumphs Kings alive, as Julius Caesar brought King
Iuba and his son, with all their treasures of Mauritania in great triumphs
and pomp into Rome.

Marius brought in his triumph Iugurth with all spoils and wealth of Numidia,
with all the solemnity that could be.

Paulus Emilius triumphed over Perseus, King of Macedonia, and his children,
whom he conquered, and brought captives and prisoners into Rome.

Others brought in their triumphs, with all pomp and solemnity, crowned with
Laurel and Olive garlands, the forms, likenesses, and pictures of Mountains,
Hills, Woods, Cities, Towns, Rivers, situated in those regions whom they
conquered.

Lu. Cornelius Scipio after he had put Antiochus the great to flight, he
carried in his triumph into Rome, the likeness and form of 130 Cities and
towns which he conquered in Asia, and therefore was surnamed Asiaticus.

Lu. Silla in like manner carri^d all the Cities of Greece, set ^ut very
lively on large En^ignes, and painted bravely on ^anners and flags.

So did Marcellus carry the picture of the City Siracusa in his triumph, set
out on long Tables.

So did Caesar carry the likeness and form of the River Nilus, and the River
of Rhyne ^n long tables painted, with the pictures of Scipio and Cato: So that
nothing escaped the Romans in their triumphs, for the greatness of the Empire
grew daily such.

Of the birth of Mahomet.
THe nativity of Mahomet, which was upon Friday, is unto this day among the
Turks solemnly celebrated with diverse ceremonies and sacrifices in remembrance
of his birth, every Friday through the year, but especially upon Good Friday,
in contempt of our Savior Christ, the Turks have such a royal Feast, that
the charges of that one days feast far surmounteth all the other 51 Feasts.

The Arabians honor the nativity of their Mahomet so much, that they begin the
year, and make their computation of time from the birthday of Mahomet by the
name of this word Hegyra, as the Spaniards were wo^^ of long time after they
were subdued by the Romans, to number their years from Augustus Caesar's
Reign, by these 4 letters, A, er, a: which is, Annus ^rat Augusti. These
Infidels and Pagans observe a memorial for the nativities of their Kings and
Princes throughout the whole world.

In Persia the birth of Cyrus upon the 16 day of the Month Lois.

In Macedonia the nativity of Alexander the great, upon the Ides of February.

And in Rome the nativity of Romulus, upon the 21 day of September.

In like sort the nativity of Julius Caesar, upon the fourth of the Ides of
July.

The nativity of Nerva upon the 4 Calend of December.

The Nativity of Adrian upon the 6 Calend of November.

Of Antonius pius upon the first of April.

Of Gordianus upon the 13 of January.

Of Constantine the great, upon the 4 Calend of Febru^ary.

And so of Traiane, Vespatian, and others, whose Natiuities were with great
honor observed, and with great dignity of triumphs, feasts, sacrifices,
games, and plays, with all pomp and glory in remembrance of good Kings
nativities, solemnized: For Beata resp^^^ cui princeps Philosophus.

All the Kingdoms of the World in their feast Nataliti^, in memory of the most
happy state of a good King, used all kind of strange inventions to magnify
their Kings: the Egyptians in their Pyramides and Obeliskes: the Grecians in
their triumphant Arches, and Pillars: the Persians with feasts and banquets,
solemnized the Nativities of their Kings, and the Romans excelled with sundry
pompes of triumphs, to set forth ^he dignities of their Kings, Dictators, and
Consuls. Others ^n the sacred Wood Aricin^m, do sacrifice to Diana with their
pomp of Peplon, etc.. Beside such magnificent and trium^hant Games and Plays
to set ^orth the dignities of the feast Natalitia, in memory of good ^rinces
nativities. As at A^ens Magna Panathenaea, first ^stituted by Ericthonius, to
ho^our Minerva every fifth year. ^n like manner as the games ^f Olympia, was by
Hercules, celebrat^d to honor Jupiter or Isthmia, was by Thaeseus made to
honor Neptune: So in Rome the great Plays and Games, called Ludi triumphal^^
Ludi Natalitij were only to^ that effect invented, to magnify good Princes,
and to record their worthiness with Feasts, Triumphs and Plays, in memory of
their nativities. For (...) this feast of Natalitia, the common people
assembled together with sweet flowers, green herbs: some made them boothes
with Oken boughe^ and some tents, covered wit^ with long Reeds, with great
banquets, and much mirth, (...) honor the nativityes of King^ The Roman
shepherds dres^ upon that day their sheepe-^^^ with green rushes, sweet
flo^ers, with branches and bough^ they, their Wives and Families with
nose-gaies and garlands, with Bagpipes and fiddles celebrated their feast
Natalitia at the birth of any King, Dictator, or Consul of Rome.

In other places they celebrated the games Saturnalia in December: their games
Sigillaria in January: the Games Lupercalia in February. But in Athens their
Bacchanalia is solemnized in November: where the Ministers and Priests of
Bacchus and Diana, by the names of Mimallones, Sileni, M^nades Bacchae,
Satyrae, etc. all crowned with Ivey Garlands, and with Ivey spears in their
hands, singing the song of Dithirambos, dancing Enoplia with the pomp of
Peplon to honor Bacchus: then how ought we to celebrate the Natalitia and
inauguration of our Englands joy, the establisher of our peace, King James of
blessed memory, and also his sacred Majesty who is the greatness of great
BRITAIN, and the unparalled pattern to all Kingdoms, of Piety and
Religion, of whom it may be truly said, With Graces three, with Muses nine,
With Sibyls twelve can he
With three the fourth, with nine the tenth
With twelve the thirteenth be.


Of the inauguration and anointing of the great Duke of Muscovia, with the
ceremonies at their Coronation.
AT the Coronation of the great Duke of Muscovia, (...) the States of Muscovia,
which they call Camesi, assemble together at Saint Michael, their chief
Temple, the day appointed for the Coronation: the City is so strawed with
flowers and sweet odours, and set forth with boughs, that their triumph is
great, feasting according to the custom of the Mus^ovites. The great men meet
the Duke, or the Emperor, and ^ring him into the Temple: who ^t his coming
into the Temple, an old fatherly man meets him, having on a long garment
down to the ground, Bombycina vest. This embraced the Em^erour most
courteously, for ^ee was the Metropolitan of Muscovia, or the chief Priest,
which they call Princeps sacro^um, whose authority and command in that Country
is very great.

In the midst of the Temple was made a Theater with seats to fit on, and with
stairs to pass to every place of the Theater, being set forth with most
sumptuous shows: the feat of the Emperors was made most royal; and with
great magnificence, sitting in Scamno, with a rich purple cap on his head,
beset with Gold and precious stones: a precious garment wrought with Gold, and
laced close at his breast, called Bombycina vestis, his hands so be set with
Jewels, that only the Emperors hands and his head were to be wondered at.

Now the Emperor being in his Palace, the States and the great men in their
feats, the chief Priest, or the Metropoli^tan turns his face, and looks
upon the Emperor, saying My most loving Son, and great Duke of Muscovia, now
the Gods have placed thee in the highest Tower of Fortune, and in the great
state of Dignity, not to harm or hurt thy people, but to help and to guide
them: not to devour them, but to relieve them; ministering Laws and Justice to
every man alike, laying before thine eyes, the noble Examples of the best
Emperors: thy Father brought much calamity, and wrought many dangers to this
Empire.

Will thou defend thy Country with Justice, and with arms, make much of good
men, and subdue the wicked. If thou do this, we thy Citizens here will pray
unto the regal Gods of supernall and infernal power to bless thee with much
felicity, that in thee we may see our Country flourish.

This being done, the people make great joy* and triumph form the highest to
the lowest: and therewithal much money is thrown among the vulgar people.

I could not read of any crown, nor of any other monuments among the
Muscovites, for it seemed by the tyranny of the Emperors, that they use very
few godly ceremonies.

I should have set down, at the coming of the great Duke through the street,
the peoples throng was such, that many were with naked swords to make way for
the Emperor to pass by, who commanded by all rigor and extremity to keep the
people off.

The Nativity of our Saviviour Christ.
THe Nativity of our Savior Christ seemed so simple, his life so poor, and
his death so ^gnominous, that he was a stumbling block to the Jews, and a
laughing stock to the Gentiles: they so thought, for that he was borne in
Bethlem a little village in Judea, and that he lived, and was conversant among
simple people, without pomp and glory, and that he died the death of the
cross with reproach and shame, supposing him to be a Carpenters son, but they
were deceived; his birth was most glorious, the appearing of the Star prooved
it, ^he descending of Angels singing Gloria in excelsis, did manifest it, the
coming of Magi from the East, did confirm it: his life was most Imperial,
comanding Water into Wine, the blind to see, the lame to go, the sick to
health, and the dead to rise. His death was most triumphant: with the song of
Hosanna he vanquished Devils, subdued Hell, and conquered the world, and said,
Consu^matum est. Therefore his nativity is to be solemnized of all Christians,
his life to be worshipped, and death to be glorified with Al^elujah, Hosanna,
and Gloria in excelsis, songs triumphant, and fit for Jesus Christ our Savior.

Of the ancient and strange ceremonies at the Election of the Prince of
Carinthia.
CArinthia, is a Province where the Sclavonians speech is spoken, where manners
and customs are most strange, and the like Ceremonies not read of. When any
new elected Prince enters into his government, he is brought into a fair
large valley, where was wont to be an ancient City, where some monuments are
left as relics, so that time wear out the name of it. In a wide fair meadow
hard by, a marble stone is erected, upon the which stone a Rusticall fellow
stands, which by succession of blood that place and office by heritage does
possess. There he has hard by him a deformed lean Mare, and an old lean
Ox, and the Rusticall Country people in heaps about him.

On the farther side of the medowe is the new Prince with his Barons and States
about him, with great pomp, very richly attired, all in Purple, having the
Princes Ensigns and his Arms, and 12 Banners carried solemnly before him, the
Prince being apparrelled like a poor simple country man, in old broken
garments, his cap bare, and his shoos worn, with a country staff in his
hand, seeming rather more like a shepherd then a Prince: who coming nigh to
the Clown that stands upon the stone, he cries out in the Sclavonian
tongue, and asks, who is this that is coming here so proud, the Barons and
the States answer, he is a Prince of the Country: then the Country man from
the Marble stone demands again,

Is this man a right and just Judge? Does he seek the benefit and wealth of
this Country? Is ^he of honest and virtuous condition? Is he a sound Christian
in religion? Will he defend the true faith? And is he worthy of this honor?

To whom all the States and Barons answer, he is, and shall be. Again he
says, I ask you by what law and right should I be removed from this seat?
The County of Goritia answers: for money this place is bought: then this Ox,
and this Mare shall be thine, and all the Garments which the last Prince did put
off, and thy hou^e shall be free without any tribute. Then the countryman
descends, and meets the Prince, and strikes him a little on the cheek,
saying, I command thee to be a good just Prince: then he takes his Mare and
his Ox, and gives the place to the Prince, who straight stands upon the
Marble-stone, taking a naked Sword into his hand: first, he does flourish it
one way, then he does flourish it another way, promising thereby equal Justice
to the people: there they bring water in a Countrey-mans cap to drink, to
signify unto the Prince, that he should abstain from wine. After these
ceremonies, the Prince comes down from the Marblestone, and is brought to
the Temple called, Our Ladies Chapel, which was the seat (sometime) of a
Bishop: then from thence, after some sacrifice which was to be used, all things
done and performed, the Prince puts off the rusticall garments that he put
on before, to perform the custom and ceremonies of the Country, and wears
his princely wonted attire: and after he had feasted with his Barons and his
Nobility, he returned to the meadow again, where the Marble-stone was, and
sits there on his Tribunal seat, to hear causes pleaded, and to give
judgment according to Justice: this is the manner and strange custom of the
election of any Prince in Carinthia.

So strange were the customs and manners in old time, as well at the election
and coronation of Princes, as also in their ceremonies and Scepters.

For the first Kings of the world used for their Scepters, long gilded spears.

The old Kings of Rome used a crooked staff, called Lituus.

Tarquiniu^ Priscus the 5 King of Rome, had his Scepter of Ivory.

The Kings of India had their Scepters of Ebony.

The Lydians carried before their Kings great Axes.

The Kings of Sicily used a silver staff for their Scepter.

The Babylonians used diverse kinds of Scepters, with sundry figures, as of
Lions, Eagles, etc.

The manner of the funeral pomp of the Grecians.
IN other parts of Greece they used more solemn mourne^ull ceremonies at the
Funeral of their Kings and Princes: ^hey took down their Bul^arkes and
Fortresses of Wars, ^hey untile their Temples, they ^^bvert their Altars, they
reject and depose their Idols: they put ^ut their fire, and the men shave ^oth
their heads and beards, and ^hey clip their horses, and left nothing undone
that seemed ^ournefull: Then all the Priests, ^agistrates, young Gentlemen, and
children, carried Trophies and Monuments of the dead ^ing, with his Ensigns
and ^rmes crowned with Garlands, ^^cording to the custom of ^reece. The
Noblemen carried diverse great Cups or Bowls: some full of Wine, others full of
Milk, and some full of Blood, all in white Garments* others carried Honey and
Cakes, which should be sprinkled, and cast upon the funeral fire: at what
time, they sung Hymns, Odes, and songs, called Ialem^^ in the praise of the
dead Prince: and lastly when the King is solemnly thus burned, the Prince^ and
great men of his blood, should carry his Ashes in Golden pots, crowned over
with all kind of sweet flowers, which should be a memory or Trophie of the
dea^ King.

The Grecians had also these customs at the funeral of their dear friends,
as Parents, Brethren, Sisters: both the Men and Women should have their long
hair, and offer it upon the Hearse of the dead: So Achilles solemnized the
funeral of his dear friend Patroclus, cutting the fore locks of his hair, to
set it among many other of Patroclus friends upon his Hearse or Tomb.

Euripides funeral was of Ar^b^laus King of Macedonia so honored, that he
lamented Euripides death with mourning apparel, and with a sha^en head and
beard, according to the use and custom of the Macedonians.

The great pomp and solemnity at the inauguration of the Pope of Rome.
THe Pope of Rome at his inauguration, excelled all other Princes in solemnity
and pomp, for after that the Pope is new elected by the whole College of
Cardinals; he comes from his Palace of Saint Angelo, with great glory and
honor toward Saint Peter's Church: First the Officers, as Stewards,
Controllers, Treasurers, and chief Rulers, apparrelled all in long
Scarletgownes. Secondly, the Knights of Rome: Thirdly, the Barons, Counts, and
Marquesses: Then the Abbats: then followed the Bishops, after the Bishops, the
Archbishops in their long Pontifical garments, with silver Miters, richly
beset with stones. After came 3 degrees of Cardinals, Deacon-Cardinals,
PriestCardinals, and Bishop-Cardinals. The Pope with passing pomp is carried
upon men's shoulders in Cellagestatoria, with his triple Crown on his head,
full of precious stones, and with a most sumptuous and precious robe, wrought
over very artificially with Gold, and set with diverse stones, and so carried in
pomp to St. Peter's Church upon Kings Ambassadors shoulders.

After some prayers and sacrifice done, he is again upon men's shoulders
carried from St. Peter's into Saint Andrews Chapel, where after many rites and
ceremonies finished, which were provided for his inauguration, he is taken up
again into his golden chair from St. Andrew's Chapel, where Andrew the
Apostles head is presented: thence he is carried to the Chapel of St. Peter
and St. Paul: thence carried from place to place by the Legates and Ambassadors
of all the Kings of Christendom, then being in Rome, representing the states
of Kings and Emperors.

Oh superbum animal: for between golden and silver Crosses, the Miters of
Bishops, and Cardinals Hats, shining as stars with diverse kinds of precious
stones, with Jewels: the Popes triumphant carriage under such^ regal Canopy,
with his triple Crown, his rich and Pontifical garments, blessing the people,
passed far the pomp o^ great Xerxes in his voyage into Greece: or the
triumphs of great Pompey over all Africa and Asia at Rome: Hos ludos and iocos
diceres, prout rabies Papa: with such peales of Gunnes, ringing of Bells,
sounding Trumpets, with such clamours and noise of other brazen Instruments,
that it far surmounted the besieging of Carthage, or the assaulting of Numantia.

In like triumph and pomp he is again carried into his Palace of St. Angelo,
blessing the people from place to place, and in every place as he is carried:
the people again crying out, wishing him the felicity of Augustus, and the
love of Traian, using several solemn Ceremonies, with the greatest pomp that
can be invented.

His Dinner that day exceeded Ca. Caesar, who in his triumph over Africa,
prepared 22000 ^bles most roially furnished: and his banquets after dinner
far excelled the banquets of Lacius Lucullus, or Marcus Antonius. His Mirthe
and Music passed the feast Hyacinthia.

The funeral pomp of the Roman Emperors.
THe pomp and solemn state of the Funerals of the Roman Emperors were such,
as being set forth, the solemnity of the dead Emperor were such, as the
Senators, Dictators, Consuls, and chief magistrates of Rome, being in their
appointed funeral garments, attending to carry the Coffin, with one before the
Hearse, playing upon a Shalme or a Flute with a mournful funeral Song called
Nania, which in like manner, the Grecians used at the funeral of their Kings,
the song which they called Ialemos.

Then the Patricians and Senators carried before the dead Emperor, his Statues
and Images: and after that, the Statues and Images of his predecessors, to set
forth the dignity of his stock, as Ca. Caesar did the funeral of his Aunt,
Mother to Marius, whose Statues Caesar caused to be carried before the Coffin,
with all the Sergeants carrying their Axes and rods, with all the Ensigns,
Crowns, rich spoils, and Trophies, which Marius had gotten in his victories.

In like manner Tiberius Caesar, the third Emperor of Rome, caused at the
funeral of his Father Drusus, that the statue of Aeneas, and all the statues
of the Kings of Alba, until Romulus time, the 17 after Aeneas, and the statue
of Romulus, and of the whole family of Gens Iulia, from Romulus time to Julius
Caesar, lineally.

The like pomp was before Sylla, and others, by the Patricians and Senators.
Yet Marcus Aemilius, Lepidus, Pomponius Atticus, with some others, commanded
that they should not be brought into the Field of Mars with any solemnity of
Jupiters coat, of triumphant garments, Purple robes, and such other pomp: But
specially if any dyed in the field, the rare sight of the solemnity excelled:
the General and chief Captains, and every Officer with his band, trayling
their Pikes after them on the ground, with the points of their Swords
downward, their Ensigns folded together, their horses sheard and clipped, their
dumb Music, with all the ruefull sights that might be invented, etc.

Of the order of the inauguration and Coronation of the Kings of Persia.
IN Persia after great King Cyrus death, for so were the Kings of Persia
called, Great Kings, his successors used Cyrus orders, with the like ceremonies
as was solemnized at the inaugurations of King Cyrus: for then there was no
anointing of any King in the whole World, but of the Kings of Israel: other
Nations used such ceremonies as their Countries observed in their electing of
Kings.

In some countries they made choice of the most likely est men in sight, as
among the Ethopians.

Among the Medes, he that excelled in comeliness, and talnes of person, and
strength of body, should be elected King.

In Lybia, he that was most swift in running should be King.

In Persia, then a Kingdom under the Medes until Cyrus time, whose greatness
grew such, as he became the only Monarch, by whom all the East Kingdoms were
subdued: his Successors, the great Kings of Persia, were with these ceremonies
made Kings. They should sit in Cyrus Chair, they should put on those garments
that Cyrus first ware, which were kept as monuments and relics for the Kings
of Persia. The new King sitting so in Cyrus Chair, three of the greatest
Peers in Persia, brought unto him three dishes, in the one was five dry
figs: In the second a little Turpentine: the third Milk. These Ceremonies
being finished, after that the new King had eaten of the dry figs, and had
tasted of the Turpentine, and drank of the Milk, he rose from Cyrus Chair,
and was thence brought unto the next Hill: for the Persians had no Temples, nor
Alters there. Aftar supplications done, they sacrificed unto the Sun, whose
Temple (say they) is the whole World: thence the King is brought to Persepolis,
where the new King again puts on the twelve sundry robes of Cyrus, one
after another, by several ceremonies to be done, while they do sacrifice unto
the whole host of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, whom the Persians
cal^ in one name Jupiter. Magi there having Tiara on their heads, and crowned
with Myrtle, sang their sacred songs Theogonia, while the new King is putting
on of these twelve Robes.

After this, the King went to Cyrus chair, and read the laws of Persia: For
as the old Kings of Rome were only by the divination of the Augurers made
Kings, and instructed in their Kingdoms: so the Kings of Persia were by their
Magi instructed in their sacrifice, and taught in their Religion; without whom
neither was it lawful for the Romans to do sacrifice, without their Augurer
stood by, or for the Persians, without their Magi being in place.

The manner and order of the Indians in celebrating the nativity of their Kings.
THe Indians so honored the birthday of their King, at what time the days
began to lengthen, that the King with all his Nobles went to the River Ganges
to wash and bathe themselves, where they offered in sacrifice to the Sun a
number of black Bulls, for that color among the Indians is most esteemed.

After sacrifice done to the Sun, the King held a Feast, which the Romans
called Hilaria, which was wont to be celebrated upon the ^ Calend of April, at
what time the Roman Matrones, and the young women of Rome crowned with Myrtle;
bathed themselves before they sacrificed unto Venus.

This very time the young men of Athens kept festival days, with mirth and
pastime, to honor the Moon for the like cause, as the Indians had for the
Sun. This feast Hilaria had all public and solomne Plays, with all kind of
triumphs, for joy that the Sun began to turn his face, and to lentghen their
days, tanquam patriae solatium and initium laetitiae.

Of the Nativity of King Cyrus, and of the Persian feasts or joy thereof.
THE great King Cyrus (for so the Persians named their Kings after Cyrus time)
upon the very day that he was borne, he had victory over the Scythians and
Saracens, he so honored and magnified that day, that Cyrus commanded that they
should be called the great Kings, and appointed that it should be solemnized
yearly with a regal noble feast, called Sacaea, after the name of that Nation
conquered: in the which feast was celebrated diverse strange kinds of
ceremonies: as the Masters to attend upon the Servants, the Mistresses upon
their maids, imitating the orders and manners in the feast Saturnalia, wherein
also were Bacchanalia used, in the which feast were men, women, and children,
which disguised themselves like Faunes, with Javelins wreathed about with Ivy
in their hands, and with Ivy crowns on their heads, dancing, and skipping,
after Psalters and Howboyes, singing sacred songs unto Bacchus, called Orgya
and Dithyrambos: this feast Cyrus commanded to be yearly solemnized in Babylon,
upon the sixteenth day of the month Loys, on the which day, Cyrus (as some
suppose) was borne; which day among the old Persians was highly honored, for
of all the feasts and sacrifices of all solemn great days, the days of their
Kings nativities were most in honor esteemed. This was the only and greatest
feast of the Persians, for the rich men would celebrate the feast of their
Kings birth, with sacrificing of whole Camels, Horses, Oxen, and Asses, sparing
no cost in this feast: the poorer sort strained themselves with all charges to
set forth the feast of their Kings nativities: at what time the Magistrates
used to sing the song Magophonia at their feast, and the song Theogonia at
their sacrifice. For this feast Sacaea was called among the Thessalians
Piloria, in Creete called Hermea, in some place called Penagria, in another
place called Saturnalia; but in all places used and celebrated with great
solemnities at the nativity of Kings and Princes.

Of the funeral pomp of the Egyptians.
THE Kings of Egypt were most sumptuously reserved in this order: their bodies
were opened, and were in such sort used, as the Egyptians use, with Myrhe,
Aloes, Honey, Salt, Wax, and many other sweet odours, being seared up, and
anointed with all precious oils, and so they reserved the bodies of their
Kings in high buildings made for the purpose, far from the ground, as in their
Pyramides and Labyrinth before spoken. The Funeral was so lamented, that all
Egypt mourned in this sort: the men would clap dung and dirt upon their heads,
beat their bodies, stri^^ their breasts, knocking their heads to every post,
howling and crying for their King: their women bare-breasted, besmeard with all
kind of filth; running up and down in furious manner, fasting and mourning 72
days from wine or any other meat, saving bread, and the water of Nilus.

Of the funeral pomp of the Thracians.
THe Thracians Funeral is full of mirth and melody, for when they bring their
Friends to the Grave, they use to sing Thracian Songs, with all sweet music;
only this ceremony they reserved, when any man that was of great calling,
dyed, his Wife must be brought the same day to the grave of her husband in her
richest ornament and best apparel, accompanied with her Parents, and next in
blood, with great solemnity, which after sacrifice done upon the Grave of her
husband, she must make sacrifice of her self: The Priest must bring her to the
Altar, where she is sacrificed with a veil over her face, and after oblations
and prayers done, she is slain upon her husbands Grave for sacrifice.

Of the sacred anointing of the Kings of Israel.
THe anointing of the first King of Israel, was by Samuel the Prophet, who was
commanded to anoint Saul, the first King of the world that was anointed: he
powered oil upon his head, he kissed him, and said, the Lord has anointed thee
King over his inheritance: and the people shouted, and said, God save the King:
at this time began first the use of oil in anointing of Kings; after this
manner were Saul and David anointed Kings of Israel, and after David, his son
Solomon.

The order and ceremonies, were to ride upon the Kings beast, and to sit upon
the Kings throne, where the Prophet (being called the Seer) poured the oil
upon his head, to signify the gift of the Holy Ghost: Then the Prophet kissed
the King upon the cheek, and turned his face to the people, and said, God save
the King: then they sounded the trumpets, and brought him to his Dinner with
all mirth and music. Thus were Saul and David anointed by Samuel, and after
them Solomon anointed King.

Of the solemnity on the birthday of Prince Aratus by the Achaians, with
feasts and sacrifice.
IN like manner the Achaian^ solemnized the nativity of Aratus with a royal
feast and sacrifice, yearly upon the Grave of Aratus, which was called
Aratium: The Priests were girded about with a purple cloth, the Senate in white
robes, with Garlands of flowers on their heads: the magistrates and chief
officers of all Achaia, with great pomp crowned with Laurel and Myrtle, with
hymns and songs made a solemn procession round about Aratium upon the
birthday of Aratus: such was his love among the Grecians, that he was chosen
seventeene times General of the Achaians.

The Trophies and triumphs that were invented to honor the nativities of Kings
and Princes were such, that some builded Cities, as Alexandria, to honor
Alexander: Caesarea, to honor Caesar, and Antiochiae, to magnify the name of
Antiochus the great. Yea, such were the dignities and honors of Princes, that
the Senators and Patricians of Rome, by common consent of all the Magistrates,
changed the name of the Month Quintilis, to be called July, to honor the
name of Julius Caesar, and the Month Sextilis to be called August, in memory
of the birthday of Augustus, which to this day stands.

Yet Domitianus the Emperor, though he had commanded by a decree, that the
Month October, should be called Domitianus, after his own name, in
remembrance of his Nativity: And Germanicus, Father to Caligula, commanded the
Month September to be called Germanicus, to hold his birthday, yet took no
effect: Such is the continuance and long memory of a good Prince, and such is
the decay and short remembrance of a wicked Prince.

The birth of Minerva.
IN like manner upon the Calendes of March, the feast of Minerva was celebrated
in Mount Celio, at Rome, where the plays called Quinquatriae were sumptuously
solemnized, continuing five days: at what time they presented Minerva with
presents and rewards: On the which day, the young knights and lusty youths of
Rome, entered in Arms on horseback, and on foot, into Martius field, to
honor Minervas nativity with feats of Arms.

This feast was in Athens solemnized by the name of Panathenaea, their Poets,
Orators, and Musicians contended for victories on the day of Pallas birth, as
they did in the games called Scoenici: The prize and reward of the Victor, was
to wear a long precious garment called Palladium, wrought over with gold, and
to wear a crown of Laurel, and to sit in the chair of Pallas.

Of the birth of Xerxes, and of the solemn Feast thereof.
THe great Xerxes King of Persia, upon the very day that he succeeded his
Father Darius Hisdaspis as King, he yearly most solemnly used to celebrate
such a princely noble Feast in memory of that day, which the Persians so
honored, tanquam Imperij natalem, as he would command all the Nobles of
Persia to come in the greatest pomp they could, and he himself in his most
sumptuous Persian Robes, with his Diadem upon his head, solemnized the Feast
with all pomp and glory. Upon the which day Xerxes was called of all the
Peers, Nobles, and all his people Ti^^n. This day was so celebrated among the
Persians in remembrance of Xerxes first day to his Kingdom. So the Siracusans
honored Ti^olion for his great victories, in memory whereof they yearly upon
the day of his Birth decreed, that plays and games of music, with running,
wrestling, throwing of darts, swimming, running of horses, with other exercises
of the body, should be celebrated.

In like sort the Parthians observed that day, that Arsaces their King had
subdued Seleucus with all kind of joys, mirth and triumphs that the Parthians
could invent: they magnified that day with all games and plays, and kept a
great solemn Feast in remembrance of their liberty and deliverance from their
bondage and thraldom under Seleucus by Arsaces. If therefore they honored
that day, Tanquam initium libertatis with songs Theogonia, shall we not Canere
Paean, who have so long enjoyed peace and quietness of liberty by the happy
reign of our most gracious Sovereign, of whose nativity and happy government
we may sing with joy,

Blessed is that land whom God lends such a King
Who Peace, Religion, Piety does bring,
And who does strive these blessings to uphold
To lead his subjects unto Heavens fold:
We all are bound to pray for his long life,
Which keeps this Island free from fear and strife
FINIS.

