THE WHOLE COURSE OF Chirurgerie, wherein is briefly set down the Causes,
Signs, Prognostications and Curations of all sorts of Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers,
Fractures, Dislocations and all other Diseases, usually practiced by
Chirurgions, according to the opinion of all our ancient Doctors in
Chirurgerie. Compiled by Peter Low Scotchman, Arellian, Doctor in the Faculty
of Chirurgerie in PARIS, and Chirurgian ordinary to the most victorious and
christian King of France and Navarre. WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED THE Presages of
Divine Hippocrates.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Purfoot. 1597.

TO THE MOST PVISSANT and mighty Prince JAMES the Sixte, by the grace of God,
King of Scotland.
MOST Renowned and dread Sovereign: as heretofore I have presumed to shroud
the first fruits and degrees of my studies, under your Highness Name and
protection. So now both humble and entire affection have moved me to present
this Treatise to your royal View as a Testimony of humble duty, to express
my poor, yet unfeigned zeal. For to your Majesty the protection of all our
doings do justly belong: and to your Highness are we principally bound to
do all Service, the which I being willing to perform, and also tendering the
commodity and benefit of my native Country (which GOD willing no occasion
shall cause me to omit) I have published this Treatise and these my painful
labors to exonerate my self of the burden which every man is bound to
undertake for the Common wealth: if my industry could have produced better
effects it would rejoice to pass under the protection of so excellent and
mighty a Prince. But the Arcadians can give Pales but a fleece of woolle, the
Athenians a dish of Olives to Pallas, and my self have nothing but these
unpolished lines to present to your royal Majesty. May it the^ please your
Highness, as Minerua harbored an owl under her target, Cytherea a deformed
Cyclops in her lovely bosom, and Apollo the night-rauen under his heavenly
Lute: to accept in good part the travails of your humble subject and vassal,
which I humbly offer to your Highness, praying daily that all the blessings
in heaven may increase upon your Majesty's Person and Progeny to your
Princely content and immortal glory.

Given at London the xx. of April. Your Majesty's most humble and obeisant
subject. Peter Low.

To the friendly Reader.
IT is commonly said as it is of truth good friend that idleness is the mother
of all vices which does not only engender them but also nourishes and
intertaineth the same, for avoiding whereof as also having promised in my
Treatise of the Spanish sickness to further thy knowledge with the whole Course
of Chirurgerie, now do I publish the same, not as Plato did his common wealth
Cicero his Orator, and sir Thomas Moore his Eutopia, leaving to the world any
wished perfection not practiced, but I impart to thee my labors and hidden
secrets and experiences by me practiced and daily put in ure to the great
comfort, ease and delight of such as had occasion to use my help. For being
Chirurgian mayor to the Spanish Regiments two years at Paris and since that
time following the King of France my Master in the wars where I had
commodity to practice all points, and operations of Chirurgerie, upon the
which occasion I collected my practice with the opinion of both ancient and
late writers at vacant hours into a book which is that I offer to thy view.
Seeing then I do not entreat of any vain fable, but of such earnest and
serious matter as touches the profit of all men in general, and the benefit
and commodity of every man in particular. I hope the readers hereof will
vouchsafe to attribute and grant such diligence, and willing ear, mind and
attention hereunto as they are accustomed to do in those causes which they
account most weighty, grave and necessary and which they are most desirous to
know, learn, and understand. Herein thou may reap the fruits of my trauells
and studies, and by the friendly acceptance hereof gain to thy self fruition
and commodity of my other like labors, like as my Treatise of the help of
women in the time of their infantme^t, with the curatio^ of such diseases as
happen commonly to maids and married women, and the treatise which is called
the poor man's guide which are works esteemed by such learned men as have seen
them, most necessary for the common wealth. Some men perhaps more respecting
their own private gain then the public profit will think that I should have
co^cealed those things as did the Egiptians, by writing in letters
Hydrographicks. But I rather follow the Grecians who used every year to write
in the temple of Esculapius in Epidauro, in the presence of all the people all
the sickness, they had cured together with the several remedy, for as the
Philosopher says bonu^ quo communius eo praestantius. Also being moved by the
counsel of Cicero where he says that we should not only have regard to our
own particular, but also to the profit and commodity of our kinsfolks and
frindes, and generally to the common wealth of that Country where we took
our birthe, the which counsel also was observed amongst the old Romans when
their estate most florishtd, for they did account him amongst the number of the
unfortunate, that during his life did not manifest (in some one public
benefit or other) his affection and thankful heart to the place wherein he first
bread, nevertheless there be some envious and ignorant persons whom I may justly
compare to Antipholus that pearelesse pick thank, whose filthy heart being
inflamd with malice, will find fault with this my labor, to whom I will answer
according to the saying of Erasmus Roterodamus, vt ignaui canes omnibus ignotis
allatrant ita barbari quicquid non intelligu^t carpunt ac dam^a^t, only upon
this hope I rest, that as in good will and love I have done this, so the well
disposed will ce^sure it in the best sort, and where fault is they will in
friendly and charitable manner correct and amend the same, the ignorants I would
desire only to put to their hand and do better, wishing every man as much
profit and benefit in reading hereof as my willing attempt has intended them,
and so I end bidding the gentle Reader most hartelie farewell.

From London the 20. day of April. 1597.
Omnibus clarissimis Doctoribus Regii collegij chirurgicoru^ Parisiensu^ nempe
D. Rodolpho Lefort, D. Petro Pigret, D. Anthonia Portal, D. Seuerino Pineau, D.
Hyeronimo de la Noue, D. Philippo Colot, D. Simoni Pietro D. Iacobo Guilmean,
D. Loudouico, Hubert, D. Iodoco de Beauuais, D. Gerardo Oliuier, D. Francisco
de Leury, D. Iohanni de Hayes, D. Iohanni Girard, and omnibus alijs, Petrus Low
Doctor in Chirurgia. S. P. D.
MEus naturalis zelus erga patriam meam, Domini Asclepiadaei, fecit vt
generaliter ea celare non potuerim, quorum notitiam legendo atque exercendo
mihi acquisiui: quandoquidem in his partibus non inueni viros tam peritos huius
scientiae, quam apud vos: vtpote qui sequantur potius accidentales quasdam
obseruationes, quam infallibilia artis praecepta. Hoc autem chirurgicum opus
meum vestris acribus iudicijs examinandum relinquo: and laborum meorum honorem
vobis debitum ingenue fateor, qui meae musae fuistis. Mea quidem methodus ea
est, qua vos in vestro famosissimo Collegio vtimini: quam etsi non ita exact
sigillatim exequutus sum, tame^ quam diligentissime potui, eam obseruaui:
excepta sola Anatomia cum aliquibus alijs rebus particularibus: quas breui in
lucem edere spero. Primo de chirurgiae origin tracto, and chirurgicis
instrumentis: secundo de rebus naturalibus, non naturalibus, et praeter
naturam, cum definitione, causis, signis, prognosticis, and cura tumorum in
genere: tertio de tumoribus qui a q^atuor humoribus procedunt: quarto de
distinctione tumorum in specie, a capite ad pedes: quinto de eodem ordine in
vulneribus, vlceribus, fracturis, dislocationibus, and variis alijs chirurgiae
operationibus: postremo de remedijs co^muniter vsurpatis a chirurgo, cum
authoritatibus omnium antiquorum authoru^, in quolibet moibo particulari.
Itaque pro omnibus, post coelestes potentias, me vobis omnino obligatum sentio:
ideoque oro Deum opt. max. vt foelicitate semper vos bear velit.

Datum Londini, 20. die Aprilis. 1597.
To the friendly Reader in praise and commendation of the Author of this
Treatise M. Peter Low Doctor in Chirurgerie, and Surgeon unto the French
King. William Clowes one of her Majesty's Chirurgions, wishes all happiness,
with much increase of knowledge in this most excellent and famous Art of
Chirurgerie.
Here have thou friendly Reader truly and faithfully set down unto thee, a
most worthy and compendious doctrine, containing many wholesome and profitable
precepts, for the curing of Tumors, apostumes, wounds and ulcers, fractures,
dislocations in general and particular: with their Indications
prognostications, signs and judgments: with diverse operations chirurgicall,
for the most part in Dialogue wise, very delightsome, plain and profitable,
in which discourse is also cited and set down many worthy quotacions, famous
authorities, and Authors of renown, with diverse well experimented remedies,
both simple and compound, and so very briefly concluding with the divine
Presages of Hipppocrates. All which it has pleased master Peter Low of his
own entire affection and unfeigned zeal which he bears to all young
springing Plants, called of Paracelsus and other learned writers, the children
or sons of Art: has here published in our own vulgar toungue his most
fruitful and necessary Treatise of Chirurgerie, not as a stranger, but as a
dear Friend. In like manner he has of late performed one other Treatise
being extant, and is entitled by him, The cure of the Spanish sickness. And
further I have thought it good, here to foretell, he is fully determined to
publish in the English tongue, other very brief and pithie works of
Chirurgerie, unless he be stayed by the wrongs and injuries of a rude
multitude of subtle Sicophants or ungrateful Emulators, men indeed defective
in their Art and foully faulty in their judgments, being the only race and
ofpring of Erasistratus and Thessalus Tralianus, who have most unseemly
behaved themselves behind his back, chiefly about the answering of this
present book, before a sort of them had ever seen him, or understood whereof
he entreated, and have used against him likewise, a number of ridiculous,
aspiring and proud pontifical comparrisons, patched together, like the rags
of a beggars cloak: and yet some of these hideous Monsters in humanity, are
as it were fallen asleep, in their own beastly ignorance, making no
conscience in mispending their talents: nevertheless, they will be marvelous
vigilent in carping and reprehending of other men's labors and travels, which
is a point of extreme foolishness in them, because it is said, he that has
done least, is worthy of thanks. Notwithstanding, according to the old wonted
guise they have plounged themselves again and again in the floods and
streams of unquenchable hatred against all men whatsoever (English or
stranger) that publishes forth books of Physic or Chirurgerie in the
English toungue: never considering the grave and wise sayings of Cicero, that
a man is not only borne for himself, but chiefly to profit his native
Country, Parents and Friends. It is said, That man may boast of his wealth,
that has gotten it well.
And many of these foresaid professed enemies are more delighted in bragging
and boasting of their own cunning and great skill in scratching and scraping
together of abundance of woful-gotten pelf, then otherwise careful to seek
the good of others by publishing of such like works of Chirurgerie, as is this
present Treatise, nay, a many of them are so evil affected and uncharitably
given, that they will with all rigor, hard and bitter speeches most unjustly
wound men behind their backs, and that after a Parasiticall manner:
sometimes before persons of good account in their chambers privately, and many
times also at tables openly, with most intolerable reproaches and odious
defamations, and after extolleth them to their faces with a world of
commendations, they will with the Crocodile seek all advantages to spoil a
man secretly and after wash his face again with dissembling tears most
trecherously. But here to leave such vain and variable heads in their
indignation^, which reward hatred for love, and contempt for friendly
affection: and end with all thankfulness unto the Author of this Treatise,
but most specially for publishing the same in our English tongue: praying unto
God, who is the giver of all knowledge and good gifts to increase the number
of all well minded men, who for the good of posterity do employ their labors
and spend their time in the publishing of such like books of Chirurgerie,
which will be no doubt a great benefit unto the country and common wealth.

William Clowes.

Ad virum virtute et doct^ina praestantem Petrum Low Chirurgiae Doctorem.
Carmen Iambicum.
SVnt plurimi, quos esse splendidos iuuat,
Alterius et superstites virtutibus
Clarere posteris: Opus laudarier,
Dignumque creta scilicet notarier.
Sic proditur Vappa hominis and men's degen^er
Sunt quos priorum inuenta clarioribus
Ditarier multum suis iuuat notis:
Opus mehercule laud dignius sua.
Namque est boni quocunque vel iuuamine
Been posse, nec non velle posteris been.
Se^ quid meretur ille, propria manu
Non qui addit inuentis, sed inuenit prior?
Solum furere, polum ferir^ ^ertice,
Nec non haberier vel hamanus Deus,
Homo vel esse diuus omne in saeculum.
Hoc differens solum a Deo viuus, quodis,
Dum illustrat humani tenebras ingenij,
Perdurat idem neutiquam mutabilis:
At hic v^lut candela, quae dum illuminat,
Nostros ocellos, proprio igne deperit:
Post reliquum est: habemus hoc quod vidimus.
Tua ergo perge dare, feresque hanc gloriam:
Nec proptis v^^it, nec obiit commodis.
Quod and fatentur vltro, and vsque, predicant
Qui vel tuum hoc videre opus chirurgicum:
Sic mortuo virtus alet famam tibi.
I. M. C. V. Med. Doctor.

G. Baker one of her Majesty's* chief Chirurgions in ordinary.
WHO can deny, but he deserves great fame
that profit yields, all Nations where he goes:
His Country may rejoice to hear his name,
that in strange Lands, such books of knowledge shows.
He studies how to make good Surgions known,
rebukes the bad, and honors men of skill:
Then let him reap the corn that he has sown,
his harvest seeks no more but worlds goodwill.
The Schools have plac'st him in a doctors state,
the grauest here his learning does commend,
The Learned sees his study has bin great,
whereby he brings great things to perfect end.
A wonder is, how World bare men rewards,
for riding horse, or dressing meat you see.
And those that save men's lives they least regard,
for they get neither stipend gift nor fee.
Blind is that Age that does the best despise,
and helps the worst to worship, wealth and grace.
A common thing, vice lets not virtue rise,
but holds it down that ought have highest place.
Yet none can rob the learned of their right*
no more then take s^^eete smell from flower in field.
Then Doctor Low thy lamp does give such light,
that every one to virtue fame does yield.
Pass on with praise through every soil and coast,
Where Low is known he shall be honored most.
G.B.

John Norden Esquier in praise of the Author.
APollo seen in Simples, for his Art
in curing men, a God was na'md to be:
Knowing all secrets and each hidden part
that virtue yeildeth to each herbs degree.
And by his knowledge of herbs simplicity,
the Heathen took him to be a Dietie.
For when as Nature wounded was oppressed,
not able to sustain the grief she bare:
The body dying, then for want of rest,
Simples recured, such their virtue are:
That who so seeks, and knows each Simple found,
there Nature soon shall cure any wound.
See Chiron here, Apollos Puple, he
declar's the secrets of his Masters skill:
He seeks no meede nor looks for any fee,
then give him honor for his mere goodwill*
That being Stranger borne yet loves us so,
to leave his Art with us to cure our woe.
In praise of the Book.
Lenuoy.
LOw is thy name, high grows thy fame,
Amongst all English men,
Thy book shall save, my vearse from blame:
When world well ways thy pen*
Give zoyilus o^ Momus brood*
Do carpe at thee what then,
Do feed thy hope with heavenly food:
Amongst wise learned men.
John Norden. Esquire.

In praise of the Author and his work.
THen O blessed science under son,
That most men's lives does save,
The art that greatest praise have won:
Whhereby great help we have.
Is surgerie, for knowledge there,
In highest grace does shine.
The skill is honered every where,
For special griefs divine.
When wrath and rage makes quarrels rise
And men in fury fight,
In surgon such great knowledge lies,
Green wounds are healed straight.
Flesh cut, blood lost, and every vain,
And sinnowes shronke away,
He can by art restore again:
And comfort their decay.
The mangled bones are set and knit,
In their own proper place,
And every lymme in order fit,
Comes to their force and grace.
By surgons mean who quickly sees,
The dangers as they are:
And me^ds the mischiefs by degrees*
With knowledge and great care.
Has instruments to scarch each joint,
Each skull or bruised bone,
And can with balmes and oils anoint*
The nerves and veins each one.
Knows all the nature and the kind*
Of herbs of floweer and weeds,
And can the secret virtue find:
Of blossoms leaves and seeds.
Heales cankers ulcers and old sores,
Has precious poulders smalll,
To eat proud flesh, and rotten kores:
And dry up humore all.
What grief of boby can be namd,
But he can help in have,
Yea though the liver be inflamd:
Or lihgts and lungs do wast.
In tune and temper he can bring*
The lack of each lame part,
As though in hand he had a string,
To lead man's life by art.
Half gods, good surgons may be called,
much more then men they be,
And ought like Doctors be instald*
In seats of high degree.
What does preserve the life's of men,
May claim due honor right,
And should be praysd with tongue and pen,
As far as day gives light,
Long study gives a glorious crown,
A garland decked with flowers,
Under whose shade of rare renown,
The muses makes their bowers:
To set and see whose gifts excel,
In wit and cunning skill.
Who best does work, who does not well,
And who bears most good will.
To virtue, learning and good mind
The muses favors those,
And gives them grace of their own kind,
Great secrets to disclose,
Reuiues their wits makes sharp their sense
To judge deserve and know,
Whose tongue is typt with eloquence,
And whose fine pens does flow,
And who the liberal art detaines,
And mortal virtues have,
In whom a hidden skill remains:
And cunning knowledge brave*
Yt seems a stranger here of late,
Has from the Gods divine,
Got credit honor and ectate,
To please the muses nine.
The surgons of our Queen likewise,
Does praise him for his skill,
His printed books may well suffice,
To win the worlds good will.
His merits far surmounts the love,
I bear to men of worth,
My pen does but affection move,
His deeds do set him forth*
His knowledge makes blind bonglers blush
Their boldness brings him fame
Vain Valentine not worth a rush,
Where Low, but shows his name.
You paultrie sensles saucie Iackes,
That patch up wounds in post,
Trudg hen^e trusse up your pedlars packs,
He cares not for your bost,
His face and brow from blot is clear,
The sages of our soil,
Bids Doctor Low, still welcome here
To your great shame and foil.
Who well deserves is honored much.
As trial daily shows,
Who has good name is wise and rich,
And loved where he goes.
Since of this Doctor and his art,
These virtues I rehearse,
I him in every point and part,
Salute with English vearse.
Quoth. Thomas Churchyard Esquier.

The names of the Authors alleged in this work.
ARnoldus de villa noua. Albertus magnus. Anerrois. Antonius beneuenius.
Alphonsus ferreus. Albucrasis. Auicen. Aetius, Aristoele. Alexander Trallianus.
Andronius Auinsor. Aerastus. Bacchannellus. Brunus. Bartapallia. Baptista
montanus. Bruensweke. Cardanus. Cornelius Agrippa. Celsus. Cicero. Clemens
Alexandrinus. Constan^inus. Capiuaxius. Dionysus. Dodoneus. Fallopius.
Fernelius. Fuchius. Gordonius. Gulielmus de salieto. Galenus. Guido. Horodotus.
Hippocrates. Henrnius. Haly abbas. Heliogabalus. Hollerius. Henricus. Iacobus
Hollerius. Iacobus Dondus. Iubertus. Johannes devigo. Jesus. Justinian.
Laurentius. Leonellus fauentinus. Lanfrancus. Menodotus. Monardus. Marianus
sanctus. Marcus lepidus. Macrobius. Moses. Messalinus. Nicolaus Alexandrinus.
Oribasnis. Olphansius ferrens. Plato. Plinius. Paracellus. Paulus Aegineta.
Petrus Arg^lla. Pareus. Ptolomaeus. Quercetanus. Rasis. Rondeletius. Rogerius.
Rolandus, Scribanius largus. Soranus. Sardinius. Togatius. Tertullianus.
Thesaurus poperum* Titus liuius. Theodoricus* Valerius maximus. Wickerus.
Zenophanes.
THE FIRST TREATISE of Chiurgerie which contains Eleauen Chapters. By Peter
Low Arellien.
Chapter 1 Of the origin, and excelleecie of Chirurgerie. Chapter 2Of
Chirurgerie in general, and of operations, and instrumetts of Chirurgerie.
Chapter 3Of natural things in general. Chapter 4Of Elements, and the
consideration thereof. Chapter 5Of the temperaments and complexions of ma^s
body. Chapter 6Of the four humors in general and particular* Chapter 7Of
members and spirittes p^incipall of our body. Chapter 8Of vertue^s or
faculties, and whereof they proceed. Chapter 9Of actions or operations of
virtues. Chapter 10Of spirittes, and whereof they proceed. Chapter 11Of
ihinges, which are annexed to natural things.
The first Chapter of the original beginning, and of the antiquity, and
Excellency of Chirurgerie.
COnsidering with my self, that all men are naturally obliged to serve to the
common wealth by some honest profession, and that no man is able to discharge
that duty, and benefit to his native country, except he learn in his tender
age, the science, wherein the ornament thereof consists, after full
Deliberation I applied my self to the study of Chirurgerie, which is by the
consent of all learned men, not only a science very profitable and necessary
to all sorts of people, but also most ancient and honorable, as manyfestly
testifies all the antiquity: in reading whereof we find the invention of
Chirurgerie ascribed (for the excellency thereof) to the Gods themselves, to
wit, to Aesculape son of Appollo, from the which Podalire and Machaon his
sons, learned the same and cured sundry and diverse, which were deadlye hurt
and wounded at the siege of Troy, as reports Homer the poet. 1. and 2. Iliad.
Clemens Alexandrinus says that the first operator was the Nephew of Noah and
after him Apis king of Egypt. Libr. 7.
Cornelius Celsus says, that it was found, and exercised long before other
sciences. But passing with silence, Apollo, Aesculapius, and all that sort of
Gods, as also Hippocrates, Galen, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Parmenides, Pimander,
Democritus, Chiron, Paeon, and all the ancient Philosophers, together with
Alexander the great, Marcus Antonius and the rest of the Emperors, Kings and
princes, who professed the same, is it not most manifest in the old testament,
that it was inverted and approved by God himself, for in the XX* Chapter of
the fourth book of the Kings, we read, how Esaie healed by Gods own
commandment Ezechias, by laying a fig on his bi^es, and sores: as also in
the 8. and 9. Chapter of Tobias, how the angel commanded him to slay a fish,
called Cassidill, and to take the gall thereof to the web of the eyes. But
what, not only was it invented by the divine power, but in like manner expressly
commanded in the 8. Chap. of Eccle. and diverse other places, that the
professors thereof should be honored by all men, for God created him to the
effect he remain with thee, to assure thee, and the^ which are with thee. Now
seeing I have sufficiently both by the Scripture and otherwise proved the
excellency of Chirurgerie, it is not needful to compare the same with other
arts, and sciences, for if any art be praised, because it was, and is,
professed of noble men, ye may clearly perceive, that the Gods, Emperors,
Kings, and Princes, have practiced the same. If we consider the sentence of
the divine Philosopher Plato, Plato.
that things good, are difficile, there is no thing harder, than Chirurgerie,
the which will occupy a man all his life time to seek out the nature of
things pertaining thereto. If things be praised for their strength and force,
what thing is of more strength, than to restore a man to his health, which
otherwise was altogether lost* some man may perchance object to me and
allege, that many professors of Chirurgerie, with their charms, herbs full
of poison and false promises, destroy many people, who would easily have
recovered their health, if they had given no credit to such dissemblers. I
answer, that such deceivers deserve and merit to be grievously punished and
banished out of all countries, for ye must understand, that such pernicious
and shameless people are not, nor should not in any wise, be termed
Chirurgians, but abusers of ^he name thereof; for this cause, Libr. Digest.
the prudent Emperor Iustinia^ pondering the great damage, that redoundeth to
to the common wealth, through permission of such ignorants, straightly
ordained, that no governor, nor Judge of provinces or towns whatsoever,
should permit any man, to practice Chirurgerie: but he, who was received,
and admitted lawfullye, by the Doctors, who are professors of the same, which
law is yet observed, in all common wealths well governed, and especially in
the most ancient city of Paris, where the professors are learned, wise and
grave men, who are so careful of the weale-publique that they admit no man
into their College, except he have first past his whole course in the science
of Chirurgerie. I doubt not, but these few words, all men of wisdom will
confess, that these charms, with their Diabolical herbs, who travail
through countries, deceiving the people* are no wise to be called Chirurgians,
but severely to be punished, which I speak not of malice, or envy to any
p^^ticuler person, but for the aduancemente of learning, and profit of the
common wealth, whereunto I refer my whole travel and studies.

The second Chapter of Chirurgerie in general, of Operations, and instruments
of Chirurgerie.
Interloquutors, John Cointret Deane of the faculty of Chirurgerie in Paris,
and Peter Low his Scholar. CO. I perceived by your former discourse touching
the original of Chirurgerie and the excellency thereof, the great desire you
have to profit therein, and to give good example to all those, who would
profess the same: In consideration whereof, at your instant request and
entreaty, I am deliberate to confer with you in that matter, seeing both our
leysures does permit, to demand of you in few words, the whole principal
points of Chirurgerie, but, according to Cicero, seeing all doctrine
whatsoever, which is founded on reason, Cicero. libr. 1 Offic.
should begin at the diffinition, to the end we may the better understand,
that whereof we do entreat, first I ask you, what is Chirurgerie?


LO. It is a science or Art, that shows the manner how to work on man's body,
exercising all manuell operations necessary to heal men in as much, as is
possible by the using of most expedient medicines.


CO. Why say you art or science?


LO. Because it is divided into Theorick and Practtik, as says Hieronymus
montuo.


CO. What is Chirurgerie Theorick.


LO. It is that part, which teaches us by rules only the demonstrations, which
we may know, without using any work of the hand, and therefore we call it
science.


Co. What is practick.


LO. It is that part, which consists in (...) of the hand, according to the
precepts in (...), as Aposthumes against nature, Byles, (...) that be out of
their natural place* (...) operations belonging to the work of (...) shall
hear in the Sixth Treatise.


CO. Ere (...), let us (...) what is the subject of this (...).


LO. ^


CO. Seeing the subject is so (...) that the Chirurgian be (...) the
preservation, as recovery (...).


LO. (...) be so.


CO. How, (...).


LO. Arist^ the (...) us to begin at (...) more (...) and difficile, as (...).


CO. ^


LO. Five.


CO. ^


LO womb, to cut a leg, being gangrened or mortified and the like.


CO. What method is to be observed of the Chirurgian in working these
opperarions.


LO. First to know the disease next to do the operation as soon as may be,
surely, Land loupers and simple Barbers.
without false promises or deceyte to heal things, that cannot be healed,
for there are some, who, void of knowledge and skill, promise for lucres to
heal infirmities, being ignorant both of the disease, and the remedies thereof.
These faults be often committed of some who usurping the name of Chirurgian,
being unworthy thereof, have scarce the skill to cut a beard which properly
pertayneth to their traide.


CO. It seems by your words* that there are some infirmities pertaining to
our art which are incurable.


LO. There are diverse* like as Cancer occult, leprosy* elephantike particular,
also when the diseased refuses the remedy proper for the cure thereof: as to
cut a member being mortified, to make incisio^ of the hydropick, and also when
by the curing of the malady, there ensues a greater disease like as to stay
altogether suddenly the hemorrhoides, which have long run, to cut the varice on
the legs or elsewhere, because the humor takes the course oftentimes to some
principal part, which is cause of death. Also in healing the biles which come
in the legs or arms, called malum mortuum.


CO. What remedies then are most expedient to be used in these diseases.


LO. Remedies palliatiue and preservative to let the evil, that it increase
not, as we shall entreat of each of them in their several places. Conditions
of a Chirurgian.



CO. To do all these operations, what qualities are required of the Chirurgian.


LO. There are diverse, Lib. 7. Cap. 1.
and first of all as Celsus says, that he be learned chiefly in those things
that appertain to his art, that he be of a reasonable age, that he have a good
hand, as perfect in the left as the right, that he be ingenious, subtle,
wise, that he tremble not in doing his operations, that he have a good eye,
that he have good experience in his art, before he begin to practice the same.
Also that he have seen and observed of a long time, of learned Chirurgians,
that he be well manered, affable, hardy in things certain, fearful in things
doubtful and dangerous, discreet in judging of sicknesses, chaste, sober,
pitiful, that he take his reward according to his cure and ability of the
sick, not regarding avarice.


CO. What conditions ought the sick to have. Conditions of the Sick.



LO. Diverse also, and first he must have a good opinion of the Chirurgian that
he have a good hope to be cured of him, and be obedient to his counsels, for
that avails much in healing of maladies, that he endure patientlye, that
which is done for the recovery of his health.


CO. Which are the instruments, that the Chirurgian ought to have to do his
operations. Instruments.



LO. They are of two sorts, for some are common, others are proper, and the
instruments or remedies common be also of two sorts, for some be medicinals,
and some be ferramentalls.


CO. Why do you call them common.


LO. Because they serve indifferently to diverse parts, and may be used in all
parts of the body.


CO. Which are the medicinalls.


LO. They consist in ordaining good regiment, in things natural, unnatural
and against nature, in letting of blood, also in applying plasters,
catapla^mes, linimentes, ponders, vnguentes and such like.


CO. Which be the instruments ferramentals.


LO. Some are to cut as rasures, some to burn as cauters actualls, some to
draw away, as tenells incisiues, pincetts, tirballes, some are to sound, as to
sound a wind, the stone in the bladder* and such like. Some are to sow wounds,
and knit veins and arters as needles.


CO. Which are the proper instruments.


LO. Those which serve to one part onley, as in the head a trepan, with sundry
other capitalls, in the eye, an instrument called speculu^ oculi, a needle
proper to abate the Cataract, in the ear a ciring for deafnes or to draw forth
any thing enclosed in the ear, some in the mouth as speculum oris, or
dilato^u^ for conuulsion, others are proper for the plurisie, others for the
hydropsie, some to draw the stone, which are made of diverse fashio^s, some are
proper for women as speculu^ matricis, sundry are proper for the birth, as ye
shall here in our treatise of the sicknesses of women, some are for the
fundament as speculum any, some for broken bones and such as be out of their
place, as machnies, lacs, glossocomes. In his book called Antidotarium.



CO. Which of these remedies are most necessary to be had always with him.


LO. Arnoldus de villa noua counsels, always to have six to help in
necessity for things that are common, the first an astringent or retentiue to
stay a bleeding or fluxion that comes in any part, the second is basili^ to
make matter in a wound or an a posthume, the third some cleansing salve as
Apostulorum or Diapeo, the fourth is to fill up a wound or bile, with flesh
that is hollow, like as vnguentum aureum. The fifth is cerat galen, or rosat
mesne proper to appease a great dolor or heat, which often chances. The sixth is
called De^iccatiuum rubeum or such like, to dry and cicatrize the skin.


CO. How many kinds of ferramentes ought the Chirurgian commonly to carry
with him.


LO Six, a pair of sheeres, a rasor, a lancet, a sound, a tirball, and a
needle.


CO. How many things are to be observed by the Chirurgian before he undertake
any operation.


LO. According to Haly Abbas there are five. Haly Abbas in his Surgery
The first to know well the temperament of the patience. The second, he must
know the sickness and nature thereof. The third whether it be curable or not.
The fourth remidies proper and meet for the disease. The fifth, the right way,
to apply such remedies as be needful, of all these he ought to give good
reason and authority, of such famous men as have written of this science.


CO. In how many things consists chieflye the contemplation of Chirurgerie.


LO. In three things according to Fuchius. Compendium medicinae Fuchij.



CO. Which are they.


LO. The first, are those things, that concur to the making and constitution
of our body and therefore are called things natural, the second are those
things, which conserve the body from sickness and being rightly used
nourishe the same, our auntients call them things unnatural, because if they
be immod^ratly and ill used they be altogether contrary to our bodies, the
third, are those things, which be indeed contrary to our bodies and
therefore are called things contrary to nature, 2. Therapen and multis alijs
locis.
as Galen writes.


CO. Tell me some thing more particulerly of these contemplations of
Chirurgerie.


LO. I am contented, if your leisure does permit.


CO. Then, we will in the nexr Chapter follow out natural things.


The third Chapter of natural things in General.
LO. May it please you to prosecute the discourse of natural things, seeing we
have alredie entreated of Chirurgerie in general, of the operatio^s and
instruments Chirurgaticalls.


CO. I like very well of this method, how many natural things are reckoned
by the Chirurgia^.


LO* Seven, the first is called Element, the second Temperament or complexion,
the third humors, the fourth members, the fifth virtues or faculties, the sixth
works and effects of virtues, the seventh Spirits.


The Fourth chapter, of Elements.
CO. Seeing according to your former division of natural things Element is
the first, then what is an Element.


LO. It is the most simple part, 5 metaphi ^a. 3
whereof any thing is made and in the destruction thereof is lastly resolved.


CO. How many elements are there.


LO. Two according to the contemplation of Chirurgerie, viz. simples or
intilligibles and composed o^ sensibles.


CO. Which are the intelligibles.


LO. Those which are known only by the speculatio^ and judgment the which was
first observed by Hypocrates.


CO. How many are they in number.


LO. They are four according to Arist, to wit, the fire, the air, the water,
and the earth, the which have four diverse qualities, hot, cold, moist, and
dry. Lib. degeneratione.



CO. Are these four Elements otherwise distinguished.


LO. They are distinguished also according to their lightness and heaviness.


CO. Which are the light.


LO. The fire and the air, and seeks upward by reason of their lightness.


CO. Which are the heavy.


LO. The water and the earth and by reason of their heaviness they move
downwards.


CO. Which are sensible elements.


LO. They are similar or like parts of our bodies, as says Galen. Secundo de
elementis.



CO How many are they in number.


LO. Twelve, to wit, the bones, the cartilages, flesh, nerves, veins, arters,
pannicles, ligame^ts tendons, the skin, the fat grease, the marrowe, to the
which twelve similar parts, some add parts made of the superfluities of our
body, as the hair and nails.


The fifth chapter of temperame^ts, wherein is showed the te^perature of man's
body, of every nation, and four seasons of the year.
CO. What is Temperament.


LO. It is a mixtion of the four qualities of the Elements as says Auicen,
Cap. 1. de complexione.
or as says Galen it is a confusion or mixing of hot, cold, dry, and moist.


CO. How many sorts of complexions are there.


LO. Two, to wit, well tempered and composed, or evil tempered.


CO. What is temperament well tempered.


LO. It is that which is equally composed of the Four qualities of the
Elements, of the which compositio^ and substance amongst all natural things,
there is but one so tempered, which is the inner skin of the hand, chiefly in
the extremities of the fingers as says Galen, Galenus: Lib. 1 de temperamentis.
and is called temperamentum ad pondus. There is another kind of this called
temperament ad Iusticiam which is according to judgment.


CO. What is temperament ad Iustitiam.


LO. It is that which is composed according to the exigence and dignity of
nature, and is known by his operatio^s, for when any thing naturally has his
operations very perfect we esteem it tempered ad Iusticiam.


CO. What is temperament evil tempered.


LO. It is that in the which one Element, governs and has dominion more than
other, as the hot does surpass the cold and so forth.


CO. How many evil temperaments are there.


LO. There are diverse, which indeed pass not the Limits of health: for some
surpass the temperate in one simple quality, some in too composed and so
forth.


CO. How many simple qualities are there.


LO. Four as you have heard, hot, dry, cold, and humide, in like manner
there are four composed to wit, hot and dry, hot and humide, cold and dry,
cold and humide, of the which Galen has openly written. Lib. 1. artis paruae.
Galenus. Lib. de ligame^tis.



CO. What parts of our bodies are attributed to these four qualities.


LO. To the heat we attribute the parts most hot of our bodies as the spirit,
the heart, the blood, the liver, and the kidneys, the flesh, the muscules,
arters, veins, skin and milt. To the cold we attribute the hair, bones,
cartilage, ligame^ts, tendio^s, membraines, nerves, the brains, and the fat
grease. To the humide qualities, the brains, the blood, the fat grease, the
flesh, the papps, the stones, lights, liver, kidneys, marrow. To the dry, the
hair, the bones, cartilages, membraines, ligame^ts, tendons, arters, veins,
nerves, the skin: nevertheless, some exceed others in these qualities, as
you may perceive by their order: For it is necessary in healing wounds and
ulcers to know the te^perature of every part, for other remedies are to be used
in hard and dry parts, than in soft and humide parts.


CO. How are the four qualities compared to the four quarters of the year.


LO. The spring time is hot and humide, most healthful as says Hiopocrates
and continues from the X. of March until the XI. of June. The so^mer begins
at the XI. day of June, Aphoris. 19. and etiam de natura humana.
and ends on the XIII. day of September and is hot and dry. The Autumn or
harvest, from the XIII. day of September until the XIII. day of December, and
is cold, dry, very unhealthful, sickly, the which sicknesses, if they
continue till Winter, are most dangerous. The winter from the XIII. day of
Dece^ber until the X. day of March, is cold and humide, in this time of the
year men eat much, inge^der abundance of crudities, of the which comes diverse
sicknesses.


Co. How many ways know ye the temperature of man's body.


Lo. Five ways to wit, by the constitution of the whole body, by the
operations and functio^s, by the countries, wherein men are born by the color,
and by the age which being al co^sirered, we may judge of every man's complexion.


CO. How know you the te^perature of man's body by the co^stiturio^s.


Lo. Galen says those which are fat, 2. de temperamentis cap. 6*
be cold like as fatnes is inge^dered of a cold habitude. Those that be gross.
and full of flesh be hot, because much flesh is inge^dered of great abundance
of blod, as says Auice^.


Co. How know you the te^perature of ma^s body by the operatio^s.


Lo. Galen says, that any creature, plant, or herb, is of a good temperature,
1. treatise and 1. cap 1. de temperamentis cap. 6.
when they do well their functio^s natural.


Co. How by the nations or countries know you the temperatur.


Lo. The people toward the South are mela^cholick, cruel, vindicatyf, always
timide, they are subject to be mad and furious, as often chances in the
Realm of Feze and Marock in Africa, Ethiopia and Egypt, where there is a great
number of mad men, they are also subject to be lepre, chiefly in Ethiopia, they
be lean, pale colored, black eyed, and are hot, by the natural air, z. de
temperamentis cap. 6.
Galen they are also subject to Venus gaimes, because of the melancholicke
spumous humor, which is cause, that the Kings of that country have had all
times a great number of wives and Concubines, so that some have had three
hundredth, four hundredth, some a Thousand, as reports Bodin in his
commonwealth. Lib. 5.
They are subject to the falling sickness and Scrofules, and fever quartane,
yet they are wise, modest, and moderate in their actions, they are also proper
for the contemplation of natural and divine things, they have little interior
heat, and for that cause are abstinent, because they cannot digest much meat,
so we may say, that those people, being subject to greatest sicknesses and
vices, are also adorned with greatest virtues, where they are good. The people
toward the North are cold and humide, neither so wicked, nor deceytfull, they
are faithful and true, yet because they are of a grosser wit and more
strength, they are more cruel and barbarous, they have greater force and are
stronger by reason of the thicknes and coldness of the blood, they be very
courageous for the great abundance of blood and smaler judgment, they have
great heat in their interior parts and therefore eat well and drink better
which is an unhappy vice. They are high in stature, great bodied, more
beautyfull, than those of the South, less given to the lust of the flesh, and
less subject to ielosie which is a common vice to the people toward the East
as Greeks and Turks: or West, as Spain and such like countries. But
principally the people of the South, from whom is come the use to geld men,
whom they call Eunuchs to keep their wives. Moreover, they who are toward
the North are more laborious and given to arts mechanics, and more proper for
wars, than sciences. The people betwixt the South and the North, as Italy,
Faunce and such like, be almost of the Northen peoples temperature, but
somewhat hotter, they have less internal heat and force, than the Northern
people, but more the^ they of the South, and therefore decide their quarrels
oftener by reason, than force. Yet it is certain, that they of the Weste, draw
more to the qualities of those of the North, like as those of the East, to the
conditions of those of the South.


CO. How know you by the coulor man's temperature. Galen. libr. de tuenda
sanitate



LO. Galen says those which are of color somewhat red, yellow, or blew, be of
a hot temperature, those which are black, white, or lead color, are of a cold
complexio^, otherwise be the four colors, the red, the yellow, the black, and
the white, the red is ordinarily sanguine, the black is melancholy, the yellow
is collericke and the white is Phlegmatic.


CO. How know you man's temperature by the age,


LO. For as much, as there is a particular of the age, we will defer it, till
we come to that chapter.


CO. By what outward marks know you every man's complexion?


LO. He of the sanguine complexion is fleshie, liberal, loving, amiable,
gracious, merry, ingenious, audacious, given to Venus game, red colored, with
diverse other qualities, which shows the domination of the blood, and it is
hot and humide, and is in good health in summer, and in winter by reason of his
humidity. The choleric is hasty, prompt, and in all his affairs envious,
covetous subtle, hardy, angry, valiant, prodigal, lean, yellow colored,
and is hot and dry, and is in good health in winter. The Flegmaticke is fat,
soft, Galen de placitis.
white, sleepie, slothful, dull of understanding, heavy, much spitting, and
white colored: finally his temperature essential or accidental is cold and
moist, and in good health in summer. The Melancholicke, which is either by
nature or accident of color liuide and plumbin, and solitary, coward, timide,
sad, envious, curious, auaritious, lean, weak, tardife, and so forth, and is
cold and dry and are well in harvest. As touching the complexio^ of every age,
you shall hear in the chapter of age, and for the complexio^ of every part of
the body ye shall hear in the poor man's guide.


The sixth Chapter, of Humors.
CO. Thou know that the most part of all sicknesses proceeds and are
entertained by some humor, and sometime by sundry humors together, therefore it
is most necessary, that the Chirurgian know perfectly the humors of our
bodies, to the end he give the better order, for the curation of maladies, then
tell me what is an humor.


LO. It is a thin substance, into the which our nourishment is first converted,
or it is an natural Ius that the body is entertained norished or conserved
with.


CO. Whereof proceeds the humors.


LO. Of the juice or chiles which is made in the stomach, of the aliment we
are nuorished with, changed by the natural heat of the stomach and parts
near thereto, thereafter brought to the liver by the veins meseraicks, and
makes the four humors which differs in nature and kind.


CO. How many humors are there.


LO. There are four which represent the four Elements as well by the substance
as qualities, whereof every thing is made, Galen calls them the elements of
our body.


CO, which are the four humors.


Lo. The blood, the phlegm, the choler, and melancholy.


CO. What is the blood*


LO. It is an humor hot, aerious, of good consistance, red colored, sweet
tasted, most necessary for the nourishment of the parts of our body, which are
hot and humide, ingendered in the liver, retained in the veins, and is
compared to the air, as says Galen.


CO. What is phlegmie. ^. de placi^is.



LO. It is an humor cold and humide, thyn in consistance, white colored, when
it is in the veins, it nourishes the parts cold and humide, it lubrifieth the
the moving of the joints and is compared to the water.


CO. What is choll^r.


LO. It is an humor hot and dry, of thyn and subtle consistence, black
colored, bitter tasted, proper to nourish the parts hot and dry, it is
comparrd to the fire.


CO. What is melancholy.


LO. It is an humor cold and dry thick in consistence, sower tasted proper to
nourish the parts that are cold and dry and is compared to the earth or winter.


CO. How many sorts of blood are there.


LO. Two, natural and unnatural.


CO. How many ways degendereth the blood from the natural.


Lo. Two ways: first by some alteration or transmutation of the substance, as
when it becomes more gross or more subtle than it should be, or else by
adustion, when the most subtle becomes in choler, and the most gross in
melancholy: secondly through unnatural proportion and evil mixion with the
rest of the humors and then it takes diverse names as for example, if with the
blood, there be abundance of pituit, such is called Phlegmatic, if the
choler exceed, chollerick and so forth in the rest.


CO. How many sorts of phlegmies are there.


LO. Two, in like manner, natural and unnatural..


CO, How many kinds of pi^^ite unnatural are there.


Lo. According to Galen there are four sorts. The first called vitrea, because
this humor is like unto melted glass, it is cold, 2. de differentiis febrium
ca. 6
and proceeds of gluttony and Idleness, it provoke to vomit, causes
great pain in the parts, where it falls as on the teeth and Intestines. The
second is called the sweet phlegmie, because in spitting of it, it seems
sweet, it provoke the body to sleep. The third is called acide or bitter
Phlegmie, because in spitting, it seems bitter, it is cold and makes the
body hungrye. The fourth is salt Phlegmie, it makes the body dry and
thirsty. There are some, who make an other kind, called gipsei, because of
the form and hardness it has like lyme called gipsei: it is often in the
joints and is reckoned under the vitrea.


CO. How many sorts of choll^r are there.


LO. Two in like manner natural and unnatural.


CO. How many ways becomes the chollor unnatural.


LO. Two ways, first when it spilleth rotteth and is burnt, and then it is
called choll^r adust by putrefaction: the other is made of the mixture of the
other humors.


CO. Into how many kinds is it divided.


LO. In four as says Galen. The first is called vitellin, because of the
coulor and thick substance, Tractatu de atra bile and multis alijs locis.
it is like the yolke of an egg, it is ingendered in the liver, and the
veins, when by the unnatural heat, it dissipateth and consumes. The second
is called verricuse, because this coulor represents a wart, called Verruca.
The third is called erugmous, because it is like the rust of Brass or Copper,
called aerugo. The fourth is called the blewe choler, because it is ble^e like
Azure. These three last humors, as says Galen are engendered in the stomach by
the vicious meats, and of evil juice, which cannot be digested and converted
into good juice.


CO. How many sorts of melancholy is there.


LO. Two, natural and adust.


CO. How many kinds of adust or unnatural are there.


LO. Two, the first is that, whereof comes the humor melancholicke, which is
like the lees of blood, when it is very hot and adust, or by some hot fever,
that the blood it self does putrify, as says Auicen, and differs from the
natural melancholy, as the dregs of wine burnt, from the unburned. 14. Method.
Galen says that humor, which is like the lees of wine, when it becomes more
hot, it ingendereth an humor against nature, called atra bilis, of the which no
beast can taste. The second kind proceeds of an humor chollericke, the which
by adustion is converted into diverse coulors, at the last into black coulor,
which is the worst of all.


CO. Knowing these four humors and their generation, we must know in like
manner, that in our bodies their is concoctio^, therefore tell me how many
kinds of concoction there are.


LO. Lib. de consensu medicoru^.
There are three, as says Johannes Bacchanellus: The first is made in the
stomach, which conuerteth the meat we eat into the substance called chile,
in the which the four humors are not, but potentially, the second is done in
the liver, which makes of the chile* the mass sanguiner, ^s says Galen. 4.
de vsu partium.
The third is made, through all the body of the which are inge^dered the four
humidyties which the Arabs call humors nourishing or elementaries, 1. Cano.
cap. 1.
as says Auicen. The first has no name and is thought to be the humor, which
droppeth from the mouth of the veins. The second is called Ros, the which
after it is drunken into the substance of the body, it makes it humide,
whereof it takes the name. The third is called Cambium. The fourth is called
Gluten and is the proper humiditie of the similar parts.


CO. Have not these humors certain time, in the which they reign more then
other, in man's body.


LO. Yes indeed, Com. in apli. 15. sect. 1. lib. 6. epide. Alexander apud
pr^ble. 74. lib. 2.
for the blood reigns in the morning from three hours until nine: in like
manner in the spring time: The choler from nine in the morning, until three
in the afternoon: as in Summer: the phlegm from three afternoon, until nine
at night, as in autumn: the melancholy from nine at night, until three in the
morning, like as in winter: and this is the opinion of Hipocrates and Galen as
touching the humors.


The seventh Chapter of members and parts.
CO. What call you members or parts. 1. lib.



LO. Auicen speaking of members, says, they are bodies engendered of the first
commixtion of humors.


CO. How many sorts of members are there.


LO. Five, of the which the first is called principalles, the second are
members that serve the principal members, the third are members, that neither
govern nor are governed of others, but by their own proper virtues, the
fourth are members, which have proper virtues of themselves and also of others,
the fifth is called members excrementals and not proper members as others.


CO. How many principal members are there.


LO. Four, to wit, the brains, the heart, the liver, and the testicles: the
first three are called principalles, because by them all the body is governed,
and without them, men can not live, the fourth, which are the testicles, is
called principal, because without them, men can not be procreated, as says
Galen.


CO. Which are those, which serve the principal members. lib. de vsu partium.



LO. The nerves serves the brains, the arters, the heart, the veins, the
liver, the instruments spermatickes, the testicles: by the nerves the spirit
animal is carried through all the body, the spirit vital is carried by the
arters, the veins serve to carry the blood through all the body, as also to
bring the chiles to the liver, the instruments spermaticke for the bringing
and casting forth of the seed.


CO. Which are the members, which neither govern, nor are governed of others.


LO. The bones, the cartilages, membranes, glandes, tendons, ligamentes,
fattee, simple flesh and so forth.


CO. Which are those, which have proper virtue of themselves, and also of
others.


LO. The belly, the kidneis and the matrix,


CO. Which are the members called excrementous.


LO. The nails and the hair.


CO. Are the members no otherwise divided.


LO. They are divided into parts similars and dissimilars.


CO. Which are the parts similars.


LO. The bones, nerves, arters, flesh and so forth, and are so called, because
the less part of them has the same name that the whole has. Galen. lib. de
differentijs morborum. cap. 3.



CO. Which are the parts dissimilars?


LO. The ear, the eye, the leg, hand foot etc.


CO. Why are they called dissimilars?


LO. Because when they are divided, they loose the name of the whole, as the
membranes of the brains are not called the brains, nor the membranes of the
eye, the eye, and so forth in other dissimilar parts.


The eight Chapter, of Virtues.
CO. What call you Virtues?


LO. They are the cause whereof proceeds the actions or powers as says Galen.


CO. How many virtues or faculties are there.


LO. 1. De facultatibus naturalibus.
Three, to wit, animal, vital, and natural, and those virtues have a
certain simpathie one with another, for if one be hurt, all the rest suffer
with it.


CO What is animal virtue?


LO. It is that which comes from the brains, and sends the sense and
moving through all the body by the nerves.


CO. How many sorts of virtues animalles are there?


LO. Three, to wit, motive, sensitive and principal.


CO. Wherein consists the virtue motive.


LO. In the instruments that move voluntarily, as the muscles and nerves.


CO. Wherein consists the virtue sensitive.


LO. In the senses externe and interne.


CO. Into how many is the virtue sensitive externe divided.


LO. Into five, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling.


CO. What is the virtue sensitive interior.


LO. It is a virtue that correspondeth to the five external virtues, by one
organe only, and therefore is called sense common.


CO. Wherein consists the virtue principal.


LO. In imagination, reasoning and remembering


CO. May these three virtues be divided severally one from another.


LO. Yes, because one may be offended without another, which shows them to
have diverse seats in the brains particularly.


CO. What is the virtue vital.


LO. It is that, which carries life through all the body.


CO. How many sorts of vital virtues are there?


LO. Two, to wit, virtue vital active, that is in doing operations, and
virtue vital passive, in suffering operations.


CO, What is the virtue active?


LO. They are those virtues which dilateth the heart, and arters, as chances
in mirth and love.


CO. What is virtue passive?


LO. They are those virtues, which constrains and binds the heart and
arters, as happens in melancholy, sadness and revenge.


CO. What is the virtue natural?


LO. It is that which comes from the liver, and sends the nourishment
throughout all the body.


CO. Into how many is it divided.


LO. Into four, the first in attraction of things proper, the second in
retayning that, which is drawn: the third, in digesting that, which is
retained: the fourth, in expelling that, which is hurtful and offends.


CO. Do all these four virtues their operations at once.


LO, No: for first attraction is made, then retained until perfect digestion
be made, lastly virtue expulsive, casts forth all things hurtful to nature.


The ninth Chapter, of actions and operations of virtues.
CO. What call you actions of virtues.


LO. They are certain affections or mouinges actiues proceeding of virtues.


CO. How many sorts are there?


LO. Three, like as of virtues, animal, natural, and vital.


CO. Seeing the difference is not great betwixt virtues and operations of
virtues, it is superfluous for the present to insist further in that matter.


The tenth Chapter, of spirits,
CO. What are spirits.


LO. They are a substance subtle and aerious of our body, bredde of the part
most pure and thin of the blood, sent through all the body, to the effect,
the members may do their proper actions.


CO. In what parts of our body abound they most.


LO. As says Andreas de Lorraine, they abound in the heart and arters, in the
brains and nerves. In his dissections.



CO. How many sorts of spirits are there.


LO. Three, animal, vital and natural.


CO. What is the spirit animal.


LO. It is that which remains in the brains, of the which a great part is
sent to the eyes, by the nerves optickes, some to the ears and diverse other
parts, but most to the eyes, therefore, those who have lost their sight, have
the other virtues more strong, the which caused Democritus and other
Philosophers put out their eyes, Democritus.
to the end their understanding might be more clear.


CO. Is the spirit animal brought through all the nerves substantially.


LO. No, but only by the nerves optickes, because they have manifest
hollownesse, and not the rest.


CO. What is the spirit vital.


LO. It is that which is in the heart and arters, and is made of the
euaporation of the blood and of the air labored in the lights by the force of
vital heat, and thereafter is diffused through the members for the
conservation of the natural heat.


CO, What is the spirit natural.


LO. It is that which is engendered in the liver, and veins, and there
remains, while the liver makes the blood, and other operations natural, the
use of it is to help the concoction.


The eleventh Chapter, of things annexed to natural things.
CO. Seeing we have amply discoursed of natural things, and the number thereof,
it shall be needful in this place to know how many things are annexed to
natural things.


LO. Four, to wit, age, color, figure, and kind.


CO. What is age?


LO. It is aspes or part of our life, Auicen de co^plexione cap. 3.
in the which our bodies are subject to diverse and many mutations.


CO. Thou know, that all things which are created, if they be material,
should have an end, and that there is nothing under the heavens, except the
soul of man, but is subject to corruption, and change, as all philosophers
do grant, as Aristotle, Hippocrates and Galen do testify, Arist. de 'long*
et breuitate vitae. Hippo. lib. 1. de dieta. Galen. lib. 1. de sanitate.
and it is certain, that we from our birth are subject to diverse alterations,
therefore tell me into how many diverse apparent mutations have our ancients
divided the life of man?


LO. In that there is found great controversy, for the Aegiptians and
Pithagoreans were of the opinion, that there were so many ages, as there are
signs in an hundredth years, thinking a man to live only a hundredth years,
and every seventh year, we may perceive some notable change, besides the
particular change in every sign, both in temperature of the body, and
manners of the mind. The most part of our late writers are of the opion that
the natural course of our life, endures fine special mutations, which they
callages, to wit, Infancy adolescencie, young age, man's estate, and old age.
The infancy is hot and humide, but the humiditie surpasses the heat, and
lasts Ptolomeus. In this time a man is subject to many griefs and diseases,
as fever, the flux, Ptolomeus lib. 4. Iuditio.
Worms in the belly, the stone, aposthumes, and such like. The adolescencie
is hot and humide likewise, but the heat 25. years, which is the time
prefixed for the growing in height in this time they incur many diseases, and
chiefly the Sciatica as says Gordonius, Gordonius.
and it is governed by Mercury, 35. years, subject to hot fevers, frenzies,
and diverse other diseases, and is gouuerned by Venus, which ingendreth great
cupiditie of lust. Man's estate is most temperate of all, and 50. years, and
neither augmenteth, nor diminishes, in this time men are subject to hot
fevers, flux of blod, pluresie, litargie, frenzy, and such like, and is
governed by the Son, Ptolomeus.
who is author of wisdom and gravity; Then comes 70. years and is governed
by Jupiter, author of wisdom and counsel Epilepsie, Lethargy, Numnes, and
such like as says Gordonius, and is governed by Saturn, Gordonius.
and is full of sloth, dull, froward, and uneasy to be governed. Lastly
follows the third part of old age, Decrepite, unto the which as says the
Prophet Royal, happens nothing, but grief and sorrow, all the actions, both
of body, and spirit, are weakened, the feeling grows remiss, the memory
decays, the Judgment fails, and so returns into infancy, whence
proceeds the Proverb, bis pueri senes. This old age is set down in the XII.
Chapter of Ecclesiasticus. Some add the fourth kind of old age, called senium
ex morbo. Although that our auntients, have described the ages by years, yet I
am of the opinion, that the ages should not be divided according to the number
of years, thinking, that thereupon should depend, youth or old age, but rather
after the temperature of the body: for all men, that are cold, and dry, I call
them old, so there be many old folk of 40. years, and many young of 60. There
is a complexion, that waxes soon old, an other later, those of the sanguine
complexion, are long in growing old, because they have much heat and
humiditie. The melancholicks waxes soon old, by reason they are cold, and
dry. As touching the sex feminine, it becomes old sooner, than the masculine.
Hipo. Lib. de partu.
Hipocrates reports, that women in the mothers womb are formed in seven
months, and in like space grow slolier then men, but being born grow faster,
and sooner wise, and beco^e sooner old, for the feebleness of the body, and
fashion of life, being for the most part idle, and there is nothing, that
brings old age sooner tha^ sloth, and want of exercise.


CO. Whereof proceed the colors.


LO. Of the just proportion of the humors, which rule and govern in man's body,
as if there be a just proportion of the 4. humors, the color is red, if
abundance of melancholic humor, it is liuide and black, if abundance of
chollor, the color is citrine and yellow, if phlegm, the color is white and
pale.


CO. What is figure, or habitude.


LO. It is a thing, that shows the temperature, whereof the body is composed.


CO. How many sorts of figures are there.


LO. There are 4. the first is called quadrature, which is of


CO. What is sex.


LO. It is nothing, but a distinction betwixt man, and woman, the man is of a
hot temperature, and the woman, and eunuchs are cold.


CO. Is it a general rule, that al men are hot and women cold.


LO No for Galer says, Lib. de pul^ibus.
that it is poss^ble to find women of more hot temperature than men, but
s^eldome, and sow end natural things, wherein consists the constitution of
man's body.


THE SECOND TREATISE of unnatural things, the consideration whereof is most
needful for the preservation of health, and contains six Chapters.
Of the air.Chapter. 1 Of meat and drink.Chapter. 2 Of moving and
exerciseChapter. 3 Of sleeping and waking.Chapter. 4 Of repletion and
euacuation.Chapter. 5 Of perturbations and passions of the mind.Chapter. 6
CO. Having spoken sufficiently of natural things which are proper for the
constitution of man's body, now in like manner it is necessary to follow out
those things which are called unnatural things, and conserve the body, if
they be rightly used, and if otherwise, they destroy the nature and health of
man's body, as says Auicen Prince of the Arabians, and therefore are called
unnatural things, of the which I would gladly know the number.


LO. They are six, to wit, the air, that goes about us, the meat and
drink we use, the motion and rest of our bodies, the sleeping and waking, the
repletion, and euacuation, and the perturbations of the mind.


The first Chapter, of the air.
CO. Seeing the air is so needful unto us, that no health may be
maintained, nor no defection cured without the same: as we see by the
continual inspiration that al living creatures draws for their refreshing,
as also for the regendring of the spirit animal, in like manner, the air may
alter our bodies in three manners, to wit, by the quality, by the substance,
and by the sudden changement, as ye shall read at more length in the poor
man's guide: and is no less profitable and necessary to our life then
respiration, and without respiring we cannot live one moment, as says Galen.
Therefore I would know of you what air is.


LO. It is the matter of our respiration. 6. method et 8. de placitis
Hippocratis et Platonis.



CO. How many sorts of air is there.


LO. Two, to wit, that which is good and that which is evil.


CO. What call you good air?


LO. That which is pure, clean, thin, exempt from evil inspirations, deep
valleis, clouds, rotten smelles, far from stanckes, mosses, cauernes,
carrions and all corruption, upon knows, such air is best against all
sicknesses, as well for the preservation of the health, as curing of
sicknesses, as says Cardanus. Lib. de difficultate spirandi



CO. What is evil air?


LO. It is that which is contrarious to the other, thick, rotten, near
hills, mosses, stankes, dubbes, the sea, and towns that be low and close,
infected with evil savors, or situated betwixt two hills or places, where
passes the filth of towns, also that which is nebulous and comes from
stinking breathes, also by the celestial influence as says Hippocrates: in
like manner that which is exposed to the south wind, and the air which is
enclosed in close houses for certain time, which becomes mouldie and
putrified, because every thing that is hot and humide and wants euentilation,
becomes putrified, great towns near the sea, as often we see in the end of
Summer and Autumn, great maladies and dangerous, sometimes the plague, as
writes Cardanus, Lib de subtilitate.
for it enters into our bodies by the mouth and nose, when we respire, of the
which, often are engendered maladies very difficill.


CO. Whereof proceeds the variety of the qualities of the air?


LO. Of three things, like as of Regions or Countries, of winds, and of the
situation of the place where we are.


CO How proceeds the variety of the air by Countries.


LO. There are some which are evil tempered, and others well tempered,
according to the Climate, where they are situated, like as under the pole
Articke and Antarticke the far distant sun beams, which makes the
temperature extreme cold, for the which it is inhabitable, yet there are some
habitables, like as Scythia and other such Countries, under the equinoctial
Line, the intemperature is so extreme hot, because of the right reflection of
the Sun, especially between the circle Articke and Cancer, like as in the
Antarticke and Capricorn, the air is more temperate, chiefly in the midst,
according to the approaching of the Sun, as we see in the four seasons of
the year. Cardanus says, that those Countries which are mountainous, Lib
artis paruae
are most temperate, and that a man may live an hundredth years, in such
places. Pliny says, that men, beasts and trees are far stronger, and more
barbarous in hilly parts, then in other parts, and that for their great
liberty. Those which dwell in low parts and valleys, are more effeminate,
as says Titus Liuius.


CO. Seeing the air is so necessary for the curation of malladies, is there no
way to alter and accommodate it by art to the sickness?


LO. 6. epidemioru^.
Yes verily, and for this cause Hippocrates counsels in malladies cronickes,
to change the air and country, and in maladies commitialles, to change the
air, country and nouriture. 5. therapeuticorum.
Galen counsels those who have ulcers in the lights to dwell at Rome,
because there the air is very dry: in common sickenesses we help the air
somewhat by Art, like as in fevers, which are hot and dry, we choose a
house which is cold and humide: diverse windows for the euentilation thereof,
or winds made by Art, also by casting cold water through the house, by
spreading and strawing of flowers and branches of trees which are cold and
humide, like as violettes, roses, wild vine berrie trees and such like: also
beware to have many people in the chamber, as counsels Cardanus. Lib. 5.
ar^^s paruae.
But when the sicknesses are cold and humide, as fevers putrified, catarres,
hydropises, tumors pituitous, we choose houses which are hot and dry. Also
to spread and straw flowers, herbs, branches of trees, which are hot and
dry, as cammomile, sage, lauander, marierome, spinnage and such like. Under
the signification of the air in this place, we understand all manner of
winds, little and great, the which is most necessary to be considered,
because they do not only alter and change the body, but also the spirit. It
goes by the nose to the brain, by the mouth to the heart, by the pores of the
skin, and moving of the arters thorough all the body, it furnishes the
aliment to our spirits, for this cause the divine Hippocrates notes, that the
good and evil disposition of our spirits and humors depends of the
constitution of the air and winds. For we see where there is great trouble
and variety of winds, the people are arrogant, difficill to be governed, and
very cruel.


CO. Seeing that of the wind these accidents fall, let me know what is
Wind.


LO. Hippocrates says it is no other thing, but an unstable motion of the
air, the which being stirred by some motion, it purges,


CO. What nature is it of?


LO. It is hot and dry, like as it is made of an exhalation hot and dry.


CO. How many diverse sorts of winds are there?


LO. There are four principal, to wit, Eurus from the East, hot and dry:
Zephyrus from the West, cold and humide: Auster from the South, hot and
humide, putrifactiue, it passes by the sea Mediterrane: Boreas from the North,
cold and dry, resisting against putrefaction. Arist. attributes two
collateral to each of these four, 5. meteorum.
and so in all makes 12. some make two and thirty, like as the Mariners, but
the exact contemplation of these matters, is not much requisite in a Chirurgian
Bodin says in his common wealths, that the winds make great variety in us,
for in countries where the wind is violent great, the people are turbulent in
spirit, and there where the wounds are not so violent, the people are of a
more quiet spirit.


CO. What mean you by situation or place.


LO. I mean as to be situated toward the sea, stanks, dubbs, mosses and such
as you have heard, also those who have no other aspect, but either to the South
which is humide and putrifactiue, or to the West, which is cold and humide.
Also to be dwelling in ground which is fat, the air is hot and humide, and in
ground that is full of Sand, hot, and dry, and in Marsh ground and Fennes,
cold, and humide, or in Stony ground, which is cold and dry. Titus Liuius
says that the places change the nature of our bodies, as those which dwell in
Mountains differ from those which dwell in low places, also says he those
places and Countries which are fertile, the men are ordinarily Cowards, given
to lust, the Countries and places barren, the people are more hardy and
ingenious, quick spirited. Arist says those that dwell in cold Regions, are
proud, cruel, and barbarous in their manners, very strong, in hot countries
they are wise and more fearful, those which dwell in low Marsh Countries, are
dull, sleepie, the which proceeds of the disposition of the air.


The second Chapter, of meat and drink.
CO. Seeing the aliment is no less to be considered for the preservation of
the health, than the air, it is necessary to know what is aliment with the
diverse sorts thereof.


LO. Aliment is that, which augmenteth and nourishes our bodi^^.


CO. How many kinds of alimentes are there.


LO. There are diverse sorts, like as flesh, fishes, herbs, fruits, corn,
drink, natural and artificial, condimentes simple and compound.


CO. Are they all used after one intention.


LO. No, they are of diverse natures and must be used in diverse manners,
according to the temperature of the body, as writes Cardanus. Lib. 1. de
sanitate tuenda.



CO. What sort of norriture ought we to use most commonly.


LO. That which nourishes well, ingendreth good juice, of the which Galen his
writing in his books of the faculty of Aliments, and in the book of
Conservation of health, as also Hipocrates in diverse places..


CO. In the using of Alimentes, how many things are there to be observed.


LO. Nine, to wit, the goodness, the quantity, the quality, the use and
custom, the appetite, the order, the hour, the age and time of the year.


CO. First then we must consider, that he who would have his body entertained
in good health, must use meats of good nourriture, then tell me what is
Aliment, which ingendreth good juice.


LO. It is that which is light of disgestion, that nourishes well, makes
little excrements and ingendreth good blood as says Cardanus, such as Capons,
Partridges, Larks, Veale, Lib. de sanitate tnenda.
Mutton, Kidds, yolks of eggs, some kind of fishes, but few as says Cardan.
good wine, bread of Wheat that is neither too new nor too stale, as says
Auicen. 3. lib. de sanitate tuenda.
Also good Ale, that is old, clear, well sodden, taken moderatly, for
otherwise the fume and vapors of it, 25. lib. cap. 57.
are more dangerous then that which comes of wine.


CO. Have the ancient mediciners spoken any thing of this of drink.


LO. Galen nor Hipocrates have made no mention of it, the Arabs have esteemed
much of it and invented diverse ways to make it yet far differring from the
manner we use in making thereof. Auicen and Auerois who have written at large of
it, say that it has the virtue to quench the thirst, provoke sleep, and
tempereth the body.


CO. Which are the Elements which engender evil humors.


LO. All that are of evil disgestion, like as Bacon, yet nevertheless, Galen
greatly commends, for the similitude it has with humane flesh, yet it is
found by experience that the great use hereof, causes Leprosy, because
Swine amongst all other beasts are most subject to that sickness, for this
cause says Tertullian and Baptist Mantuan that Moses did forbid it to the
Jews, because they were already subject to that sickness, as writes Arist.
In like manner salt Beef, Hearts flesh, Hairs, Rams, Goats, Geese, and all
sorts of water Fowls, Cheese, Fruits, all sorts of legumes, all sorts of
bread, excepting bread of wheat, ar wrireth Galen. Lib. de bono and malo succo.
As for the propriety of every sort of aliment ye shall hear at length in our
treatise, entitled the poor ma^s guide.


CO. What meanest thou by the quantity of meat.


LO. That we never eat more then contenteth nature, 2. aphoris.
and not according to appetite, as says Hipocrates let never a man, who would
live in health, fill himself too full of meat, nor be slow to exercise and
travel, and in so doing he shall sieldome be sick, so some old writers says
that we should eat to live, but not live to eat, as many do now a days,
like as the half of the people does burst with morning drinks, desiune,
dinner, afternoones drink, supper, and collation: so that they give no leisure
to nature, to digest that meat, the which wracketh their bodies, and
offends God by such Gluttonye: The other half of the people is half
hungered, who works and trauaileth sore, yet we see they live longer, and is
less subject to sickness.


CO. Is there always just measure to be observed in meat.


LO. No but in whole folks, we use according to their temperature, in sick
folks in like manner, according to the diversity of the sickness, Galen
counsels in long sicknesses, Lib. ad glauco.
the sick shall use the diet more large, and in short sicknesses, the diet
shall be meaner, when the sickness is in chief force, they must use a very
spare diet, 5. aphoris.
yet as says Hypocrates it chances often times greater accidents of over
straight a diet, Lib. 1. sanitate tuenda.
nor of a more large diet. Cardan is of the opinion to eat little at once, for
the Concoction is made the better, so there remains little Superfluities and
excrementes, Plutarch, Pliny, and Macrebius, are of opinion that one sort of
meat simple is best; and of most easy disgestion.


CO. What do thou observe touching the quality of meat.


LO. In whole folks according to their temperature, in sick folks according
to the diversity of the sickness, in Children ^liments that are hot and
humide, in hot sicknesses cold meats, in cold sicknesses hot meats and so
forth in others.


CO. What do thou observe touching custom or use.


LO. The custom should be observed, for as says our ancients it is a second
nature, we see that which is accustomed although it be not over good, yet it is
better. Therefore if we change, it must be done, by little and little, 9.
aphoris.
as says Hipocrates I have often seen men become sick in other Countries,
chiefly for the changing of the alimentes, Lib. 2.3. aphoris.
in like manner Hipocrates says what we have appetite unto, we should eat it,
although it be worse, than thar we have no appetite to: for it is better says
he, because the stomach does digest it more quickly and better, than that
which we take unwillingly.


CO. Thou know that good order is to be observed in all things, but
chieflye in meat and drink, for the great effects that insueth thereof.
therefore tell me what order should be used in eating and drinking.


LO. Cardan counsels to eat that first, which is easiest to be digested,
otherwise we force our stomach, Lib. de sanitate tuenda. Lib. de victu in
morbis acutis.
yet the humides first, Hyppocrates counsels to use light things in the
morning, to open the Bellye, and such things at Night, as nourishes the Body,
also it best to eat before drink, for the disgestion is wrought, the better.


CO. Is there any time observed when a man should eat and drink?


LO. I^ is always best after some exercise, but to eat moderatly, chiefly
when we are hungry, the exercise helps digestion, and augmenteth the
natural heat, in sick folks the time is observed, according to his custom
and force of the sickness, yet in the beginning of the access, it is not best
to eat or drink, except in great necessity for lack of strength: soon
after meat go not to write nor read, nor use no profound meditation, for
that deturneth natural heat which should be occupied to digestion.


CO. What observe you touching age.


LO. I observe in children aliments humides are best, for in using of dry
meats, you dry up the body and hinder the growing: to young men, who are
exceeding hot and dry, use alimentes of contrary qualities, like as to old
men, which are cold and dry, we should use meats, which heateth and
humecteth the parts solid, in like manner the young should eat oftener and
more, because they have abundance of natural heat, old on the contrary, for
lack of natural heat. Hippocrates says in his Aphorisms old men fast
easily, next, those which are in manly age, next, adolescencie and young men,
but least of all, children.


CO. What distinction make you touching the time of the year?


LO. In winter which is cold and humide, we must use meat hot and dry,
like as roste, and in greater quantity: drink little and good. In the spring
time, which is hot and humide, eat less and drink more, but weaker: use
meats of good suck. The Summer which is hot and dry, we use meats cold and
humide diminish the eating and augment the drink more then in the spring. The
Autumn, which is cold and dry, we begin to cat a little more, and drink
less then in Summer or Spring time: and so we follow the mutation of the
time, by meats and drinks which are of contrary qualities.


CO. What is drink?


LO. It is a liquor appeasing the thirst and mixting the meat in the stomach.


CO. What is thirst?


LO. It is an appetite of a thing cold and humide, for the drink does humect
and refresh either actualment presently or potentially to come. Pline says hot
drink is contrary to nature, we must not drink so soon as we sit down to
the table, for it moves and augmenteth the Cat^ars, also there is nothing more
evil for Cat^ars nor to drink when we go to sleep. Here we must observe in
drinking, that we drink never so much, that it it swim in the stomach, as
those do, who drink for pleasure, of whom Crinitus makes mention saying
that the first draught quenches the thyrst, the second makes a man joyous,
the third makes him drunken, the fourth puts him clean out of his senses,
Macrobius make mention that eating do make a man quiet and drink causes him
clatter, drink moderatly taken has three offices, the first it helps the
digestino, the second is to mingle the meats, third is to bring it to the
Liver, veins, and arters, and there is two sorts of it, the one norisheth,
like as wine, beer and ale, the other does not nourish, as water


The third Chapter, of moving and exercise.
CO. What mean yau in this place, by moving.


LO. All kind of voluntary exercise, as laboring, running, ryding, playing,
wresling, leaping, dancing, fencing.


CO. Do these exercises bring any commodity to our bodies.


LO. In right using of them there comes great commodity, and in ill using
great and perilous accidents. Hipocrates says, who desires health, let him
not be dull to labor, for a man may not be healthful if he travel not to
dissipate the excrements of the third digestion, Lib. de lusu pile.
that is much recomme^ded by Galen, but he blames all exercise that moves the
body unequally.


CO. What particular commodity baue we of exercise.


LO. It helps the natural heat, it quickneth the spirit, it opens the
pores of our bodies, whereby the excrements are consumed and wasted, it
comfort all our members, it confirms the inspiration and other actions of
our bodies.


CO. What time is most mete for exercise.


LO. It is best before meat or long time after meat for the stomach, being
full of meat it hinders the digestion, Fuchius reports that the Scholars
of Almaine, Lib. 2. compen medicine.
play immediately after meat which causes the^ to full of humors, crudities,
scabbs and ulcers, Hypocrates says that labor, 6. epidemior.
meat, drink, sleeping, playing, and women ought to be moderatly used, like
as all other exercises, the exercise should be before, or long after meat, as
ye have heard, when the digestio^ is perfect in the stomach and veins, if
otherwise it be used, there gathers abundance of crudities and choll^rick
humors, the exercise duly done purges the body of many excrements, the
exercise ought to be done in this manner, after ye rise in the morning, ye
shall walk a little, to the end, that the excrements of the first digestion
may fall into the intestinies, and those of the second into the bladder, that
done, spit out all in the mouth, throat, and stomach, wash the hands, face,
and rub it with a rough cloth, to cause it to exhall and dissipe the vapors.


CO. What say thou touching rest.


LO. Like as exercise duly used has great force for the co^seruation of
health, so on the contrary much rest, not only dulleth the principal
instruments of our bodies, but also the mind, it makes many crudities, and
thereupon great abundance of evil humors, De morborum causis cap. 5.
Galen reckons idleness to be cause of many cold maladies, as also the Mother
of many mischiefs, the which were too long to recite in this place.


The fourth Chapter, of sleeping and waking.
CO. Lib. 1. simptomatuum causis Paul. agineta.
What is sleep.


LO. Galen says it is a rest and quietness of the body, and chiefly of the
spirits and faculty animal.


CO. What is the cause of sleeping. Lib. 1. Hip. lib. de in somnijs.



LO. The chief cause is in the brains, when the vapors ascends thereunto,
and by the coldness of the brains, those vapors are changed into humors, the
which closes the conducts of the nerves.


CO. What things does provoke sleep.


LO. All such things as makes abundance of vapors, like as wine, ale full of
barme, milk, Card. lib. 1. de somnis.
and all things that are moist and cold, and commonly after meat, vapors
ascends to the head, and so provoke sleep.


CO. Do all men sleep like quantity.


LO. That is according to the temperature of the person, for some sleep
longer, some shorter.


CO. What space is ordinarily required for men to sleep.


LO. Seven hours, eight hours, some Nine as Galen says. Pliny says that
in sleeping we spend the half of our time, 6. de tuenda valetudine cap. 5.
it dulleth the head, it hinders to digest the crudities, it gathers
abundance of excrementes it hebeteth and makes gross the spirits of old folks
and children, it rety^^^ the excreme^ts, in sleeping cover well they head and
feet, for cold of the extremities is very contrary to those that has the
brains cold and humide, Aristto.
Pliny in the 7. of his natural history said that Epimenides did sleep in a
cave the space of Fifty 7. year being wearied and by the heat of the sun,
yet when he wakened he thought to have slept but on day.


CO. What time is most meet to sleep.


LO. Hyppocrates, Aetius, and others are of the opinion to walk on the day and
sleep in the night, for that is the institution of nature, also the sleep
should begin two hours after supper, such time is most meet for the digestion
of our meats, for by sleep the natural heat is in the ce^ter of the body.
Sleeping on the day fills the brains full of humidity, also it hinders the
concoction of the which comes ganting, ri^ting, winds, heaviness of the
members, chiefly of the head, and diverse sicknesses, as catarrhes, Lib. de
contradice^t ^us ^edicorum.
Cardan cou^selleth to sleep in the day, but means of such folk that does
not rest in the night


CO. When men go to sleep, Which side should they lie on.


LO. First on the right side, because the meat go more easily to the botto^e
of the stomach, thereafter on the other side. no ways on the face, for that
causes defluxions in the eyes, as says Jesus: nor on the back, for that
makes heat in the raines, Lib. de oculis.
apoplexy, the maire, the gravel, and diverse other accidents: in no wise, the
hands under the head, as some do, for that causes defluxion of humors on the
lights: sleep not soon after meat.


CO What is to be observed in sleeping, of sick folks?


LO. Hippocrates says, In Aphorismis
those sickenesses wherein the sleeping is painful, esteem them to be
dangerous and mortal, if not painful, Lib. de somnijs
it is a good token.


CO Is it needful to observe dreams in sleeping?


LO. Cardan says, dreams are not to be neglected, because sometime, by that
we know the affections of the humors, which demaineth: as for example, the
sanguine dreams are merry, the choleric dreams are fiery, the
melancholicke sad, the phlegmatic cold, for they think they see rain and
snow in their sleep.


CO. What meanest thou by waking?


LO Waking should be moderatly used, for much watching corrupts the brains
and the good temperature, it debillitateth the senses, alters the spirits,
moves crudities, alterations, 3. Aphorismorum.
heaviness of the head, resolution of all the body, dissipateth the natural
heat. Hippocrates says, that sleeping and waking if they be excessive, they
are evil and perilous, so mediocritie is best in all things. The cause of
waking is dryness and heat of the brains, it dries the habitude of the body,
and so much touching sleeping and waking.


The fifth Chapter, of repletion and euacuation.
CO. Thou shall understand, that repletion, plenitude and abundance is all one
matter, therefore I would know how many kinds of repletion there is.


LO. There are two, to wit, in quantity and quality.


CO. What mean you by repletion in quality.


LO. I mean, when the quality of the meat excee^eth without the humors.


CO, What mean you by quantity?


LO. I mean, when meat drink and humors are in so great quantity, that
nature cannot overcome, and it is called excess or satietie, of the which come
infinite maladies.


CO. How many kinds are there hereof.


LO. Two, to wit, the one of meat, called Satietas of the Latins, and the
other of the humors.


CO. Is satietie of meat otherwise divided.


LO. It is yet divided in two, to wit, the one is called satietas ad vasa, that
is, when the stomach and veins are so full, that it makes them over large,
as happens to them, who are always eating and drinking in such quantity,
that they are constrained to vomit it up again, these people are more worthy
to be called beasts, then men, for that not only offends God, but wracketh
their own bodies. The other sort of plenitude is called satietas ad vires,
which is, when there is so great abundance, that the virtue, force nor
faculties of our bodies can not govern nor digest.


CO. Tell me what the quality of repletion of humors is.


LO. It is when all the humors or one alone exceeds and demaineth such as are
good and loweable.


CO. How call thou it, when all, and when one only demaineth?


LO. When all, it is called plethore by the Greeks, and plenitudo by the
Latins; and when only one or all domene as the vicious domains, it is called
cacochynne or juice vicious, either of the choler, phlegm or melancholy


CO. What is euacuation or inanition?


LO. It is an outdrawing and taking away of the humors, which domains and
molesteth our bodies, which are euacuated either universally or particularly.


CO. Which are the universal euacuations?


LO. Those which are done by purgation, vrining, bleeding, vomiting,
scarrification, exercise, friction, bathing, medicaments, digerents,
hemerhoides, menstruous purgations, also by the act venerian, in like manner
by abstinence of meat, but that is done by accident.


CO. Tell me after what manner the euacuation universal is done.


LO. By purgations, and by medicamentes catartickes accommodated to every kind
of humor by things diuretics, by vomitors, by things which provoke
spitting and diverse others, which I leave to the learned mediciner.
Phlebotomie, how it is done, when, and after what fashion, ye shall hear at
length in the sixth Treatise, like as of frictions, The body is euacuated by
the immoderate act of Venus, like as diverse other mischiefs ensues thereupon*
Jesus lib. de oculis.
and first of all, it is hurtful to the eyes, and all the organs sensitiues,
to the nerves, the thorax, the neirs, and parts near to the neirs, and diverse
other parts of our bodies, Paulus Aegeneia.
and makes men forgetful, provoke the gout, and dolors nephreticks, and
diverse diseases of the bladder, brings soon old age, consequently death, it
does hurt, immoderatly used not only to man, but to all animals, Pliny tells
of two that died suddenly in the act venerian, women are always better
disposed, as says Hippocrates* Notwithstanding the Bishop of Illerden in
Spain, in his book entitled Consilium fraternitatis, reports that in his
time a woman complained to the King of Arragone, that her husband did know her
30. times a day, and her husband confessing the same to the King, was
commanded upon pain of death not to have company with her above six times a
day, least the woman should thereby be in danger of her life* wherein says
he, we are not so much to marvel at the ability of the husband, as at the
complaint of his wife seeing the verse says* Et lassata viris nondum satiata
recessit. And also in the xxx. Chapter of Solomon's proverbs: Three things are
insatiable, and the fourth is never satisfied. But because such as delight in
this pastime will formalize, as also because the usage hereof is sometime
profitable to the Chirurgian, I will not altogether condemn it, but like as I
have set down the incommodities* so shall you hear the commodities hereof
according as some learned men have written. Lib. 1. cap. 15. Haliab Les. li. 5
Paulus Aegineta says, the usage of Venus moderatly used, makes the body
more agill and quick, it softneth the instruments being hard, it opens the
co^duits, it purges the phlegm, and is profitable for all passions
phlegmaticks, for heaviness of the head, it drives away anger, sadness and
melancholicke passions, imaginations nocturnals, it procures appetite, Aetius
says, it is a work of nature, Lib. 3. cap. 8.
and so being moderatly used, it is good, if the parties be hot and humide, it
euacuateth the sperme, for otherwise it should become in some quality
venomous: so it delivers man of great euilles, of the which Galen speaks.
Hippocrates says, 6. de locis affectis.
that the first act of Venus cease many great sickenesses: so these are the
commodities of Venus moderatly used. Abstinence also euacuateth the body, both
in sick folk and whole, but by accident as ye have heard, the which is done
two ways, the first, when ye neither eat nor drink at all, and that is called
abstinence: secondly when we take meat, but not so much as is needful, for
conservation of the virtue, and that is properly called diet.


CO. Which are the particular euacuations?


LO. When the brains are discharged by the rouse of the mouth, and evidently
by the nose, by the eyes and ears obscurely, the lights by the trachearter,
the stomach by vomiting, the intestins by the fundament, the liver, the melt,
the kidneis and the bladder by the urine, the privy parts of women by
purgations natural* of the which, some are done by the gift of nature, some
artificially if need be, as in others: of the which ye shall hear at more
length in my book of women's diseases.


The sixth Chapter, of perturbations and passions of the mind.
CO. Arist. Deuideth the mind into two parts, to wit, the part of reason
and the other without reason, and it is subject to diverse passions, therefore
tell me what thou call passion of the mind.


LO. It is a suffering of the mind by the just course, the which makes makes
maruailous mutations in the body, and therefore most necessary to be marked,
because of the great chances, which ensue thereupon, Cap. 5. de animalibus.
as we may perceive by the authorities of Arist. who says the motion and
perturbations of the mind, brings great motions and mutations to the
natural heat. In like manner Hipocrates and Galen show that many die by the
motions and perturbations of the mind: ^^^idimioru^. (...) simpt. causis cap
5. and ^. method.
for the perturbations of the mind either d^lateth or comprimeth the heart, for
the which the vital spirits are either cast forth by the dilatation of the
heart, or else contained by the great compression hereof, among the which joy,
hope, love brings the spirits outwardly, sadness and fear, brings inwardly
to the center in diverse manners as ye shall hear.


CO. How many such passions are there.


LO. There are many, but here I will reckon those which are most common, like
as mirth, sadness, fear, anger, shamefastnes, envy, hatred, hope, Mirth.
love.


CO. What is mirth.


LO. It is an affection of the mind conceived of a thing good, and pleasant, by
the which the blood and spirits are sweetly spread, for the present goodness,
by the dilatation of the heart, if it be great, and last any space, there often
comes death, because the heart is destitute altogether of blood. Arist
reports of a woman named Policri^a, that she dyed for joy, also^
Phillippides a writer of comedies being contending with an other, and
ouercomming his neighbor, beyond his expectation, Lib. 9. cap. 12.
dyed for joy, Valerius Maximus wr^teth of two women, one Chilo^ a
Lacidemonian, and Diagore, a Rhodian. that they dyed for joy, for the return
of their sons, as also, because they had overcome their enemies in the wars*
Gellius tells of one Diagoras, who when he saw his three Sons Crowned at
Olympus for their virtue, dyed for joy, embracing them in the presence of the
whole people. These accidents happen oftener to women, then to men, because
naturally they have the heart more cold, and fewer vital spirits, therefore
the few spirits dissipateth soon and so dye. In like manner faintharted men,
yet joy moderatly used does many good things in us, first it refussitateth the
spirit, it helps the concoction, and all the habitude of the body, it
fortifieth the virtues animal, much laughing is hurtful to young children,
Sadness.



CO. What is sadness?


LO. It is an affection that reuoketh the natural heat inwardly, toward the
center of the body, but at great leisure it presses the heart, and dries up
the body, that hardly the spirit vital can govern as before, or if any be,
it is so feeble, that it can not go with the blood, through the rest of the
body, so consumes the body, it becomes atrophie and lean, and causes
death. Cicero writes, saying, it were great good among men to live without
eating or drinking, Ad Atticum.
but it were a greater good, if men could live without melancholy, because the
meat we eat, does but corrupt the humors of our body, but sadness and
melancholy does consume both flesh and bones, and also gnaweth the entrails,
of the which diverse die. Pliny says, Lib. 7. cap. 36.
that one Petrus Rutillius after he knew that his father had a repulse of his
petitions, died for sadness. Also Marcus Lepidus, after his wife was divorced
from him, dyed. In like manner Hely high Priest of the Jews, and diverse other,
which were too long to repeat. Also Antonius Boneuenus de abditis morborum
caus^s says of a boy that dyed for fear, by seeing of two men cladde in
black in going to the stool and so dyed 8. days after about the same hour,
as do the most part.


CO. What is fear?


LO. It is a motion, that reuoketh the spirit to the center, to the heart by
the arters suddenly, which suffocateth the natural and vital heat, it causes
trembling, sometime the belly loses, and death ensues, so I find, that
fear makes the same accidents, that melancholy does, but grreater in short
time, it draws the blood and spirits to the heart, the visage grows pale,
the extremities cold, with universal trembling, the voice is intercepted with
great palpitation of the heart, it being suffocated, by the great abundance of
the blood, and spirits, that it can not move liberally. Galen says this
passion happens often to women and people of cold temperature. 5. De Symtomatum
causis,
Zenophon assures that the great torments of fear is more vehement the^ all
present adversities. Diverse learned men have affirmed that men have grown
white in 25. years, only by the apprehensio^ and fear of death.


CO. What is anger?


LO. It is a sudden reuocation of the spirits to the external parts with an
appetite of revenge: or it is an ardent heat or ebul^sion of blood done in the
heart, with desire of vengeance: whereof come evil accidents, this inflameth
the whole habitude of the body, causes fever, because by the inflammation of
the heart, the spirit and blood are troubled, likewise the brains and nerves,
of the which comes Frenzy and diverse other accidents: it binds the heart
and lights. Shamefastness



CO. What is shamefastness?


LO. It is a mouement of our body next to anger, by the which one knowing and
suspecting his own fault, Haliabbas. li. 5.
would be angry with himself, seeing the judgment of others: in this passion
the blood returns in and suddeinly out, so the cheeks become redsome dye.
Pliny says that one Diodorus professor of Dialecticke, having propounded to
him a question, and not answering it as he should, dyed for shame. Valerius
maximus reports of Homere, that he died for shame, because he could not
resolve a question propounded to him by fishers. Envy.



CO. What is Envy?


LO. It is a triste oppression of the heart, angry at the felicity of some
other man. Hatred.



CO. What is hatred?


LO. It is an old habitude malicious, bredde of anger, by the which the heart
would revenge the injury. Esperance.



CO. What is hope?


LO. It is a motion by the which the heart desires the good future, it opens
and dilateth it, like as joy for the present good.


CO. Love.
What is love?


LO. It is a fervent motion, by the which the heart desires ardently, and
endeavors to draw to it, a good, assured and apparent, not much different
from hope, except the love is more ardent.


The third Treatise of things altogether contrary to our nature, which
contains three Chapters.
CO. We have discoursed sufficiently of natural things, whereof our body is
composed, as also of unnatural things, which may alter our bodies not being
duly used, here we intend to speak of thing? which are altogether contrary
to our nature* and destroy it: for the which cause Galen calls them things
contrary to nature, 2. De temperamentis et 1. de Symptomatu^ causis.
therefore let me know what things those are, which are altogether contrary to
our nature, and how many they are in number.


LO. They are three Malady, Cause of malady, and Accidents of malady.


The first Chapter, of Malady.
CO. Seeing thou say that the first of the three things contrary to nature
is Malady, then tell me the definition thereof.


LO. It is a disposition against nature, that hurts manifestly the operations
of the body.


CO. Then tell me what is health?


LO. It is a constitution according to nature, which makes the actions of our
body perfect.


CO. How many kinds of maladies are there?


LO. Three, to wit, Intemperi^, Evil confirmation, and Solution of
conti^^^nitie.


CO. What is Intemperie?


LO. It is a malady in the similar parts digressing from the own temperature.


CO. How many ways is that done?


LO. Two ways, to wit, either by the simple intemperie, by the abundance of a
humor only, as cold, hot, moist, or dry.


CO. What is Evil confirmation?


LO. It is a vice in the parts organicks, either in the figure, magnitude, or
situation, as for example, that which should be naturally right, is oblique
and so forth, as if a part were augmented or diminished contrary to nature: in
like manner in the number of parts, as if a man had six fingers, or four,
also in the situation or collection, as if parts naturally joined were
disioyned, as happens in dislocations,


CO. Which is the third kind of malady?


Lo. Solution of conti^^itie both in the similar and organicke parts, which
has diverse names according to the variety of the parts where they are.


The second Chapter, Of the cause of Malady.
CO. What is the cause of Malady?


LO. It is some affection, which makes sickness, of the which some are
externes, some internes.


CO. Which are the externes?


LO. They are called procatarticks or primitiues, as strokes, falls, shot and
such like, or evil nourri^^r.


CO. Which are the internes.


LO. They are two, to wit anticedents, and coniunct.


CO. Which are the causes antecedents.


LO. Evil humors in the body.


CO. Which are the causes coniunct.


LO. It is that which makes the sickness presently, and is always with the
sickness, and where the sickness is not, it is absent.


CO. How comes the cause of malady.


LO. There are some, we have from the Mothers womb, and from the parents,
which we call maladies heriditaries, some do engender after our birth, as by
the regiment of life, strokes, and falls, as you have heard.


The third Chapter, of accidents and Symptoms.
CO. Lib. de simpt. differentijs.
What is accident or Symptom.


LO* Galen says that symptom is any thing, that chances to man, by nature,
so the causes interne of sicknesses, may be called Symtomes.


CO. How many kind of Symptoms are there.


LO. Three, to wit, the first is when the action is offended, which may be done
three ways, that is either abolished, diminished, or deprauated, as for
example, in blindness, the sight is abolished, dimished as suffocation as
happens in the beginning of Catarack, deprauated as for a certain time, as
in changing the simple affection of our body, or the whole habitude from one
extremity to another, as the natural heat into inflamatio^, the scabs of the
flesh into leprosy, the third is in the vice of the excreme^ts, by immoderat
retention, or expulsion as the Hemorhoides, the purgations of women, the
vrines, these or any of these retained, or euacuated, overmuch makes great
accidents and so we end this treatise.


THE FOVRTH TREATISE OF tumors or aposthumes against nature in general which
contaynes XIII. Chapters. Written by Peter Low arellian Doctor in Chirurgerie,
and Chirurgian ordinary to the King of France and Nauair.
Of tumors in general.Chapter 1 Of Phlegmon.Chapter 2 Of furuncle.Chapter 3 Of
Anthra^ or Carbunele.Chapte^ 4 Of gangrene or h^stiomen.Chapter 5 Of
Sphasell.Chapter 6 Of tumors bilions.Chapter 7 Of Herpes.Chapter 8 Of tumors
petuito^s.Chapter 9 Of flat^ons tumors.Chapter 10 Of ^^heor^ma, ste^tema, and
mellericeris.Chapter 11 Of melancholicke tumors.Chapter 12 Of Cancer.Chapter 13
The first Chapter, of the causes, signs, and curation of Aposthumes in
general.
COinteret. Now it is neceslarie we come to the exercise of Chirurgerie for
the more sure understanding of the same, wherein we will begin at tumors er
aposthumes against nature, demanding first of you, what is an aposthume.
Definition.



LO. It is a disease composed of three diverse maladies, to wit, Galen. 2. ad
Glan. cap. 7.
evil co^plexio^ in the similar parts, evil composition or constitution in
the instrume^tall parts, and dissolutio^ of co^tinuity in both similar and
isntrumental parts, offe^ding the actions of the member where it is. Cause.



CO. What is the cause of Apostumes?


LO. Some are generals, and some are specials.


CO. Which is the general cause?


LO. Either fluxion or congestion.


CO. What is fluxion. It is a moving of the humors of the body to some certain
part, the which either by the quantity or quality or both together, may not
be received by the part without offense. Galen lib. 13. method. cap. 5. and 6.



CO. Which are the causes of fluxion?


LO. They are double, to wit, either in the part or parts that send or in
the part or parts that receive.


CO. How is the fluxion made in the part that sends?


LO. When the faculty retentiue of the part is ouercharged with humors, which
offend either in quantity, quality, or both, for then the part discharges it
self, by the virtue expultrix, chiefly when it is strong, also when the part
that sends, has connection with the part that receives, or when the patt
that receives is inferior to the part that sends, or if the said parts have
any sympathy tog^^her, as the stomach with the brain.


CO. Which are the causes in the parts, that receive?


LO. They are diverse, as weakness, not having force to repel or drive them
elsewhere, the vessels and conduites large, where the matter does pass, or
else because it is soft in substance and so easy to receive: sometime for the
dolor, which makes attraction of the matter from the parts near to it, or
great heat which draws and provoke fluxion.


CO. Galen lib. 2. de differ. febr. cap vltimo and ca. 7. de curatione p.
sanguinis missionem and 6. epedemiorum.
What is congestion?


LO. It is a mass of matter contrary to the nature engendered of the
superfluities of the third concoction, of the aliment and food which are
distributed for the nouriture of the parts of the body, which chau^ceth when
the aliment is not so digested, as it may well be appropriated to the part,
which should be nourished.


CO. Which are the causes of congestion?


LO, They are either imbecillitie of the faculty concoctrix of the part, that
it can not digest that, which is sent to it by nature for the nouriture of it,
or imbecillitie of the faculty expultrix, that can not expel the
superfluities, that rests commonly in the parts*


CO. By what means know you the tumors made by fluxion and congestion?


LO. The tumors made by fluxions are with great dolor, rednes, pulsation, and
make the degrees faster, than the other, which are done by congestion. Those
which are done by congestion, g^owe little and little, and do diminish in like
manner, when they come to their declination.


CO. Which are the special causes of aposthumes?


LO. Three to wit, primitive, Haly abbas lib 8.
antecedent, and coniunct.


CO. Which are the primitive causes?


LO. They are external causes as falls, strokes, and other external
violences, which move the humors of our body, also great heat of the air, or
meat or drink, taken over hot or over cold.


CO. which are the causes antecedent?


LO. They are internal not known as the presidents, the which inge^dreth not
only the malady, but also entertain such as the humors naturalls offe^ding in
quantity or quality, also the intempetature, feeblenes and evil
confirmation, dolor of the parts.


CO. Which are the coniunct causes?


LO. The coniunct is the matter gathered together in the place, and is so
called because it is with the sicknesses and norisheth it. with the disposition
of the member.


CO. Which are the general signs of aposthumes. Signs general



LO. Tumor or swelling in any part otherwise than the natural disposition,
offending the action, also difference of the parts, which should be like to
other dolor and heat.


CO. By what signs know you every kind of tumur. Signs.



LO. Either by the color, intemperature, hot, cold, hardness, or softnes,
dolor, tension, mordica^ion, as also by contimation of the fluxion, for first
the color is like the humor, as if it be red it is of the sanguine humor, if
white, of pituite, if black, of the humor melancholicke, if yellow, of choll^r.
Further if there be heat, it signifies, either sanguine, or choler, or some
burnt (...) or if cold, waterie or windy, it signifies the humor pituit^ous or
mela^cholick. Galen 14. meth cap. 9. Com. 2 3 apho lib. 1. prog.
Hardness with-dolor, signifies phleg^o^, if without dolor^schir. If softnes
without dolor it signifies Edema, tensio^ betokens great repletion of wind,
if mordication, it signifies the acrimonie of the humor that makes the tumor.


CO. How many sorts of aposthumes are there. Difference.



LO. Two, hot and cold.


CO. Which are the hot.


LO. Those which proceed of blood and choler.


CO. Which are the cold.


LO. Those which come of phlegm or melancholy.


CO. Which are those that proceed of blood.


LO. phlegmon, Carbunculus, Phimus, Phigetlon, T^rminthon, Fermiculus,
Gangrena, Authrax, Tuberculus, Opthalmia, Schinancia, Bubo.


CO. Which are those that come of choler.


LO. Eresipelas, Herpes, Formica, and Empetigo.


CO. Which are those which proceed of the petuite.


LO. Galen lib. tumor. co^tra naturam cap. 5. and 13. motho. cap.
Oedema, all windy aposthumes, Atheor^ma, Steotema, and Mellericeris, As^ites,
Lenchophlegmatia, bronco caele.


CO. Which are those, that come of melancholye.


LO. Schirrus, Cancer, Leprosy, Dracunculus, Wartes, Clauus, Thimus, Morphea
nigra and alba: of all which we will hereafter entreat perticulerly in
several Chapters, at this present it shall suffice to know, that they
proceed of the four humors. Judgment.



CO. What judgment give you of tumors.


LO. I give some to be cureable, some dangerous, some dolorous, some long in
healing, and some to be mortal.


CO. Which are cureable.


LO. Those which are in the parts musculous and bodies of good temperature.
Gal. ad Glanc. cap. 4. and lib. 1. and 4. method.



CO. Which are the dangerous.


LO. All those, which do penetrate internallye in the body, and those, which
are very large not pointed, as says Hipocrates, and and those, 1. prognostic.
Gordon perti. 1
which are in parts very sensible.


CO. Which are the dolorous.


LO. Those which are in the parts neruous, and membranous, and are engendered of
a sharp and biting humor.


CO. Which are long in healing.


LO. Galen says that those, which happen in rich and delicate persons, because
they refuse fit remedies for the curation of such tumors, also all that are
hard and in evil disp^sed bodie^ and hydropicks, Elephanticks, all such as
are long in healing*


CO. Which are mortal.


LO. Those which are venomous, or taken the course inwardly toward the noble
parts, or those which are in the noble parts. Degrees.
How many times or degrees have the aposthumes. Gal. lib. de totius morbi. ca.
3. and cap. 1. de morbo. te^poribus. Aetius lib. 4.



LO. Four, to wit, the beginning augmenting, state or vigor, and declination.


CO. What is the beginning.


LO. It is when the tumor does first appear and begins to swell.


CO. What is the augmentation.


LO. It is when the tumor grows more and more, as also the accidents.


CO. What is the state or vigor.


LO. It is when neither the tumor nor accidents grow, but remain in one estate.


CO. What is the declination. Aetius lib. 4. cap. 31.



LO. It is when we perceive the tumor, and also the accidents to disminish
with a dissipation of the humor, either by resolution, or supuration.


CO. What is resolution?


LO. It is the euacuation of the humor by the pores of the flesh insensible to
us.


CO. What is suppuration?


LO. It is a virtue which makes the humor gathered in the place, into matter:
so all aposthumes do either end, by one of these two determinations, or else by
induration, or corruption, so in all there are but four termination, the best
is resolution in the beginning, the worst corruption, but supputation is
better, than induratio^.


CO. Which are the signs of these terminations?


LO. The signs of resolution are lightness or ease of the member tumified,
diminution of dolor, pulsation, and tension, Paulus lib. 4. cap. 17. and com.
aphor. 47. lib. 2.
with itching in the part. The signs of ^upputation, are dolor, pulsation,
augmentation of heat, and fever, with eminent tumor. The signs of induration
are diminution of tumor, and the accidents precedent, with a manifest hardness.
The signs of corruption are diminutio^ of feling of the dolor, with change of
the coulor, and so becomes by little and little black, and evil sauoured.


CO. What is the general cure of aposthumes? Cure.



LO. Ar for the cure we must vnderstan'd that either the tumor or swelling is
in making, or is already made, for the which cause, we have two intentions,
the one to stay the fluxion of the humor to the place, Galen 13. method* cap. 2.
the other euacuate the humor gathered in the place.


CO. How stayest thou the fluxion?


LO. First I consider if it come of plenitude of all the body and the^ I stay
it by letting blod, if the region, Gal. ad Glan. ca 2. and lib. 3. met. cap.
4.5.6. and cap. 9. de curatione per sanguinis missionem and 5. meth cap. 3.
air, time of the year, and strength of the patie^t do permit, after the
form ye shall hear in the 7. treatise: also by bathing, exercise, unctions
degerants, and abstinence. In like manner if cacochymie or plenitude of humors,
I heal it by vomiting, purgations and Clisters. If through imbecillitie of the
part, I fortify it, by meet remedies, if by the situatio^ which is lower, I
situate the part in such fashion that the part offended is higher, than the
whole. If dolor be the cause, I stay it, by using anodine remedies, as ye shall
hear in the sixth treatise. If great heat, I stay it by cold things. Gal. lib.
5. simplic. cap. 19. Gal. lib. 13. method. cap.
I stay and deturne the fluxion, by scarifications, ventousing, cornets,
horshleaches, straight binding, frictions, and such like.


CO. By how many ways do you fortify the part?


LO. By three ways, that is, by cold and humide things, or cold and dry or
cold and stiptick, so any part may be delibated three wais, that which is
relaxed with heat and humiditie, must be comforted with cold and dry things,
the hot and dry, is healed by cold and humide things. If (...), and opennes of
the pores, it is cured by things cold and stiptick.


CO. Which is the se^ond intention.


LO. It does consist in euacuating, that humor, which is made, to the end the
member may return into his own estate. Galen lib. 14. method. cap. 1.4.5.
Gal. lib. 1. prognost. and com. aphor. 35.



CO. How is euacuation done.


LO. Two ways, first by dryuing the humor to some other part, as to repel it
inwardly, also in fortifiing the member.


CO. When shall repecussiues be used?


LO. In the beginning, and that as well on the sore, as about it, but that which
is on the sore, must not be so astringent, nor corrobaritiue, as that which is
about it.


CO. How many kinds of repercussiues ere there?


LO. There are diverse, for some be cold without astriction, like as bol
armenie, plantine, the stone hermatite: some be* hot, as galls, red wine,
nuts of Cipres, wormwood, mastick and such like.


CO. Are they not otherwise divided.


LO. Guydo of G^lea^ does divide them into proper and commune: the proper, as
oxycrate, solanum, bol armenie, wormwood (...), and such like: the commune, as
whites of eggs, mallows, oil of Roses, camomill, mastick white colyriu^ and
such like.


CO. How shall these diverse sorts be used?


LO. When the matter is hot, the repercussiues shall be cold, and when it is
cold, they shall be hot. Gal. lib. 14 method. cap. 3.



CO. Are repercussiues indifferently used in all sicknesses?


LO. There are ten exceptions wherein the propers are not used: first, when the
matter is in the emunctoirs of the noble parts, secondly if the matter be
venomous, thirdly being thick and evil to remove, fourthly when it is very
hard impacted in the place, fifthly, when it happens in the crisis of a sickness,
sixthly, when the matter comes of a cause primitive, seauenthly in a body,
plethorick, eighthly when the part is weak, and the body destitute of force,
ninthly when it is in the noble parts, tenthly when it is with vehement dolor,
and in that we use anodines, and not repercussiues.


CO. How is the second intention done?


Lo. By euacuting, that which is done in ^he place, and that by resolving, and
discutient medicaments, and euaporatiues, that are meanly hot and humide:
likewise by drawing emplasters, by sucking, ventousing 'incisio^ of the part
grieved, as says Auicen; but yet in both the euacuations, we must regard the
quantity and quality of the matter, which the tumor is composed of, as also
to the nature of the place. where it is, for we must not cure those, which
proceed of blood, as those which come of phlegm, chollor, or mela^choly: also
we must respect the nature of parts, Gal. ad Glanc, cap. 2.
for we must use other remedies in soft and humid parts as the flesh and
gla^des, tha^ in hard and dry parts, as nerves, ligame^ts, Gal. lib. 7. method.
cah. 13. and ca. 7* lib. 4. method.
cartilages and bones. We must also have respect to the parts of the body, for
some are simples, others composed, some of one te^perature, some of another, so
the remedies must be used to the part. We must also respect the confirmation of
the part, for some are hollow without, or within, some are soft, Gal. 2. ad
Glan. Gal. 7. metho. cap. 1^.
easy to receive fluxio^: in like manner we must regard the co^munications of
the veins one with an other, also to the commodity of the co^duits, to expel
the excreme^ts, as also to the virtue of the place, for some are se^sible, some
not, as also the diversity of the parts for some are noble parts as the brain,
heart, and liver, Gal. artis paruae cap. 9.
which send the virtue through all the body by the nerves, arters, and veins,
others do serve the principal parts, without whose action we cannot live,
like as the stomach, the kidneyes, bladder and sundry others. ^^len. lib. 2.
ad G^aue. cap. 2.
In parts that are sensible, we must beware to apply medicines that loose and
resolve (...) or to apply any thing that is of a strange qualitie^ and venomous.


CO. Are there no other things to be considered in the cure of tumors?


LO. We take our indication according to the diversity of the tumor.


CO. How many sorts of tumor are there?


LO. Four, some are hard, some soft, some inward, and some vlcered.


CO. What remedies use you in these apostumes?


LO. In hard apostumes, we use remedies, that soften, and have a hot and
somewhat dry virtue, we use no resolutiues in such tumors, by reason the
matter waxes hard like a stone: the soft are cured by hot things, that
resolve and open the pores: the vlcered apostumes, like as formica, are healed
by cold things: the inward are cured, by diminishing the matter, with
bleeding, purging and other general remedies, abstaining from all strong
drink, violent exercise, and perturbations of the mind, like as anger, fear,
and the rest, which ye have heard in the treatise of unnatural things: the
rest of the cure pertains to the judgment of the expert Chirurgian, Antonius
Beueuenius. Hollerius. Marianus sanctus.
using such remedies, that soften and make ripe, as cassia fistula, triacle,
and solanum, which have great virtue to resolve hidden apostumes, as writes
Hollerius and Marianus sanctus.


CO. If the apostumes end not by resolution, induration nor corruption, but by
suppuration, what is to be done?


LO. It must be opened.


CO. By how many ways?


LO. Two ways, either by themselves, or help of the Chirurgian?


CO. Which are opened by themselves?


LO. Those which are hot, eminentes, soft and tender skinned.


CO. In what time do they open?


LO. Some in ten, fifteen or twenty days, some in forty or threescore
days: Hipp. 2. progn.
but according as we apply fit remedies, some open sooner, and some are
longer in opening.


CO. Which are those, which are opened by the help of the Chirurgian?


LO. Those which are hard, large and thick skinned, cold, and in bodies evil
disposed, in parts membranous and the emunctoires.


CO. How many ways helps the Chirurgian?


LO. Two ways, either by canter actual, potentiall, or by incision.


CO. How many ways makes the Chirurgian his incision?


LO. Three ways, in length, breadth, and circular.


CO. What mean you by the length?


LO. When it is according to the rectitude of the muscles, nerves and
membranes, to the end, the action of the part may be preserved:


CO. When by the breadth?


LO. When we have intention, to destroy the action of the part, as in spasme,
or conuulsion, Cornelius Celsus.
we cut the nerve or muscle overthwart, to save the rest, for better it is,
that one member be debilitated, then to lose the whole body.


CO. When use we incision circular?


LO. When the cauitie is great, to the end the matter may euacuate the better.


CO. You have answered to me sufficiently touching apostumes in general, I
would have you hereafter particularly to entreat of every one of them by
themselves, beginning at those which proceed of blood, and first with
Phlegmon, because it is most common, Galen. 13. meth cap. 1.
and causes many diverse accidents, thereafter, follow out the rest in order,
as well general as particular, so at our next meeting, we will entreat of
wounds after the same method.


The second Chapter, of Phlegmon.
PHlegmon is a tumor against nature, engendered of defluxion of blood in diverse
parts of the body, Definition.
but most commonly in the soft parts, and is of color read, sore, hard,
inflamed, Galen. 14. method. cap. 1.
accompanied with fevers and diverse other accidents. Of it there are two
sorts, the true Phlegmon is engendered of natural blood, being in any part
more then is needful for the use thereof, the other comes of unnatural
blood, altered by some change, as by mixtion of one or more of the other humors
with it, Differ^^^^.
so according to the domination of the humor, it takes the name, as for
example, if the choler domaine amongst the blood more then the rest of the
humors, the tumor shall be called phlegmonerisipelatus, and in like manner in the
rest, as phlegmon edematus or schirrus, so Galen says, that the humors are
seldom found alone, Lib. de differentijs morborum. cap. 12.
but mixed together. The cause is triple, primitive, antecedent, and coniunct.
The primitiues are external and first motives, as great usage of meats, which
engender much blood, Cause.
also all those things which may move the humors and provoke fluxion, falls,
strokes, breaking of the bones, contusion, heat, excessive labor and such
like. The antecedant cause ^ great superfluity and abundance of blood,
offending either in quantity, quality or both, intemperie, evil
confirmation, and dolor of the part. The cause coniunct or continent, is the
blood or matter affixed in the affliged part. The signs, are inflammation,
Signs.
rednes, hardness, fever, dolor, and pulsation chiefly, it being in maturitie.
Gal. 13. meth. cap. 1. Haliabbas. lib. 8.
The judgments, the small ones do often resolve, the great ones do often
apostume, someti^e degender into great sickenesses, according to the evil
disposition of the body and parts, Judgments.
where it chances, as mortification and schirre. Sometime it returns to the
place it came from, as in the emunctoires of the noble parts. As for the
curation, it shall be reduced to four points, according to F^chius and
Togatius, Cure.
the first in good diet of life, secondly in staying the humor, that flows
to the place, thirdly in euacuating that which is in the place, fourthly in
correcting the accidents, which often chance, as says Galen. As touching the
first, which is good diet, as says Galen, Com. 3. epidemiorum.
it shall be observed in six things not naturals, which shall be cold,
contrary to the humor, which is hot, sometime it shall be cold and humide,
and if it be with fever the humor, that flows, shall be diuerted by taking
away the cause, as repletion of the evil humors, by bleeding, Gal. 13. meth.
cap. 6.
purgations, and also by strengthening the part, if it be debille, also by
frictions, ventouseing and binding: The humor shall be euacuated in diverse
ways, according to the degrees of the apostumes, as in the beginning, we must
use repercussiues, as whites of eggs, oxycrate, rose and plantaine waters,
cataplasmes of bol armenie, terra figillata, bark of pomegranate, henbane,
oil of roses, unguent of roses, album rasis, diacalcitios or populeon. For the
augmentation, which is the second degree, we use repercussiues and resolutiues,
like as mallows, plantaine, roses, wormwood, barley flower, oil of camomill,
oxicrate, powder of roses, and myrtle, sodden wine called sapa, rose water,
vinegre, saffron, of which things, you may make cataplasmes, liniments,
fomentations, as you shall find expedient. In the vigor, we use repercussiues
and resolutiues in like force, like as mallows, parietarie, althea roasted
under the ashes, oil of roses, camomilli with a little bean flower. In the
declination, we use only resolutiues: Auicen counsels to soften a little,
which shall be done with fomentations of althea, origan, line seed, fenigrec,
flowers of camomill, roses, which things shall all be sodden in white wine
mingled with a little barley meal and honey, unguent of aragon, martiatum, or
agrippa de althea, de melil^to, or diachilon paruum. We correct the accidents,
which is the fourth point, as dolor, which must be appeased by all means, for
the great accidents, which often do ensue. For the which we use oil of roses,
wax and wine sodden together, as counsels Galen. Also cataplasmes of white
bread and milk, water, oil of roses, violettes, or camomill, or annise seed,
or sweet almondes, yolks of eggs with a little saffron, in like manner the
flowers of mallows, camomill, and mellilot sodden in wine, putting thereto a
little barley flower and goose grease, line seed, also vnguentes of roses, and
populeon. If these things be not sufficient, we take the leaves of henbane,
poppie roasted under the ashes, and tempered with the juice of sorrel, and
housleeke, put to it a little hens grease, and saffron. Gal. lib. 1. simp.
cap. 6. Gal. 13. meth. cap. 6
If the matter take the course inwrdly to some noble part, we remedy it by
application of ventouses, cornettes, frictions, straight ligatures, and such
like. If the matter com to a disposition schirrus, we must use medicame^ts,
that soften. and digest, as ye shall hear in the Chapter of schir. If ^t tend
to putrefaction it shall be helped by deep scarifications, cataplasmes made of
bean flower sodde^ in vinegar and honye, and such other remedies, as ye shall
hear in the Chapter of Gangren. Oftentimes this tumor tends to suppuration,
Lib. 4. cap. 17.
which we know as says Paulus by the great swelling and rednes of the place,
eminent, great heat, dolor, pulsation, and fever, and such like: those things
being perceived we pass from resolutiues to suppi^atiues, as to foment the
place, first with hot water or oil, Gal. 2. ad Glan. cap. 7. and lib. 5.
suplic. cap. 8. and aphor. 22. lib. 1
also with honey and water called, Hydreleon, making a cataplasme with wheat
flower sodden in Hydrel^on, putting to it a little fresh butter, Calves grease,
Henns or Goose. Also you may make a suppuratiue of Lilly roots Sorrel,
Parretarie, and Mallows, sodden in Hydrelion put thereto a little flower of
Fenegreck, Lyu-seede oil of Lillies with a little sower leaven, after it is
taken of the fire, put to it two yolks of Eggs, this sort of remedy
appeaseth well the dolor, for the same effect, we use the emplaster called
Dilachilon magnum or Basilicon. The suppuration made we know by the diminution
of the accidents, and the tumor which is pointed, also with pressing on it with
the two thumbes we find it soft, with great innundation. Pau. lib. 6. cap. 34.
Then if it open not shortly of it self, it must be done by a ruptor or
lancet, otherwise it waxes hollow and putrifieth within. In the opening of it,
there are three tules to be observed as ye have heard in the general Chapter.
Gal. 13. metho. cap. 5.
Here we must observe, that the incision be made in the inferior part, Gal.
aphor. 27. lib. 6. Celsus lib. 7. cap. 2.
the matter must not be euacuated at one time; make the incision the length,
eschewing nerves, sinews, veins and arters, and not by the breadth, as says
Auicen. When it is opened, we use the yolke of an egg, with a little Turpintine
and oil of Roses, for a certain space thereafter honey of Roses or sirupe of
Roses, Lib. 1. cap. 26:
mundificatiue de apio apostolorum, or my mundificatiue set down in the poor
man's guide, or any other thing, that munifieth, sometime we add a little
egiptiac, specially to those which withstand the former remedies, the ulcer
cleansed, we mix with a little Turpintine and Honye some powder of Irish
aloes, and thus, or some little aureum with these pouders, thereafter the
emplaster of Diacalciteos, or red desiccatiue and such like, so the ulcer
heals.

The third Chapter, of the tumor Feruncle or Dothine which proceeds of
Phlegmon.
WE have spoken in the general Chapter of diverse tumors, which come of the
sanguine humor, as Phigethton, Phinia and diverse others, but by reason, they
may be cured by the general r^r^ of Phlegmon, we let them pass* and speak of
the rest beginning at F^runole, called by the Grecian Dothene. F^runcle is a
tumor sharp pointed, with inflammation and dolor, chiefly when it grows to
matter, and is ingendered of a thick (...) or in the soft parts, Definition.
and grows commonly to the bigness of a doves egg, and is for the most part
in the skin. Celsus lib. 5. Cause. Paul. lib. 4. ca. 23.
The causes are external or internal, the internal is abundance of blood,
the external is in the vice of the skin, also the suppression of the
purgations in women, and wearing unaccustomed clothes: also by sudden taking
a cold air after a great heat, Hip. lib. de humidorum vsu. Cure.
or vehement heat, immediately after cold. The cure first consists in
general remedies as purgations and bleeding, next lay on it a little
Diachilon, with henns grease or Basilicon, Galen counsels to c^^we wheat in
the mouth fasting and lay on it. If it be deep and much inflamed, Lib. tumo.
co^tra naturam.
oftentimes it degenerateth into Anthrax and Carbuncle. and in that ease, it
must be cured, as ye shall hear in their proper Chapters.

The fourth Chapter, of Anthrax or Carbuncle.
WE must understand, that there is no difference between Anthrax and
Carbuncle, saving that Anthrax is the Greek word, and Carbuncle the Latin
word, and is so called, because it burns the place where it is like coals.
Carbuncle is properlye defiined to to be a p^stule inflamed black, Definition.
burning the place, where it is sore, with many blisters about it, as if it
were burned with fire or water. Gal. tougastius.
The cause is diverse according to the sundry kinds thereof: Cause.
the cause of the simple Carbuncle is an Ebullition of blood, thick and bot,
where it falls in any place, it burns, and makes ulcers, with a scale on
it, accompanied with great inflammations and dolor. Signs.
The signs of the simple are those, Cel. lib. 5. ca. 8.
there appear many little black Pustules, not eminent, sometime pale, and
grow suddenle red with great inflammation about them, the place is harder then
it ought to be, the sick loses appetite, and coueteth sleep, accompanied
with cold sweates and fevers. The signs of the maling are, vomiting
continually, want of appetit^e, trembling, sounding beating of the heart, the
face waxes white and liuide. The iugdmentes are, if it happen near the
stomach or throat, Judgment.
it hinders the respiration as says Celsus. That which rypeth and comes to
matter is good, that which appears and goes away with Fever is mortal, that
which is first red, ne^t yellow, is not evil, as says Auicen, that which is
first pale, and afterward black, is evil, all those which are in the
emunctions of the noble parts* are most dangerous. The cure consists in
universal and particular remedies, Cure.
the universal are a good diet of life, which shall be called and humide like
unto the regiment in Phlegmon, resisting always to the malignitie of the
humor, his drink shall be made with sirupt of Lemmo^s, acetosis s^plicis,
capilli veneri, granatorum, bluglossi, with water of the said things: use
always the tabletts of the margarite frigide, conserues of Roses, and
buglosse, bol armenie and terra sigillata, and Iuorie in powder, the opiats
which shall be made of the same ingredientes, are made of sirupe of Lemmons
and Treacle, using rhis epitheme on the noble parts Rec. aquae scabiosae,
rosarum nenupharis an. 2. vnc. aquae buglossi 1. vnc. trechiscorum, rasis,
camphor^^ an. 1. vnc. corallorum rubrorum 1. drag. di. triasandali and boli
armenici an. vnc. 1. croci and aceti par^um, fiat epithema. Use clisters, and
bleed much as counsels Galen and that in the same side vsque adauimi
defectum. The particular remedies are these, first we make deep
scarifications, and it with water and salt, Paulus lib. 4. cap. 25.
called aqua marina, we lay horsleache^ on the scarifications using a
cataplasme on the part of Crummes of white bread, leaves of Plantine,
arnoglosse, flower of Lentilles, Galen lib. 5. meth. cap. 10.
soddeu in vinegar and honey. Hipp.
Hipprcrates counsels to apply canters actualls, or some caustic
medicament, as oil of vitrioll, unquenched lyme, quoniam in extremis morbis
extrema sunt adhibendaremedia, and also ventouses, and medicines, which have
virtue, to draw the venim from the noble parts. Paulus does counsel to
separate the infected from the other parts, and raze it from the root, Gal.
13. metho. cap. 6. holleris lib. 1. de materia chirurgica.
afterward use this cataplasme to provoke the fall of the scale, which also
mitigateth the pain, composed of Lyn-seede, Mallows, Violets, yolks of
Eggs, Butter, and Barley meal. For the sharpnes of the humor, put about the
part affected vnguentum de bolo, and on the pustulles the pastules of
Andronius and Musa. Gal.
When the scale is fallen, cleanse the ulcer with sirupe of Roses, honey of
Roses and Turpintine, mundificatiue di apio, this done cicatrice and fill it up
as other ulcers. Some counsel to take the consolida mayor, Guido Rog^nt and
theodericu^.
and bray it between two stones and lay on it.

The fifth Chapter of Gangren and (...).
Definition. Gal. 2. de locis affectis et 2. ad Glanc. cap. 10. com. in aphor.
50. lib. 7.
When the inflammation neither resolves* returns inwardly, nor suppureth, nor
becomes hard, it degendreth into Gangren, which is a mortification not
altogether of the part, but tending by little and little through the great
violence of the inflammation: for thereby the veins, and arters are stopped,
that the natural heat may not pass, so the part easily corrupts, and
waxes gangrenated. Cause.
The cause is, great quantity of blood in the member, which lets the
spirit to pass, so binds and intercepteth it* Gal. 2. ad Glan.
in such sort, that the arters cannot work their transpiration and requisite
exhalation, so for want of natural heat, the members suffocates. Also great
application of cold medicamentes, as repercussiues in phlegmon and erisipelas,
or some violent external cause, chiefly in the feet or hands, as cold,
sometime crisis of fever or malign malady, strait ligatures, contusions,
strokes, or biting of venomous beasts, chiefly in the ways, and passages,
Signs.
when the spirits do pass. The signs are, if it came of inflammation, we
perceive the red color to decay, dolor, pulsation and feeling, it waxes
pale, soft and black, and in pressing on it with thy fingers, it falls down
and rises not. If it come of cold, we perceive great beating pain, great
coldness, without motion or feeling* accompanied with trembling and shaking.
If it come of strait binding, hurtes, or biting, we know it by the marks
and precedent signs and others, according to the diversity of the cause.
Judgments.
The judgments are, if it be not helped presently, the force of it is so
vehement, that the part dies presently, and the parts near to it, and so
causes death of all the body. If the muscles and nerves be not hurt, Paul.
lib. 4.
and the person young and of good constitution, and well seen unto in the
beginning, it is not difficil. Celsus.
The cure after general remedies, Cure.
as purgations and bleeding: is diet, in using cordialles, Gal. 2. ad Glanc
cap. 9. Arnoldus de villa noua. Paul. lib. 4. cap. 19.
deep scarrification on the part, and washing it with water and salt, applying
on the part, cataplasmes made of flower of beans, barley, Orob, and Lupines
sodden in honey and vinegar, putting to it a little powder of roses and
mirtl^es, a little myrhe and aristolochia, washing often the sore with oximell.
If need require, to use more strong remedies, take egipciac, and mix
therewith a little arsenic, or orpiment, and put in the scarrifications, which
remedies must be used with good judgment, noting where the gangren cease.
The fury of the malady being past, cause the scarre to fall, with honey,
butter, and yolks of eggs. If none of these prevail, but that the gangren
becomes in sphasell, Cornelius Celsus.
we must use the like cure, as in sphasell, for the safety of the rest of the
body.

The sixth Chapter, of Sphasell.
WE must here consider the differences between Gangren and Sphasell, for
Gangren is the Latin word, and is a mortification of all the parts where it
happens, Gal. 2. ad Glanc cap. 9.
saving the bones, and is cureable: but Sphasell or ^^deration is a
mortification both of soft and solid parts, and is no ways remedied, but by
amputation, it is called the fire of S. Anthony or S. Martial. The cause is,
as you have heard in Gangren, joined with an evil disposition of the body,
Definition.
and an humor venomous, which commonly corrupts the bone, Albacrasis lib. 2.
cap 87.
before it make any external show, Cause.
sometime it proceeds of old ulcers, that have been long orpressed, with
rotten matter, and so corrupts the bone and causes mortification, also
biting of vipers and mad dogs. The signs are these, Signs.
the member waxes black, as it were burnt, afterward rotten, which in
short time overcomes the whole body, the skin does come from the flesh.
The Judgments are, Judgments.
that it is for the most part incureable, and the patient dies in a cold
sweat. The cure, in so much as may be, Celsus lib. 5.
consists only in amputation of the member, Cure.
which shall be done in this manner, for the friends must first be advertised
of the danger, because often death ensues, as you have heard, either for
apprehension, weakensse, or flux of blood. For this cause the learned Celsus
calls it a miserable remedy, yet we use it, by reason in so doing, Celsus
lib. 5. cap. de sphaselo
there is some hope, and in not using of it, there is none, but sudden death,
for better it is to loose one member, then the whole body After this, we must
apply on the place of amputation, for there is diversity of opinions:
Hippocrates and some others counsel to cut in the ioynte, Lib. de hemen.
for it is more easy to be done, and also the marrow is not discovered, as in
other parts, and the flux of blood is not so great. Others think it best to
cut four inches from the joint, either above or under, according to the
putrefaction, which is both more easy, and sure then in the joint. For these
and sundry other circumstances, I advise to cut four inches from the joint in
all amputacions, saving only if the mortification or riuing of the bone end in
the joint, the^ it may be cut in the joint, chiefly in the knees: but
wheresoever you make your amputacion, remember to cut rather a little of the
whole, then to leave any of the infected, for if any remain, it infecteth the
rest, and so requires new amputacion. The place of amputacion noted, we
situate the sick, after a fit manner, having respect both to the nature and
quality of the part, and to our own commodity, then you shall have two men
to hold the patient, next, the Chirurgian shall command the sick to bend and
put out the member, to the end the skin, veins and arters may be the more
lengthened, that after the amputacion, they be more apparent so be knitte or
canterized. That being done, the Chirurgian shall pull up the skin and muscles,
as much as he can afterward he shall take a strong ribband, and bind the
member fast, above the place two inches, where the amputacion shall be. The use
of this ribband is diverse, first it holds the member hard, that the
instrument may cut more surely, secondly, that the feeling of the whole part
is stupefied, and rendered insensible, thirdly the flux of blood is stayed by
it, fourthly it holds up the skin and muscles, which cover the bone, after it
is loosed, and so makes it more easy to heal. The bandage thus made, we cut
the flesh with a rasor or knife, that is somewhat crooked like a hook, the
flesh being cut to the bone, it must be scraped with the back of the said
knife made purposely for that effect, to the end the periost, that covers
the bone, be not painful in cutting the bone, otherwise it teareth with the
saw, and causes great dolor, and also lets the cutting. This done, saw
the bone, and being cut, we loose the ligature, and draw down the skin to
cover the bone in all parts. If there be great putrifactio^, let it bleed a
little, for that discharges the part, and so is less subject to inflammation,
then we put the extremities of the fingers on the orifices of the great veins
and arters to stay them from bleeding, till we either knit, or canterize them
one after another, as shall be thought expedient. Where there is putrefaction,
we stay the flux of blood by canters actual, Gal. 2. ad Glanc
and where there is no putrefaction, nor malignitie of humor, we use the
ligature. The canter or actual fire, makes a scale, stays the bleeding, and
draws to it and consumes the malignitie, and virulencie of the humor, which
is in the part, so in that point is better then knitting, by reason that in
knitting we loose much blood, and by drawing the veins, b^^ick decourbing or
other instrument, they do break, also being knit, do often unloose, so I
find the fire more expedient, being done in this manner. We must have three or
four little instruments of iron, crooked at the end, the point in form of a
button, made red hot, which we take, and apply on the veins one after
another, holding them a certain space, till the scale be made, yet not burning
much of the vein. In amputacion without putrefaction I find the ligature more
expedient, being done thus, first thou shall hold thy fingers on the veins,
and in the other, let one loose, and take hold of it with thy beck de corbing
or other meet instrument, taking a little flesh with it, then put through a
needle with a strong thread, knit with a double knot, tying a little of the
flesh with the vein, which will make it hold the better, but if this slip, as
often it happens, ye shall do in this manner, first in putting through the
needle, begin in the utter skin^ an ynch above the wound, by the side of the
vein, cause it come out a cross in the wound by the side of the vein, yet
lower down than the orifice thereof, The way to knit veins.
then put through your needle in the other side of the vein through the wound
and cause it come out of the wound on the skin an inch broad from the place it
went in, then knit it hard, putting a little piece of cloth doubled, betwixt
the two threads, to the end the knot enter not into the skin, this way of
ligature may be used in diverse parts of our body. The blood being staunched,
we use this following astringent powder. Rec. boli aimenici 3. ounces farine
volatilis 2. ounces picis, resine, sanguinis draconis an. one dram, of this
powder you shall cast on the wound with dry flax, thereafter an astringent or
defensive made of the foresaid pouders with whites of Eggs and oil of Roses,
lay it on flax in like manner, that shall be wett in oxycrate to cover the
sore, thereafter, take a doubled cloth* sufficient to cover the sore and parts
near to it, wet it likewise in oxycrate, wherein cast the foresaid defensive:
thy bands, wet likewise in oxycrate, bind it well* so that it be neither too
straight, nor too slack, then situate the member in good sort, and remove it
not in three days, chiefly in winter, which is to be observed according to the
accidents, which happen. In changing these remedies beware to take away the
s^are or knotts of the thread, for avoiding whereof we rub the part with
cerot of Galen, to the end the defensive cleave not to it. If there chance any
vein or arter to open, we shall dissolve a little vitrioll in vinegar. and lay
on the vein on flax the breadth of a Groate, this will stay it presently, as I
have often proved. If two or three open, cause thy servant to put his fingers
on them, and knit them, as ye have heard before. The second dressing shall be
done in the same manner, Second dressing.
or at least some astringment chiefly on the veins and arters, and so
continue, till such time, that there is no more fear of blood, which will
continue 8. or 10. days, on the rest of the wound, use digest^^ made in this
form. Take Turpintine well washed in Plantine water vnc. 4. honey of Roses vnc.
1. barley flower half an ounce two yolks of Eggs, and incorporate all well
together, and lay it on the sore, till it be perfectly suppured, thereafter
mundificatiue d^appio, apostolorum and such like with this emplaster composed
of equal portions of Diapalma and red Desiccatiue for a certain time, next
use this Cicatrizant to the entier curatio^. Take tutia praeparatae, plumbi
crudi, antimonij crudi corticis granati, bala^stiorum, nucis muschatae, boli
armenici, sanguinis draconis an. drag. 1. accipiantur omnia simuli cu^ vnciis
tribus vnguenti diapomphol^gos and fiat magdaleon bone consistentiae. In the
mean time, if there be any excrescence of flesh, we correct it with powder of
alume, sauine, or oker, or powder of Mercury, taken in a little quantity,
these or any of them, may be applied alone, or mixed with some unguent. This
operation is most learnedly set down by my good friend M. William Clowes one of
her Majesty's Chirurgians, Clowes.
in his observation with an sure method to stay the flux of blood. For a
further declaration of the premises, I will recite a history, which I did see
during the siege of Paris, where through great hunger, cold, and other
miseries, hapened many grievous sicknesses, as gangrens and mortifications:
amongst the rest, there was a Spanish souldior, who had blacknes on the toes of
his feet as if they had been burnt, I cut off his toes, and scarified the
rest, and used such remedies, that he healed. Shortly after there hapened the
like in the toes of the other foot, which I would have cut, and cured as the
first, but he esteeming it a deformity, would not suffer me, so that the
grief by delay waxed so violent and furious, that by the advice of the best
Chirurgians in Paris at that time, I was constrained to cut off the whole
leg, and so helped him. This history have I alleged to show the danger of
delay, and that if any such thing happen, we should not defer it, but
proceed as ye have heard. Thus we end the tumors, which proceed of the
sanguine humor, and hereafter we will prosecute those which come of choler,
beginning first with Erisipelas.

The seventh Chapter, of tumors Bilions called by the Latins Flaua bilis and
first of Erisipelas.
WE said, that there were 2, sorts of hot tumors, to wit, Phlegmon whereof we
have spoken, and Erisipelas, Definition.
whereof in this Chapter we will speak. Erisipelas is a tumor which proceeds
of the humor chollerick, Haly abbas lib 8. Gal. 14. metho. cap. 2. and lib. 2.
ad glanc. cap. 1. Lib. and cap. cita to. Arnold de villa noua.
with great inflammation, dolors, for the most part not eminent, without
pulsation, and is of pale and red color. It is called in Greek Erisipelas, in
Latin Iguis sacer, in our tongue wild fire, it differs not greatly from
Phlegmon as says Galen: some esteem them to differ, because the one
proceeds of blood, the other of choler, they differ also in coulor, the one
is red, the other oftentimes pale, the phlegmon enters deep in the flesh and
muscles, and so remains in the skin. Of this there are two sorts, the first
is the true Erisipelas which comes of choll^r only, but when it is mixed with
the humors, there comes three kinds of it, Gal. 2. ad glanc
as ye have he^d in phlegmon. The cause of this tumor is abundance of the
chollerick humor, Cause.
great heat of the sun, strokes, falls and using of hot medicaments, which
move the fluxion, and draw the humor to any part of the body. Signs.
The signs are these, the tumor is li^^e, vehement heat, dolor, mordicant,
and sieldome comes to maturitie, it appears often in the neck and face, by
reason of the tenderness of the skin, the coulor is not perfetered but mixed,
and so is somewhat pale. If it be vlcered, Iugdmentes.
it is better then if it strike in, that which comes out is good, that which
appears in the the face and in wounds is evil, those which happen in the
matrix are mortal, those which appear in the head, Hip. 25. aphor.
are very dangerous, and if good remedies be not used, the party dies as
says Aegineta. As touching the curation, there are two things to be
observed, Cure.
euacuation general, and refrigeration with consolidation of the part, the
way of life shall be cold and humide contrary to the humor, which is hot and
dry, as ye have heard in the general Chapter, abstain from wine, strong
drink, all sweet things, from anger, Paul. lib. 4. cap 21. Cel. lib. 5. cap.
26. Gal. 14. meth. cap. 3.
vehement exercise, great heat and such like. The humor must be euacuated by
purgations, clisters, and bleeding, and sometime scarified, if it become
liuide, being first fomented with hot water, and use things on the sore which
are cold and humide, as Solanum, Housleeke, Lettice, Succorie, Vmbilicus,
Veneris, Cucumbers, take the juice or water of these or any of them, wet a
cloth therein, and lay it on the sore, which is most expedient, when it is in
the face: also cold water and oxycrate as counsels Galen and Auicen, for
the same purpose cerot Gal^n often washed in plantine water, is very good. If
there be vehement dolor as often chances the roots and leaves of Henbane
being roasted under the ashes, and mixed with a little Populeon are very good:
likewise vnguentu^ album cum camphora, also the cataplasme of Barley flower,
Lyn-seede sodden in Hydromell or oxycrate, putting to it a little powder of
Camomill and oil of Roses: remember that all these remedies must be liquide,
often removed, and the place well cleansed, that no thing remain on it. If it
come to a bile or ulcer, cure it as Herpes.

The eight Chapter, of Herpes.
HErpes is a little ulcer accompanied with tumor, which proceeds of the pure
bilious humor, Definition.
Gal. li. ad Gla^c. cap. 1.
without mixture of any other humors. It occupies most commonly the
extremities and outward parts of the skin, and is comprehended under
erisipelas, like as formica and impetigo, which are called commonly chollericke
pustulles. There are three kinds of it, the first is made of the thin
cholar, which burns only the skin, Difference.
Gal. com. aph. 45. lib. 6. Hipp. lib. 22. predict et 6. aphor. et Gal. lib.
contra naturam.
and is called simply Herpes, the second is made of a more thick choler, which
vlcereth a great part of the skin, and is called Herpes depascens, by reason
that it eats and consumes the skin: the third kind is made of choler and
pituite together, accompanied with some malignitie, as commonly happens to
those, who are infected with the neapolitane disease, and is called by our
auncientes, Herpes miliaris, because the pustull is little, like the grain
called milium. The pustulles have diverse denominations, some call them papula,
or eruptions pituiteous, others call them ecthim^ta, others call them
apenthemata. Hip. lib. 3. epidemiorum. Gal.
The cause and signs differ not from those, which ye have heard in the
precedent Chapter. As for the cure, Cause.
it consists in three parts, first in staying the fluxion, by euacuation
universal and provocation of urine, Signs. Cure.
and good diet, Gal. 2. ad Glan. et lib. 14. meth cap. 17.
as ye have heard in erisipelas: secondly, in euacuating that which is in the
place, by such things as have the virtue to discuss, digerre and dry lightly
and not humect, as in eris^pelas. Oricasius lib. 7 synopseos cap. 34.
Then in the beginning we shall use vine leaves, plantaine, gooseberrie leaves,
arnoglosse, putting thereto a little and barley flower with some honey.
Furthermore the bark of the pomegarnet, dissolved in wine with a little fine
flower, and made in form of a cataplasme, is good. The third intention is, in
drying up of the ulcer, by reason that all ulcers whatsoever, require
de^^cation by gentle medicaments, Hipp. lib. de vlceis.
excepting always the malign ulcers, and in them we use more shrong and
mordicant remedies: first we shall use fomentations of roses and plantaine
sodden in wine or water, and an unguent made of oil of walnuttes and wax,
thereafter washed in smithes water, also the unguent cerusse, or this unguent
thus made. Rec. unguent. populeonis cerat. refrigentis Galeni, cerussae an.
dram one dim. litargyri 3. ounces, olei rosacei 1. ounce malaxentur omnia
simul, et fiat vnguentum. The other pustulles, like as formica and impetigo, be
cured commonly by general euacuations, other defedations of the skin, which
proceed of the humor melancholicke or chollericke, are cured by universal
euacuations, by sweating and bathing, and by applying some unguent on the part
affected, as unguent. enulat. putting thereto sometime a little mercury. This
unguent is most excellent for this purpose, as also for the itch, which
happens to young children. Take elle campaign roots and seethe them in the
juice of plantaine, fumitorie, yolks of eggs, hogs grease or fresh butter,
being all mingled together, put thereto a little brimstone well puluerized,
with oil of hypericon, Rogerius tract secundo.
so make an unguent of good consistance.

The ninth Chapter of tumors which proceed of the pituite, and first of Edema.
Having amply spoken of the two hot tumors, as also of those which doc commonly
come of them, now in like manner we shall show of the two cold humors, the
one engendered of melancholy, the other of phlegm or pituite. Edema is a soft
tumor without dolor, white colored. Of it there are two sorts, like as of
phlegmon, Definition.
the one is the true natural Edema, Call. 2. ad Glanc cap 3.
engendered of the pure phlegmatic humor, the other is bredde of the phlegm
mixed with the other three humors, and takes diverse names, according to the
principal humor as ye have heard. And like as there are two sorts of it, so
it may be named two ways, to wit, either malady, or symptom of malady as
happens in the feet of those, which are hydropicke, and have been long
sick, Com. aphor. 2 sectione 1. et lib. 6. epid. et aphor. 12. secti. eius.
lib. et lib. de officinae medici. Call. 2. ad Glanc cap. 3. et aphor. 21. lib.
4. de curatione victu in morbis acutis.
which are accidents of these maladies, and require no particular curation,
saving only rubbing of the part with oil and salt, or water and salt, or
oxycrat in wetting a cloth therein and laying on it. The cause is a
phlegmatic and vaporious fluxion of humors pituitous and flatuous in any part
of the body, as also imbecillitie of the part, which can neither digest, nor
expel that which is contrary, also great idleness. The tokens are these, the
tumor is soft, cold, in pressing on it with the fingers, there remains a
hole, and rises not again, it is clear, and not dolorous and happens
oftenest in the weakest parts, as in the joints and glandulles, Cause.
Lib. 14. meth. cap. 4.
and in the extremities, as in the face and feet in cold weather, and in old
folks, or after maladies in people that are full of humors, Signs.
and make no exercise. Gal. 2. ad Glanc cap. 3. Paul. lib. 4. cap. 27. et 14.
meth cap. 4.
This tumor turns seldom to matter, except in hot places, by reason the
matter is cold: it ends often by resolution, sometime it turns to schirre,
or nodosities, or some other kind of cold abscesse, and that by the great
usage of digestiues, Judgments.
which make the matter wax hard. In the cure there are two points to be
observed, Cure
first, to divert the fluxion by remedies that have the virtue to cleanse the
pituite humor, as Diaphenicon, Catholicon, Diacartami, agaric and such like,
for the administration of the which, you shall use the counsel of the learned
Physician, also in diet in the six unnatural things tending to heat and
drought, Gal. lib. de attenuatione victus. cap. 1.
eat roasted meats rather then sodden, but in little quantity, abstain from
all things that breed phlegm, as fruits, potages, cheese, fish, herbs,
water, sadness and much sleep, drink wine with little water, and use bread
that is well baked, use things to corroborate the principal parts. Hipp. 6.
epide.
Abstain from women, espeacially if the sick be weak, yet we find the
usage of women to be good in maladies pituitous, for that heateth and dries,
use sildome bleeding in this disease. The second intention consists in taking
away that which is in the place, Gal. 2. de sani^^te tuenda.
which is in the place, which shall be done according to the times and degrees
of the tumor, Lib. 4. meth. cap 4.
first we shall use medicines repercussiues and discutients, which shall be
mean and not strong. Galen does much commend oxicrate in this case, by reason
the vinegar repelleth by the cold virtue, and resolves by the dry virtue: if
it he not sufficient, mix with a few ashes of the oak tree, sal nitre, or
quick lyme, Gal. 2. simp. Paul. lib. 4. cap. 27. Auicen. tract. 2 cap. 3.
also the emplaister di vigo, or a fomentation of camomille, melilot, rosemary,
sage, wormwood, Origan, hyssope, red roses, of each one handful one ounce
and half an ounce of salt and sulphur, seethe them in smithes water with a
little vinegar, and foment the part, with a spounge or cloth. For the same
purpose you may make cataplasmes of the flower of beans and lentilles, and
branne sodden in vinegar, putting thereto a little of annise seeds, mirtles,
or iris, the emplaister of melilotus also is good. Rogerius counsels to take
the juice of walwoortes and sorrel, and marathum, take of every of them a
reasonable quantity, and seethe them with the unguent de althea, honey, oil
and butter, make a cataplasme thereof. If this tumor comes to ripeness, cure
it, as other apostumes, if it wax hard and schirrus, cure it as ye shall
hear in the Chapter of Schirre.

The tenth Chapter, of the waterie and windy tumors which depend of Edema.
Ye have heard in our general Chapter, Definition.
of diverse kinds of tumors phlegmatickes, which pertain to Edema, whereof we
will speak hereafter, beginning with the windy tumors, which are nothing but
certain winds or inflations engendered by a spirit, thick and vaporous, Gal.
14. meth. cap. 7. Auicen. lib. 4. cap. 2.
and not of subtle substance, and aerious: sometimes these winds are enclosed
under the skin, and within the membranes, which makes distention, sometime
dolor according the part where it is. They are sometime in the ventricle, in
the Puddings, and in the capacity between the puddings, and and the perito^,
Difference.
as in Tympanies, and sounds like a drum, it is sometime dispersed amongst the
muscles, and this is properly inflation differing from Edema, for in pressing
with the fingers, the print does not remain, but the other kind approach near
to the nature of Edema, which is the flatuosities dispersed in the muscles of
other parts musculous. The cause of this tumor is too much using of cold
flatuous meats, Cause.
Gal. lib^ 3. simtomatu^ causis.
which engender the humor Phlegmatic and causes these winds, also the cause
may be in the ventricle and puddings, also in the obstruction, and
stratghtnesse of the passages, and imbecilitie of the natural heat, as says
Galen. The signs are tumor, softnes more clear, than Edema, 2. ad glanc. cap.
6. and oribasius lib. 7. sinop. ca. cap. 50.
and by pressing the fingers, there remains no mark as in Edema, by knocking
on it, it sounds like a bladder full of wind and so in these points it
differs from Edema. Signs.
The cure shall consist in two points, first in diet, which shall be hot and
dry, Paul. lib. 4. ca. 28.
eat little and of light digestion, Cure.
let your bread be of good wheat well baked and salted, use things too
corroborat the natural heat and discuss the thick cold vapors and attenuat,
also to corroborat the ventricle with aromaticall things, and electuaries, as
Dia calaminto aromatico, gariophillato dia galinga, rose and such like. Eat
good flesh as mutton and veale, rather roasted than sodden, let the drink be
Claret or white wine. The second consists in euacuatio^ of the humor which is
in the part, by topical remedies which have virtue to clarify the skin to the
end the vapors may pass out, and are called discutientes or carmen^atiues, as
annis-seedes, Isope, fennel, parsley, baccaelauri, Juniper, paritorie,
rosemarie, camomill and mellilot, oil of Irin and Bays: of these we may make
cataplasmes, fomentations, lessiues, according to our own Judgment, also
limments of Camomill and Rue, Lillies and a little Aquauitae or the emplasters
called baccae lauri, oxycroci and de vigo, mixed together, make an emplaster
and lay to the sore. Also a new spong wet in lexiue, also lanra succida, wet in
wine and oil, if these winds make dolor, Paul. lib. 4. ca. 28.
as commonly we see in the chollick passion, first appease the dolor, then
euacuate the matter, which shall be done according to the part, habitude of the
person, and discretion of the learned Chirurgian. Use also clisters
carmenatiues, if the flatuosities be in the intestines, apply three or four
ventouses on the belly.

The eleventh Chapter, of the tumors Phlegmaticks called Atheoroma, Steotema,
and Mellericeris.
THese tumors are called commonly ecressences phlegmaticks, by reason they
proceed of the humor phlegmatic yet they differ from the other tumor by reason
they are in a membrane, like little bags, Auicen. Paul. lib. 6. cap. 36.
they are also of a diverse strange sorts of matter of the which they take their
names as Atheorema is also called because in it is contained a matter like
gruell, called by the Greeks Athera. The Steot^ma is so called, because in it
is contained a humor like Grease, called by the Greeks Stear, Definition.
Mellericeris is so called, because in it is contained a matter, both in coulor
and consistence like honey, called by the Greeks Meli, and is hardest of them
three to heal. As for the other tumors, as br^nco ^eli, ganlion* testudo, and
the residue we shall speak hereafter in the particular tumors, these tumors
happen most commonly in places membranous, where there is scarsitie of flesh,
as on the joints, hands, and diverse parts of the face. The cause is pimitiue,
Cause.
antecede^t and coniunct, the primitive or first motive strokes falls. violent
forces, immoderate eating and drinking. The antecede^t cause is abundance of
humors, chiefly of the phlegmatic unnatural., engendered by evil diet, the
cause coniunct is the diverse kind of substance contaened in the part. The
signs are, Signs.
that they appear by little and little without either dolor or president
inflammation, nevertheless by reason of the diversity of the substance contained
in them, they have diverse signs, the Ateorema is long in figure, in pressing
on it, it goes in slowly and returns not sudde^ly, Togalius cap. de
ateoremate.
it is soft without dolor, the coulor of the skin unnatural in the which is
found sometime with the matter, hair sometimes bones and such like. The signs
of the Steot^ma are hardness, and if it go in, in pressing on it, it returns
not easily, it is large, in the which is contained with the accustomed matter,
Petrus Franco, de steotemate.
bones, cotton, and such like, of the which I fond great quantity in the knee
of a Nun, whom I cured in Paris of a Steotema. The signs of melliceris, are,
great softnes in touching, clear, in pressing on it, it goes in easily and
returns easily, and is round in figure, and contains besides the matter
accustomed, a grauelly hard matter, Cure.
In the cure there is a simple intention, to wit, euacuatio^ of the matter,
which is in the place, and is done either by a launcet, or cauter potentiall,
not euacuating all the matter at one time. Here we must consider that those
tumors, are so^etimes inserted with veins, arters, nerves and tendons, which
require great dextetie in the operarion* In taking away of the bag, wherein
the matter is contained, to the end ye offend not the former parts: for
better it were to leave the operation by reason that oftentimes, there comes
great flux of blood, as I have seen chieflye on the temples. The tumor being
opened, ye shall use such medicaments, for the cleansing thereof, as ye have
heard in other tumors. The matter euacuated, we must consume the whole
membrane, wherein it is enclosed, otherwise it will return, we consume it with
powder of Mercury, egiptiac or such like, thereafter incarnate and close the
wound as in others. Some use only resolutiues on these tumors, but such things
are both tedious and uncertain, Paulus lib. 4. and Aetius 15.


The twelfth Chapter, of tumors engendered of the Melancholic humor called by
the Latins atra bilis or nigra cholera and first of Schirre.
Seeing we have suffitiently spoken of tumors ingendered of the sanguine
chollerick, and pituitous humor, now it rests to speak of those which
proceed of melancholy, called tumor Schirrus, by reason the Greek word Schirr
signifies hardness, Definition.
Schirre is a tumor hard with little or no dolor, or feeling, whereof there are
two kinds, Gal. 2. ad glanc cap. 5.
the one is called the true Schirre exquisite, the other is falls. The true is
as ye have head, Difference.
the false is altogether without feeling, yet hardly may it be perceived. Gal
2. ad glanc. cap. 9. Gal lib. tumorum cap. 9. and lib. 5. simpl. cap 9.
There is an other sort of Schirre engendered of a phlegma^tick, thick and tough
matter, and is composed of an humor thick and cold. The cause is a cold dry
humor either of matter melancholic, phlegmatic, or both, for first when the
blood is made in the liver, there is engendered in it a malancholicke humor,
Cause.
Gal. 14. meth. cap 3.
which is like the dreggs of wine, which afterward is drawn to the milt, for
the nouriture thereof, specially by the usage of such meats, as are apt to
make the same, and the milt weak to draw the same, then it goes into the
veins and is mingled with the blood, which by there virtue expuitrix, expel
it by the Hemorrhoides, Gal. 5. simpl. ca. 8 lib. de locis aff. cap 3.
or varices and sometime disperseth it through the skin, and breeds the
Morphew or Leprosy. Sometime it is cast on the most weak parts, and
according to the place and qualities of the humor, breeds either Schirre or
Cancer. Gal. lib. 3. meth cap. 16.
If it be cast on any dry part, as ligamentes, tendons, joints, ends of the
muscles, or in the milt, kidneis, liver, or matrix, it causes Schir. If it be
cast on the soft parts, as parts glandules, as the pappes, the emunctoires
and face, and the privy parts it makes cancer. The cause also may be
sadness, suppression of the Hemorrhoides and menstruous purgations, Paul. lib.
4. ca. 32.
also by too much applying of cold medicines on tumors, as erisipelas or
phlegmon: for by that means, the most subtle does resolve, and the rest does
become hard. Signs.
The signs are these, the tumor is hard, and grows slowly, of color liuide
when it comes of melancholy, when of phlegm, it is white, and when of both
humors together, it is of a mixed color, as liuide and white, and insensible,
because the humor is so thick and dry, which closes the conduites of the
nerves, so that the animal spirit is enclosed in such sort, that the part
has no feeling. Those which have no feeling, are altogether incureable, those
that have any feeling, Judgments.
if they be taken in the beginning, may be helped in some sort, but hardly,
those which come to suppuration, degendreth easily into schirre. The Cure
consists in three things, first in diet, tending to heat and humiditie, Cure.
abstayning from anger, sadness, fear, and venerian exercise: the second
point consists in euacuating the matter antecedent, by purgations and
bleeding, by provocation of the flowers, and hemerhoides: the third point is,
to euacuate that which is contained in the place, which is done by things
remollientes and resoluentes, Gal. 2. ad Glanc
like as the grease of hens, cocks, calves or geese, also gu^me ammoniac,
stirax, galbanum, roots of althea, lillies, camomill, of these we make
liniments and cataplasmes, also the emplaister of Diachilon magnum, et album de
vigo with double mercury. Gal. 2. ad Glanc
Galen commends goats dirt to be an excellent remedy, to discuss tumors
schirrous. Sometimes it happens in the tendons, and then it is healed by
perfumes made thus. Take the stone called pyr^^es or any other stone, that is
red hot, and quench it in strong vinegar, and then receive the smoke on the
sore part, then apply remollientes, sometime after the perfume the gu^me
ammoniac dissolved in vinegar is good, Gal. lib. tumorum contra naturam. cap.
6. et 4. meth cap 9. et 2. ad Glan cap. 11.
and must be used with great discretion. If none of these serve, and it tend
to suppuration, we must not use too hot remedies to stir it, by reason it
degendreth easily into Cancer, for the which have recourse to the next Chapter.
In some parts it may be cut, so ye cut all, and leave nothing adherent to
the whole parts, nor no root of it. For the great flux of blood, which
happhneth, either knit the veins, or staunch it, with canters actual, the
which is dangerous, when it occupies the internal parts, for the which
Hippocrates forbiddes to seek the exquisite cure of the occult Cancers. Lib.
6. aphor. cap. 38.


The thirteenth Chapter, of Cancer, which the Greeks call Carsimonia.
WE must understand, that Cancer is comprehended under the tumor Schirrous,
yet there is great difference, for in Cancer there is great dolor, punction and
pulsation, which is not in schirre, it grows sooner, Definition.
Celsus lib. 5. cap. 28. Auicen. tract. 2. cap. 15. Guido.
and has great veins about it. Cancer in Latin is the sore of a beast, Guido
says, it is called Cancer, either by reason it sticks to the part, like the
fish Cancer, or because it is round and has veins about it, like the feet of
a Crabbe, and is also like unto it, being liuide of color as also because it
gnaweth, eats, and goes like this fish. It is a tumor inequall, having the
sides hard, eminent, turned, Difference.
and dolorous. There are two kinds of it, vlcered, Paul Aegin. cap de
carsinomate Lib. 4. cap. 26.
and not vlcered, the vlcered is immobill, hot by accident, having many veins
about it, like the feet of Cancer, the not vlcered is called Cancer occult.
The cause of it is a melancholicke humor, dry, not only in the part, as
schirre, Cause.
but also in the veins about it, the which by continuation of time, makes it
more sharp and malign, Gal. 14. meth.
whereof comes Cancer vlcered: also evil diet, using of things that breed
thick corrupted blood, with other such causes, Gal. 2. ad Glanc Paul. lib. 4.
cap 26.
as ye have heard in the precedent Chapter: the debilitie of the milte and
weakness of the part. These tumors for the most part are engendered in women's
pappes, chiefly in those, who have great and very fleshie pappes, Aetius. 4.
tract. lib. 4. cap. 43.
by reason they are glandulous and cold of themselves: they breed also in the
conduites of women, lips, nose, eyes, ears, roof of the mouth, legs,
hands, and fundament, by reason those parts are weak, Signs.
and have little natural heat. The signs are dolor, tumor, and they seem
soft, but in touching are hard, the ulcers inequal, sordides, the sides
swelled, horrible to look on, pale colored, evil sauoured, by reason of the
humor, Judgments.
which is most sordide and stinking. As for the judgment, those in the
stomach, head, shoulders, neck and under the arms are all incureable,
because these places can not be cut, for the great flux of blood, which may
happen in them. Aetius lib. cita. Hip. lib. 6. aph. 38.
Some are little vlcered, some much, some recent, others inueterate, some in
one part, and some in another, some more malign then others, and for the most
part are incureable. It has diverse denominations according to the parts, as
if it come in the face, it is called noli me tangere, Ioh. de Vigo. lib. 2.
apost. Alexander tral. cap. de carsinomate.
if in the thighs or legs, it is called lupus, if in any other part, it is
called cancer: The cure of this shall be in the beginning to stay the
melancholidke humor from settling in the place, and growing, which must be done
by fit remedies to purge the melancholicke humor, Cure.
and by bleeding, if the age and time permit, then abstain from all meats,
that engender this humor and heat the blood, such as old hairs, salt flesh,
hearts, goats, spices, mustard, pottage, cheese, fish, and such like, walk not
much, abstain from great travel, sadness and anger, use meats that breed
good blood, as mutton, veale, kiddes, capons, all sorts of fowls, saving
water fowls, drink whay, corroborate the liver and milte. As for local
remedies, first if it wax great, and in fit places, some counsel to cut it,
in such sort, that there remain no root, but my opinion is not to do such
things, but rather follow the counsel of Paul, Paul. lib. 4. cap. 26.
which is, to take the juice of morrell, plantaine, lettice and sorrel,
centorie, shepheardes purse, wette a cloth in these juices and lay on it. Also
I have often used, the urine of a young maid in the same fashion, and oil of
roses, veri^ce, litage, cerusse, burnt lead, diapalma, of these ye may make
fit remedies to keep it in one estate, and correct gently the acrimonie of the
humor. If these things let not the augmentation of it, we must go to the cure
of cankred ulcers in the treatise of ulcers, and thus we end the Treatise of
tumors in general.

THE FIFTH TREATISE of Tumors in particular.
Having discoursed in the former Treatise of the causes, signs and cure of
Tumors most general, now in like manner we shall entreat of the Particular,
which happen in the most parts of our body, beginning at the head, which is
the seat of reason, memory and understanding, and is subject to many sorts of
tumors, whereof we will show at length in this Treatise, but specially of
those, which oftnest do happen, beginning first with Hydrocephalie and
Physocephalie, which occupies the whole head, thereafter, with those Tumors,
which occupy certain parts thereof, as the eyes, ears, mouth, nose and
cheeks, and so descend to other parts of the body in like manner, to the
feet and extremities of the hands, as ye shall hear: which contains thirty
eight Chapters.

Chapter 1 Of Hydrocephalie and Physocephalie. Chapter 2 Of the Tumor called
Nodus, or Ganglion. Chapter 3 Of the Tumor in the eye, called Lippitudo.
Chapter 4 Of the tumor in the ears. Chapter 5 Of the Tumor called Parotidis.
Chapter 6 Of Tumors in the nose called Ozena, Sac^oma, Polypus. Chapter 7 Of
the Tumor in the mouth called Vula or Columella. Chapter 8 Of the Tumors in the
amigdalles called Tonsillae. Chapter 9 Of the Tumor called Angina, or
Strangulatio. Chapter 10 Of the Tumors in the teeth, called Epulides. Chapter
11 Of the Tumor under the toungue, called Batrachos. Chapter 12 Of the tumors
in the neck, called Struma. Chapter 13 Of the Tumor in the throat, called
Bruncoseli. Chapter 14 Of the tumor called Ane^^risma. Chapter 15 Of the tumor
in the Pappes. Chapter 16 Of Pluresie Chapter 17 Of the tumor in thae Navel
called axunfalon. Chapter 18 Of the tumor in the belly called Hydropsie.
Chapter 19 Of the tumor in the fu^dame^t called co^diloma Chapter 20 Of the
swelling of the veins in fundame^t called Hemorrhoides. Chapter 21 Of the
tumor in the intestinie, called Exitus Longanonis. Chapter 22 Of the tumor in
the Coddes. Chapter 23 Of Hernes in general. Chapter 24 Of the tumor inguinall
called bubono^^el^. Chapter 25 Of the herne called ^nterocele. Chapter 36 Of
the herne called Epipocele or Zeirbale. Chapter 27 Of the herne called
Hydrocele. Chapter 28 Of the herne called Ventosa. Chapter 29 Of the herne
called Sarcoceli. Chapter 30 Of the herne varicus called Cirsocele. Chapter 31
Of the herne Humerall. Chapter 32 Of the tumor in the Flancke called
bubonecele. Chapter 33 Of the tumor in the knees. Chapter 34 Of the tumor in
the legs called varicus. Chapter 35 Of the tumor in the legs called
dra^^culus. Chapter 36 Of the tumor tn the legs or hands called
Elephansiasis particularis. Chapter 37 Of the tumor in the fingers called
panaris or paren^chia. Chapter 38 Of the tumor or hardues in the toes, called
Corns.
The first Chapter, of Hydrocephalie and physocephalie.
HYdrocephalie is a waterie humor, which occupyeth the whole head and
Physocephalie is a windy humor, Definition.
which does the like, these tumors are contained eythet between the pericrane
and skin, or betwixt the muscles, Difference.
or betwixt the pericran and crane, or betwixt the crane and me^branes, Com.
aphor. 3. lib. 4. de ratione victus. Cause.
which cover the brains, called dura matter and pia matter, but the tumor in
this case is not great. The cause is either internal, or external, the
internal comes from the matrix, and of the Mothers milk, which is too
waterie, Rondoletius.
and such like food as breed waterie humors. The external cause comes of
cold, presently after the birth it hapeneth also, through unskillfulness of
Midwife, as I have sometimes seen, which draws and presses the child's head
so much at the delivery, that the veins and arters break, Paul. lib. 6. cap.
3.
Aetius lib. 6. cap. 1.
not being as yet strong, so the blood sheddeth through the rest of the head,
and degendreth into water. The signs are great tumor with deformity of the
head, Signs.
the eyes and face swelled, as does appear in the Hydropicks. Judgments.
The judgments are these. such as are within the crane, are incurable, those
that are betwixt the crane and pericrane, or betwixt the pericrane and muscles
may be cured. As for the curation of the curable they are healed partly by
diet, Cure:
and by using of things drying and abstayning from things humide, also by
external remedies applied to the part, that dry with some astriction and
comfort the head, which shall be done by liniments, fomentations, vnguentes made
of calamint, origan, betonie, camomill, me^^ot, anthos, red roses, also ye may
make lessiues of the vine ashes, also shave the head and apply this emplaster
following. Rec, olibani vnc. 1. sarcacoll^ drag. 1. gummi arabici, seminis
raphani and anethian, 1. vnc. di. ole de spica parum, cerae quantum sufficit,
fiat emplastrum. If the humor be in great abundance, or that the crane or
membraines are offended, we must use incision and perforation of the crane,
the^ eauc^ate the humor and heal the wou^d as in others. There is yet a kind
of this called Macrocephalie, which is a supernatural greatness of the Pan and
flesh, and not properly tumor and receives no curatio^, but is si^ldome seen:
one of this sort I saw in Paris of the quantity of a pot of 3. quarts

The second Chapter, of the tumors called Nodus or Ganglion which comes in
the head.
Definition.
THese tumors are sometime hard, otherwhiles soft always round which chances
for the most part in the dry neruous parts, but chiefly on the head, and
joints, on the hands and feet. The causes are strokes and wearines of the
joints and such other as ye have heard in A^^^roma, Cause.
as also the signs. Paul. lib. 6. cap. 3.
The cure first consists in good diet, eschewing al meats which engender
gross humors, eat of things of good digestion, Cure.
abstain from drinking of water, purge and bleed* Auicen.
haunt no humide place: as for the p^rticular remedies we must understand that
this humor is sometime enclosed in the membraine, and in that proceed as in
A^^^^oma, sometime it is not enclosed* and the^ we may apply a cake of lead
rubbed with quicksiluer, or an emplaster resolutine made of galbanum, O^basius
lib. 7. sinopseos.
ammoniac oil of lillies and bays, brimstone and virioll roman calcined.
Sometimes it is with corruption of the bone, in that case, the humor must be
euacuated, and the exfoliatio^ of bone procured, as ye shall hear in the
chapter of ulcers with corruption of the bone. Heurnius lib. 2 praxis medici^.
For diverse other diseases of the head, have your recourse to heurnius demorbis
capitis.

The third Chapter, of the tumor in the eye called Lippitudo and Opthalmia in
Greek.
OPthalmia is an inflamatio^ of the whole eye, Definition.
but chiefly of the membraine called coniunctiue with great rednes and dolor.
The cause is either external, or internal, Gal. 1. de accid morb Paul. lib.
3. cap. 22.
the external, as strokes, heat, dust, wind, great cold, rubbing, or some
moate in the eye: Cause.
the internal ^ause is defluxion of the humors, being nere to the brains, as
also the veins externe and interne of the head, whereof proceeds fluxio^, also
the sanguine humor, chollerick or phlegmatic, which asce^deth to the head. The
signs are manifest, Gordon pertic. 3. cap. 2.
like as great inflamatio^, rednes, heat of the eyes and temples, dolor, Signs.
repletio^ of the veins, hardness, this sickness has 4. degrees, like as other
tumors and happens often to yo^g children, and others who have weak eyes,
which is the cause, that they are subject to the fluxio^ of humors. The
judgments are, the matter of this is sometime hot, otherwhiles cold, Judgments.
and those which happen in winter are the worse, the^ those which happen in
So^mer, if they be neglected and evil handled, there follow evil accide^ts,
as spots, rupture of the cornea and diverse others. If the dolor be vehement, it
is dangerous, for corruption and corrosion of the cornea. Gordon lib. citato.
As for the curatio^, there are 3. things to be observed, the first is good
diet, eat little chiefly at night, Cure.
abstain from al vaporous things and al evil digestio^, fishes, fruits,
spices, salt and humide things, abide neither in great darkness, nor too much
light, for great light dissipeth the spirit, and sometime causes blindness, as
we read of the soldiors of Xenophanes, who through going long in the snow,
became almost al blind. Zenopha.
Also Dioni^^^s tira^t of Sicil made blind his priso^ers after this sort, first
he impriso^ed the^ long in a very dark place, the^ he brought them sudde^ly
into a great light, and so made the^ all blind. All colors are not expedient
for the sight, the white dissipeth the spirits and draws them to it, the
black makes them too dull, and there is n^ color that comforts the sight, but
grene, blew, and violet, which nature shows us in the compositio^ of the eye,
for the tunic v^e a shows the green and blewe of the part, that looks to
the humor custalline. Endeavor to be laxatiue, walk not too much, beware of al
perturb^ons of the spirit, from smoke and dust and blowing of Alchymie, for
both it hurts the eye and consumes the substance, and makes men miserable
both in body and goods, hold up thy head, and abstain from wine and women and
such like, as ye may perceive by these verses of the learned Gordoniu.

Haec occulis multum, sol, puluis, fumus et aestus*
Ventus cum fletu, vina Venusque nocent.
Acria ne mandas, nec quae sunt plena vaporum.
Nec caepas, lentes, allia, po^ra, fabas.
The second intention consists in euacuating and diuerting the humor by
pills, clisters, bleeding of the vein Cephalicke, ventouseing on the
shoulders, frictions on the thighs, legs and extremities, also by opening
the vein and arters of the temples. The third intention is in the topicall
remedies, Jesus lib. de oculis. Galen 13. therapeutic. Hip. de oculorum morbis.
as collyrs of diverse sorts, according to the diuorsitie of the degree and time
of the apostume, as in the beginning of the inflammation, take plantaine and
rose water, of each half an ounce, two whites of eggs, and a little fennel
water, women's milk, the mu^ilages of hipsileon with a little trochistes of
rasis sine opio, a litilt caiphure put of thiis in the eye, and at night make a
cataplasme of an apple roasted, and lay on the eye: or this remedy, which I
have often proved not only in the opthalmie, but diverse other maladies of the
eyes. Take two ounces of white wine, as much rose water, and euphrage, half a
crowns weight of Tutie prepared, as much of aloes, 3. or 4. leaves of Massi,
put all in a violl and stop it close, set it three weckes in the sun:
instill thereof in the eyes. In the mean time use emplaisters on the temples
of mastick, de bolo et contra rupturam and such like, to stay the fluxion. For
the great dolor, use the roasted apple with a little women's milk or a little
plantaine water, put between two clothes, likewise for the vehement dolor, the
blood of a pigeon or hen under the wings instilled is very good, there are
diverse other remedies, whereof we shall entreat more at length in the poor
man's guide like as also of Egilops, and Enchilops, with diverse other maladi-s
of the eyes.

The fourth Chapter, of the tumors in the ears.
THere come many grievous diseases in the ears, sometime outwardly, and
sometime inwardly, Definition.
occupying sometime the whole ear, sometime a part thereof. The cause is,
Cause.
an hot humor and biting descending from the nerves of the fifth conjugation
with the dura matter dispersed in the conduite of the ear: sometime a vaporous
spirit and cold thick humor, which makes difficulty of hearing, and
sometime deafenes. The Signs are manifest. Signs.
The judgments, Judgments.
young people are more grievously tormented then old, and die often, before it
come to suppuration, and that within 7. days, by reason of the great
accidents, as fever, lightness, sounding. In old folks it comes often to
suppuration, yet the dolor is very vehement, by reason of the nerve of the
fifth conjugation, also for the membranes and propinquitie of the brains,
nature has given it an exquisite feeling. Gordon. party. 3.
The cure consists in remedies universal and particular, universal, as good
diet, abstayning from wine and all strong drink and fumie, Cure
bleeding of the vein Cephalicke, and using of clysters, or some gentle
medicines according to the humor, as ye have heard in Opthalmi. As for
particular remedies, they differ not much from others, except that we use no
repercussiues, abstain from all cold remedies, by reason of the nerve which is
deep and hollow. If the dolor be vehement with heat, use oil of roses,
mirtles and cidoniorum with a little vinegar, mix all together, and drop a
little in the ear: cattes water distilled is good as says Quersitanus. If it
tend to suppuration, handle it as other apostumes.

The fifth Chapter, of the Tumor that comes behind the ears, called
Parotides.
NAture has placed by the roots of the ears, certain little glands, to the
end they may receive the vennemous matter deposed by the brains. Definition.
Parotides is an in^^amation or apostume of the glands behind the ears. Paul.
lib. 3.
The cause is, Cause.
the humor which easily descends from the head, Paul. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Lanfranc. tract. 3.
partly because nature has ordained them for receptacles, as ye have heard,
and by reason they are soft, cold, and the passages large, that bring the
humor. Sometime the cause comes of the whole body, like as in crise of
fever, Alex. tral. lib. 1. cap. 34.
it may come of any one of the four humors, or all mixed together, which may
easily be known by the accidents. The signs are, tumor, dolor, vehement
fever, pulsation, Signs.
with such other, as ye have heard in tumors. The Judgments are, Judgments.
that those by crisis, without sign of maturation are evil, and if it go to
the internal parts, it is for the most part mortal, as says Auicen. The
Cure general is to use clisters, Cure
bleeding in the vein Cephalicke, using good diet, eating things of light
digestion, not vaporous, abstayning from strong drink: the particular remedies
differ not from the cure of other apostumes, except that we use no
repercussiues, but only maturatiues, attractiues, Fuchius de medendis morbis.
and anodiues, and some digerents in the beginning, like as oil of lillies,
Iris, camomill, bitter almondes, with sheep wool, or a cataplasme of
digerent herbs. It is best not to abide the perfect suppuration, but so soon
as may be, Dodoneus.
to cause it open, for by that means, the venomous vapor does dissippe, the
dolor cease, and nature does more easily discharge. It may be opened by
canter, or lancet, but beware of the nerve, vein and arters, for the great
accidents that happen. Lanfranc. 3. tractatu. Bacchanellus de consensu
medicorum.
Being openeed, it must be cured by suppuratiues, mundificatiues, incarnatiues,
and desiccatiues, as ye have heard in others.

The sixth Chapter, of the Tumors in the nose, called Sarcoma, Ozena and Polypus.
THe nose is a part of the body, by the which the brains does discharge the
excrements, in the which do chance three kinds of maladies, yet not much
different, Definition.
the first is called Sarcoma, which is an excrescence of flesh against nature,
the second is called Ozena,, which is most dangerous and ill sauoured, the
third is called Polypus, which differs not from Sarcoma, saving that it is
not so great. Paul. lib. 3. cap. 29.
Polypus is a tumor, which proceeds of the bone ethomides, and sticks fast
to it. The cause is rotten humor thick and viscous, which comes from the
head. Cause.
The signs are manifest to the sight, and by the narration of the sick. The
Judgments are these, that which is hard and black, Signs.
must not be touched, that which is soft may be healed, Judgments.
if the excrescence be white, and soft without dolor, Me^nes. de compos.
medicament. cap. 3 Auicen 5. tract. cap* 2. Auicen Rondol et Mesmes.
it is easy to heal, if it be read and brown, with dolor, it is very
difficill: if it occupy both sides of the nose, either the sick sleeps with
open mouth, or else he suffoketh. The cure is most diff^cill, as I have often
seen, and better it were, to use remedies palliatiues, then to adventure any
perfect cure, Cure.
yet the cure in so much as may be, is by universal remedies, as purging and
bleeding, and in good diet. Lib. de medendis morbis.
Fuch^ns counsels to rub the head with such things as have virtue to
corroborate and dry the brains. The particular remedies shall be according to
the Tumor, which is sometime hard, otherwhiles soft, the soft must be taken
away with instrument, or canter, or some causticke powder, Halyabbas. lib. 9.
as powder vitrioll, mercury, arsenit, allom* spuma aeris, atramentum
sutorium: ye may mix any of these pouders with some vngue^t anodine or honey,
use de^ensiues for the inflammation, unguent pompholigs with a little balaust is
good. Also this water: Rec. bolaustiorum, corticis, malorum granatorum, an.
lib. 1. gelangae, caudae equinae, linguae passerinae, et her^iariae an. manip.
di. radic* bis tortae 4. vnc. sumitatu^ piri siluest. manip. di. contundantur
and simul distilleutur and fia^^aqua, de qua frequenter abluat nares, add to
it a little Alum. If either this or the other, which is hard, degender into
an ulcer cancrous, touch it not, but use such remedies, as ye shall hear in the
ulcer Cancrons.

The seventh Chapter, of the tumor in the mouth called Vunla, or Columella.
THe mouth as says Gordon is the instrument of voice in beasts, and speaking
in men, in the which happen diverse grievous and dangerous passions, but we will
entreat of those, which are most dangerous, beginning with Vunla, Gordon
party. 3.
which is called in our tongue the pap of the mouth. Nature being provident
that nothing should offend, has placed in the roufe of the mouth this little
piece of flesh for diverse reasons, first that we may pronounce and s^eake
clearer, for which cause it is called plectrum vocis, also that the air enter
not in the trachearter, Gal. lib. 11. de vsu partum.
till the force and impetuositie of the cold be corrected, for we see in those
who want it, have both deformity of speech and refrigiratio^ on the lights.
Definition.
Vunla is an inflammation or aposthume either in form long, and is called
Columella, that is like a pillar, or like unto the vine berrie called Vua.
Brunus lib. 7. Cause.
The cause is either interne or externe, the interne are hot humors, which come
from the head, and cause an inflammation, also asce^ding from the stomach, as
happens in rotten fevers, in like manner of abundance of blood. The cause
externe is cold, Aetius sermo. 8. cap. 45. Signs.
Cough, excessive eating and drinking at vnacostomed hours, chiefly at night.
The signs are manifest to the sight, chiefly in pressing down the tongue,
accompanied with dolor and fever, and pain to swallow any thing, the sick
thinks, that he has always something in his mouth. The judgments are, that
sometime, it falls so much, Judgments.
that it fills up the whole throat, so the sick suffofoketh, in case it be
not quickly cut, if it be cut altogether, the patient waxes dumb, or at
least, speaks so, as he may not be understood, Aetius sermon. citato.
and his drink does avoid by the nose, which accidents I did see in a Chanon
of S. Honorie in Paris who was my patient. The Cure consists, first in the
form of diet, tending to cold and dry, Cure.
using meats of light digestion, drinking no strong not fumie drink, often
using of clisters, and bleeding in both the arms, if ye perceive plenitude,
ventouses on the shoulders, and opening the head, with sca^rifications, Gal.
13. therap. Trallianus.
frictions on the neck, opening of the veins under the toungue. The
particular remedies shall only be, plantaine, rose or common water, with a
little vinegar, and wash thy mouth therewith, holding it a while therein: Or
this, take barley, plantaine, shepheardes purse, the bark of the pomegarnet,
of each one a little, and seethe them in water, putting thereto after it be
strayned, a little syrrop of violettes or roses, and use it as the former. Or
this powder, made of Alum, balaust, terra sigillata, roses, read sugar,
Rondoletius.
mixed all together, and put in a little instrument meet for that purpose, to
apply it to the sore: the like may be done with a little pepper and salt
brayed together, as also water of allom. If by none of these the greatness
does diminish, it must either be cut with sheeres, or burned with can^er
actual, Pareus. cap. de columella. Albicrasis lib. 2 Celsus lib. 6. Hipp.
progn. 3. cap. 9.
or consumed with causticke medicaments, like as oil of v^trioll, strong
water, powder of coters. The best remedy which I have found in this disease is
cutting of it with the sheeres, thereafter wash the mouth with oxicrate, or
some astringent water, or red wine mixed with allom water. Sometime it
tends to suppuration, which if it happen, cure it with gargarismes, and such
other remedies expedient for ulcers in these parts: if all this fails, have
recourse to the poor man's guide.

The eight Chapter, of the Tumor of the of the Amigdalles, called by the
Greeks Paris^himia, and by Latins Tonsilla.
AT the root of the tongue, Nature has placed two little glandes, like unto
almondes, for which cause they are called Amigdalles, Definition.
and are there placed for diverse reasons, but chiefly for receiving the
humiditie of the brains, which if it fell only on the toungue, would trouble
the speech, and also that the toungue should be moistened with some humiditie,
otherwise it should become dry in speaking. The Cause is, great abundance of
viscous humiditie, Cause.
mordicant, which comes from the head, drinking of strong and fumie drink,
walking morning and evening when the dew is fallen, Fucbius de medendis morbis.
also great abundance of blood, and sometime in children through the
bitterness of the milk. Signs.
The signs are evident to the sight, chiefly in pressing down the tongue.
Judgments.
The Judgments are dolor, fever, accompanied with such inflammation, which
causes the sick to suffocke. Cure
The Cure consists in good diet, eat little and of light digestion, abstain
from all strong drink, as in other inflammations, use clisters and bleeding in
the arm as also the veins under the tongue, use ventouses* and frictions on
the neck, gargarismes, refrigeratiues, and desiccatiues. If it apostume, as
often happens, it must be opened with a lancet, if the Tumor does so augment,
that the sick is in danger to suffocke, the^ thou shall make incision on the
trachearter, betwixt the third and fourth ring, cutting only the membrane
that holds them together, and not the proper substance of the cartilage, so
the air shall avoid, put in a tente of silver, that is hollow, into it, till
the inflammation be past, thereafter close up the wound, Andrew Scot.
This was practiced by Andrew Scot one of the King of Scotlands Chirurgions in
Paris most cu^ningly* To do this operation, thou shall hold backward the
patients head, lift up the skin with the hand, and cut it in length, so the
membrane shall be discovered, then make your incision, with a Bistorie in the
said place: during which time, use externally, medicamets about the neck, that
are made of barley flower, lint seed, and fenegrec, with such like, as shall
be found most expedient, according to the degree of the malady. It is good to
use this remedy, which has virtue to close the soft parts, and dry up the
pituitous humor, which is fallen on the part, and has the virtue to soften the
glands interne, as also to loose, and is thus made. Rec. nidi hirundinis 3.
vnc. pulueris nucum cupressi. 1. vnc. rosarum 1. vnc. se. accipiantur cum
oximelite, fiat cataplasma. Rondeletius de curandis morbis.
This operation of incision, is very dangerous, if it be not well made, by
reason of the flux of blood, which often does happen, as also for the nerves,
which pass that way. I cured an apothecarie in Paris after this method, and he
healed, sometime it degenereth into Schirre, and then it must not be touched,
but by remedies palliatiues.

The ninth Chapter, of the Tumor in the throat, called by the Greeks Schinanch,
and by Latins Angina or Strangulatio,
ANgina is an apostume or inflammation of the interior muscles of the throat,
whereof there are four kinds, Definition.
Paul. lib. 3. cap. 24.
the first is great inflammation in the throat, the second is a humor contained
behind the Amigdalles, Difference.
which hinders swallowing, and sometime suffocketh, the third is great tumor
and inflammation toward the chinne, Aetius sermon. 8. cap. 47.
both externally and internally, the fourth kind is, when the vertebres of the
neck go out of their place, whereupon the tongue retireth from the proper
situation, with difficulty of breathing: The cause is either great cold air,
usage of cold drink, also it proceeds of multitude of humors not of all the
body, but of the head* and parts near to it. Cause.
The Signs are difficulty of breathing, fever, dolor in the throat. Signs.
Paul. Aegin. lib 3. cap. 27.
The Judgments are these, if it come suddenly through a fever, without any
appearance outwardly in the neck, it is mortal. Judgments.
The Cure consists in remedies universal and particular, Cure.
the general shall be in ordering good form of life, in the six unnatural
things, eat little, drink ptisan, sleep little, use clisters, and some light
purgations, bleed in the veins cephalicks in both the arms, also in the
veins under the tongue. Hip. 4. de victu in mo^bis acutis and Paul. lib.
alligato.
The particular remedies are to use frictions, ventou^es with scarifications on
the shoulders, application, of hot bread to diuertise the humor with this
liment on the neck, unguent refrigeratine, oil of camomill, Lillies and
violets, with a little hens grease, thereafter apply sheep woll on it, as it
comes from the sheep, in the mean time gargarize the mouth with plantiue
water, vinegar, or whay or with this that follows, take barley, plantine,
pimpernell, chereuill and sees altogether, after the ^bullition, put to it a
little Diamoron or honey, of Roses. Diverse other remedies are set down by
Paulus and Mesues. De metho. curam dor. morborum. Rondeletius.
Or this Re. aquae solani, plantaginis caprifolij, an. lib. se. aceti vnc se.
diamoron vnc. 3. fiat gargarisma. If it turn to suppuration use this
gargarisme, take the roots of mallows, and althea, sorrel, and lyn-seede, of
every one a little, boil it in Cowes milk, putting thereto a little of the
musilages of Psilion, which thou shall hold a certain space in the mouth, the
matter being become to maturitie, open it with a lancet, thereafter this
cleansing gargarisme composed of decoction of barley honey and sirupe of roses,
being cleansed, ad to the said decoction a little alum, balanse and mirrhe and
sicatrize the wound. All this time keep good diet and abstain from women,
beware the matter take not the course to the lyghtes which is most dangerous.
If any bone, or pycke be in the throat, ye shall use the remedy set down in
the poor man's guide, which is most excellent and easy to be had.

The tenth Chpter, of the tumor which comes at the root of the teeth called
Epulides.
Definition.
EPulides is a tumor or excrescence of flesh, which comes at the roots of
the teeth or between them in great quantity, chiefly about the teeth called
mol^res it augmenteth by little and little. Cause.
The cause is a sharp, biting* humor which comes from the head and stomach,
as chances in putride fevers, by the evil vapors which ascends, and
corrodeth the gummes, it happens also after ulcers in the mouth, chiefly to
those, who have been ill cured of the Neopolitane sickness. The Signs are
manifest to the sight and touch, as says Auicen. Signs.
The Judgments are, that sometime it is as great as an egg, Judgments.
sometime it grows to both the jaws, in such sort, that the mouth cannot
open. Paul. lib. 3.
Cure.
The topical remedies consist in usage of things discutient, as decoction
seminis lini and such like, Gol. de comp. medicam. Paul. lib. 3. cap. 26.
sometime it suppureth, and then cure it, as in others ye have heard. Sometime
it neither suppureth nor discusseth, and then ye shall proceed as I did in
Paris to a Gentleman's boy, who had his mouth so grown together on both sides,
that nothing almost could enter therein, and it was in this wise. First, I made
incision, and cut the most part of the excrescence, so consumed the rest with
causticke powders, and produced the cicatrice, and he healed. To others, I have
knitte the excrescence with a threede, the which I find more sure, and not to
be feared, neither for flux of blood nor inflammation, that which remained
after the threede was fallen, I consumed it with powder of mercury, allom,
vitrioll, aqua fortis and such like. Sometime this Tumor is hard and schirrous
for the which ye must use palliatiues, as in the Chapter of Schirre. As for the
maladies of the teeth, the way to correct and help their deformity, to draw
the corrupted, and put artificial in their place, ye shall hear at length in
the Treatise of the poor man's guide.

The eleventh Chapter, of the Tumor which happens under the tongue, called
Batrachos or Rannuculus.
RAnnuculus is a tumor of the veins under the tongue, and is sometime of such
greatness, Definition.
that ye would think it another tongue, Paul. lib. 3. cap. 26.
Cause.
this happens of^ to children and old folk, Paul. lib. 3. cap. 26.
so that the voice is intercepted. The cause is a slyme pituitous humor which
disc^^deth from the head: and when the tumor is excrescence of flesh, Cause.
the cause is as of other excresc^nces. It is commonly wrapped in a chest or
little membraine like as At^^^^ma. The sig^es are evident and it is in coulor
like a frogge called R^na, Signs.
whereof it takes the name, with great tumor in the veins of the tongue, which
suffoketh the sick. In opening of it the sick sometime becomes mad as I did
once see: Jacques Guilmio Chirurgian reports to have seen it four times.
Cure.
As for the cure, that which happens in children is healed with gargarismes,
resoluentis and iucisiues, in old folk the veins under the tongue, must be
opened. If the ranuill be great it must be cut and drawn away, Aetius sermon.
8. cap. 37.
the superfluity, which remains shall be dried with sall ammoniac, flos aeris
and such like. Sometime we cut it with a bistorie, and apply ca^^er^ actuals.
As for the little pustulles which come in the mouth that the Latins call Aphthae,
as also diverse others, ye shall hear at length in my Treatise of the
delivery of women, where I entreat of those diseases which commonly happen to
young children.

The twelth Chapter, of the tumor in the neck called by the Latins Stuma or
Scrofulae.
Definition.
STruma is an inflammation of blood and pituite in the soft and glandulous
parts as under the chyn and oxters on the papps, and b^tweene the thigh and
the body, and may happen in any part of the body. Gal. 14. methca 11. Cel. lib.
5. ca. 25 Johan. de vigo cap. de tumoribus pituitosis
The matter that is engendered of, is a rotten thick matter, and congealed blood
like glandes. The cause, are falls, and strokes, or humor pituitous mixed with
melancholy, also drinking of evil waters, where through many were infected at
the siege of Paris also the retentio of the excreme^ts of the brains, Cause.
which should avoid by the muoth, Theodericus li 11. Gordon pertic 1.
nose, ears and eyes. This disease happens oftenest to young children both
for the rariti^ of the skin, and gulosite, for the which some call them
Scrofulae, by the simtlitude of a greedy beast, called Scrofa. The signs are
apparent to the sight in the parts where they are, sometime few in number,
sometime many, Signs.
and are covered membranes, like At^^^oma and Steotoma. Judgments.
The Judgments are, that those which are superficial, mobill, and not many in
number, may resolve, immovable, Baraia pallia.
hard and maling, do not resolve, or hardly receives any curation, those that
are great, and near the tracharter, are difficill in opening, by reason of the
nerves recurrent which being cut, the sick waxes dum, they are also difficill,
Aetius and Leonidas.
when they are accompanied with veins for fear of flux of blood. The cure
consists in remedies universals and p^rticuler as in good regiment, eat
little and of light digestion, Cure.
abstain from such things as engender gross humors, purge often, blede in both
thy arms, ha^nt no humide places, the drink shall be composed after this form,
take Scrofularia 3. parts, Auicen.
Scolupendula 2. parts, Pilosella and Brassica of each a little, the toots of
Reddish and Aristolochia a little, sees them al in white wine with a little
honey, till the half be consumed, of this ye shall use 3. ounces in the
morning every 2. days once. I have used to diverse with good seccesse a
decoction laxatiue the space of 15. or 20. dais, also my confectio^ set down in
the poor man's guide. The p^rticuler remedies are to rub the part with a
little salt butter, fried in a pan with a little vinegar till it grow black,
some use the emplaster de vigo, with mercury, also the cataplasme, set down
in the Chapter of Paristhimia. If it tend to suppuration, use this, take the
leaves and roots of mallows, Rondeletius de curundis morbis.
lillies of each 2. ounces, leaves of camomill one ha^dful, make a decoction, to
the which add the flower of beans, lyn-seed and ^enigreck, an. 3. ounces,
swines grease that is flesh a pond, and make cataplasme, putting to it a little
oil of ^rin and lillies, this ^ath the verru both to digest and ^ype. When it
is opened cure it, as ye have heard in others. Sometimes children having scabs
in the head, and the brains humide, and by wrong lying, and taking cold in the
night, have the glandes tumified, for remedy whereof, apply oil of camomill
anissedes, and sweet almo^ds, with a little hens grease and butter If the
tumor be hot, add to it, oil of roses, and violetts, it is good also to rub
it, with fasting spittle, till it grow hot. I have heard of sundry that
have been cured perfectly by George Boswell a very learned Surgeon of S.
John's town in Scotland, who is most skillful in our Art.

The thirteenth Chapter, of the tumor in the neck, called Bruncoceli or Hernia
gutturis.
THis Tumor, which the Greeks call Broncon, is round, great, Definition.
engendered of the humor Phlegmatic, betwix the trachearter and the skin,
Paul. lib. 6. Difference.
sometime occupying the most part of the neck: of the which there are diverse
kinds, according to the matter contained therein, sometime like at^^r^ma,
other whiles like a^enfrisma. Cause.
The cause is not different from those, that it is like unto, yet some are
external, some internal: as coldayre, drinking of evil water, as those who
dwell in Piemont, who are much subject, because the most part of their drink
is melted snow: also the retention of the purgations in women, and great
abundance of the humor melancholicke. The Signs are most evident to the
sight: The Judgments are, Signs.
that those that come by nature, are incureable, and those which are like
a^e^frisma must not be touched, Judgments.
Paul. cap. de hernia gutturis Rolandus lib. 3
those that are very great, aocompanied with veins, are very dangerous, and
in no wise to be touched, those that are tractable, must be opened by canter,
or lancet, eschewing always the veins. The cure is like unto at^^r^ma, Cure.
in the beginning it is good to apply a cake of lead rubbed with quick
silver, or the emplaister de vigo with mercury, and rubbing it with thy hand,
till it grow read, and use things to provoke spitting, for the which it shall
be expedient, to use five or six grains of the arabicke powder, in the mean
time use good diet, and things to cause loosenes of the belly: bleed in both
arms if the malady requires. Ye shall hear of this at more length in the
Treatise of childebirth, by reason sometime it happens in time of travailing.

The fourtenth Chapter, of the tumor called Ane^^risma.
ANe^^isme is an tumor sofr to the touch the which is engendered of blood and
spirrit under the skin and muscles, which happens in diverse parts of the
body, Definition.
chiefly in the neck, for which cause we speak of it in this place. The cause
is either dilatation, incision, or ruption of the arter, Paul. lib. 6. cap. 30.
which often chaunceh to women in the time of their birth, to water men and
others who use violent labor through crying, or great violence, Cause.
which dilateth the arter. The signs are, this tumor in pressing on it with
thy finger, thou shall feel great pulsasion, Signs.
and the tumor of the same coulor, as the rest of the skin, it is soft in
touch, and yeildeth to the finger, by reason the spirrit retireth into the
arter, and having taken away the finger* it does return presently and in
returning making a noise, by reason of the blood and spirit, which returns at
a little incision, this happens when the Ane^frisme is done by An^stomis, that
is being opened and cut. Gal. lib. tumorum cap. 11.
When the arier is riuen, as happens in women, and those of great exercise,
there issues forth more abundance of blood, tha^ spirrit, and is more hard,
than the other, and makes less noise in retiring. Those which are
superficial in the exterior parts, as the head, legs, and arms, may be
knit, and are cureable, Judgments.
those which are profunde and interior, as in the breast, as of happenth to
those, who sweat excessiuely of the Venerian sickness, also those in the neck,
under the arms and flanckes, and where there is great dilatation of great
arters are not cureable, but death ensues in few days. Paul. lib. 6.
If the tumor be opened the patient dies presentlye: this happens oftentimes
by the unskillfulness of the Barbors and Apothecaries, that meddle therewith, and
and ruin a number of people through their ignorance, as I have often seen,
for such people esteem all tumors, that are soft, to be opened, as common
Aposthumes. In Paris 1590. there happened such a disease to one called Captane
Tail, who was one of the chiefest Captains amongst the Spaniardes, on the
right side of his neck for the which I as Chirurgian ordinary to the regiment,
was sent for, and found that it should not be touched, of which opinion was
also my companyon Andrew Scot a man very expert in his art who was at that
time in great practice at Paris, Andrew Scot.
and now Chirurgia^ to the King of Scotland, I ordained remedies to let the
increasing of it, which receipt of mine being sent to the Apothecarie, he
thought it not meet medicine, for an aposthume, as he termed it. he sent for
his brother, the glorious Barbor, who seeing the Captain, found no difficulty
but swear with great oaths, that he had charms for all sotes, and the
Apothecarie swear, that he had salues for all sores, and so presently opened it
with a lancet, to avoid the matter, as they thought which being the spirrit
and bold came forth with such violence, that the Captain died presently. I
doubt not, but that in these countries, there be many such things committed by
such ignora^ts, and so destroy many people. I use always in such, chiefly in
the neck, and under the arms, and in the paps, these remedies that I prescribed
to the Spaniard, that is, first to draw blod in both the arms, next to apply on
the sore cerat Galen or de bolo, or this Ree. pulueris suhtilissimi, boli
armenici, sanguinis draconis, myrtiloru^, lapidis calaminarii in aceto
extincti, absinthei, an. vnc. 1. cum cerato refrigera^tis Galeni quantu^
sufficit, fiat vnguentu^ sieve magdaleon. For the same effect I use a cake of
lead rubbed with quicksiluer, these things will hinder the growing for a time,
although it be nere the noble parts. If it be in the extremities, as legs or
arms, they may live a long time, by the usage of the aforesaid remedies. I
knew a woman in Paris who had one very great in her thigh and lived 10. years,
if it be little and superficial, I find no better, tha^ cataplasme made of
claret wine with the crops and leaves of cypres, which I have often used on the
arm, when the arter has been opened in stead of the vein. Otherwise I knitt
them after this form, first I incise the skin long-wise, next discover the
arter, and being discovered, I pass a needle with a double thread under it,
two inches above the incision or ruption of the arter, and the^ knitts it with
a double knot, voydes away the blood contained, and cures the wound,
according to the estate it is in.

The fiftenth chapter, of tumors or aposthumes in the paps.
THe papps, which are part is glandulous ordained by nature, partly for the
decoration of women, and partly to be answerable to the 2. cha^bers of the
matrix* Definition.
and are ordained for the generation of milk, and are subject to diverse
diseases, as other parts of like substance, here we will only entreat of the
aposthume, which happens in them. The cause is such, as ye have heard in other
aposthumes, Cause.
and the retensio^ of the purgations, also abundance of thick and knotty milk.
The signs are, such as ye have heard in others, as dolor, pricking, tensio^,
rednes and fever. Signs.
The cure consists in vniuer^all and particular remidies, universal, as
purgatio^s, Cure.
bleeding, chiefly of the veins saphens, ve^tosing and friction on the thighs
with other convenient remedies for the prouocatio^ of the purgations, as ye
shall hear at length in the treatise of the diseases in women. Use good diet,
tending to humidity. The particular remedies differ not from others, saving
that we use familiar and weak repercussiues, because it is nere to the noble
parts: in the beginning it shall be good to foment the pappe with hot water
vinegar and oil of roses, or this, take the flowers of camomill, lyn-seede and
fenegreck of each half a pound, the juice of mallows, roses, and plantine of
each three ounces, vinegar two ounces, wet a cloth therein and lay on the sore.
If it tend to maturation, use this the crum of white bread, and bean meal of
each half an ounce, flower of Fenegreck half an ounce, Mallows, althea and
lilly roots of each a little, sees them in milk, putting thereto the yolke of
an egg, fresh butrer and a little saffion, when it is come to suppuration open
it with canter or lancet, vacuate the humor, and cure it as other apostumes:
make a bandage to hold it up, and labor not with the arm on the sore side,
for that makes attraction of milk to it.

The sixteen Chapter of the Tumor in the thorax, c^lled Pleurisy.
Definition.
Pleurisy is an inflammation, and tumor of the membranes which knitte and
cover the ribs, whereof there are two sorts, Difference.
false and true: the false is outward, in the muscles of the short ribs:
Paul. lib. 3. Gordon. partic. 4. Auicen. 13. cap. de pleurit.
the true is that which comes in the membranes which knitte the ribs. The
Cause is externe and interne, the externe is great heat or cold, also great
usage of strong wine, Cause.
or very cold water, violent exercise, Aetius. sermon. ^. cap. 68.
or cold air after great heat: the internal cause is great repletion of all
the body and four humors, but chiefly the blood and choler, which make the
most subtle part of the blood ascend from the vein cave, to the vein azigos,
thereafter in the muscles, veins and membranes inte^^stals. The Signs, Signs.
as says Galen are great dolor from the shoulders to the nethermost ribbe,
Gal. 5. de locis affectis. cap. 3.
punction in the side, continual fever, difficulty of respiring, coughing,
hard pulse, great alteration with want of appetite, Judgments.
The Judgments are these, that which comes on the right side, is not so
dangerous, as on the left, if the spittle be black, liuide and viscous with
continual cough and vehement dolor, long continuing, Auicen. lib. 4.
it is mortal. If the urine be thick, blewe or black, it is mortal: if the
cough be very dry, and cease not, it is an ^uill sign: If the spittle be
white, light, equal with little cough, and the patient sleeps well, good
appetite, and the urine read colored, it is a good sign. The Cure consists
in universal and particular remedies, Cure.
universal as clisters, bleeding in both the arms, chiefly in the side
opposite to the sore, keeping good diet, abstayning from all strong drink,
women, violent exercises, perturbations of the mind: the particular shall be
cataplasmes and liniment^s of flowers of camomill, melllot, annise seed, lin^
seed and fen^gre^, if the dolor be great and does continue, Fuchius
counsels, frequent applycation of ventouses, with scarrification of the
part affected. If by these remedies the pain does not cease, neither that ye
perceive any euacuation of the humor, neither by the mouth, urine nor
fundament, it is to be suspected to turn into Empiem, which is a collection of
matter between the ribs and the region of the lights, sometime with
corruption hereof, for the which we make incision, either by canter or lancet,
but rather by the canter, for neither does it close so soon, nor is so
dolorous, the opening shall be between the third and fourth of the true
ribs, beginning at the nethermost, and so counting upward, six inches from
the ridge of the back. If ye see tumor eminent in any place of the thorax,
open it in the most convenient place: Hippocrates counsels to decouer the
third ribbe, and bore it with a trepan to let out the humor, when it is open,
put in a hollow tente, either of silver or lead, let not all the matter
avoid at one time* but by little and little, and cure it as other apostumes.

The seventeenth Chapter, of the Tumor in the navel, called in Greek
^^c^mphalon, or Eminentia vmbilici.
When the Peritone is dilated or riuen, the Navel does swell or tumifie in
such sort, Definition.
that sometime it riueth, the cause is often in the midwife, that either
knitteth too near, or too long: by the near knitting, Cause.
either it slippeth, breaks, or causes conuulsion and other grievous
diseases: by the too long knitting, it gives place to the intestine or
^mentum, or some blood or flesh, waterie or windy vapors do occupy the
eminent place. Signs.
The Signs are known by the diversity of the matter contained therein:
Theodericus lib. 3.
as if the omentum: it is soft, and in color not different from the rest of
the flesh: if the intestine, the tumor is soft and inequall, and returns
into the capacity with a noise: if humiditie or vapors, the signs are, as in
waterie and windy tumors: if blood, which happens through the infecting of
some vein or arter, the signs are, as in aue^^risma: if excrescence of flesh,
the tumor is hard and obeys not easily. The Judgments are these, when the
dilation is great, Judgments.
it heals not easily, and often riueth by some violence or coughing, The Cure
is, first in good regiment tending to sobriety, Cure.
Celsus. lib. 6. cap. 17.
abstayning from all statuous meats, and such, as engender crudities, little
moving and such like* Particular remedies consist in emplaisters astringent, or
the emplaister set down in the practice of Petrus de Angilla: Cap. de
emin^ntia vmbilici
also fomentations astringent, and bandages, chiefly in the beginning. If that
help not, reduce the puddinges and quafe, and cause the sick to hold in his
breath, till ye knit the production, let it fall of it self, and produce the
cicatrice. If it be riuen by violence, or great cough, that the intestine
comes out, as happened to a woman, whom I cured in Paris, ye shall enlarge
the wound with a convenient instrument, reduce the intestine, and use* the
suitor pellitor, and cure it as other wounds. If there be wind and water in
the place, cure it, as ye shall hear more at large set down in the Chapter of
Hernes.

The eighteen Chapter, of the Tumor in the belly, called Hydr^psie,
HIdropsie is a Tumor against nature, engendered of great quantity of water,
wind or phlegm, Definition.
sometime dispersed through the whole body, and is called universal: Gal.
lib. 2^ de facul. natura. et cap. 6. lib. 5. de locis affectis.
otherwhiles in some part thereof, and is called particular, most commonly in
the capacity of the Peritone, of the which there are three kinds, to wit,
ascites, timpanites and anasarca. Difference.
Ascites is a malady, that causes the belly and legs to swell, Theodericus.
through a waterie humor, the rest of the body is small and lean. Tympanites
is a malady, in the which is more flatuositie, and less humor, and in
touching sounds like a drum. Gal. com. 2. aph Called dry hydropsie by Hip.
Anasarca or L^ncophlegmatia is a disease, wherewith the whole body* but
chiefly the privy parts are swollen with a pituitous humor, white and clare,
accompanied with fever. The cause is either externe or interne: externe as
strokes, Cause.
falls, heat, cold, flux of blood, Theodericus party. 6.
or great and long running of the hemerhoides, or through dissenteria, also
great usage of humide meats, as sewens, evil water, and such like, whereof we
had good proof at the siege of Paris, also evil regiment, Plato says, that
in the time of Apollo and Aesculapius, neither caiter nor hydropsie, nor many
other diseases which now reign were known, and that, through their great
sobriety. The cause interne comes chiefly of the virtue alteratrix and
concoctrix of the liver, Signs.
in like manner apostumes of the liver, Gal. de facul na. cap. 7. et 5. de
locis affectis. et lib. 3. cap. 29 Alexander Trallianus. Hip. lib. 2. prognost.
Gordonius pa^^*
also passions of the stomach, through the vice of the veins meseraicks,
intestine, matrix, bladder, lights, milte, and kidne^s. The Judgments are,
that all hydropsies after a hot fever, or in the fever, are evil: if after
apostume of the liver, it receives no curation, if by using remedies the sick
grows better, and within 3. or 4. days is ill again, he heals not, if he
become laxatiue, and have no ease of his pain, it is mortal, if the spittle,
the breath and extremities do stink, they are signs of death, if flux with
difficulty of respration, he shall die within three days, of all sorts
ascites is the worst, those that are young and robust, using exercise, and if
the humor be not putrified, Cure.
may be cured. For the cure hereof, there are 3. intentio^s, the first is good
diet tending to hot and dry, Paul. lib. 3. cap. 48. and lib. 4. ca. 6.
of good nourriture and light digestion it is good not to drink at all, but if
it be any, let it be a little old man. I knew a man, that was cured, by
abstayning from drink half a year. Anthonius Been uenius reports that he
knew men cured, Lib. de abditis morbor. causis.
by abstayning from drink a year, without using any other remedies. Let their
bred be of barley, wherewith shall be mingled the powder of wormwood* annisseede*
betonie, calamint, calamus aromaticus, succorie, fennel, which things may
also be put in their pottage and drink, asses and goats milk is also good.
The second intention is, with fomentions and vnguentes resotiues, as ye have
heard in Edema. The third intention is to corroborate the intemperie of the
liver as is ample set down by Albucrasis. Some counsel to make incisio^ the
which I have often seen, Lib. 3. haly abbas and Guido.
but with evil success, and therefore not to be used, as being rejected by
Celsus, Paulus, Trallianus* Gordonius and others. The manner of incision is
thus, make the incision with a bistorie by the navel* but 3. fingers under it,
toward the flanck, shuning the Linaea, put a hollow tent in it, and euacuate
the humor by little and little. I have set down an excellent remedy in the
poor man's Guide for the curation of this disease, if the fault be not in the
liver, whereby I healed many in Paris, during the time of the siege. There are
many other things, which might be spoken of this matter, which I leave to the
mediciners, being more medicinal, than Chirurgicall, but by reason that
sometime it falls under the Chirurgians hands, I thought good thus much to
entreat of it.

The ninteenth Chapter, of the Tumor in the fundament, called Condiloma.
THe fundament is subject to diverse passions, as Condiloma, ficus, atrices,
hemerhoids, rhadiae, clausio, Definition.
paralysis, pruritus, fistula. Celsus. lib. 6. Paul. Aegin. cap. de condil.
Fernelius lib 5. symp* et parti. morb Gordon partic. 5.
Condiloma is a certain excrescence of flesh, hard, tuberculus, and membranous
in the brimmes of the fundament, sometimes accompanied with great tumor and
swelling, and are called Condilomata, sometime not swelled, and are called
Atrices. The cause is the weakness, softnes, and low situation of the part,
also defluxion of humors, Cause.
which become rotten, for the which it is of hard curation. Celsus. lib. 6.
The signs are manifest to the sight, Signs.
accompanied with great tumor and dolor. The Cure consi^th in good regiment,
and rest, often purging with clisters, bleeding in the arm, Cure.
to divert the humor, if there be any inflammation, using vomitors, and things
to provoke urine. The topicall remedies are, in the beginning to use linimentes
of oil of roses, cidoniorum, with whites of eggs, thereafter use remollientes
and discutientes: if it tend to suppuration, use such remedies, as ye have
heard in others, putting thereto a little of tapsus barbatus, it must be opened
in form circular, this counsels Gordon, to the end the matier remain not
long there in, which easily causes fistule. If the excrescence be great and
hard, they must be consumed with causticke medicamentes, as counsels Celsus.
Sometime the fundament is closed, as I saw in Picardie in the Town of S.
Quintin in France, where I brought a woman to bed, that had two children, the
one had excrescence of flesh and dyed soon after it was borne, the other had
a membrane, that closed the passage of the excrementes, which I c^tte with a
bistorie, and it healed. This happens often to maids in their conduites, for
the which do the like, or have recourse to Celsus. Lib. 7. cap. 28.
Or to the man's Guide.

The twenty Chapter, of the Tumors in the Fundament, called Hemerhoides.
THe Hemerhoides are an inflammation or voiding of blood, Definition.
of some one or more of the five veins, which go about the Fundament, of the
which there are diverse kinds, Symptom. morb. lib. 5.
as says Fernelius, some are interne, which are not to be seen, others
externe, some swelled and void no humor, but in tract of time return
inwardly, some open, and avoid abundance of melancholicke blood, which makes
great pain. The cause is great abundance of melancholicke, Cause.
pituitous or bilious blood, also great usage of mordicant medicines, as says
Gordonius. The Signs are these, if the humor be cold, the sick feels great
heaviness, Signs.
and dolor, and trembling of the belly, if the humor be hot, there shall be
great pulsation, evil coullor of the face, heaviness of the eyes. The
Judgments, this disease is dangerous and difficill, for sometime the great
euacuation causes the hydropsie, Judgments.
evil color, and weakness of the body, which often ends in fistule. If
they be suddenly stayed, they engender dangerous maladies, and often death,
the humor taking the course to some other part, as the liver or the lights, as
says Bartapallia: if they void moderatly, it is good, and preserves the
sick from melancholy, leprosy, strangurie, grief in the sides, and
inflammation on the lights. The natural course of them is to void every
month once, Hip. 6. epid.
or at least four or five times in the year. The Cure is somewhat difficill,
the part being sensible and cold, Cure
having no force of it self, also being in a low place, easy to receive
fluxion, and being in a privy place, hard to come to at all times: yet in so
far as may be, it consists in good diet, abstayning from all things of
evil digestion, and which breed melancholy, next, the body shall be
gently purged, then bleed, Finchius lib. 3 de medendis morbis. Baptista
Mon^anus.
if either they flow moderately, or be painful, also bleed in the vein in
the ham or foot, If they be tumified, apply a horsleach, and some medicaments
to make them open, and ease the pain: as cataplasmes, fomentations, half
bathes, or sassettes of henbane, tapsus barbatus, violettes, red roses,
mallows, lintseede, all soddeu in milk and applied on the part. Also the
yolke of an egg, oil of roses, rose water and cream applied after the
aforesaid manner, are of great force. Poor man^ guide.
Some for this purpose use hogs doung hot on the part, for the appeasing of
the pain, as you shall hear further in the poor man's guide, Or this, take
sorrel, violettes, henbane, of every one a little, roast it under the aeshes
and mix it with a little hogs grease and lay it on the sore. If they void
much, apply ventouses on the shoulders, with astringent and corroboratiue
emplaisters on the os sacrum and fundament, made of sanguinis draconis,
masticke, mallows with the hair of an old Hare cut very small, and a
little powder of roset, Montanus.
mix all together with the white of an egg, and lay on the foresaid places.
If the pain be vehement and interne, take a tente, wette in the foresaid
remedy, and put in it, or take this unguent, composed of rosat. m^snes, cerat.
Galen and comitissae mingled all together in a mortar of lead. paulus
counsels, when there are diverse, to leave one open for a certain space, for
fear the humor take the course to some noble part. There are diverse other
familiar remedies, for this purpose, which shall be set down at large in the
poor man's guide.

The one and twentieth Chapter, of the Tumor in the Intestine, when it falls,
called by the Latins, Exitus longanouis or Any prec^dentia.
EXitus longanouis is the fourth coming or rather turning over of the great
Intestine, Definition.
which happens through the laxation of the muscle Sphinter, the which makes
it fall, and tumifie, which is most common to young children. The Cause is
external and internal: Cause.
external are falls, and strokes on os sacrum, sitting on cold stones,
great compression of the fundament, also apostumes which happen in these
parts. The internal cause is great humiditie, which relaxeth the muscle,
flux of the belly, often pressing to go to the stool, as commonly happens
to those, Signs.
who have the Dissenteria. The signs are apparent to the sight: Cure
the Cure shall be in general and particular remedies: Auicen. lib. 3. tract.
1.
the general shall be first in good regiment of life, abstayning from much
drink, pottages, herbs, fruits, and all meats that engender erudities,
also the usage of purgations shall be expedient. The particular remedies are to
foment the place with smithes water and red wine, in these shall be sodden
red roses, myrtles, centinodie, shepheardes purse, roch allom, seethe all
together and foment the place, then annoint it with oil of bays and myrtles,
and apply on it powder of masticke, mirhe and nuttes of cipres, thereafter
cause the sick to draw in his breath, so it shall be easily reduced: being
put in, wet a cloth in the former fomentation, and lay on it, and band it for a
certain space, preasse not sore in going to stool, and keep you warm. If
for all this it heal not, have recourse to the poor man's guide in the Chapter
of diseases of young children in these parts.

The two and twentieth Chapter, of the tumor in the Coddes.
IN the Coddes, are situated the stones, which are ordained by nature for the
generation of man, which are subject to diverse tumors and inflamatio^s so that
sometime the stones do swell, Gal. de vsu part. et artis medicae cap. 9.
Definition. Lamrancus tract. 3.
to the greatness of a goose egg accompanied with dolor and hardness, so that
the heart, liver, and brains feel the grief. The cause is either external,
or internal, Cause.
the external, are strokes, falls, application of remedies, which offend the
nature of these parts* the internal cause is defluxion of humors which often
happens in the low, parts of our body, retention of a maling Gonorhea, also
when the seed is any wise out of the domicill and yet retained in the
capacity, as happens to young men in the night, so waking at the discharg of
that humor they do retain it by force which afterward rottes, and makes
defluxion on the stones, as I have sometime seen. The signs are inflammation,
dolor, hardness, Signs.
ponderositie which may easily be perceived, great dolor of the muscle called
Su^pensor which gives voluntary motion to the stones. The judgments, if such
tumors be not swiftly cured, the aposthume, become hard, Judgments.
and sometime Scirrous, which may not be cured, but by amputation, as I have
seen in three diverse persons. Cure.
The cure is general and special, general in good regiment of life,
abstayning from strong drink, eating little and of good digestion, little
traveling, bleeding the vein saphen, using of clisters, and provoking urine.
The topicall remedies differ not from other tumors, saving that neither apply
remollients nor suppuratiues without great consideration, but repercussiues, in
the beginning as oil of Roses, vinegar, whites of Eggs and such, thereafter
this remedy, that has the virtue to repel, and discuss the humor.
Bartapallia.
Rec. radicum altheae and lini an. vnc. 2. foliorum violarum, maluae,
parietarie, plantaginis, hyosciami aen. manip. 1. camomillae, melioti, rosar^m
siccarum an. P. 1. coquautur in oxymelite cum fari^is fabarum and hord^i an.
vnc. se. If it turn to suppuration, do as in others, if by long delay the
stone be altered, the best remedy is amputation: if vehemenr dolor, as often
happens, apply on the sore cassiafistula or new Cheese with a little
vinegar, which are things most anodine in such griefs.

The three and twentieth Chapter, of hernes in general, which happen in the
flanck and Codds.
AS in diverse parts of the body happen diners sicknesses, so in these parts
come 8. sorts of diseases commonly called ruptures or hernes and are divided
into five propers and three commons, the first of the propers is called
Bubonocele or hernia in completa, that is when it remains in the flanck, the
second is called ^nterocele or hernia intestinalis that is when the intestine
falls into the codds, the third is called Epiploceli or her^ia Zirbalis, when
the caul fall in the codds. The first of the commons is called Hydrocelae or
hernia aquosa, which is a watery humor in the codds, the second is called
Physocele, or her^ia ventosa, which is a wind in the codds, the third is
called Sarcocele, or hernia carnosa, which is a scirrous or fleshie substance
in the cod, the fourth is called Cirsoceli, or hernia varicosa which is when
the veins, that nourishe the stones, are dilated and full of melancholicke
blood, the fifth is called hernia hum^^alis, which is when any defluxion of
humors falle^h in the coddes, of all which ye shall hear hereaftet in there
several Chapters, beginning first with B^bonocele.

The four and twentieth Chapter, of the tumor inguinall called Bubonocle.
Definition.
BVbonocele is a tumor in the flanck either of the call, or intestine, Gal.
tumor. cap 17. Auic. 22. ca. 2. A^tius sermon. 19 cap. 29.
which happens through dilatation, or ruption of the peritone, and is called
b^ the latins hernia inguinalis, or inconpleta. The cause is external and
internal, external in strokes, leaping, wresting, crying, vomiting,
choughing, Cause.
riding on hard trotting horses, bearing of great burdens, the violent using of
women, or any violent using of exercise dilatatio^ of the ligame^t in women,
through great travel in childbirth* the internal cause are using of viscuous
and flatuous meats, great repletion of the belly, and of humors. The signs
if it come through relaxation, Signs.
it reduces easily, if of the intestine, ye shall hea^e a noise, and it is
dolorous. The judgments, many die of this disease, Judgments.
the gutte being forth, fills full either of wind, or excreme^ts or both,
which is so difficill and painful to be reduced, that the sick dies. As for
the cure, Cure.
use fomentatio^s remollientes and discutientes made thus. R^c. radicum
altheae, brioniae, cucumeris ^grestis an. M. 1. folioru^ maluae, bismaluae,
pari^tariae et violarum an. M. 1. floru^, et foliorum camomillae, melitoti, and
rosarum an. P. 1. seminis altheae, lini et fen^greci an. vnc. se. coqua^tur
omnia in lacte vel aqua, et f^menta locum cum spongis. If by these remedies, it
reduce not, being great abundance of wind, ye shall use five, or six
punctio^s with a needle for the purpose, which dissipeth the wind, and
reduces easily, then use emplasters astringent, with a ba^dage for a certain
space, in so doing those which come of releaxatio^ sometime heal others, which
come by ruption do nor heal, so the sick must have a trusse for the purpose,
with an emplaster to let the falling down again, and no other cure to be
used, yet there are some ignorant people, who take upon the^ to heal this, as
also the 2. co^pletes by drinks, charms, praying to Saints, and going on
pilgrimage, which are al false and found on no reason, others, as Tbeodo^ricus
counsel to cure the^ by actual canters, Lanfra^cus by pote^tiall, Bernardus
and Rogerius, by the wearing of a golden threade, called punctus aureus, which
are all dangerous and uncertain ways.

The five and twentieth chapter, of the herne or rupture intestinall called by
the Greeks ^nterocele.
THis kind of rupture is, Diffinition.
when the gutts fall down into the codds, either through ruption, Baccha. lib.
3. Paul. cap. de rami^e. Fanenrinus de mede^dis mor. Pareus lib. 7.
or enlarging of the peritone, where the Spermatick vessels do pass, and
where the muscles Cremastres end, and the membranes Dartons and Heretroides
begin, wherein the gutt, caul^, or both do fall. The causes are like to
Bubonocele, Cause.
Signs.
the signs are great in equal tumor, sometime hard, by reason of the fecall
matter contained therein. The judgments are these there commeteh inflammation,
Judgments.
and the more ye prease to reduce it, the inflammation is the greater, so it
changes the coulor, which is an evil sign, sounding and voyding of matter at
the mouth are evil signs and if the intes^i^e be not reduced the patient
dies, which happens through the narrownes of the dilatation. Cure.
As for the cure, first rubb the codde with oil of camomill, and lay the sick
on his back in such sort that his arse be higher, than his head, reducing with
thy hand little, and little, pressing most on the place where it defended. If
the fecall matter let the reduction use the remedies set down in Bubonocele
and clisters to discharg the intestine, if by these remedies, the intestine do
not reduce, but the matter wax hard with great dolor, ye shall make incision
in the upper part of the cod, eschewing the intestine, thereafter put a little
piece of wood up by the production of the peritone, near the hole of descent,
the piece of wood must be round on the one side, and flat on the other, whereon
ye shall make the rest of your incision, and rub the descent with a lttle
oil, so it shall easily reduce. If then it reduce not, the peritone must be
incised, and use the canter Gastrographick, and handle it as other wounds, this
operation must not be used, but in great necessity, and when the sick is
strong, prognosticating still of the danger, nefefellisse aut ignorasse
videaris. Being reduced, it must with bandages and astringent fomentations be
contained with rhis ^^plaster. Celsus.
Rec. emplastri contra ru^turam vnc. 2. mastichae vnc. 1. vnguenti comitissae
and desiccatiui rubei an. vnc. se. lapidis calaminaris in aceto extincti parum:
or this, tak^ bean flower and the bark of the oak tree, sanguinis draconis,
powder of sage and roses, of every one a little, seethe all in smithes water,
putting thereto a little hogs grease, and lay it on the place in form of an
emplaister, and keep the bed for the space of forty days, shifting it once
in six days, using good diet and of light digestion, abstayning from crying
and coughing, laying the hinder parts higher then the head, through this
method some heal, chieflly when the dilation is not great^. If the dilation be
so great, that there is no hope of recovery by these remedies, we come to the
operation of the hand, the body having purged and bledde before if need be,
eating little the night before the incision: the sick shall be laid on a
form or board, situated as ye have heard, his legs and hands bound, and
so reduce the intestine, which being done, one shall hold his hand on the hole
of descent, then the Surgeon shall take the stone on the sore side, making an
incision two inches broad, at the which draw out the testicle, Halyabbas
Rogerius Theodoricus Albucrasis Brunnus and Rolandus.
separate the didyme from the scrotum, till ye come to the hole of descent, and
knitte with a waxed thread, and cut the production with the stone a little
from the threede, stay the flux of blood, and heal it, as other wounds. If
the patient be old, make incision in the lower part of the scroton, to the
end the matter may avoid the better. Sometime the dilation being great, the
intestine sticks to the peritone, so in knitting the peritone, ye knitte the
intestine also, which if it happen the sick voydeth the excrementes by the
mouth, and so dies. This happened once to my Master, who had used this
operation a long time, whereof I thought good to let you understand, if any
such cure come in your hands. Sometime being healed in the one side, it
falls on the other side, for the curation whereof, do the like, yet it is
very incommodious, for after, the party is disabled to engender, and the hair
of the beard becomes thin and falls, for the which cause and diverse,
Gordon. Paul. Leonellus. Fauentinus and de Vigo.
I am of the opinion with the learned, not to attempt this operation, but
rather to use a tru^se, so in process of time, nature ingendreth a certain
piece of flesh in the hole of descent.

The twenty six Chapter, of the rupture Zirball, called Epip^cele.
Definition.
EPipocele is a descent of the caul in the codde or flanck: the Cause is not
different from the precedent, Cause.
accompanied with abundance of humidities in these parts, Signs.
the Signs are like the precedent, saving that it is softer and uneasy to
reduce, Cure.
not dolorous. The Cure must be like to the intestine in all, cutting the
production that falls, knitte and canterize it, to let the flux of blood of
the veins and arters, whereof comes great danger, if it be reduced and yet
bleedeth, it causes flux of the belly and often death.

The twenty seven Chapter, of the waterie Herne called Hydrocele or Hernia
aquosa.
Definition.
THE waterie Herne is a Tumor in the coddes, which grows by little and little
sometime to great bigness, Celsus. lib. 5. Fuchius lib. 6. Albucra. lib. 1.
Gal. lib. 3. de sympto^. causis. cap. 2. Aetius sermon. 19 cap. 22. De Vigo cap.
de aquosa ramice.
and is contained sometime in the codde, otherwhiles betwixt the membranes,
that cover the stones called Dartos and Heretroidos, sometime within them,
sometime it is accompanied with the gu^te, and is called Hydrointerocele. The
Cause is like as ye have heard in Hydropsie, and is a particular Hydropsie,
sometime strokes, the vessels being riuen, the blood changes into a
waterie humor. The Signs are, the Tumor is clear, and becomes long still in
one estate, Cure.
not painful, heavy, sometime hard, and is known by holding the codde
betwixt thee and the candle, Signs.
and being enclosed in membranes, it appears to be a third testicle.
Judgments.
The Judgments, some resolve, oftentimes the intestine also falls, chiefly
in the left side, by reason of the milte, Bacchanellus lib. 3.
which is full of cold melancholicke humor, which oftentimes corrupts the
testicle. As for the Cure, the sick must be purged, Cure.
with fit medicines, according to the nature of the humor, use mean
exercises, meats hot and dry in small quantity, abstayning from drink,
and keep thy belly loose, sleep little, and provoke urine by diureticke
things, abstain from all things which breed wind. The particular remedies
are in using fomentations as in Hydropsie, next, the astringent emplaister made
of read desi^catiue, the unguent Comitisse, with the powder of lapis
calaminaris, extinguished in vinegar, oaker, balaust, bol armenie, allom,
mustard seed and euphors, malax. all together with a little oil of camomil,
and lay on the sore. If these remedies suffice not, by reason of the great
quantity of the water, we put a Seton through the lowest part ^f the codde,
and draw it twice every day, till the humor be euacuated. If the humor be in
the membranes, that cover the stones make incision in the side of the codde,
eschewing the testicle, put a tente in it, and dress it twice a day, keep it
open, till the humor be euacuated, use remedies anodi^us, for to appease the
dolor, Paul. lib. 6. Albucrasis li. ^.
and ^ic catrize it as other wounds.

The twenty eight Chapter, of the Herne windy called Physocele.
THis Herne is a collection of wind in the Scroton, called Hernia ventosa:
Definition.
the Cause is imbecillitie of natural heat in these parts, and phlegmatic
matter, Cause.
with such other causes, as ye have heard in windy apostumes. The Signs are,
the Tumor is somewhat hard, light, round, Signs.
suddenly engendered, occupying for the most part, the s^roton and wand,
resisting to the touch, clear as a bladderfull of wind, the wande greater in
one place, then in another. The Judgments, if this vapor dissip not,
Judgments.
it causes many euilles, sometime occupying the whole body, and proceeds
often of matter venenous. The Cure shall be, Cure.
first in good diet, as in Edema, next, to apply on the place things
resolutiue and corroboratiue, as ye have heard in windy apostumes, some
allow the plaster of Vigo with mercury, or diapalma malaxed with wine, also
the dregs of claret wine, boiled with bran, and laid warm on the place.

The twenty nine Chapter of the Herne carnosa, called Sarcocele.
Definition.
THis is a Tumor in the cod, sometimes in the membrans dartos and heretroidos,
Paul. lib. 6. Fauentinus.
chiefly about the stones, like unto a tumor schirrous, Cause.
and as it were accompanied with veins varicous. Albucra. lib. 3. de Vigo.
lib. 11.
The Cause is, abundance of gross humors in these parts, which does corrupt
the testicles, and at last degendreth into a hard fleshie disposition. Signs.
The Signs are, Guido. tract. 11.
unequal tumor, hard, always in one estate, dolorous, and being touched (all
which is in the testicle,) does move. Judgments.
The Judgments are, that when it happens to young folk, and handled in the
beginning, it does some time heal, but commonly it is incureable, and the
worst of all the eight kinds. If by feeling it at the uppermost part of the
didim, it seem unnatural great, the tumor is incureable, and better it is not
to touch it, then to attempt any cure: if ye find the didim small, there is
some hope of cure: For the which we must situate the sick as ye have heard,
Cure.
De Vigo. lib. 2* Rolandus and Albucrasis de hernia carnosa. Arnoldus de villa
noua de mala complexione.
next, make the incision in the upper part of the cod, knitte the didim and
canterize it, as ye have heard in interocele. If it adhere to the codde,
separate it, and cut off the testicle, with the excrescence, if after the
incision, there comes inflammation and dolor, let the patient bleed, and
rest five or six days, as counsels Franco, and leave the cure, to give
order to the accidents.

The thrrtie Chapter, of the Herne varicous, called C^rsocele.
THis Herne is a Tumor, and dilation of the veins that nourish the testicles,
Definition.
Paulus. Bacchanellus.
which are full of melancholicke blood, and also the membranes hereof. The
Cause is, some gross humor or melancholic blood, Cause.
gathered in that part, by reason of the debilitie and decliuitie of the place,
Gal. lib. de tumoribus.
and heaviness of the humor. Signs.
The Signs are, the repletion of the veins, sometime few in number, sometime
many wrapped together like a vine branch, soft in touch, and returning into
the belly, by pressing on the didime. Judgments.
The judgments are, it is without dolor, most dangerous, and difficill to be
cured, Gordon Bacchanellus.
as ye shall hear in the varices of the legs. The cure shall be first in
purging the body of melancholic, then bleed if need be, Cure.
therefore make incisio^ on the scroton the breadth of two fingers in the place
of the varice, thereafter make pass a needle with double thread under the
varice and in the upper part of the wou^d, an other in the lower part* leaving
an inch betwixt, then open the varice, and euacuate the humor contained: if
there be any more do the like, that done knitt the thread, and handle the wound
as others. If the testicle be infiltred with veins accompanied with dolor,
that it may not be handled this way, the didime must be cut as in the
pre^^dent, and so proceed in the cure,

The one and thirtieth Chapter, of the herne Hum^rall.
THis herne is an aposthume and defluxion of humors together in the codd or
membranes, Definition.
Rolandus.
that cover the testicles, and sometime in their proper substance. Cause.
The cause is not different from other aposthumes, as also the signs. Signs.
The judgments are, Judgments.
such as are long in healing the part being cold and membranous, sometimes
suppureth, otherwhiles resolves, if it continue long, it corrupts the
testicle. The cure, the sick shall be purged with clisters and bled rest, and
wear a trusse to hold up the stones, Cure.
and dressed according to the nature of the humor and accidents, after the
method set down in the general Chapter of Aposthumes.

The two and thirtith Chapter, of the tumor in the Flanck called Bubo.
Definition.
THis word Bubo is taken in place for the part betwixt the thigh and the body,
Gal. lib. 5 ca. tumor 2. ad glan et 3. meth.
called in latin Ingnen, in which there are many glandes, which often do
swell, and tumifie. Cause.
The cause is, defluxio^ of humors, violent exercise, crisis of maladies,
Signs.
dolor, or ulcer in the leg or foot, or some other part near to it.
Judgments.
The signs are evident. The judgments, when it happens by crisis of malady
it is difficill, Gal. 13. meth.
if no fe^er have proceeded, nor vapor venomous, it is easy, sometime it does
resolve, otherwhiles suppo^eth. There are other gla^des lower, where ordinarily
the plague ingendereth. Cure.
The cure differs not from other aposthumes, which come in parts glandulous,
where of I have spoken amply in the Chapter of Scrofulae.

The three and thirieth Chapter, of the tumor in the knees.
Difinition.
THis tumor comes by fluxion or congestion of humors in the joints, Cause.
and chiefly in the knees, the cause is, Gal. com. aph. 74. lib. 4. Paul. lib.
3. cap. 78*
strokes, falls, plenitude of humors, crisis of maladye, heat* cold, long
travel, laxations. riding and frictions. The signs are manifest, and the
judgments are, that those which happen after a long malady, Signs.
are difficill and dangerous, Judgments.
as says Hyppocrat^s, and are long in healing, painful to the sick dolorous,
the humor being either extreme hot or cold, which makes inflammation in those
parts, sometime matter virulent under the lidde, which causes the bone go
out of his place, and sometime turns over, as I saw once in Paris. The cure
consists in universal, and p^rticuler remedies, Cure.
universal shall be according to the quality of the humor, as ye have heard in
the general Chapter, the Topicall remedies, shall be repercussiues, and
discutientes, and drying according to the nature of the part, which shall be
distinguished, Auicen* Henri.
according to the degrees of the aposthumes, as ye have heard in Phlegmon. If
it tend to suppuration be wary in opening of it, our auntients forbid to open
deep under the lidde, because parts are sensible and dolorous, of the which
happens evil accidents. Use medicamentes corroboratiues, and anodines,
euacuate the matter and cicatrice the wound, as others: sometime the tumor is
ingencred of wind, which deceives the Chirurgian, and if it happen, cure it
as ye heard in windy, and waterie tumor.

The four and thirtieth Chapter, of the tumor in the veins of the legs called
Varicae.
VArix is dilatatio^ of the vein greater, tha^ natural, which happens in
diverse parts of the body, as temples, Definition.
Paul. lib. 6.
belly, under the navel, on the testicles and matrix, but chieflye in the
legs, which is sometime one vein, sometime diverse together, full of thick,
burnt, melancholic blood, letting action of the place. The cause is abundance
of the mela^cholick humor, retentio^ of the moves course in women, Cause.
and Hemorhoides in both sexes, which dilateth the veins, and sometime
breaks, as often happens to women in their travel, for the which I have
treated at le^hth in the treatise of wome^s birth, likewise vehement exercise,
as leaping wresling, carrying of great burthe^s, strokes, falls, torments and
such like. The signs may be seen by the greatness of the veins, which commonly
are blacker, than the natural. Signs.
Judgments.
The judgments, those that are interne, Gordo^. partic. ^
are incureable and not to be touched, because it lets the ^fluxion so
returns to the noble parts, and causes great accidents, intertaineth old
ulcers and lets the cure thereof. The cure is diversely set down by diverse
authors, some counsel to incise them in diverse places according to the
circum^olution; and let the blood, Cure
then to close up and bind the wound, as in other blo^dinges, resting that
day, Rolandus. Paul. lib. 6. cap
and if they swell again do the place with a little ink the skin, above the
vein, thereafter take up the skin with thy hands, and incise in the middst
thereof, then let it go, that the vein, may be seen and pass two needles, as
in the varicus herne, let it bleed, a quantity, and knit it, let the three ad
fall of it self, without drawing it by force, and cure the wound as others.

The five and thirtieth Chapter, of the little Tumors in the legs called
Dracunculus.
Definition.
THis is a tumor or extraordinary dolor bredde in the legs or arms, Aetius
cap. vltimo. Paul. Aegin. Auic. lib. 4. cap 21.
called Draguneus, yet diverse authors have given it diverse names, as Auicen
calls it Meden by the name of a town, where it is frequent, Albucrasis
calls it Venaciuilis, Halyabbas vena famosa. There is also touching the
cause, and cure, great difference, it chances most commonly in the midst of
Arabia, as writes Paulus and is not often seen amongst us, yet somewhat I will
say of it for the better instruction of the young Chirurgian, Paulus and Auicen
are of opinion, that in the place affected, the humor is like unto little
worms sometime great, otherwhiles small, chiefly in the parts musculous, as in
the arters, Cause.
thighs, and legs, and sometime in childrens sides under the skin, with
manifest motion. Some take it be a sharp and mordicant humor between the
flesh and skin, which in time waxes hard like an nerve or tendon. It is
iugendred of a hot melancholic blood and burnt phlegm sent through the veins
to the exterior parrs by the virtue expultrix. Monard. lib. 7.
Signs.
The signs are vehement dolor, fever, hard, and round like nerves, seeming
to move in the touching as it had life, the tumor is long, and stretched from
one joint to an other, as from the kne^ to the foot. The cure whether it be
humor, Cure.
or animal vegetative, is to foment the place with milk and camomill, or
medicines to appease the dolor, then to give air either by canter, or
vissicator, if it be not dolorous and tend to suppuration cure it, ^s ye have
heard in Erisipelas, changing always your remedies according to the times of
the Tumor, and Humor which reigns.

The thirtte six Chapter, of the Tumor in the legs or arms, called by the
Greeks, ^lephantiasiis particularis.
THIS if it be universally through all the body, it is called Leprosy, if it
be particular, Definition.
it occupies only one member, which spoyleth the form, figure and
disposition thereof, and makes it rough, like the skin of an Elephant,
Gordon. part. ^.
for which reason it is called Elephantiasis. If it occupy the skin and not
the flesh, it is called Morphaea. The Cause comes from the mothers womb,
Cause.
and is called Malady hereditarie, or after we are borne: if from the womb,
either the child has been conceived in the time of the monthly purgations,
or else the mother, or father has been elephanticke. After we are borne, it
comes either of corruption of air, as in places near the Sea, which makes
the humors of the body thick: also dwelling in hot countries, as in
Aphricke, Spain and others, where many have this disease: also in cold
parts, which thicken the humors, and plenitude of the humors, chiefly of the
melancholicke, retention of the hemerhoides, or purgation menstruall, defect in
the milte corrupts the humors, chiefly melancholy, great usage of
melancholic meats, ae Swine, Goats, Hares, cheese and such like, The Signs
are, Signs.
great tumor occupying the whole member or some part thereof, which augmenteth
by little and little, not dolorous, insensible, which sometime is inflamed. The
judgments, when it is universal or particular, it is incureable, yet some
remedies palliatiues may be used, Judgments.
to let and stay the malady, Cure
by purging the melancholicke humor, bleeding, bathing, ventousing, provocation
of the flowers, and hemero^hes, using of good regiment and things that
engender good blood, abstayning from things of contrary quality, the which
must be done by the advice of the learned Physician. If there come inflammation
in the heart, use such remedies as are set down in the Chapter of Phlegmon. I
have seen some have this malady, and live 20. years and more, by the using
of good regiment, but I have known none to come to perfect cure.

The thirty seven Chapter, of the tumor which comes in the extremities of
the fingers called Paneris or Paranochia.
Definition.
THis Aposteme, which occupyeth the extremities of the fingers and roots of the
nails is called by the Greeks Paranochian, by the Latins Reduuiae. The Cause
is melancholic humor, venomous, and most hot of the nature, Cause.
which proceeds from the bones, nerves, tendons, and membranes, which cover
the same. The signs are vehement dolor, Signs.
whic makes the ^icke almost beside himself, great inflammation, fever, and
sundry other lik accidents, Judgments.
as in Carbuncle. The Judgments it is sometime vlcered with virulent matter,
and is very dangerous as says Gordonius, oftentimes before there, be any
outward appearance in the flesh, it rotteth both the bones and ligaments and
membranes, and then there is no remedy, but to cut it, for fear it infect the
rest, and also cause death, as reports de Vigo. Cure.
The Cure, first the sick shall be purged and bleed in the arm opposite, using
good regiment, and abstayning from all strong drink: as for the topicall
remidies, there are diverse opinions amongst our old writers, some counsel
repercussiues and ^nodins and supuratiues, other counsel for the greatness of
this disease, not to abide the maturation, but presently make incisio^ in the
inner side of the part or joint, the length of the said joint, going to the
bone, Petrus Bayrus in sua practa.
to give issue to the venim, which is commonly the periost, and bone let it
bleed, till it ^^aunch of it self, thereafter wash the part with strong
vinegar, and Aquauitae, wherein has been delayed a little Treacle, using a
liniment of unguent rosat, Populeon, with a little oil of Roses, or a
cataplasme made of the leaves of Henbane, Sorrel, mandrakes, roasted under the
ashes and mingled with a little Butter or Hogs grease, this does appease the
dolor and provoke matter. This being done cleanse the ulcer, and cicatrize it
as in others.

The thirty eight Chapter, of the little hardness in the feet commonly called
Corns.
THose hard tumors, Definition.
which commonly occupy the toes and feet, chiefly the joints and under the
nails, are called Corns, and in latin Clauus, Difference.
of the which there are three kinds to wit Corpus, Callus, and Clauus. The
Cause is chiefly in wearing straight shoes, Cause.
superfluous excrements, which cannot avoid, so remains in the partueruous*
and acquireth a certain hardness, according to the nature of the part, where
they are. The Signs are apparent to the sight. The cure is, that those, Signs.
that are little, not deep, are to be cut finely at the root, Cure
and filled up with a little wax and green copperous, or else a little of the
sand, which remains of the urine, take heed ye cut not to deep amongst
the ligaments and tendons, for the great accidentse, that follow, as
inflammation, Petrus bayrus.
sometime conuulsion, and Gangren, so that some loose their toes and feet. In
cutting a part of it, the root grows more large, then it is best, to foment
the part with water of mallows and Althea, or water, wherein Tripes have been
sod, thereafter use Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Aquauitae and lay one it, or
this which I have often used made of like quantity of Turpintine, wax and
verdegreace and apply thereon. And so we end this Treatise, and shall follow
out to entreat of wounds in like manner.

THE SIXTH TREATISE Of Wounds, and contains twelve Chapters.
Chapter 1 Of wounds in general. Chapter 2 Of the simple wound. Chapter 3 Of
the composed wound with loss of substance. Chapter 4 Of the contused wounds.
Chapter 5 Of wounds done by gunshot. Chapter 6 Of wounds in the veins and
arters. Chapter 7 Of wounds in the Nerves. Chapter 8 Of wuundes by biting of
venomous beasts. Chapter 9 Of wounds in the bones. Chapter 10 Of wounds in
the head. Chapter 11 Of wounds in the thorax. Chapter 12 Of wounds in the
belly.
The first Chapter, of the cause, signs and curation of wounds in general.
CO. Definition.
Like as we have proceeded in the former Treatise of Tumors, ^al. 3 method.
cap. 1.
we shall follow out the same Method in wounds, and so I demand, what is a
wound?


LO. It is a dissolution of the continui-tie, Celsus lib 5. cap. 26.
recent, bloody without putrefaction in the soft, hard, or organicke parts.


CO. Which is the cause of wounds?


LO. Whether they be animate or inanimate, they are of three sorts, of the
which they take their denomination, as if the wound be made by a thing sharp
pointed, as a rapier, lance, or darte, it is called thrust or stabbe: Celsus
ibidem.
if with a cutting thing, it is called incision or cut, if with a heavy blunt
thing, as a stone, or club, which comes by force and breaks and contundeth
the flesh, Signs.
it is called co^tusion.


CO. Which are the signs of wounds?


LO. Celsus ibidem. Gal. de causis morborum. cap vltimo.
They are manifest, according to the judgment and accide^ts that follow.


CO. Which are the differents?


LO. Some are simple, others composed,


CO. What is a simple wound?


Lo. It is that, wherein is no lack of substance, and healed one way only to
wit by co^solidatio^, as says Hyppocrates.


CO. What is composed?


LO. It is that in the which there is loss of substance* and has diverse
intentions for the cure thereof.


CO. Differ wounds no otherway?


LO, They differ also in that some heal easily, some are difficill, and some
are mortal, some without intemprie, some little, other great, sperficiall,
profound in the simple or similar, others in the isntrumental or orgaine
parts, some in soft, some in hard parts.


CO. Which are those which heal easily.


LO. Those which are in the flesh not touching veins, nerves, nor arters, in
bodies well composed, and where there are no great accidents, nor in parts
dangerous.


CO. Which are dangerous?


LO. All those, which are interne also in the membranes of the brains, in the
heart, lights, liver, Diaphragma and great intestins, Hip. lib. 6. and apho.
18.
and those that are within three fingers to the iointes, also wounds in the
nerves, which cause conuulsion for their communication with the brains, those
in the Esophag, vines Ingulare, in the flanck thighs and betwixt the fingers
and all those yet are without tumor, Paracelsus in magna Chiru^gia.
all wounds in the head both great and small, wounds that are deep made
overthwart, also some are difficill for the excellency of the part, being
necessary to all the body and life it self.


CO. Which are mortal?


LO. All those in the substance of the brains, heart, liver, midst of the
lights, chist of the gall, midst of the Diaphragme, stomach, milt, kidneis,
and small intestines, Hip. lib 5. apho
bladder, matrix, trachearter, and spinall medull: Also those at the roots of
the emunctoires and noble parts: in like manner in the vein ca^e descending
or ascending, the vein part, great arter, or in the back cause present death,
be reason of the great euacuatio^ of the blood and spirrits.


CO. Which aere the particular signs, whereby you know those parts to be
mortal?


LO. Every one has a particular sign, as if the brains, or membrane thereof
be hurt, the blood comes forth by the nose by the ears, Brains.
with vomiting of choler, voiding of the excrementes unawares to the party,
the face ugly to the sight, the feeling dull, and understanding hurt, the
patient falls into rauing and convulsion within 3 or 4 days. We know the
heart to be hurt, when there comes out quantity of blood, Heart.
thick and black, chiefly if the right side be hurt, if the left, it is more
red and subtle, the pulse becomes weak and variable, the color pale, with
universal trembling, casting a cold ill sauoured sweat, the extremities wax
cold, often sounding, and dies shortly. Lights.
We know the Lights to be hurt, when the sick does breath with difficulty,
voyding a spumous blood at the mouth and wound, and lying on the wounded side,
speaks, and not on the other side: some rave, the red color and heat goes
to the visage, in the end issues quantity of matter at the wound. Diaphragm.
The Diaphragme being hurt, the flancks retire and close, there is great weight
on the part, dolor in the rig back, cough, difficulty of breath, with issue of
a spumous blood at the wound, as in the Lights. If the Liver be hurt, Liver.
there comes out great abundance of blood the flanckes retire toward the
back, the color like death, the eyes sink in the head, want of rest, the
urine is bloody, the excrements purulent, the sick comes to lie on the belly,
the dolor is pricking, extending to the breast bone and ribs, in respiring he
draws in his shoulders and vomiteth choler. Lib. 6. cap. 88. Milt.
Paulus Aegineta reports, that one lobe of the Liver may be hurt, and yet
death not follow of necessity. If the Milt be hurt, the blood comes forth
black and thick at the wound or left flanck, which with the stomach waxes
hard, there is great drought, dolor in the furcilles, as in the Liver. Kidneis.
If the Kidneys be hurt, the dolor descends to the root of the thigh and
testicles, there is difficulty of urine, pissing of blood, sometime blood
staieth within, and the sick dies all swollen. If the Orifice of the stomach
be hurt, Orifice of the stomach.
there ensues vomiting of choler, as also of that which is eaten presently,
the pulse is weak, sweating, the extremities cold. The stomach and intestine
ieiunu^ being hurt, have the same signs with the meat and drink issuing forth
at the wound, the flancks dolorous and hard, the Patient voydeth choler at the
mouth, and spitteth blood, with great cold in the ext^mities. The Spinall
medull hurt, Spinall medull.
the sick becomes paraliticke and in a conuulsion, and loses the feeling,
the inferior conduites are relaxed, so voydeth the seed urine or excrements. If
the Bladder be hurt, Bladder.
there is great dolor above the yard, pissing of blood, voyding of urine at
the wound, vomiting of choler, cold in the extremities. If the Matrix be hurt,
Matrix.
the dolor does communicate to the liskes, haunches and thighs, the blood
comes forth partly by the wound, partly by the nature, some lose sense and
reason, and some speech, and have the same accidents with those that are hurt
in the heart. Intestines.
If the Intestines be hurt, there is great dolor, with continual voyding of
the fecall matter at the wound.


CO. What is to be considered of the Chirurgian touching the Judgment of
wounbs. Judgments.



LO. First to know what part is hurt, and the nature thereof, whether there be
any or no hope of health, knowing the parts, that are easy to heal,
difficile, and mortal, also the usage, actio^, substance, and situation of the
same, likewise the figure of the wound and actions that happen, the
temperature, age, sex, region, season, and constitution of the time. Wounds in
the nerves, te^dons, ioints and bones without appearance of tumor are evil
signs, and show the humor to be brought to the noble part. Wounds with
fracture behind, are in danger of spa^me, and such being before, are in danger
of ra^ing and fre^sie. I^ convulsion happen in a wound, Hip. lib. 5. apho 65.
chiefly after some great infla^mation, it is for the most part mortal and
shows the parts neruous to be hurt. Wounds in the head, if after x. days
symptons do happen, signify abscesse in the liver, and likewise great desire
of drink signifies the same. Wounds that have bled much, if conuulsion ensue,
are dangerous, as also all thrusts in nerves and tendons, the vnuoluntarie
vomiting of choler, when the sick is hurt or the infla^matio^ lasts is an
evil sign.


CO. Until what time should we stay our Judgment of wounds in the head?
Hip. de vulneribus capitis.



LO. Until Forty days, and some late writers till fifteen and twenty
days, days, after which time, comes often fever and other evil accidents,
which chance often at full Moon, and dies, as I have sometime noted.


CO. What time of the year is most expedient for curation of wounds?


LO. The spring time, when the weather is neither hot nor cold, the Autumn is
evil, for the moystnes of the ayte, as also the cold winter which is enemy to
ulcers and wounds in the membranes and bone as says Hyppocrates.


CO. How Cure.



LO. Hip. aph. et 20. lib 5. Ce. lib. 5. ca. 25
Five, first in ordring of universal remedies, regiment of life, air, which
must be hot and temperate, the sick must be nourished with little meat and of
light digestion, somewhat refrigeratiue if there be fear of fever or
inflammation, which danger is most to be feared before the 7. day, abstain from
wine and all strong drink, except through loss of much blood the heart be
faint, Auicen.
supp lightly, abstayn from women, and all vehement passions of the mind. If
great dolor, inflammation, conuulsion happen, as in parts neruous and bare of
flesh, Gal. lib. 4. met. and lib. de curatione per sanguinis misson. cap. 7.
and 8. Hip. lib. de vloeribus.
let blood, use some light purgations, if the body be Cacohchymick. In great
wounds of the head and in such times, as is not convenient to give potions at
the mouth, as ye shall judge by the sickness and state of the diseased, use
Clisters. The second point in taking away of that which is noisome, as Iron,
Balls, Stones,


CO. By what means take thou such things away?


LO. They shall be taken away either by the part where they enter, or parts,
whether they tend, which is done by diverse sorts of instruments fit for that
purpose, also by the help of these medicame^ts, radix pectinis veneris cum
malua tusa. Plin. lib. 24. cap. 19, Aristolochia, ammo inacum cum melle,
arundinis radix con^^sa et melli^d^nista, altoresi fructus tritus, dictanmum,
propolis narcissus, lacerte caput tritum, et appositum. Oribas^^s lib. 7. cap.
17. excepting always if they be in some part noble, and in that case, are
not to be touched, because it hasteneth death, and helps not: then we must
consider, Cel. lib. 7. ca. 3.
if the thing be superficial, not yet passed the great vessels, as veins,
arters, and nerves, it shall be best to draw it out by the wound, if it be
passed the veins, arters, and nerves, it shall be best to draw it by the part,
whether it tends, by incision of the part, least by drawing it forth, where
it came in, dilacerations of the said parts, Cel. lib. 7. ca. 3.
which is to be observed in broad arrows: by this means the wound heals
more easily, by teason that the medicament may be applied on both sides, and
the matter does void better. Beware in making the incision to cut nerve,
vein, or arter, if at first they cannot be drawn out, they are to be let
alone for a certain space, Albucr. lib. 2. cap. 94.
in which time the flesh which is about it does consume and putrify, and so
gives an easy issue. The late practitioners think best to draw it out at the
first, if it be possible, because then the patient feels not the sore so much
as afterward, also the part does swel through fluxion of the humors, which
makes the wound, narrow accompanied with greater dolor than at first. For the
extraction we situate the sick in such form as when he was hurt, Hip. Paul.
lib. 6. cap. 88.
and seek the thing in sounding of it with meet instrument, or the finger
which is most sure, and draw it forth, with the least pain, that may. If the
wound be not great enough, that it may not be drawn without delaceration of
the flesh, which makes great inflammation and dolor, we must after the counsel
of or auntients dilate the wound with a rasor, to the end, the thing therein
may be drawn forth the more easily, for the which it is necessary to know
the form substance, situation and connection of the part* Cells. lib. 5. cap.
26. et Paul. lib. citato.
with the Symptoms which do commonly follow. If the thing be in the bone, it
must be drawn by a Tyrefond, and shaken a certain time before, as counsels
Albrucrasis, if the bone be much broken, it shall be best to use dilatation,
both to draw more easily the little pieces, and also conioyne the great. If
without great pain the bullet, or other thing can not be found, and the sick
feel no great harm ^hereof, Hip. Paul. lib. 6 cap. 88.
it shall be best to let it alone, till such time it show it self, which
sometime happens not in long time, as we see by daily experience. The Gal lib 4
3. m^^ho et artis medicae^ca. 90. Suture. Gal. lib 3 m^tho. cap. vlt. and cap.
4. comm. apho. 9.



CO. What is suture? It ^s a joining of the parts separated against the course
of nature with needle and thread, to the end the cicatrize be the surer in
great wounds as the Thighs, Leg, and a^mes, where rhere is great distance
between the brimms. I^ the part be altogether cut and have almost no hold,
whereby to receive life the suture avails not, also if the lips of the wound
be swollen and inflamed it must not be done, till the inflammation be past, and
the wound something suppured, in doing whereof it must neither be too slack,
nor too straight. Cel. lib. 7. cap. 2^.



CO. How many sorts of sutures are there?


LO. Diverse according to the diversity of the wound, hurt, parts, and nature
of the bodies, and are commonly referred to three, Suture incarnatiue.
to wit, incarnatiue, retentiue, and conseruatiue.


CO. After how many ways use thou the incarnatiue?


Five ways, first we must have a needle of a reasonable length, sometime right,
otherwhiles curbed, triangular at the point, with a soft, round, great
thread, to the proportion of the needle and wound, also you must hold your
needle case on the other side of the wound to hold it steadie, let the first
stitch be in the outside of the wound and the case on the hurt side, next the
stitch on the hurt side of the other side, and the case on the whole side,
beginning always in the midst of the wound taking reasonable great stitches
in deep wounds, and superficial in small wounds, the lips must be joined
even together, so knit the thread, and it cut near the knot, thereafter if
need be, put an other stitch in the interspace, observing always an inch
between the stitches.


CO. How is the second done?


LO Either with a needle and the thread not suffitient, we pass an other
needle in the wound, as the pre^^dent yet not drawing it through, as does
women, when they stick a needle in their sleeves, and turn threade abour it,
and after this order, use so many, as shall be needful, according to the
greatness of the wound: and this kind of future we use in cloven lips,
which shall be done in this manner. If it be not great, and much dylated, and
the person neither too young, nor too old, nor of evil habitude, we take the
lip and cut all the skin of the inner side of the cleft, with an
instrument, then we pass one needle as abouesayd or two if need be, with an
emplaister of Betonica, or such like, which does conglutinat the lip commonly
in Ten days, after which time cut the thread, and out the needle, and induce
the cicatrize, as in others: Do the like in the ears, or nose, being so
cloven.


CO. How do thou the third future incarnatiue?


LO. With long needles and


CO. How is the fourth future incarnatiue done?


LO. By little pieces of Auic. tract. 1. cap 8.
incorpora^e all with whites of eggs and lay on both sides of the wou^d with
the aforesaid clo^h, and the clothe be further back, than the lips of the
wound, so the points shall be near, to the said lips, which being fast, we
put a thread through these points till such time, as we see the lips of the
wound to close* and knit the thread with double knot, this is called dry
future, and is commonly done in the face, and such places, where we desire the
Cicatrice not to be seen.


CO. How do


LO. With claspes of Iron sharp pointed, and long, which take the lips of the
wound being put together and houlde them so, this was used by some old
practitioners, but at this present, it is not in use, as being dolorous, and
exciteth inflammation and fluxion. Second suitor general.



CO. How is the second kind of future general done?


LO. It is done after the manner, that the Glouers sow there gloves but is
neither sure nor profitable, for one point slipping, the rest slip also. In
like manner, the blood, which is retained, swells the part, and falls
amongst the muscles, which often does rotte, and gangren the part* so it is
better to knit the veins and arters or canterize the^, which I have done with
good success, and used by our auntients where there was great effusion of
blood in the veins and arters, and now commonly used in the intestines and
bladder, and such other membranous parts.


CO. Third suitor general.
How is ^he third suture general done?


LO. As the rest, but not so hard, and is used to conserve the lips of the
wound being separated, and where there is great loss and dilaceration of flesh.


CO. What time appoint you to take away the points of your sutures?


LO. According to the opinion of Vigo in 6. or 8. days, yet in our ordinary
practice we limit no time, for some conglutine sooner tha^ others, so when the
part divided begins to conglutinate assuredly we take out the stitches.


CO. Is there no other sort of sutures commonly used?


LO. There is a kind which We use in the belly, called Gastroraphie of the
which diverse have written in diverse manners, here I will set down that which
is sure and most easy in the wounds of the belly. Gal. 6. metho. cap. 4.
Albucr. lib. 2. cap. 85. Cel. li. 7. ca. 16.
First if the guts come forth, they must be put in their place, also the
caul, first knitting and cutting away that, which is altered, leaving the end
of the ligator out at the wound, that which falls, may be drawn out, then
thou shall cause one to take both sides of the wound in his hand, then he
shall discover a little of the wound, so make the first stitch of the needle at
the extremity of one side of the wound pearsing the skin and muscles, not
touching the peritone, thereafter put the needle in the other side, through the
peritone, muscles, and skin, then make an other stitch, like to the first, not
touching the peritone, then make the fourth point like the second, pearcing
peritone, muscles and skin, so continue it, till it be all sowed, taking the
peritone on the one side, and leaving it always on the other.


CO. What is bandage, or ligator?


LO. It is a piece of cloth made long two or three else, Ligator, which is the
second help in conioyning of wounds. Celsus. lib. 5. cap. 26.
and in breadth three or four inches, according to the member and hurt, the
cloth must be soft, clean without hem or seame, and more slack in wounds than
in fractors, and of it there are diverse sorts, for some are to contain, as in
simple wounds, some are to expel matter, as we see in cave wounds, some are
defensiues to stay fluxion, some to retain the medicaments on the part, as in
the throat and belly, some are mortificatiue, which we use in legs or arms
gangrened to cut them off. The way how these bandages should be used, are after
diverse manners, according as ye shall hear in their proper places hereafter.
Four points in correcting accidents of wounds. Aposteme. Hemeragie.



CO. Which is the fourth point observed in curing wounds?


LO. To give order to the accidents, which are double, to wit proper, and
accidental.


CO. Which are proper?


LO. Aposteme, hemeragie, and putrefaction.


CO. What is aposteme?


LO. I have set down the definition, signs, difference, and cure thereof in
the general Chapter of Apostemes.


CO. What is hem^ragie?


LO. It is an issuing of the blood in great abundance, the vein or arter being
cut, riuen, or corroded: there is another flux of blood, which sometime comes
at the nose, and chances often in days critic, Gal. 3. de cri^bus.
which should not be stayed, unless it be excessive.


CO. How should the excessive flux be stayed.


LO. By things, about and on the place, which cool, agglinat, and dry by
ligators, ca^ters actual, and such like, as I shall set down in the Chapter
of wounds with flux of blood. Putrefaction.



CO. What is putrefaction?


LO. It is that which corrupts and lets the spirit and natural heat in
the member, where through it becomes rotten and putrified.


CO. What is the cause of this putrefaction?


LO. Either corruption of the spirit vital, or else viscus and cold humors,
which stop the passage of the vital spirit, some are causes primitiues as
strokes, contusio^, straight binding and such like.


CO. Which are the accidental symptoms?


LO. Symptoms accidental. Evil* complexio^
Evil complexion, fever, dolor, spasme, paralise, syncope and alienation.


CO. What is evil complexion?


LO. It is an evil comixtion of the four humors, when one reigns more than
an other, as was said in the first Treatise.


CO. What is Fever?


LO. It is an extraordinary heat, beginning in the heart sent through all the
body with the spirit and blood, Fever.
by the v^ines and arters.


CO. By what means is it cured?


LO. It is distinguished according to the time cause and nature, which points
belong to the Physician.


CO. What is Dolor? Dolor.



LO It is a feeling of a thing, which has a contrary quality in our bodies.


CO. What is the cause of Dolor?


LO. Solution of continuitie, or some sudden alteration, the accidents which
come of it, as also the cure, is set down in the general chapter, yet we will
say somewhat of it at this present. Al dolor makes altracio^ of humors and
blood, which makes infla^mation, for the which fome^t the place with oil of
roses, with the white of an egg, if the Dollor be great stupifie the part with
oil of popie and opium with mandrager, also the root of solanum brayed, and
put with the same is good to mitigate the dolor, as says Galen, if it be not
appeased by these remedies, Lib. 5. method. et lib. 3. cap. 4.
it is a sign that the nerves are hurt, for the which have recourse to wounds
in the nerves.


CO. what is spasme.


LO. It a mnladie in the nerves, Spasm^.
making inuoluntari moving, drawing the muscles and tendons toward their
beginning, uneasy to relax.


CO. What is the cause of Spasme?


LO. Repletion, Hip. aphor. lib. 5. et 6. apho. 39 et Gal. lib. de sympto^.
causis. Gal. 3 techni^*
euacuation, and dolor.


CO. Is it dangerous?


LO. Auicen says, that all spasme confirmed in wounds is mortal, others are
cureable: that which chances through thrustes in the nerves is evil. If it
happen by great euacuation of blood, it is mortal, as says Hippocrates, and
better it is, that a feu^r come in a conuulsion, then conuulsion in fever:
spasme after fevers, is mortal, as says Hippocrates.


CO. Which are the signs of spasme?


LO. Difficill moving of the body, tension of the neck, contraction of the
lips, astriction of the jaws, peruertion of the eyes and face, which, if it
take the course to the parts appointed for respiration, it is lamentable, and
the sick shall soon die, that which is confirmed, is incureable.


CO. What is the cure of it?


LO, First we foment the part, with hydrel^on or hydromell, sometime bathe
with water, wherein has been sodden mallows, althea and violettes,
extremities of calves, mutton, goats, lambs and such like, with a certain
quantity of oil: being taken out of the bath, rub the part with oil of
violettes, sweet almondes, hens grease or mutton, also rub the neck,
back and head being rased, with oil of lillies, vulpinum, turpentine*
ph^losophorum. For the same purpose, dry perfumes are good, Gal. 6. meth*
Galen com. aph 17. lib. 5.
it shall be good, sometime to draw blood on the same side, if there be
plenitude with inflammation, if there be cacochymie, purge the body of the
humors, which abound: if the cause come of dolor, or some bite of a venomous
beast, the dolor must be appeased, and apply on the sore, treacle, and ventous,
to draw out the venenositie.


CO. What is Paralisie?


LO. It is a mollification or relaxation of the nerves, with privation of the
moving, Paralisie.
whereof there is two kinds, universal and particular.


CO. What is the universal?


LO. It is that which occupies all the body saving the head, and if it occupy
the head also, it is called apoplexy, which is an other kind. Galen* 3. de
locis affectis. cap. 10.



CO, What is the particular?


LO. It is that which possesses and occupies one member only, as the hands,
feet, tongue, legs, and such like.


CO. Which are causes?


LO. Some are intern and some externe* Interne as gross humor, which moyste^
the nerves in the brains and the marrow in the which let the vital spirit to
pass. Externe are wounds, incisio^, falls, strokes, con^usio^* aposteme,
cold, and al outward things, that may let the animal spirit to pass.


CO. Is it cureable?


LO. Al parali^^es are difficill, by reason the nerves are destitute of their
natural heat, which is the efficie^t cause of curatio^, yet some are cureable,
when the nerve has lost the feeling and moving it is called Aploplexie, Gal.
3. de locis affectis
when it comes to one side it is called Resolution of the part.


CO. How is it cured?


LO. By universal and particular remedies, universal, as purgations,
Clisters, bleeding, good diet hot and dry, particular, as emplasters,
linimentes, ventoses, cataplasmes, fomentatio^s, also the balm of Guido, who
counsels to apply ventouses in the beginning of the nerves. Togatius
counsels a liquor set down in ad ditionibus Petri apponensisde scriptionis
mesue, also to rub the neck, back and parts most offended, with vnguentu^
martiatum or agrippae. Sincope.



CO. What is Sincope?


LO. It is sudden fall and decay of all the whole forces of the body, and of
al accidents it is the worst. Gal. 12. metho. ca. 5.



CO. Which are the causes of it?


LO. Great euacuation of blood, in^emperatur of the noble parts, vehement
passion of the spirit, fear, lack of courage, rotten vapors, as happen in
pestilent fevers and all things, that may intercept* and destroy the vital
spirit. Ga. 10. ingenio sanit^tis cap. 5. Gal 12 metho. ca. 4.



CO. What is the cure?


LO. First to encourage the sick, speak little, give him a little wine, cast
water in his face, and hold vinegar at his nose: draw his extremities, and
chiefly the fingers and rubb the part affected with this Rec. olei costini,
terebanthine an. vnc. 2. misceantur et vngatur. With this unguent Rec. vnguenti
martiati. vnguenti Agrippae an. vnc. 1. se. olei costini, and nardini et de
piperibus an. drag. 1. sagapeni, Alienation.
apopanocis dissolutorum in vino an. drag. 2. cerae parum, fiat vnguentum, quo
vngatur neruorum origo?


CO. What is alienation?


LO. It is an inordinat perturbation of the mind, with diversity of speech,
whereof there are two kinds proper and accidental, Gal. 9. metho. cap. 10.
the proper is that which we call madness, the accide^tall, is that which we
call rauing, as chances in hot fevers, and other maladies, wherein hot fumes
ascend to the head or by hott and cold air, as says Auicen, also by
putrefaction and venenositie of our meat and drink and is cured by diuerting
the fumes with frictions and ligators of the extremities, using Clisters and
rubbing the head and neck with Oxyrodinum. Gal. 3. thera Pu^



CO. What is the fifth thing to be observed in curing of wounds?


LO. To conserve the substance Thing observed in curing wounds.
and consolide the wound, which is done with vnguentes, emplasters, tents,
plumations, as ye shall hear in particular.


CO. Tell me some thing of plumatiens, tents and there use? Plumations.



LO. Plumations are made of little pieces of cloth, the threads drawn out, or
the pieces of cloth themselves, woll, or tow, Gal. com. apho 3^ et lib. 2. de
off^^ medici.
the pith of the Elder tree, the hairs of a hare, gentian. Of these some are
round, some triangulars and quadrangulars, the auntients give them diverse
denominators, either of the matter, they were composed of, or of their form:
some are applied dry, others wet in diverse li^quors, as whites of eggs, wine,
vinegar or oil, Cel. lib. 7. cap. 28. Holleris lib. 3. cap. 4. De materia
chirurgica.
according to the disposition of the part, we apply them unto. Sometime we
apply many, otherwhiles few, as the case requires. The tents are sometime
made of cloth, other-whiles of sponges or roots of certain plants, of
brass, lead, silver some cave within, others not, Tents.
of length and greatness according to the hurt, some are even, others crooked,
yet always round, and are used for diverse causes, as when wounds are to be
amplified or cleansed also in cave wounds with loss of substance, in contused
wounds, altered by the air, also when the wound is affliged with phlegmon or
any other tumor against nature, Celsus lib. 5.
also in wounds which come of biting, for such wounds have some venenositie.
In wounds with corruption of bone. In all other wounds we use not these
things* but induce the cicatrize and con^solide the wound. Consolidation.



CO What is consolidation? It is that, which has force to join, consolide and
dry the wound, and makes if like unto the skin.


CO. Wha^ skin is it?


LO. It is nothing else, but the flesh made dry and hard by the work of
nature, and virtue of medicaments, and is like the other skin, but not of the
same nature in all points.


CO There are many other things, which may be spoken generally of wou^des,
which for lack of time, we will refer, till our next meeting, against which
time I would have you to bring me in writing your opinion of wounds in
particular, as well made by Gunshot, as otherwise, and then we will entreat of
ulcers after the same manner.


The second Chapter, of the particular and simple wound in the flesh, without
loss of Substance.
I have spoken in the precedent Chapter, that wounds in the organic parts
receive no curation, now according to your direction, I will prosecu^e these
which happen in similare or simpler parts, beginning with the simple wounds in
the flesh, which is without loss of sub^tance either with accidents or
without. As for the causes, signes^ and Judgments, ye have heard suffitiently
in the prec^dent Chapter but for the Cure, the simple wound in the flesh,
heals by joining the lips of it together and help of nature, Cure.
yet for the more assurance we use to let it blede a little, Gal^ 3^ et 4.
me^tho cap. 10. Hip lib de vulneri et Celsus lib. 5. cap. 26.
if it has not bled suffitiently alredie: next we dress it with a clean
cloth or soft sponge, then we close, and put on it the white of an egg with
lint, bind the wound, and stir it not in two or three days; the white of
the egg preserves it from inflammation heat, Gal^ 3. therape^ et 3. met. ca.
10
dolor, and bleeding. If the wound be great that it joins not by the simple
l^gator, we use a future, with pouders incarnatiue or retentiues, composed of
s^nguinis draconis, thus, mastick, hollarmenie, wheat flower, all mingled with
whites of eggs and a little oil of Roses, with lint on it as before. Also a
double cloth broader than the wound, wet with oil of Roses and vinegar, bind
it and stir it not for two or three days, if accidents do not chance, and
being removed, wash it with Claret wine, wetting plumations in the same wine,
Gal. 4. methho cap. 4. Gordonin^.
which have the virtue dry and comfort. If the wound be deep and these
remidies not suffitient, we make a li^quor of oil of Hypericon and Turpentine,
with the yolke of and an egg, or a little of my balm set down in the Chapter
of Gunshot. I use, especially following the wars, this digestive made of
yolks of eggs hard roasted, and beaten with a little oil of hypericon,
Turp^ntine and Mirrh, so this keeps a long time, Holler. de matern. chirurgie.
and brings the wound to matter, the which not avoiding for the situation,
which is to high, we situate the part in such sort, that the orifice is
lowest, as for example, if the wound be in the thigh and there be a cauitie in
the knee, we situate the knee in such sort, Gal. li. 3. meth.
that is much higher than the thigh, if it avoid not that time and the cauitie
be great, we make incision in the bottom of the cauitie or cut it
altogether. Tho^ may know which of those issues is best by the greatness of
the wound and nature of the part, Brunus Guido.
it shall be best to make it in the bottom of the cauitie, using a hollow tent
in it to avoid the matter. We use also a seton, which is a little cord or
piece of cloth, rolled in form of a cord, anointed with some liquor
mundificatiue, drawing it sometime from one issue to an other, and so
continuing, till it be cleansed, dressing it thrice a day, thereafter I use
some glutinatiue medicine, as ye shall hear in the next Chapter.

The third Chapter of, of the composed wound with loss of Substance.
Definition.
THe Composed wound is when there is loss of substance to wit, Cure
skyn, flesh, and bones, for the cure we use two intentions, Gal. lib. 4. metho
et artis par^e cap. 92. Gal. lib 2. cap. 1 de eompos. pharmac.
that is, reparation of the substance lost, and induction of the cicatrize:
which is lost, if the body be well disposed, is repaired by nature only, using
in the mean time medicame^ts* that are cleansing and drying. If the flesh
renew not in his fashion, we use medicame^ts sarcotricks, which shall be made of
Iris of florence, Thus, Mastick, Aloe, Col^phonie, Pix resnia, Farina, Hordei,
Orobi, Fenugreci, Lupinoru^, Apopanax, Mirrha, Saccocolla, and sanguinis
draconis with vnguentum aureum mesue. If the wound be deep mix some of these
pouders with wine and wash the wound, with Turpentine in form of unguent and
put it in the wound either with plumations or tents, dress it twice a day in
So^mer and once in Winter, using an emplaster, that dries and comfort with
bandages. In these wounds there are four intentions to be observed, first to
ingen^er such substance as is lost, second^e to know the temperature of the
body and hurt part, to the effect, we may judge, whether the medicaments
should be cold hot or dry, Gal. meth. ca. 3
thirdly to know the accidents which happen to the sore, fourthly the regio^,
air, and way of life. The swou^de being filled up, we induce the cicatrze with
epulotick medicame^ts, as red Deficcatiue album Rasis, cerusse, plantine, also
to wash the wound with wine, Gal^ 3^ meth ca. 5.
wherein has been sod, balaust and allu^, or this emplaster. Rec. tuthiae
preporatae, plu^bi crudi, antimoni crudi, corticis mali granati, balaust^^ru^,
nucum gallarum, boli armenici, sanguinis draconis an. drag. 1. accipi antur
omnia simul cum vngue^to epompholigos onc. 3. fiat magdaleon bone
cousistentiae, Lib. 2. de materia chirurgica cap. 4.
you shall find diverse other remidies set down by Holler. Take heed that the
cicatrize be neither high, low, hard, soft, nor inequall, the high happens,
when it is not dried enough, and must be mended by scarrifications,
medicamentes catereticke,s and corrosiues. The low contrary wise comes,
through lack of some piece of boane or too much drying, and is helped only by
frictions, the inequality comes through the points of the needles, which
has been over thick and ill done, and is helped by medicamentes emollientes,
discutientes and astringentes.

The fourth Chapter of the contused Wound.
THe contused wound, to the which chances great accidence, Definition.
according to the instrument it is done with, is a kind of solution of
continuitie, made with a bruise, 4. theurapeuticorum.
and is called by Galen and some late wtiters echymosis, in the which there is
separation and dilaceration of the flesh and muscles thereof with great
quantity of blood and differs somewhat from attrition as says Auicen, for
contusion happens in the fleshie parts, Gal. li. 4 meth. cap vlt.
and attrition is done in the head and end of the muscles. The signs are like
unto other wounds with inequality and roughnes in the flesh and skin,
diversity of figure, Signs.
according to the diversity of the cause, the part and parts about are black
and liuide, by reason of the blood, which is out of his place and remains in
these parts, and cannot be euacuated by sensible or insensible transpiration,
but by suppuration. The Judgments shall be according to the greatness of
the hurt, for great contusions are dangerous, Judgments.
for the corruption of the member, and consequently the body also. As for the
Cure, there are four intentions, first, to stay the flux, if the contusion be
with wound, as often happens, Cure.
next to stay the fluxion of humors on the part by euacuation, as purgations,
bleeding, ventousing* ligators, frictions, good regiment in unnatural things:
thirdly in using particular remedies, Hip. lib. de vlceribus et vulneribus
capitis. Celsus lib. 5 cap. 19.
first digestiues, for such wounds must suddenly be brought to suppuration,
for the which use this cataplasme of mallows, violets, althea sodden in fresh
broth, putting to it a little barley flower, butter, basilicon and the yolks
of eggs, with a digestive, or this: Take wax, turpentine, Celsus Paulus.
calves grease, goose grease, honney, mirrhe and oil of roses, mingle all
together. To appease the dolor, use oil of camomill, roses, lillies, mirtles,
oxyrodin and bol armenie. The fourth intention is, in correcting of the
accidents, as dolor, apostume, gangren, for the which use such remedies as ye
have heard in the second Treatise. The wound suppured, and the accidents
corriged, it must be cleansed with honney of roses and turpentine,
mundificatiue de appio, Gal. de comp. medicament. and Aetius lib. 5.
apostolorum and such like, as ye shall hear in the introductio^ to and
Chirurgerie in the poorema^s guide. Being cleansed, we use incarnatiues, and
desiccatiues, as was set down in the former Chapter.

The fifth Chapter, of wounds done by gunshot.
I Have spoken of simple, compound and contused wounds, now will I entreat of
wounds with dilaceration and loss of soft and hard parts, and is made by
diverse sorts of instruments, as bulle^tes of lead, iron, steel, brass,
stones and other such like matter in diverse figures, as round, triangular,
quadrangular, pointed* flat, little and great, which sometime penetrate,
sometime not, whereof our auncientes have made no mention, except only Celsus,
who tells not with what instrument they were shot with, Lib. 7. cap. 5.
therefore though some have written of late, yet because they are of diverse
opinions and written in sundry languages, I will show my opinion touching the
same, not making any mention of others, who have written of the same. This
kind of wounds is accompanied with tumor, dilaceration of flesh, veins,
arters, nerves, tendous, ligamentes and boanes, superficial* profound,
otherwhiles through the body, and according to the difference, the Chirurgian
must take his indication to diuersifie the remedy, in like manner, apostume,
dolor, corruption of the parts gangrened and mortified through the great
abundance of blood, dispersed betwixt the muscles, also for the dissipation
of the natural heat, sometime one only accident, otherwhiles diverse
together, for the which we use two curatiue intentions, to wit, restitution of
such things as are lost, and to conioyne the parts divided. These wounds come
indifferently to all parts of our body whereof there are diverse opinions, some
think, that there is venenositie in the powder, and burning in the bullette,
which is false, for the things whereof the powder is ordinarily made, as
brimstone, saltpeter, coals of diverse sorts of trees, water, wine and
aquauitae, have no venenositie in them, likewise there is no burning in the
bullet, for if the bullette of lead being shot a great way, should burn,
through heat would be melted it self. I have cured diverse within these ten
years of diverse nations, which have followed the wars in France, in the
which I have found no more difficulty then in other contused wounds: so I
think these accidents come only by contusion and dilaceration of the flesh,
and not by any venenositie, nor vstion: yet there may be some extraordinary
mixtion in the powder, which causes venom, for the which we take some other
indication, acccording to the thing. The Causes, Signs, differences and
Judgments are not much different from those of other wounds set down, and
sufficiently discoursed in the general Chapter, Cure.
as for the Cure there are five intentions, first, to draw the ball, secondly,
to appease the dolor, thirdly, to cause suppuration, fourthly, in mundifiyng
generation of flesh and consolidation, fifthly, in correction of the accidents.
As touching the first and second, to draw out the bullet and appease the dolor,
I have discoursed at length in the general Chapter, nevertheless, because in
these wounds there is vehement dolor, Gal. therapen.
which weakeneth the sick, hinders nature, causes fluxion, lets
suppuration, and consumes the flesh which is contused, I will set down things
more particularly for the appeasing thereof, in changing the temperature of
the whole body, in due usage of the six unnatural things, by purgations and
bleeding, and abstayning from things which cause dolor, as great tents,
sections, straight bandages, wrong situation of the part, incision, unless
there be great need. The topicall remedies, as cataplasmes with bread, milk,
yolks of eggs and a little saffron, also mallows sodden and beaten with
wheat flower, oil of roses, and hogs grease and saffron, are good: or this*
Rec. sanguinis draconis, boli armen^ci an. onc. 1. pulueris rosarum et
myrtillorum. an. onc. di. aceti. onc. 1. albumina ouorum quatuor, olei rosacei
quantum sufficit, fiat vnguentum. If there be great heat, oil of roses with
whites of eggs and vinegar, laid about and on the part, is good. Also cerat.
Galen. or unguent. rosat. mesne, with bol armenie* sanguinis draconis, powder
of roses and myrtles. If we fear inflammation, which often chances till the
seventh day* use the same remedies and shift them twice or thrice a day. The
tents shall be soft, wette in turpentine with a little hypericon and aquauitae
according to the nature of the part, and use this remedy hot, and continue
it till the inflammation be past, let the sick eat and drink little, that he
engender no superfluities, Auicen cou^selleth to give meat to the sick only
for sustentation of nature, abstayning from wine, for it is enemy to al
wounds, drink sodden water with sugar or honey or ptysane, till the
inflammation be past, Hip. lib. 5. aph. 17.
keep rest and quietness, abstayning from all actions of the spirrit,
watching, and women, Hip lib. 5. apho 17.
according to the disposition and nature of the hurt. Third intentions
consists in medicame^ts suuppurati^es, 3 Intention.
which must be done with speed, to the end, Hip. lib. de vlce section. 7.
they be less subject to inflammation, using remedies which are of quality
hot and dry, with virtue to correct the putrefaction, and let the Gangre^ and
mortification of the part: there are of diverse forms, the simples are made of
oil of Hyperico^, of eggs, yolks of eggs, lynit seed, Lillies, Turpentine,
Mirh and such like, or this Rec. tereb enthine onc. 2. corticis thuris drag. 1.
mastichis drag. 3. olei hypericonis, et rosaru^ an. parum, vitellum vnius oui
fiat medicamentu^. Or this which I most commonly use of Hyperico^, Turpentine
and yolks of eggs, or my balm which is excellent in all kinds of wounds,
made thus Rec. summitatu^ et florum scrophularie et hyperico nis an. quantu^
volueris, offi^glossi, vel herb carpentari^ru^ et consoli dae regis an.
quantum volueris, terebenthinae venetae, quantum sufficit, macerentur in
sufficienti quantitate olei hypericonis insolentur omnia in sole calidissimo
spatio 40. dierum in vase plumbeo, vel vitreo duplicato, posteo fiat fortis
expressio, seruetur liquor pro balsamo. The fourth intention is to mundifie and
regenerate, that which is lost, 4 Intention.
which must be done with things, that have little or no mordification,
according to the nature of the part as this take sirupe of Roses, violets,
fumitarie, wormwood, honey of Roses, unguent de apio, apostolorum, ^uscum,
egiptiacum or this take Turpentine, honey of Roses, Iris of Florence, barley
flower, Succi apij of each a little and make an unguent. If there be great
putrefaction and the matter in great abundance use this. Rec. tereb^nthine onc.
4. vitellorum ouo^um onc. 2. vnguenti ^giptiaci dr^g. 1. fiat mixio. The wou^d
being mundified and void of all superfluity we use for the regeneration of
flesh, vnguentu^ aureum, basilicon maius, emplastrum de betoni^a, diapalma,
tetra pharmacum, gratia dei, oleum mastichini et absinthij, mix there with a
little flower of barley, lupines, and orob, with Thus, Mirh, Mastick, and Aloes.
Sometime we use in these sorts of wounds; a certain drink called potion
vulnerar, wherewith we wash the wound, and is thus made, Rec. consolidae
maioris et mediae, serpentariae. linguae canis, ceruinae, herbae Roberti
glyciriz^* pimpinellae artemisiae scabiosae, plantaginis, aristolochiae,
agrimoniae, betonicae, pedis columbini, capilli veneris, ceut anreae maioris et
minoris, gaiaci, s^ls^par^lle, millefolij, baccharum lauri, of which all or
some make a decoction in water and aromatize it with cinamond honey or sugar,
drink of it twice or thrice a day as it is needful, and also thou may wash
the wound, putting thereto a little honey of roses or sirupe of roses. The
wound being filled with flesh, it must be dried with medicaments epupoloticks
which by their astriction and drying do harden the flesh, and make a substance
like to skin, as vnguentum desiccatiuum rubeu^ diapompholigos, album rasis, dia
calcit^^s, triapharmacu^, ceruss^ de minio, mixing therewith galbanum acasia,
sarcocolla plu^bum et es vstum, vitriolum, allumen, calxlota and such like. The
fifth intention is in correcting the accidents, which are diverse and great, 5
Intention.
for some come by accide^t, or some sharp feeling of the part h^rt, as dolor,
inflamatio^, conuulsion, fever and such like some come through violence of the
bu^llet, as extinction of the natural heat of the part, hemoragie,
dilaceration, contusion of the nerves, fractures of the bones, and some by the
ignorance of the Chirurgian, for the which cause he must be diligent to stop
such accidents, and if they happen to help them with speed.

The sixth Chapter, of wound^s in the veins and Arters.
Having spoken sufficiently of wounds in the flesh, in like manner you shall
hear of them in the veins and arters, one or more, without and with loss of
substance, which are accompanied with flux of blood, which comes when there
orifice is open, and is done by incision, imbecilitie of the veins abundance
of blood, or some sharp quality, and when their tunicks are divided, contused
and pierced, or else when the blood goes through the veins, as the sweat
through the skin, Gal. 5. metho. ca. 2 et 12. metho cap. 7.
the tunickes and membranes are divided by some external cause, as contusio^*
ryding shooting, falls in diverse manners, The signs are these, Signs.
if the fl^xe be of the arter, or vein, Gal. 5. met. ca 7
of the arter the blood comes leaping out subtly red and hot. If it be
more gross, black, and thick, and not leaping, it proceeds of the veins, as
says Aui^en. The Judgments are, Judgments.
if the blood come out in great abundance it is dangerous, chiefly when there
is either conuulsion, belching or rauing, if it be not stayed, Hip. aphoris. 3.
lib. 5. et lib. 7.
it causes death because it is the treasure of life. As for the Cure, there
are two intentions, the first to stay the blood, Cure.
the second to conglutinat the wound, Gui. tract. 3. ca Gal. lib. 5. metho.
cap. 2.
the blood is stayed by filling up the wound, with dry lint and above it an
astringent, or cloth wet in vinegar, if that stay it not, remove the lint often
and wet it in vinegar, which staunceth it much for these things cold and
mordicant stay flux of blood in the wounds, or make this medicament of
bolarmenie, sanguinis draconis, thuris, aloes, of each like quantity, Hip.
aph. 20. lib. 5. Ga. 5. met ca. 4* Auic. tract. 2. cap. 18.
mix them with the white af an egg and the hairs of an old hare cut small*
thereafter bind it reasonable straight, wetting the bands, clothes, and all
about it in oxycrate, touch it not in four days, in touching remove all very
softly, if it flick to* humect it with oil, whites of eggs or wine. Some to
stay blood, put these powder in the whund, which I have sometime used, viz. ma^s
blud dried with burnt cloth, wherewith thou shall fill the wou^d full, some
apply ve^touses frictio^s, ligators, on the parts opposite, some hold their
thumb long on the mouth of the vein, which is a good remedy, for the blood
co^gealeth in the vein and so stanceth. If for all these remedies, it stanceth
not, we apply on the vein or arter a little lin^ wet in vinegar with a little
powder of vitriol, otherwise we knit them as was taught in the Chapter of
Ane^^risme: if that cannot be done, we canterize the^ with hot Iro^s,
Albuc^asis.
taking heed to touch the parts ne^^ous Shelander counsels the gum lemnium
sodde^ Rennish wine, which has many virtues, for it digesteth, mundifieth,
incarnateth, Matheolus.
and is good in wounds of the head, as says Matheolus. If none of these
staunch flux of blood, it is dangerous, if it be in the matrix intestins or
bladder, it shall be stayed by iniections of juice of plantine and such like, the
blood being stayed, the wound is healed as others, having regard to the part,
for as the vein is more dry, than the flesh, and more soft, than the arter,
so it must have contrary remedies: in like manner the wound in the arter is
harder to be healed, than that in the vein. Sometime there comes such flux
of blood at the nose, that it is hard to staunch, for the which take an ounce
of boll, the bark of Pomegarnet tree, balaust and galls, of each 3. drammes,
seed of white Poppie 2. drammes, incorporat altogether with the white of an
egg and vinegar, and apply on the temples and nose, if by this the violent
flux do not stay, take four grains of my requies, which infallibly stays
all fluxes.

The seventh Chapter, of wounds in the nerves and parts Neruous.
CVttes and thrustes in the nerves chance in diverse parts of our body, and in
diverse manners according to the instrument, it is done with, some are simple,
others composed superficial, profound, according to the diversity of the
which we must diuersifie the remedy. Causes.
The causes ye have heard in the general Chapter. Signs.
The signs are known by offending of the moving and feeling and by the
vehement dolor, Gal. metho. 6. cap. 4.
which causes fluxion, fever, spasme, rauing, inflamatio^ and fluxio^ on the
nerves. Judgments.
The judgments are that all wounds in parts neruous are dangerous, for the
great communication they have with the brains, and the nerve half cut, is
more dangerous and dolorous, than if it were all cut, which if so be, the
action of the member, does decay or at the least some part thereof: Gal. 6.
ther^pu.
also wounds in the joints are for the most part mortal, because of
Aponenfrasis, Tendons and membraines, that they are covered and knitte with so
evil accidents do happen, chiefly being profound. As for the Cure, if the
body be full of humors, purge and let blood, if the nerve be thrust, Cure.
beware of putting to it any medicines conglutinatiues, but first of all some
gentle remedy to appease the dolor, hold the wound open, if it be narrow and
deep, incise it, that the mattir may pass more easily, then put in the wound
a medicament, Paulus. lib. 4. cap. 54. Gal. meth. 6. Gal. cap. 6. de comp.
medic. Aetius lib. 4. cap. 27.
that heateth and dries, to wit, oil of Hypericon, turpentine of Venice,
aquauitae, and a little enphorbe, some put to the turpentine and oil of
Hypericon, a little quick sulphur, rub the part about with oil of sage,
turpentine and annise seeds, which must be reiterated twice or thrice every
day. If there be putrefaction or inflammation, use a cataplasme made of barley
meal, linseed, or^bi, sodde^ in sapa, vinegar or oxymell, sometimes comes
pricking of the nerve in the arm of bleeding, for the which use this set down
by Mesues. Take two ounces of oil of olive, Mesues.
of salt two ounces, seethe them together, and put to it flower of turpentine,
and put it hot in the wound: if dolor happen, it shall be appeased as ye have
heard, if conuulsion, rub the head, neck, back and under the arms, with
oil of lillies, bays, costini et lumbricorum, hens grease, calves marrow,
unguent de althea, if the nerve be cut in length and appears to the sight,
abstain from all sharp remedies, as euphorbe, use diapampholigos dissolved in
oil of roses. Also this remedy of honney dissolved in oil of roses, Gal. 6.
meth. Hippocrates lib. 5. apho. 18,
wax, a little turpentine, all which remedies must be applied warm. If there
be much mattir in the wound, dress it softly with bombast, or washed with
sweet wine, and lay on it the emplaister triapharmacon, or eneapharmacon If
the nerve be cut overthwart, there is great danger of conuulsion and
inflammation, for the fibers which are cut, communicate with the vncutte. For
the cure of the which, rest, keep diet, and draw blood, with such other
remedies as ye have heard. If the nerve be contused, and skin also, and
vlcered, it requires a medicament drying, and binding the parts disioyned,
made of oxymell, flowers of beans and or^b sodden together, putting thereto a
little flower of eruy, also to rub the part with oil of roses and the white
of an egg, thereafter foment the wound with warm wine. If the nerve be
contused without offense of the skin, rub it with oil of camomill, iris
and ^ue. If the tendons be hurt, which is a substance mixed with nerves and
ligamentes, they have the same cure that nerves, but the medicament must be
more strong and dry. If the ligaments be hurt, Gal 6. meth. cap. 4.
which are like the nerves and tendons, it requires a stronger medicament for
they have little feeling, not communicating with the brains, they proceed
from the bone* and go to the bone, so any medicament drying, may be used
without offense: thereafter fill up the flesh, Gal* ibidem.
and consolide the wound, as others.

The eight Chapter of wounds which happen by biting of venomous Beasts.
SEeing we have spoken sufficiently of most part of wounds done by
instruments and things inanimate, now it rests to speak of those, Celsus.
Paul. lib. 5. cap. 27.
which are done by living creatures, as men, horses, oxen, swine, bees, apes,
serpents and diverse others, the which are not without venom. The Signs are
evident, the Judgments are, that those which are venomous are most dangerous,
Signs.
Judgments.
for if good order be not taken, they go to noble parts, so that death does
ensue. Paulus Aegineta reports that man's biting when he is fasting in the
morning, Lib. 5. cap. 26.
is very venomous. Gordonius says, that the biting of a mad dog is most
dangerous, for albeit the sick feel not much in the beginning* yet after a
month or a year it does appear, for in that time it seeks the heart,
being of nature and quality to seek the destruction thereof. I knew a boy
in London bitten with a mad dog, and being well six weeks dyed
afterward. Antonius Beneuenius counsels to take treacle with wine and
minister to such as are bitten, or hurt by ven^mous beasts, Cure.
in like manner it shall be good to apply ventouses with scarrifications, also
sucking with the mouth, by medicamentes attractiues, by canters and such like.
Paul. lib. ^. ca. ^ Gal. 13. meth. cap 6. D^osc lib 8* cap. 14.
If the wound be little, we wash it with oxycrate warm, after the ventouses
are taken away, it shall be good to open little dogs, cattes, or fowls and
lay on it, sometime to apply canters actuals, to consume all that which is
affected. If the beast be very venomous, salt or bryne with a little honney,
in the which nepeta has been sodden, is very good. And likewise the treacle
of Andromach applied in form of a plaster. Or this, Rec. picis nigra*
axungiae veruecinae, olei antiqui an partem vnam galbani onc. 1. fiat
vnguentum: the vngent of Dinus is good for all wounds both venomous and not
venenous, in all this time we must comfort the noble parts, give drinks of
triacle and mithridate, and let not the sick sleep. If the venim be
dispersed through the body, use purging, vomiting and bleeding, also
provocation of sweat and urine. The venim by these means being taken away,
proceed in the cure, as is said in other wounds.

The ninth Chapter, of wounds in the bones.
Having spoken of wounds in the flesh, veins, arters, nerves, ligamentes and
tendons, Definition.
now we will entreat of those which happen in the bones, which is an incision
done by some instrument, that cutteth, thrusts or breaks, sometime
superficial, otherwhiles through the substance thereof. The Judgments as
says Hippocrates, if trisipelas do happen in a bone uncovered, Iudgemente^.
it is an evil sign: if the great bones be hurt, as the thigh, leg, or
arm, it is without all question very dangerous, if by the stroke of
instrument any piece of boane be separated, thou must by fit medicamentes
help the separation, and not draw it by force, for that causes great
accidents, as fistules, Lib. 9. suae medicinae.
fevers, syncope, conuulsion as says Auicen. The Cure is not different from
the curation of other wounds, if the bone be broken or cut, Cure.
it must be bound and dressed as ye shall hear in the Chapter of fractures.
If it be discovered, we put on it, as counsels Auicen, the powder of mirrhe,
which causes the flesh to grow on it, then use incarnatiues and desiccatiues
and cicatrice the wound as others

The tenth Chapter, of wounds in the Head.
Here it shall be necessary to understand, that in our bodies there are three
noble parts, whereby we are governed, and without them can do nothing, as
the brains, the heart and the liver, for the which three parts nature has
ordained for every one a several domicill, as the head for the brains, the
thorax or breast for the heart, and the inferior venture for the liver, the
which three domicilles being wounded, there must some other particularities be
observed for curation thereof, then ye have heard. Therefore we will discourse
of them severally, and first of the head. The head, Definition.
wherein are contained the brains, is subject to solution of continuitie,
which sometime is simple, otherwhiles composed with fracture of the crane, some
penetrateth the membranes, other the proper substance of the brains, Cause.
Judgments.
the Cause and Judgments are, as ye have heard in the Chapter general of
wounds. Signs.
The Signs of the simple are as in others, the signs of fractures mortal in
the skull, are fever before 13. days in Winter, and 7. days in Summer, evil
color of the wound, liuide, little quantity of mattir, the skin dry and
aride, the toungue black, avoiding unawares of excrementes and water, the
sick raueth, pustulles in the toungue, conuulsion in the part opposite, some
fall into apoplexy, and death follows. The signs of healing of fractures in
the head, if after the head be trepained, or the bone cut out by stroke or
otherwise, the membrane called dura matter, being of natural coulor and moving
and the flesh that grows be red and the sick removing well his neck and
jaws, all these are good signs otherwise not. Cur^
The simple wound is cured as others the composed with fracture and other
accidents is cured after diverse manners according to the diversity of the
fracture as ye shall hear. The bone is sometime broken superficially,
otherwhiles to the middst* and sometime thorough both the tables, Hip lib. de
vulneribus capitis Eiue kinds (...) factures.
offending the membranes that cover the brains, of the which fractures there
are five kinds, the first is called fissure or cleft, which shall be known by
incisio^ of flesh to the pan in form of St. Andrews cross, dura matter taking
away the least you can of the said bone as counsels Celsus, giving only
issue to the blood and matter contained in the place. The second kind of
fracture is called con^usion, which is oftentimes apply a ^ire found, if that
be not suffitie^t, apply a trepan, the an eleuator. The third kind is pressing
down of cranium Celsus, euacuat the blood if any be, cleanse and dress well
the wou^d, close the bone with the flesh, sow up the wound, leaving a space for
the te^^to Sandlis in France, a valiant Captain of Paris who had a stroke on
the right parietarie, who notwithstanding of all handling by skilful
Chirurgia^s, dyed within 20. days at which time his cranium was opened, and
there was found great quantity of blood, under the left parietarie, with
cleft in the same. There is yet another kind of malady, called co^motion or
astonishment of the brains, Astonishment.
the which causes the same accidents, as the the fracture of the cranium and
is caused by falls from the high places, strokes, shot of bullets, lances, or
by the sound of a Cannon shot, or with the hand as faith Hyppocrates speaking
of a man, ^^pid emiorum
who gave a young woman in playing a little blow on the os bregma, who
incontinent took a fever and conuulsion, voided humors by the ear, and so
dyed. We must understand that any violent stroke may astonish the head and be
occasion to break veins and arters, not only of those which pass between
the suitors, but also those between the tables, for the suspention of dura
matter, of the which comes great flux of blood, which runs betwixt the bone
and membranes, or betwixt the membrane and brains, which afterward does rot
and cause many accidents, as dyuines of sight, vomiting of chollor, which
chances by reason of the nerves of the sixth coniugaton, that has connection
with the stomach, in like mannner inflammation of the membranes, which
communinicate to all the body, and causes fever, rauing, aposteme, corruption
in the brains and death. The wounds of the head must in no wise be neglected,
albeit they be but small, for oftentimes in little wounds, come great
accidents, and especially in bodies evil disposed. The cure hereof consists
first in abstayning from wine and strong drink, using ptysan, Hip. lib. de
vulner. cap. 2.
or sodde^ water with a little syrup of vyolerts, or acetose, called potus
diuinus, so continue till the accidents be past, let the sick eat little
and of good digestion, as Capons, Chickens, Pigeons, Veale, Mutton, and such
like, using a straight diet till the accidents be past, in the mean time he
may use Comfitts of Sorrel, conserve of Roses, for such things keep the
vapors from ascending to the head, the air must neither be hot nor cold,
sleep moderately, and purge gently with Clysters, bleed in the Cephalicke
vein, according to the accidents. Parey tells of a man, from whom he drew
100. sauce^s of blood in Four days, who thereby was cured, and otherwise
had dyed. Shave the head and apply Cataplasmes of Flower of Beans and
Oxymell with the Oil of Roses and such like, that are somewhat cold and
humide, use frictions and ligators on the extremities, ventouses on the
shoulders, sometime to open the vein puppis ftontis sub lingua and the arter
on the temples. Abstain in the sickness and long after from women and
perturbations of the mind. The p^rticular is thus, first we consider if the
bone be broken, that must be trepained, ro^ged or lifted, for the doing whereof,
the place must first be incis^d as ye have heard, yet it is not needful to
trepaune in all fractions and cleftes, for sometime the first table is offended
yet not penetrating to the diploy otherwhiles the duploy, con^used the second
table whole, sometime the broken bone is a little lifted, so that the matter
contained has place to pa^^e and therefore it is not needful to trepan. If any
piece of bone the dura matter, it must be drawn by fit instruments, the trepan is
good, when the clefts in the are so little, that the matter cannot euacuat, yet
it is not mete to trepanne in all fractures as ye have heard, no^ to discover
the brains, H^p. de locis in homine.
without necessity and good judgment, so that the yo^g Chirurgian may not so
hastily, as in times past, trepan for every simple fracture, I will show, when
trepaning should be used and for what cause, and in what places, also the way to
trepan well. First the Chirurgia^ shall well consider the stroke and Simptomes
if it be little and the veins betwixt the (...) tables, o^ those, that hold up
the dura matter with the ^rane be offended, and the blood fallen on the
membrane, then the trepan must be used to withdraw that matter, which other
wise would cause death, sometime it must be used for the out taking of the little
bones, that p^ick the me^brane, also that more co^modiously we may apply our
remedies: In all these things Hipp. cou^selleth to trepan. When the fracture is
inthe first table, Lib. de locis in homine.
we use the trepan exfoliatiue to give issue to the blood, which is betwixt the
tables. The time we should trepan is 2. or 3. days at the furthest after the
hurt, long delay causes defluxion of humors on the dura matter, Hip. Cel. Auic.
which putrifieth and causes inflammation, so incontinent after we have
perceived the offense of the crane and that the membranes suffer which is
known by the sond or finger, we should trepanne in the beginning: yet sometime
stay till the 7.10. or 14. day, which is dangerous, for which cause be advised
in judging therein. Then we must know what places may endure the trepanne, and
which not, for to avoid diverse accidents, considering first if the boane be
broken and separated in diverse pieces, which if it be, the pieces must be
lifted by fit instruments, and not by the trepan. In like manner we must not
trepan on the fractures, for that cutteth the veins, arters and filamentes,
which pass betwixt the pericrane and dura matter, and cause great dolor and
hemoragie of blood, for the which cause, if occasion constrain us to trepanne
in those parts, we apply the trepan on both sides of the future, for the
avoiding of the foresaid accidents as also for euacuation of the humor
contained. The Trepan in like sort must not be applied on the open of the head
in young children, being yet soft and not solid, nor on the temples, for the
muscles temporal, where there is abundance of arters, membranes and nerves,
whereof comes great flux of b^oud, fever, conuulsion with other evil
accidents, yet if fracture does chance in those parts, we apply the trepan a
little above the said muscle temporal. We must not trepanne on the boane
petrosa, which is under the said muscle, nor on the boane of the eyes, because
there is great cauitie, full of air and humiditie, ordained by nature to
prepare the air that goes to the brains. And these are the places, which we
should eschew in applying the trepan, yet I have seen some trepanned in these
places, and heal, but no^ without great hazard. The way to trepanne is thus:
First situate the head of the hurt in good situation, and holden by some
body, that it do not wagge, close his ears with cotton, Hip. de frac^*
capitis.
have a good fire, least the cold air enter on the membranes, which may make
putrefaction, then the Trepan perforatiue shall be applied, to make a hole for
the pyramide of the great Trepan, next apply the whole Trepan with the
pyramide, turning it about softly, till thou have made a way with the teeth of
the Trepan, then take out the pyramide, otherwise it shall pass and offend the
membranes, continue in turning softly the Trepan, sometime to lift it, to put
off the sawinges of the bone, and when thou art at the duploy, which shall be
perceived by the outco^ming of the blood, you shall consider if it be needful
to pass further, as ye have heard, take good heed in trepanning of the
second table, lifting often the Trepan and sounding if it be near cut, if it be
more cut on the one side then the other, press the Trepan on the thickest
part, and in this take good heed, for often in cutting the one before the
other, thou scratche^t the dura matter which causes inflammation and death:
being almost cut, assay with the eleuator to draw it without violence, if
there be much of the sawinges on the dura matter, take them out. This I thought
good to advertise the young Chirurgian touching this operation, which being
done, thou perceiuest if the membrane be inflamed o^ in any wise altered as often
happens, and is most dangerous, for which we give clysters, draw blood, and
use fomentations on the place of anodins and repercussiues. If there be
alteration, make a medicin of honney of roses, syrrupe of wormwood, aquauitae,
with a little aloes and myrrh, some add to it a little white wine. If there
be great putrefaction, put thereto a little Egiptiac: if there be neither
inflammation nor alteration, it shall suffice only a little aquauitae with
honey of roses, so continuing till the membranes be mundified, applying always
the medicin^ hot, and cure it afterward as other wounds. Use always
as well in this, as all wounds of the head, the emplaister veneticum,
prescribed in the poor man's guide, and also the emplaister of betonica, or
diacalci^^os malaxed with wine. There is great judgment to be used in doing
this operation, and few there are found that do it well. Many I have seen
of very learned and expert men, and heard of diverse to my great joy and
comfort, among which, Gilbert Primrose and John Nessmith Chirurgians to the
King of Scotland, men very expert in this operation, like as in all operations
chirurgicals, God increase the number of such learned men in this Land.

The eleventh Chapter, of wounds in the Thorax.
THe Thorax, which is domicill to the heart and lights, Definition.
suffers solution of continuitie in diverse manners, whereof some are externe
and do not penetrate* others penetrate to some of the parts contained
therein, as the heart, lights, mediastin and diaphragma, some pass
throughout, of the which, some are cureable, some incureable, and some mortal,
as ye have heard in the Chapter General, as also the Causes and Signs. Those
which penetrate at the back are more dangerous, Cause.
then at the interior part, because of the veins, arters, Signs.
nerves and such like. The Cure consists in good diet in the six unnatural
things, purgation, Cure.
letting of blood according to the temperature of the body, time and Region.
Those which do not penetrate, differ nothing from the general of other simple
wounds, saving only in binding, which must be incarnatiue, sometime narrow,
otherwhiles broad according to the difference and situation of the wound.
Touching those which penetrate, there is great diversity of opinion in the
cure, some are of the opinion to consolide the wound as soon as may be, to
hinder the externe air to hurt the parts vital, others give counsel to
hold them open, and in case the issue be not large enough, to dilate it, and
make it larger* that if there be any blood or other thing in the capacity, it
may avoid, but which of these ways ought to be followed, the judgment of
the expert Chirurgian is to be required: knowing first, if it does penetrate,
which shall be done in closing his mouth and nose, and then holding a candle
to the wound, if the air comes forth, it is sure, that it penetrates, if
there be blood in the capacity, you shall know by the ponderositie of the
diaphragma, accompanied with dolor, fever and vomiting, if any chief part be
offended, ye shall know by the signs set down in the Chapter General. If
neither blood be shed, nor any part offended, ye shall conglutinate the
wound, putting no tent therein, using only a little of my balm set down in
the Chapter of Gunshot, in the mean time use one potion vulnerar, which does
penetrate. If there be any little thing left in the wound, nature will easily
discharge it, for as says Galen, it does expel not only that which
offends, Com. 7. apho.
through the pannicles, but also through the midst of the bones. Those which
penetrate with effusion of blood on the diaphragma and are not mortal, must be
tented, with a thread at the tent, to the end that if it go in, it may be
drawn out again, cause the sick lie on the sore side, chiefly when you
dres^e him, that the blood and mattir may issue at the wound, using always
iniections of barley, pimpernell, pilosell, buglosse, scrofularie, cheruill,
all sodden in water, putting thereto a little honney or syrr^pe of roses, with
a little white wine for a certain time. Sometime the blood cannot euacuate by
the wound, it being higher then the diaphragme, which causes difficulty of
respiring, for the which make an issue, as ye have heard in Empiema, to
euacuate the humor contained, if the put^efaction be great, mix with the
foresaid iniection a little egiptiac, the wound being mundified, with this or
such like, thou shall use this iniect^o^, which is somewhat desiccatiue. Rec.
ros^rum, balaustiorum, myrtilorum an. onc. 1. mirabolani, citrini an. onc. 2.
mellis rosati parum, coquantur in aqua plantaginis, ad consumptionem tertiae
partis: with this thou shall wash the wound twice a day. If the body be of an
evil temperature, or that the nether part of the lights be hurt, it stays
not quickly, but will void much, then we must use a tent of lead or silver,
that is hollow within, that the matter may enacuate, we use also this decoction
to drink in the morning, fasting four hours after. Take scabions, bugl^sse
borage, pimpernell, aristo^^lochia, agrimonie, betonie, pilosell, an. M. se.
vnarum mundatarum, seminis hipericonis, et cardui benedicti an. onc. 1. florum
trium cordialium an. P. 1. coquantur in aqua, add in sine v^ni albi parum,
sirupi rosati, et cinamomi an. on^ 2. using on the wound the emplaster
Diacalciteos malaxed in wine. If notwithstanding these remedies, it remains
long in healing, it does degen^er infistull, for the curation of the which.
have recourse to the Treatise of vlce^s Chapter of Fistula.

The twelfth Chapter, of wnundes in the Belly.
THe inferior venture, wherein the Liver with the Kydneis and milt are enclosed
is often wounded in diverse manners, some penetrates and some not, offending the
parts contained, as the stomach, liuerr milt, kidneis, gutt^ veins, arters,
the epiplon and v^i^ers, or some other part, the causes, signs, and Judgments
whereof, ye have heard in the general Chapter. The Cure is, Cure.
those that do not penetrate, are cured like other simple wounds, those which
penetrate into the capacity, require an other manner of cure. Wounds in the
side, in the oblique muscles are not so dangerous, as those in the
transuersall, because that the peritone is uneasy to sow specially in musculo
recto which descends from the breast to os pubis. Also little wounds in those
places are more difficill, than those that are more ample, in them if the gutts
come not, they tumifie, and so are uneasy to put in again, for the which use
such remedies, as ye have heard in Ax^mphalon, using the future Gastoraphick,
if the gutts be pierced, they must be sowed with future pellitor and cast on
the wound the powder of aloes, mirre, mastick, and boll, and reduce it softly
in the own place, using an emplaster retentiue and agglutinatiue. If the
l^i^^ium be cut, it is impossible or most dificill to heal, by reason of the
great veins contained therein if any of the guts has changed coulor, there is
no hope. If the caul of the venture be altered, it must be knit and reduced, as
ye have heard in the general Chapter. In all wounds in the belly use
Clisters and innections, astringents, and detersiues, chiefly if the great
intestine, matrix or bladder be hurt. And so we end this Treatise of wounds,
and shall follow out that of ulcers after the same manner.

THE SEVENTH TREATISE of ulcers which contains Ten Chapters. By Peter Low
Arellien.
Chapter 1 Of ulcers in generell. Chapter 2 Of ulcers s^nious and their
curation* Chapter 3 Of the ulcer Virulent. Chapter 4 Of the ulcer profound and
Cauernous. Chapter 5 Of the vlce Sordide and Putride. Chapter 6 Of ulcers
difficill to Cure. Chapter 7 Of ulcers with corruption of the Bones. Chapter 8
Of ulcers Cancrous. Chapter 9 Of Fistula. Chapter 10 Of Burninges.
The first Chapter, of ulcers in general.
CO. Seeing we have amply spoken of tumors and wounds, of their definit^n,
cause, signs, and cure, so in like manner we will proceed in ulcers, seeing
many tumors and wounds do suppure and degender in ulcers, so it is needful
after the Treatise hereof to speak of ulcers, Definition.
and first I demand, what is an ulcer?


LO. It is a solution of contim^t^ made by erosion in diverse parts of the body
out of the which proceeds a ma^ter purulen^, which hinders the consolidation
thereof.


CO. Are they not different?


LO. Some differ in nature, in substance, in quantity, figure and accidents.


CO. How differ they in nature and substance?


LO. Some are simple in the flesh, without any other indisposition, as says
Galen, or are composed with one, or mo^ maladies, as ulcers with intemperie,
corruption of the bone, aposteme, nodositie and diverse other accidents.


CO. How differ they in figure and quantity?


LO. Some are round, long, profound, superficial, great and small.


CO. How differ they by accidents?


LO. Some are putride, dolorous, fistulous, cancrous, some are inueterate, some
recent, some in on member, some in other places.


CO. How many causes are there of ulcers?


LO. Three primitive, antecedent, and coniunct.


CO. Which are the primi^^tiues?


LO. Contusion, scratching, heates, applycation of sharp medicaments,
corrosion, great cold, that extinguisheth the the natural heat, chiefly in
the extremities.


CO. Which are the causes antecedent?


LO. Evil humors in the body, which come of evil nouriture, or evil
disposition of the body, or some part thereof, Gal. de causis mo^bor. ca. 10.
et cap 4. meth.
chiefly the ly^er and milt.


CO. How are these humors causes of ulcers?


LO. Partly by their evil quality, partly through abundance thereof do
spoil, open and co^ode the most debill parts of our body, not having force to
resist such malignitie, and so causes ulcers.


CO Which are the coniunct causes?


LO The foresaid humors conjoined in the parts vlcered, as also all other
violent things, that have force to vlcerate the same part.


CO Which are the signs?


Lo. They are evident, or are in the body, and are known by the dolor, Signs.
nature or the place, accidents and excrements, and such as you shall hear in
the six kinds of proper ulcers.


CO. Which are those six kondes of ulcers?


LO. The first is sanious, Ga^. com. 3 aph et li 1 de officina medici et 3 de
loc^s affectis.
2. virulent; 3. filthy, 4. cancrous, 5. putride or stinking, 6. corrosiue or
rotten away.


CO. Have they no other names?


LO They have five other names, and first by the humors, secondly of the
matter, that comes from them thirdly of the accidents, fourthly of the
sickness, fifthly by comparing them to the similitude of beasts.


CO. How take they their names by the humors?


LO. Some are of the Phlegmatic humor, and are called Phlegmaticks, some by
the blood, and are called sanguinis, by the choler, chollerick, and by
melancholy, melancholic.


CO. How take they the nemes of the matter?


LO. Of the great abundance of sany or humidity, it is called ulcer sanious, of
the pus, pur^lent, of the sordidities, it is called ^ordide, of the virulence,
it is called virule^t.


CO. How take they their names of the acdents?


LO. Of the hardness called callositie it is hard and callous, of the cau^^ns of
it, it is called cauernous, of the fistule, it is called fistulate, of the
putrefaction, putride, of the corosion or malignitie of the matter, corosiue,
of the cankers, or hardness turned over it, called cancrous, of the dolor,
dolorous, of aposteme, apostemus. In all ulcers, where any of these reign,
they heal not, till they be taken away.


CO. What is callositie?


LO. It is a dry flesh without dolor, because it has no vein to make it
humide, nor nerve to give it feeling.


CO How is that called, which commonly comes from ulcers?


LO. It is called sanie or matter.


CO. What is sanie?


LO. It is a corruption of the part, which nature cannot digest, and make it to
nourish the same.


CO. How many sorts of sanie is there?


LO Two, to wit, that which is commendable, as it ought to be, and that which
is not.


CO. Which is commendable?


LO. It is, that which is white, light, equal in consiste^ce, neither thick,
thin, nor evil tasted.


CO. Which is not commendable, or evil sanie?


LO. It is a corruption of the in^^ument, much altered, through unnatural
heat, and according to that alteration it produces evil sanie.


CO. What call you pus?


LO. It is a kind of sanie made of the nouriture, and superfluity of the
member tending to corruption by the alteration of the natural heat, and
debilitie of the member, out of the which comes a matter called virus and
sordities.


CO. Whot is virus?


Lo. It is that, which is inge^dred of the most subtle and hot part of the
pituitous humor, which nature cannot digest for the great abundance thereof.


CO. What is it, thou call sordities?


LO It is a gross matter, engendered of gross humors.


CO. What call thou durities or hardness?


LO. It is a thing hard and solid, not easy to be corrupted, which may come
of three causes, that is, great heat, congelation, repletion.


CO. What call thou fistula?


LO. It is a profound ulcer, Gal. lib. de ^^moribus contra natura^^.
having the entry, hard, narrow, deep, cauernous, from the which proceeds a
matter virulent.


CO. What is putrefaction?


LO. It is a change of the substance of our whole body, or of some part
thereof, through an unnatural heat.


CO. What is the cause of putrefaction in our bodies?


LO. It comes, either that the spirit animal is corrupted, or cannot go to
the part, for cold, heat, apostume, pustulles, ulcers ambulatiues venenous,
also putting of oils and such like in deep ulcers, does corrupt the flesh,
also too much using of refrigeratiues in hot apostumes, and ligators which
intercept the spirit.


CO. How many sorts of putrefactions are there?


LO. Three, to wit, Gangren, Estachiles, and Histiomen.


CO. What is Gangren?


LO. It is a putrefaction of the part, having yet feeling, and differs in
that from others.


CO. What is Est^^ache^?


LO. It is a putrefaction of the member, or part thereof, without feeling,
corrupting both flesh and boane.


CO. What is H^stiomen?


LO. It is a whole corruption of the member, eating and consuming the whole
body away.


CO. What is Corrosion?


LO. It is a consumption of the flesh, through the bitterness and sharpness
of the humor.


CO. What are the causes of Corrosion?


LO. The malignitie of the flesh, the humor choleric, phlegmatic, salt,
admixed.


CO. What call thou Cancer?


LO. It is a malady of a matter cold and dry, being hot by putrefaction,
hardness and other signs, as ye shall hear in his proper Chapter.


CO. What are the Judgments?


LO. There are diverse, Iudgme^^s.
according to the accidents that fall, and first, that ulcers remaining a
year or more uncured, make the boane under them altered and rotten, and when
such ulcers are whole, Lib. 45. apho.
there remains a cauitie in the part vlcered: all ulcers that are evil
colored black are esteemed malignes, if any ulcer being filled up and ready to
cicatrice, begin suddenly to run again without manifest cause, it is in
danger to become fistulous. Lib. apho. 4.
Hippocrates says that ulcers, which have no hair about them, are uneasy to
heal and cicatrice, also those ulcers which come, by reason of some malady,
as hydropsie, and cachexie, are hard to heal. Hippocrates says also, if any
man have an ulcer, whether it be come to him before his sickness, Lib. 1.
prog^.
or in the sickness, and the sick die, that ulcer shall be before he die,
dry, blewe, or pale. The same Hippocrates says also, that those, who have
ulcers accompanied with tumor, Lib. apho. 65.
do neither fall in conuulsion, rauing, nor frenzy, but if the tumor go
away without manifest cause, and if the ulcer be in the back, the sick
falls in spasme if before in the body, in rauing and frenzy: if in the
thorax before, he falls in emp^^m and pleurisy, all ulcers accompanied with
varices, or inte^perie, and those also, that have the sides hard, are difficill
to heal, all ulcers in the extremities of the muscles of the legs and arms
are difficill and dangerous, as also those, which penetrate in the body: such
ulcers as chance in the extremities of the body, as in the feet, or hands,
make often phlegmons, or other tumors against nature, and in crisis of a malady
are difficill.


CO. Which are those, which are of easy curation?


LO, Those which happen in bodies of good complexion, and in the which none of
the foresaid accidents do happen. Cure.



CO. Which are the chief causes, Celsus lib. 7. cap. 3.4. meth. cap. 5. et 2.
Alex. apho pro. 199. lib 1. et com. in apho. 8 lib. 6.
that hinder the healing of ulcers?


LO. According to Galen, the chief cause is want of good blood, to engender
flesh, or else that it is evil, either by quantity or quality of it self,
also dolor, intemperie apostume, contusion, erisipelas, echymois, superfluous
flesh, hardness, callositie of the sides, corruption of the boane, varices,
hemoragie of blood: also roundnesse in figure, for the which Hippocrates
counsels if the ulcer be round, to put on it an other form. Imbecillitie
of the part vlcered, indisposition of the liver or milte, retention of the
monthly course in women, and of the hemerroihdes, and also the applying of
medicines unmeet for such ulcers. Many ignorant barbors fail herein, thinking
one kind of emplaister to be good for all sores, in the which they are
deceived: for he that would cure ulcers, must first take away the cause, as
also the impedimentes and accidents, otherwise he trauaileth in vain, as
says Paulus, for the perfourmance whereof, we must ordain first good diet,
secondly take away the cause antecedent, to wit, the humor which falls,
Lib. 6. cap. 82. Galen 4. meth. cap. 1.
which shall be done by purging bleeding, according to the cause on the part:
thirdly correct and heal the accidents and indispositions which accompany the
ulcer, these things done, he may come to the curation hereof, as shall be
particularly set down of every kind of ulcer, in his proper place.


The second Chapter, of Ulcers sanions and the Curation thereof.
AS in the former Chapter I have spoken of Ulcers in general, of their
difference, cause, signs and judgments and cure, so now I will particularly
entreat of them. All Ulcers are either simple or composed, Gal. 4. meth. cap. 1.
with some other malady, the simple Ulcer requires only desiccation, those
which are composed, and joined with some other accident, except those
accidents be taken away, cannot heal, for the cure of the which, there are
four Intentions, first in the way of life, which shall be according to the
strength of the sick, nature of the malady, and abundance of the humors in
the body, as if the humors be hot and sharp, we ordain cold things, The
second Intention is, in diuerting and intercepting the matter antecedent, which
is done by purgations and bleeding if the strength permit, also by frictions,
ligators, application of emplaisters, that have the force to repel the matter.
The third Intention is, in correcting the accidents joined with the ulcer, as
dolor, tumor, contusion, excrescence of the flesh, callositie of the lips,
rottenness of the boane, varice and worms. First then, we must labor to take
away the intemperie, which shall be known by the color of the member, by the
touching and feeling of the patient, which sometime is hot, sometime cold,
which if it be dry, we remedy it by purgation and bleeding, also if need
be, foment the place with hot water, till it grow read, as counsels
Galen: thereafter use this unguent made of mallows, sodden in water with a
little hogs grease and honney mixed with nutritum, 4. meth.
ceratum galeni rosatum, populeon, incorporate with plantaine water, morrell
and housleeke. If the Intemperie be humide, use unguents that dry, as
pompholigos, de plumbo, cerusa, allom water, unguent basilicon, citrinum,
fuscum de althea: or this fomentation of claret wine in the which has been
sodden roses, betonie, wormwood, roch allom. If the Intemperie be cold, we
foment the part only with wine, wherein wormwood has been sodden, hyssope,
calamint, rosemary, unguent basilicon and de althea. If the Intemperie be
hot, we remedy it by water of plantaine, solanum, housleeke, or vnguentum
rubrificum cum camphora, or cerat galen: if there be dolor with ulcer, which
comes of intemperie, erosion, of a subtle humor or solution of continuitie,
or plenitude of gross humors, or a flatuous spirit, for the which take
unguent populeon, oil of yolks of eggs, vnguentum album camphoratum, with
other such as are in tumors, if the dolor be vehement, we make a cataplasme
narcotick of barley flower, oil of roses, henbane, mandrager, poppie, all
sodden in milk, If the dolor be accompanied with tumor, first look to the
cause of it, thereafter, ordain the diet straight and cold, bleeding, purging,
according to the nature of the humor, with such particular remidies, as ye have
heard in tumors; The excrescence of the flesh shall be taken away with ca^ters,
rasors, sheeres, powder of mercur^^ burnt allom, ^^^stum, squama aeris,
vnguentum aegiptiacum, apostulorum, vitrioli romani. The hardness is cured by
Remollientes and Resoluentes, as goose, henns, ducke and calves grease, oil of
Lillies, lumbricorum, vulpinum, muscilaginis of althea and fenigreci,
basilicon, diachilon magnum de muscilaginibus, thereafter scarifie as
cou^selleth Auicen, Gal. 4 meth^^ cap. 2.
then put powder of mercury or cut it with a Rasor to the soft part. If the
ulcer become black and Red, scarifie it, and let it bleed well and apply
things drying. If it be accompanied with Varice, it must be taken away as
ye have heard in the Chapter of Varix. If there be rottensse in the bone, ye
shall have recouse to the proper Chapter. If there be worms in the ulcer, we
must consume the rottennes and humiditie they are ingendered of, and kill them
also, take the decoction of Wormwood, Agrimonie, Centorie, Calamint, which is
to wash the ulcers also in the ears, Aetius.
fasting spittle is good for ulcers in the ears, and make the Cicatrize well
favored with the foresaid dococtio^ wash the ulcers, as also with Oil of
Wormwood, the powder Aloes, mixed with the Oil of Absynthe and a little wax
is very good. Millefolum taken the weight of one dram in white Wine sleaeth
the worms in belly also. The fourth intention consists in healing of the
places vlcered, Ga. 5. me. ca. 17 et 3. met. ca. 3. Paul. lib. 4. cap 45.
which shall be done in taking away the impediments as ye have heard,
thereafter, ci^atrize the ulcer with such things as are set down for the
consolidation of wounds.

The third Chapter, of ulcer virulent and Corrosiue.
HEre ye shall hear of those two ulcers which are not much different: those
ulcers which have certain virulencie and venenositie are virulent, but after
the bitterness augment and corrodeth the flesh and makes (...) great*, it is
called corrosiue, Definition.
or eating ulcer, if eat much of the flesh nor going deep, it is called
ambulatiue, if yet it does augment it becomes in cancer or lupus as ye shall
hear. The Cause of these ulcers are evil bilio^s humors sharp and biting,
Causes
the which get some malignitie venenositie by their adustion, and happen often
after Herpes, or wounds that have been irritated by shar^ and biting
medicame^ts. The C^re is first in the manner of life according to the
disposition of the body and humors, Cure.
that reign, next in purging partly for the euacuation of such sharp humors,
thirdly in applying fit medicines on the ulcer, as if it be very humide, the
medicaments must he more drying and like to the parr, as this, take water of
allom or playntine, decoction of Cypres, Gal. li 5. meth. cap. 10.
Mirabalon, ba^k of Pomegarnet, and such like. If there be great heat in the
place cool it by refrigeratiues and desiccatiues, Guydo for such ulcers uses
a cake of lead rubbed with quicksiluer, vnguentum pompholigos, de minio, or de
plumbo, vnguentum rubrum cum camphora, take any of these mixed with a little
tuthiae preparate, plumbi vsti, cerusae lotae, beaten in a mortar of lead, with
water of plantaine, a little terra sigillata, with a little oil of Roses, make
an unguent. If the malignitie be great often the body, is dry and consume these
humors, with canters actual, powder of mercury mixed with unguent rosat, till
such time the malice be consumed, thereafter wash it with the decoction above
specified. If by all these remedies, we profit not, we use the thochisces of
diandron de musa, arsnic, copporous, using always defensiues to repercute the
fluxion, which may come through the violence of these remedies. If these be not
suffitient Auicen counsels to cut the member infected and vlcered.

The fourth Chapter, of the ulcer profound and Cauernous.
The ulcer cauernous has theorifice staight and the botto^ broad many cauernes
some right, some oblique, Diffinition.
with diverse fractuositiues without hardness and callositie, and so differ from
fistules. Cause.
The cause of such ulcers is apostemes wounds evil healed, in the which the
matter has b^n long retained and the orifice higher than the bottom, as ye
have heard, the party debilitated, so causes defluxion of superfluous humors,
not only of the part but of all the body. Thou shall know these cauernes by the
sonde, either of lead, Gal. ad glanc. ca^ 8. et lib. tumoru^ co^tra naturam.
silver, or a wax candle, and therein contained by the iniection if it be white
and cernsse, it is cold, if it be subtle and reddish, the matter is hot, those
that are easy to heal have little matter with diminitio^ of dolor and humor.
Cure.
The cure of such ulcers consists first in the way of life with remedies,
Gal. 3. me* ca. 8. et 9. et lib. 4. ca 7 et 2* ad glan. cap. 8.
according to the quality of the humor and nature of the part vlcered, as also
the situatio^, the dolor, intemperie and other accide^ts, that entertain the
ulcer. As for the topicall remedies if the orifice be in commodious situatio^
that the matter may euacuat, by vngue^ts emplasters mu^dificatiues,
de^iccatiues with lygaturs, co^presses, fomentatio^s and iniectio^s of red
wine, if the orifice be high. and the bottom low, the member must be si^uat in
such fashion that the nethermost be as ye have heard in wounds cauernous. If by
the situatio^, the matter does not euacuat or if it be in such places, that it
cannot be so situated, the^ make an incisio^ from the orifice to the bottom
with mete instruments, thereafter appease the dolor, and flux of blood, if it
be in such parts that this incision be not sanely done, the^ make an issue in
the bottom, and put a seton as in wounds caneruous, or a tent wit some fit
medicin, that mu^difieth as ye have heard in tumors, or this Rec. mellis lib.
2. viridis aeris 3 5 olei rosati lib. 1. aristolachiae long, alluminis cerusae
an. onc. 1. fiat vnguentu^, or wash with wine and honey called mulsum. If the
humor be sanguinolent and evil sauored, wash the ulcer with Oxymell, Allom
water or honey, aqua marina, with a little egyptiac. Albucrasis counsels to
dissolve egyptiac with Hydromell, which mundifieth and corecteth the
maligninie. If the matter be subtle and waterie, take barley, agrimony,
centory, worm wood and sees in honey and vinegar, it being cleansed use this
in carnatiue and glutinatiue, Lib. 3. met. ca. 3
take the roots of Iris, Plantaine, Agrimony sodden in water and honey. Auicen
councelleth the emplastrum catholicon and centorium which is of a merueilous
effect in this, put also the emplastrum de minio, di^calciteos or nigrum,
composed with galls, honey, powder of Iris, aloes, mirre and suc^like. Togat.
sets a marvelous good medicine to cong^tinat ulcers made thus, Rec.
decoctionis hordei lib. 1. mellis rosati onc. 3. sacroc^llae d^ag. 2.
mirr^thuris an. drag. 1. vini odoriferi onc. 3. bulliant ad consumptionem
tertiae partis addendo aloes paru^, strain this and put it on and in the
ulcers and bynd it upward, shift it once a day till the ulcer be whole.

The fifth Chapter, of the filthy and rotten ulcer.
THese ulcers which are oppressed with abundance of matter thick, Definition.
tough and evil coulored are called by Guydo and others sordids and filthy,
if they augment rot and mortify the f^esh, vlcered voyding a matter evil
sauoured and cadauerous, they are called ulcers putrids. If the malignitie and
rottennes continue it is gangren and is called ulcer gangrenous of the which ye
have heard. Fuchius lib^ 8. cap. 12.
The Cause is abundance of gross humors, Causes.
proceeding of an adustion and ebulition of blood, for the which they become
venomous and malign as chances after carbuncles tumors and wounds evil
dressed. Cure.
The Cure of them consists in regiment as ye have heard in the Chapter of
carbuncle, the using of the decoction of gaiac is good to dry up the humors and
eucuat them by sweating. Auicen commends much purging of the body to
discharge the part of these evil Humors, by medycines mundificatiues, like as
humiditie by drying medicines, by ventouses, scarcifications* horsleaches,
epithems. Topicall remedies are, first to wash the place with hydromell and
aqua marina, Gal. 3. me^h. cap. 6. et 7.
apostolicon or egiptiac and put on the ulcer, applying on it an emplaister de
bolo, with cloth wette in oxicrate. If the matter gender in corruption, wash it
with oxicrate, water of cenders or white soape, with this emplaister made of
salt fish, Haly abbas.
flower of aristolochia longa and orobie sodden in wine and put on the sore. If
this be not sufficient, take this medicament, quod recipit dragaganti rubri
dicti auripigment. onc. 1. calcis vinae alluminis corticis mali punici
singulorum onc. 6. thuris, gal^^rum singulorum onc. di. cerae et olei an.
qua^tum sufficit, fiat vnguentum, with defensiues of bol. If for all this, the
ulcer augment and grow worse, we use more strong remedies to consume the
putrefaction, as canters actuals, or rasors, or medicaments, that have virtue
to make a scale, according to the saying of Hipp. that which heals not by
medicaments, it heals either by iron or fire, Lib. 7. apho. ^*
which shall be continued till ye come to the good flesh, and shall be known
by the color. Arsenic or vitriol roman is good to separate the rotten from the
whole, being mixed with aquauitae, honney and egiptiac. If by all these
remedies ye profit not, but that the evil does augment, the part must be
cut off, for the safety of the rest, as counsels Celsus.

The sixth Chapter, of the Ulcer difficill to heal, called Cacoethes.
Ye have heard, that some Ulcers are easy, some hard, and some indifferent,
Definition.
but those ulcers which heal not after all things duly used, are called
Cacoethickes or malignes and long in healing, and by Galen, dispulotica. The
Cause is, the evil temperature of the body, as, Cause*
if the humors be vitiated, called by the Greeks cachochymie, or if there be
abundance of humors, called by the Greeks plethorie, they must be also
euacuated, also that that the callositie or intemperie in the part must be
taken away. The Signs are, Signs.
the diuturnitie of the Ulcer, the indisposition and malice of the humor, the
hardness and callositie of the lips tumified, there comes Sanie in
quantity, but thin, evil sauoured, little dolor, sometime heals, and often
opens up again, Cure.
chiefly in the feet and legs. As for the Cure, Gal. 4. meth. cap 5.
ye must take away the cause and reduce the part to the natural, otherwise it
is impossible to heal it. If there be plenitude, cachochymie, intemperie,
either of all the body, or some part interne, as the liver, the milte, the
stomach, or else of the part vlcered about it, vice in the humor, or some
varix, roundnesse and hardness of the ulcer: first ye must purge the body, as
ye shall find expedient, bleed if cause require, use good diet, eat things
that engender good humors, using decoction of falseperell made thus. Take
salseper^ll onc. 4. guiac onc. 1. di. macerentur per noctem in lib. 8. aquae
purissimae, bulliat lento igne, ad consumptionem mediae partis, addendo in fine
saniculi buglossi, pilosellae, pimpernellae, quinque nerui^, ga^^ophillate,
consolidae maioris et minoris, capill^rium omnium an. m. di. glicerize raze
onc. di. fiat decoctio, capiat summo mane et sudet, et a prandio onc. 4. sine
sudore et aliis horis si voluerit. This is a most excellent help for all
ulcers. If the fault be in the liver, milte or stomach, corroborate these
parts by advise of the learned Physician, if the fault be in the part vlcered,
either being tumified with varix and such accidents, it shall be corrected as
in ulcers sanious, Hip. lib. de vlc.
as also if it be round. If the fault be in the humors which occupy the
ulcer, they must be euacuated. All Ulcers which are difficill to cicatrize,
must have the blood about them euacuated, either by scarrifications or
horsleaches and washing it with allom water and such as ye have heard in ulcer
putride. If the part about the ulcer be black, liuide or read, scarrifie it
and euacuate well the blood, applying a dry sponge, with medicamentes
defensiues, as in ulcers sanious. If the lips of the ulcer be callius hard
and liuide, it must be consumed with medicamentes, if not that way, we^^t the
hardness to the quick flesh, Celsus lib. 5. cap. 26. Hip. lib. de vlceribus
Gal. 4. meth. cap. 2.
and let it bleed well to diuertise the fluxion and intercept the cause of the
hardness. These things all observed, thou shall follow out the rest of the
cure, as is set down in the simple ulcer.

The seventh Chapter, of Ulcer with corruption of the Boane.
THere are some Ulcers, which after they are healed and cicatriced a certain
space, Definition.
become tumified and suppure and renew the ulcer again, which chances when
the ulcer has been long in healing, malign, fistulous, gangrenous and
cancrenous, by the defluxion of the humor in the proper substance of the boane,
as we see in the virulence of the venerian sickness, the which consumes the
periost, rotteth the boane, and consumes the blood, HiP. lib. 6. aphor. 45.
which is the proper nouriture thereof, also application of oil or things
unctuous on the boane, which corrodeth This corruption comes by degrees:
first becoming fat, through the humor which is soaked in it, next, Celsus.
lib. 8. cap. 2.
either black or rotten, and is known by the mattir that comes from it,
which is viscous and stinking, also great store of spongious flesh, the
corruption is also known by the sight, not being white as it ought, also by
the sound, not equal but knottie and soft. For the Curation, after remedies
universal, let there be used a good diet, purging and bleeding, Cure.
and using this potio^ in the morning, not eating four hours before, nor three
after. Rec. hor dei mundi parts 3. gentianae parts 2. centaureae minoris
parta 1. coquantur in vino albo, putting to it a little gaiac, this potion is
good for the suppuration of the boanes as is learnedly written by Togatius. The
particular remedies are of three kinds, that is, rougins, canters potentiall
and actual, before the application of the which, C^lsus. lib. 8. cap. 2.
we must be assured what quantity of the boane is altered, then incise the
ulcer, discover that which is offended, and if the rottenness be but
superficial, we use rougin till we perceive the blood, which shows it not to
be altered. The boane which is near consumed, as in the head and such places
as be near the noble parts and joints and in the ridge of the back, we use
also the rougin with this powder of the roots of aristoloohia, iris*
florentiae corticis pini, thuris, aloes, s^oriae, aeris an parts aequales.
stamp them in aquauitae and dry them in an oven, which shall be done twice
or thrice, and lay these pouders on the boane, with the emplaister diacalciteos
or betonica: ye may also mix these pouders with a little honney or aureum. If
these things be not sufficient, and the alteration be greater, we use canters
potentiall, as oil of vitriol, oil of cloves, mercury, camphire, sulphur,
salis, antimonij, incense and such like. But if the rottenness be great, fat
and unctious, we apply canters actualls once or twice, to separate the whole
from that which is rotten, perfunding till the outmost of the altered thing,
which ye shall know, when there comes no more humiditie: if you continue them
longer, you consume the humiditie natural, which should engender flesh
betwixt the rotten and the whole, for the which have good Judgment. This
remedy has virtue to corroborate and comfort the part, and dries and
consumes the evil humors, and helps the separation, the which being
perceived, shake it by little and little, and draw it not by force: if it be
drawn, before the flesh be grown on the whole, the air will alter the other
also. Of this remedy comes no dolor, if ye touch nothing but the boane,
after the canters are applied, we use oil of roses with whites of eggs for
the first two days, then mixed with whites of eggs and fresh butter with
honney, thereafter some mundificatiue till the boane be exfoliated, and then
use the powder above written mixed with honney, to incarnate and cicatrize,
thereafter consolide the ulcer. If the rottennes come to the marow and the bone
be all corrupted there is no remedy, but amputation, except in the head,
haunch, and rigge back, in the which we use remidies palliatiues as ye have
heard.

The eight Chapter, of the ulcers Cancrous and their Curation.
Having entreated heretofore of Cancer in general, here we will speak of the
vlcered, Definition.
which as says Guydo is an ulcer round horrible, having the lips thick,
hard, inequall sordide, turned over, cauernous, evil favored, of color
liuide and obscure accompanied with many veins full of Melancholic blood,
voyding a matter virulent, Paul. lib. 3. cap. 67.
sanious worse than the venim of beasts, subtle waterie, black or red. It is
so called for two causes as says Auicen, the one because it cleaves so fast
to the part as cancer to that which it takes hold of, the other because it
has veins about like the feet of the cancer. The cause comes of the cancer
vnulcered, and ulcers evil cured, Cause.
and by the humors Melancholicke which come from all the parts of the body,
which do putrify and heat, so acquir a sharpnes and venenositie and breed
cancer. The signs are these, the cancer vlcered is still read, Signs.
cave to the profound of the member casting a virulent matter in great
abundance, pricking dolor, Aetius lib. 4. ca 43.
and irriteth by the application of remidies and operation manual, so not to
be touched and therefore called Noli me tangere. Guilliel. de sali ceto.
The Cure general consists in purgation and diet, as in tumors cancrous,
Cure.
Guydo commends a potion made of capillars, herbi Roberti* scrofuralia,
cent^nodie, Treacle and Methridate are good, for they cause venim to come out
in the skin. The particular is, Gal. 2 ad glane cap. 10.
if it be in such a place that it may not be taken away with the branches, it
shall be done by incision, canterization, or corrosion and that the blood be all
well exprimed out of the veins, thereafter canterize it with such as have
force to consume the evil humor, quoniam in extremis morbis* Hip. 6. apho. 1.
extrema sunt adhibenda remedia. The arsnic sublimat is excellent, for it
mortifieth in one day cancers, fi^^ules, and other strange maladies, apply
defensiues and anodins, produce the fall of the scale as in the ulcer
precede^t. Gal. 14. metho cap. 10.
When ye perceive that there is neither stink nor virule^cie, but good flesh,
heal it as other ulcers. If it be in any part that it may not be thus handled,
or the patient will not or that it is incureable, we use palliatiue remedies,
the which consist chiefly in good diet, abstayning from things contrary, using
good things, thereafter euacuation general purgations, bleeding, applying on
the part medicame^tis corroboratiues, linimentes and refrenantes to divert the
fluxion with proper medicines as this take the juice of scabius and solani an.
onc 2. plumbi vsti loti, vngue^ti pompholigos an. onc. di. vnguenti albi onc.
2. diacalciteos onc. di. oleum ^mphacinum paru^ agitentur in mortario plumbeo.
There are diverse other proper medicamentes for this effect as succus solani,
spima argenti, cer^sae, olei, an parts equales contundantur et agitentur in
mortario plumbeo, donec haheant colerem plumbi. When there is great dolor sees
althea in wine and honey putting thereto a little oil of roses to make a
cataplasme, Gal. Paul. Cells. Actius.
also wash the ulcer with wine, wherein tapsus barbatus has been sodden. There
are diverse unguents and liniments set down before in the tumor Cancrous.

The nynth Chapter, of the ulcer fistulous.
Gal lib. tumor. co^tra naturam. Definition. Lib. 4. lib. 49. et lib. 7. cap. 77
FIstula is an ulcer deep straight, round, cauernous with great hardness and
callositie from whence proceeds an humor virulent. Paulus Aegineta says it is
a sinuosity callous not dolorous in diverse parts of the body chiefly after
apostemes not well cured and hemorroides, which have run long, as also apostemes
hemoroidall. Cel. lib. 7. ca. 4
Of it there are diverse sorts the causes are, Cause.
as in ulcers cauernous, but the humor which proceeds from it is worse
coming of an evil phlegmatic and melancholic adust causing a bitterness and
venenositie. The signs are known by the sound and by the humor that comes
out which is virule^t, stinking, Guliel. de saliceto.
not dolorous except it be near the nerve. Signs.
Galen calls it a siring because it is cave within, Paulus compares it to
the reed, Aet^us lib. 6. Gal lib. contra naturam.
that have cauities as also Aetivs. The Judgments some heal easily, some are
long in healing, and some are incureable. Judgments*
Fistules with many cauernes are difficill as says Celsus, those that are nere
to any noble part as in the thorax, allo in the bladder, matrix and intestins
are all perilous and mortal, those in the ribs, back joints are suspect and
of difficill curation. Fistules in the fundament, which have the orifice
exterior, are hard to heal, Panlus. Arnold. de villa noua.
all fistules in bodies evil disposed are of long curatio^. There are diverse
sorts of fistules, for some are superficial, others do penetrate, some a
slope, some right, some simple, others composed with one or more sinuosities,
Difference.
some end in the flesh, some in the bones, Celsus lib. 5 ca. 28.
and some in the cartilages. As for the cure, we must first consider by the
judgment and sound, the deepenes and cauernosities, Cure.
if it be callons, and ends either in tendons, cartilages or bones, or
penetrateth within, all which things considered we ordayn the way of life and
purg the body according to the nature of the humor, thereafter corroborate the
parts intern with this potio^ which has often been experime^ted by old authos
Re. hordei mundi scrofuraliae an. partem vna^ agremoniae, centa^^re^^,
pla^taginis minoris an parts duas, aristolochiae partem di. folioru^ oli^ae,
filopendulae an. parts duas, scinda^tur omnia minutim pisle^tur bulliant in
vino albo cum parru^ saccari. Of this decoction ye shall take a draught every
morning 4. hours before meat. The particular remedies consist in 4. things,
first to dilate orifice, if it be stright, which shall be done by tents of
gentia^, briony, spo^g prepared, ciclamin if the fistule does penetrate deep,
tie a thread to the tent, the orifice being dilated we come to the second point
to take away the c^llosity, which is done either incisio^ or ca^terization, or
by remedies causticks and corrosiues, or to cut it with sheres or rasor, or
with such remedies, Paul. lib. 9. cap. 77. et hipp. lib. de locis in homine.
as ye have heard in ulcers caneruons. If it be profound and such kind of
places, where it may be knit, we put a needle with a strong thread through it,
and knit the thread every day more and more till it be consumed as ye shall
hear in the fistula of the fundament^ If it end in the bone and it be filed,
it must be discovered and handled as ye have heard in his proper Chapter. If
it end in the tendons, or membranes, it is dolorous and the matter sanious and
clammie, if on the vein or ar^er, ye shall perceive blood. All these things
considered if the callosity cannot be taken away by manu^l operation we apply
medicame^ts caustic, as counsel our auntie^ts, like as trochisces de
aphrodellis or powder of mercury, auripigmentim or white soap, or a tent
covered with arsnic, or with strong water, or steep any of them with vinegar
and distill in the wound, that is good where there are many cauities, for that
liquor goes through all, let it remain two days putting about it
refrigeratiues and repercussiues, some canterize the^ with canter actual.
Thereafter apply on it to appease the dolor, and to cause the scale fall, oil
of roses, with whites of eggs, as ye shall find in the poor man's guide, til the
great heat be past, and the scale fallen and that the fistule voideth matter
commendable, which is a sign, that the caul is abolished. The 3. point
consists in medicame^ts mundifitiues and incarnatiues, as ye have heard in
ulcer cauernous. The 4. point consists in sarcotices or cicatrisa^ts, as ye
have heard before. If the fistule be incurable, as ye penetrating to a part
principal or such other cause as ye have heard, as also if in curing of it,
there come a more dangerous accide^t, as in the fundame^t happens voluntary
eiectio^ of the matter fecall or cu^uulsion, in such we should not seek the
perfect cure, but use palliatines, as purgatio^s of the humor pituitous and
mela^cholick, mu^dificatiues to mu^difie the evil flesh and matter in the
wou^d, thereafter deficcatiues, as diachilon iria^u^, desiccati uu^ rubeu^,
diapalma. And this is the cure general of fistules, as well by medicame^ts as
manuell operation so now we will show the manner to cure those in the fundame^t
by manual operation: fistule in the fundament.
of the which some are apparent, others not, having no orifice exterior, but
either within the great pudding or mus^^e sphinter, this we judge by the matter
that comes forth, also by the dolor, or some precedent aposteme in these
parts, wounds evil cured, hemerroil^des (...). As for the Cure, some use
canter actual, which is in often dangerous in those parts, some counsel to cut
it with a sharp instrument which is dangerous for the flux of blood, Cure.
and cutteth the fibers of the muscle sphinter, Albucrafis Pareus. Guide.
which may relaxe the matter fecall at all times. Here I will set down, how
by the ligator this may be cured, Hipp. Celsus. Paulus.
which is more sure and easy then any of the foresaid: first the patient shall
stand on his feet, leaning forward, either on a bed or chair, opening his
legs, and continuing them so, till the operation be done. Of this situation
ye shall advise more amply with Paulus and Celsus, in the mean time the
Chirurgian shall put his midmost finger in the fundament, to the highest part
of the fistule, rubbing it first with oil or butter, with the other hand he
shall pass a sound in form of a needle, made of silver, lead or gold, to the
end it plie the better, thread it with a strong threede, rub it with wax or
medicament causticke, so it shall cut the sooner, put the needle in the
orifice of the fistule, thrusting it always in, till thou feel it on the end
of thy finger, and if there be some little membrane betwixt, pearce it through
with the point of the needle, that being done, thou must plye in a little, and
draw it out that way by the fundament, knit the threede with a running knot,
meanly hard, and knit it every day straighter and straighter, till it be
consumed. If the fistule be hidden, that has orifice interior and none
^^terior, it is more difficill, yet we dilate it with the specu^u^an^ not
hurting the sick, so we perceive the orifice interior, and pass a sound
pliable, as before in the orifice, with a threede, turning it till it come to
the bottom: if it hasse not the force to pearce through, we make an issue on
the end of the sound, and knitte the threede, as the other. Further we must
consider, that fistules which are high above or in the ring of the intestine,
are not to be cut, by reason the sick shall always avoid his mattir. This
operation like as diverse rare operations, are most cunningly done by my good
friend James Hendersome a man very expert in the art of Chirurgerie in Scotland.

The tenth Chapter, of Burnings.
Definition.
BEcause of Burning and violent heat come ulcers dolorous and evil to heal,
therefore I will set down the way to cure such ulcers. Burning is a violence
done by the ardor of the fire, hot water, or some other hot licour, in
diverse parts of our body, and make many accidents. The superficial are
subject to inflammation, the great ones to excoriation and exulceration, those
which are mean, have little blisters on the skin, in all which is dolor,
redness, ardor and such like with evident signs apparent to the sight. The
Cure is, if the combustion be great, first in the way of life, ^ure.
tending to tenuitie, next in universal remedies according to the humors which
reign. The topicall remedies are diuersified according to the diversity of
the accidents: Arist. in his first problem counsels to hold the place
burnt to the fire, and so one heat draws forth another. Also whites of eggs
with rose water stay the pustuls, those which are superficial, accompanied
with inflammation and dolor, must be cured with things that refresh, as whites
of eggs, water, vinegar, housleeke, lettuce, morrell, plantaine, henbane,
solanum, roses or the waters hereof distilled and laid on the place with a
cloth wette therein. Allom and Ceruse dissolved in Camphire water, is good:
these things appease the dolor and inflammation, and heal the Burn, also the
blades of leekes or onions peeled, with salt, and put on, heals it
maruailously, or lettuce with salt. The roots of lillies fried in oil of
roses, or the leaves sodden, will heal it also: if there be blisters, pearce
them, if there be vlceration, use remedies lenitiues and deficcatiues, as this,
oil of nuttes onc. 3. wax onc. di. mix them together and wash them in
plantaine water and lay on it. Also leeke leaves sodden in wine, or the juice
of them with unguent rosat* is good, if the sore need mundifiyng, take
turpentine washed in the decoction of barley, a little syrrupe of dry roses,
with aloes and barley meal. The sore being mundified, cicatrice it with
unguent populeon, diapompholigos, album rasis, emplastium de minio, or
diacalciteos dissolved in red wine, wette a cloth therein and lay on it. The
foresaid remedies must be softly applied, not touching it with the hand, the
often touching does iritate and cause fluxion, therefore I have set down a
secret in the poor man's guide, to heal all kinds of burning in a shot
time, with one emplaister only, wherewith I have had good effect, at diverse
times. This remedy is very good, easy to be had, and heals without skarre.
Take the bark of an Elm tree, steep it a night in water, take it out in the
morning, ye shall perceive a ielly on the inner side of it, wipe off that ielly
with a feather, or thy finger, anoint the sore therewith, and it heals, as is
aforesaid. And thus we end the Treatise of Ulcers.

THE SEVENTH TREATISE of Fractures and dislocations and embalming, and
contains four Chapters. By Peter Low Arellian.
Chapter 1. Of Fractures in general. Chapter 2. Of Curation of Fractures.
Chapter 3. Of Dislocations general and particular. Chapter 4. Of Embalming of
dead bodies.
The first Chapter, of Fractures in general.
CO. Having entreated heretofore of maladies which happen in the soft parts,
Paul lib. 6. cap. ^9. Galen. com. 1 aph. et lib. 1. de fracturis.
as the skin and flesh, here we will prosecute those which happen in hard
and solid parts, as the boanes, and first of Fractures, what is then a
Fracture?


LO. It is a general division or disscision, or solution of continuitie in the
boane.


CO. How many kinds of Fractures are there?


LO. Gal. lib 6. meth cap 5. et Celsus. lib. 8. cap. 7. Hip. 6. cap. 5.
Three, the first is ouertwart breaking, the second in length, and the third
obliquely, in this kind of Fracture the the points of the bones enter in the
flesh, and causes dolor, by the pricking of the flesh and nerves.


CO. Are these kinds of Fractures simple or composed? Difference.



LO. Sometime simple, otherwhiles composed with wound, inflammation, gangren,
dolor and such like.


CO. Differ they not after another manner?


LO. They differ according to the parts, where the Fracture is, as Fracture in
the head, nose, back, legs, fingers and such like.


CO. Which are the causes of Fractures? Cause.



LO. Haly Abbas says, and also Galen, that all outward things, Gal. de
fracturis Haly Abbas sermon. 8. com 9. aphorism.
that have force to bruise, break, cut or cleave, are sufficient to cause
Fracture.


CO. Which are the Signs of Fractures?


LO. Auicen, Rasis and Celsus say, Signs.
that by the sight and feeling the part with the hand, thou shall perceive it
unequal, Celsus. lib. 8. cap. 10. Auicen. tract. 2. cap. 1. Gal. 6. meth. c. 5
and also feel and hear a noise in handling harder, and there shall be dolor
in the part.


CO. Which are the Judgments of Fractures?


LO. Fractures in hard bo^^es and dry* as in old folk are more difficill and
longer in healing, then soft and humide in young people. Auicen says, that
Fractures in chollericke and old folk, are difficill, and in very old folk
impossible: Fractures of the ribs with inflammation and spitting of blood are
most dangerous. Cure.



CO. Of all sorts of Fractures, which are easy to heal, and which difficill
and dangerous?


LO. All Fractures i^ the ribs, which are simple, in the midst of the
legs or arms and fingers made overthwart, are not dangerous. All fractures
near the joints and in the heads of the bones are difficill, and the motion
afterward not good and those which press inward, are worse, than those which
go out. All fractures in the head how little so ever they be, are dangerous:
Celsus lib. 8. ca 10
all fractures where they are many broken pieces are dangerous, those with wound
are difficill, because the ba^dage cannot be done without dolor of the wound
Celsus says that fractures in the thigh, are evil, Hip. de vulneribus cap.
Hip. ibedem.
because the member remains always shorter, all those that are emine^t, and
have much marrow, are dangerous.


CO. Are all fractures healed in a certain space?


LO. Some are longer, some shorter, according to the greatness, hardness and
drynes, fractures in the head are healed in 35. days, in the thigh in 45.
days, in the legs and armer in 40. days, Hip. aph. 6. et ^. et lib. 2. de
fractur. Arhors. 6 5. Celsus lib. 8. ca. 7.
the nose in 16. days, the ribs in 20. days, in the jaws, the shoulder,
clauicles, hands, feet, are healed in 20. days, in the haunch and point of
the shoulder in 40. days, and likewise in other places, according to nature of
the bone, the age, the air and time of the year, and constitution of the
body, the diet, medicaments and government of the sick, which things duly done
do shorten the time of the cure. Auic. tract. 2. cap 9. Paul. lib. 4. et 6 cap.
110. Com. aph. 42. et lib. 1. de fractur.
The defect of the aliment viscous is helped by fome^ting with hot water, the
often pessing and shifting it does prolong the time as also straight ligatures,
so in deed there is no ^imited, but some are longer, some shorter time in
healing as we see by day experience.


The second Chapter, of curation of factures in General.
IN the precedent Chapter ye have heard, what fracture is with the causes,
signs, and Judgments now remains the cure, for the which ye must consider
first if there be inflammation, to differ the reduction* till it be past, for
to avoid great accide^ts, than we must have a quantity of whites of eggs and
oil of Roses beaten together cloth, co^presses, Gal. 6. meth. ca cap. 5.
bands, fe^ules, machins, lacs, oxycrate, men to help thee, with other things
necessary for the purpose, having al these in readiness, there remains yet
five points, the first is in extension of the member which is done, Soranus.
by laying it on a bench or other place proper, the sick being well situated,
there must be two persons to hold the member fractured, the one at the nether
part, the other at the upper part, of the which one draws up an other down,
to make the extension, if the hands be not suffitient to do this, we take
cords or strong cloth and bind fast the member one to the upper part, an other
to the nether, which shall be drawn by two men contrary as ye have heard. Hip.
li de fracturis com aph. 12. et lib. 1. de articules et 6. meth. cap. 5. Cel.
li. 8. ca. 10.
For the same purpose ye may use glossocomes, if great force be needful,
beware of extensio^, chiefly in dry bodies, for fear of dolor fever and
conuulsion. The second intentision after the extensio^ is made, thou shall take
the member softly with thy hands and reduce the bones in situation natural,
then lose the machins that the muscles may go to their own natural. Hip. aph.
21. et lib. 1. de fractu.
The third intension is to bind it well to hold it in the estate vnmouing and
it is done by medicament^ and bandage, we apply for the first time an
emplastru^ astringe^t or defensive, Aph. 26. et lib. 2. de officina medici et
lib. 1 de fractrris.
made of bol, fry flower whites of eggs and oil of roses, it shall be best to
rub the ma^ber with cerat galen, oil of roses, mirtill or mastick before the
application of the astringe^t, the cloth must be wet in oxycrate and the bands
also. Thereafter bind the member, of the which our ancient used only two kinds
to wit the under band, Aph. 12. et 37 ^ib. 3. de offic. medici.
which Hipp. calls Hypodesmedy, and the upper band which he calls
Hypodesmos. The nether band is divided into 2. or 3. the first is short
beginning right on the fracture wearing upward toward the knee, if the fracture
be in the leg, the volutio^s must be close together, this kind of ba^dage
lets the fluxion on the member hurt. The second band, which must be longer
shall begin in the same fashion, Com. aph. 13. et lib. 1. de frac Cel lib 8.
cap. 10. Com. ca. 13.
making 2. or 3. circumuolutions on the fracture, co^ducing downwards, this
bandage makes expression of the blood which was fallen on the fracture, let
the volutions be further asunder, being low ye shall wear up again, and end
at the other joint. The third band shall begin at the nether joint and pass
upward on the fracture to the other joint and there end with the rest, the band
must be of clean cloth thin, soft without seame or hem, of length according to
the member, Gal. 5. de offic. medici et Celsus lib. citato.
and the breadth of 3. or 4. fingers, reasonable strong, that they be neither
too straight, nor too slacketh bound, the straight makes dolor and
inflammation and lets the vital spirrit, likewise the too loose binding,
Hip. aPh. 19. et 26. lib 2. de ofic. medici et com. apho. 21 ec lib. 1.
fracturis
holds the bones together, so there must be mediocritie in that matter. The
ba^d being governed in such fashion, ye must consider, that the legs, thighs
and arms are smaler in the nether parts, than the higher, therefore we must
put double clothes to proportion the member, to make the small parts equal
with the rest and also that our splints that are made of cards, wod or white
Iron, be holden faster by the upper hand. There must be 3. splents made hollow,
Aph. 41. lib. 1 de fracturis.
the first which is biggest shall embrace all the under part of the fracture,
as fundame^t, the other 2. shall be put on both sides a little space one from an
other, these 3. splents, Hip. lib. 1. de fracturis.
being placed on the under band do hold them fast, and also keeps the bone
steadie from moving, they must not be put to before the 7. day, also they must
be narrow at the lower end according to the member, broad and strong on the
place fractured, with a little cotton or woll. Our ordinary practice is to use
them the first day, if there be no inflammation, and being done, Aph 1. et 2.
etli. 3. de officina medici
we apply the two upper bands on them, called Epidesmons, the first shall begin
in their inner side of the nether ioynte, and turn upward to the upper part
of the member. The second shall begin in the uppermost part, Lib 8. cap. 10.
et Hip. lib. 1 de fracturis.
in the out side, turning inwardes, so the one shall go contrary to the other
in form of St. Andrews Cross as says Celsus. The member bound in this
fashion and situated according to the situation of the veins, arters, Lib. 6.
met. ca. 5.
nerves and muscles as says Galen, the next we must take a napkin and row a
little straw in every end of it, sow it together and lay the member in the
midst of it, bind it with little cords or ^ibban, situate it right, soft and
high, so continue it 3. days, if no accidents happen, renew it again in 3.
days, but if the fracture be simple we remove it not before the 7. day or
longer. Aph. 39. et l^b* 1. de fract et apho. 4. ibide^.
The seeuenth day past, renew it every 7. day or 12. or 20. day if other
accede^ts do not happen as says Hipp. defensiues in the superior parts at
least in the beginning, also fome^t it with warm water for that reuoketh the
blod, comforts the part and humecteth it with a pleasant humiditie. The
fourth precept is in generation of callositie, Hip aph. 45* et 46. et lib. 1.
de fracturis.
first they shall eat meat of good suc to inge^der good blood, yet somewhat
straight till the 10. day be past abstain from strong drink, for in that time
the inflammation and fever do pass, eat veale, m^tton, and kidde, use
medicamentes emplastricks that heat moderatly, also an emplaster or cataplasme
of whites of eggs fine flower and Rosess till the 20. or 25* day be past thou
may know when the call is making, Paul. lib. 9. cap 110.
if in tying the first band it seems bloody and not wounded, it shows the
call to be making then to fortify the same we use every three days to wash
the member with decoction of Roses, and moss of the oak tree, putting to it a
little oxcrosi^m, or de althea, if in this time it itch, as often happens
foment it with water and salt and use fomentations of hot water and emplasters
of pitch to revoke and draw the aliment to breed the caul. If the call be too
great we bind a cake of lead on it, or some medicament that digesteth as
counsels Galen; Lib. 6. meth. cap. 5.
all emplastick substa^nce that heals moderately. The fifth precept in
correction of the accidents for sometime there is wound with the fracture and
then it must be banded more slack, using more bands and no splentes, also more
straight diet. Cel. lib. 8. ca 10
If either phlegmon Contusion or Gangren cure them as ye have heard in their
Chapter. If the be not proportionably, it must be amended by breaking, which
must be done before it be hard, otherwise it breaks in some other part: to
do the same, it must be fomented the space of 15 days, with hens, goose or
cocks grease, fomentations and cataplasmes that have force to soften the
call, as this: take unguent de althea and agrippa of each onc. se. olei
camomelini, lillies and laurel, axungiae gallinae anseris and fresh butter, of
every one onc. 1. with a little wax, so being softened, it separateth easily,
sometime it requires a little force to do it. Auicen and Guido write in
diverse manners to do this, which I counsel no man to try, Brunus. Albuc.
for better it is to suffer a little deformity of a part, then loss of the
whole body, to wit, death, which often happens. As for the curation of
Fractures in the head, look Hippoc. de vulneribus capitis and Galen 6. meth.
cap. 6. et Celsus lib. 8. cap. 3. and 4. et Paulus libro sexto, cap. 90.

The third Chapter, of Dislocations.
CO. Like as we have done in Fractures, so we will follow out in dislocations
but for the better understanding thereof, I would know of you, after how many
fashions the boanes are joined together, before we come to the definition of
the disease.


LO. All boanes are joined generally two ways, to wit, by Ar^thro^, that is,
by articulation, and by Symphis^, that is, by natural union.


CO. How many sorts are there of articulation?


LO. There are two, to wit, Diarthrosis, that is, conjunction with mouement
manifest to the sight, as legs, arms, feet and hands: Synarthrosis, is
moving more obscure to be perceived, as the teeth, the suitors of the head.


CO. How many sorts are there of manifest mouinges?


LO. Three, to wit, Enarthrosin, that is, when there is a great cauitie, that
receives a long roundnesse, as the thigh with the haunch: the second is
Arthrodia, that is, when a superficial cauitie receives a little superficial
head of a boane, as the arm and shoulder with the omoplat, the third is
ginglimus, that is, when the boanes receive one another, as in the connection of
the knee, and the cubitus with the arm.


CO. How many sorts are there of obscure mouinges? Lib de os^ibus



LO. Galen says, that there are three, to wit, suture, as the sutures of the
head, the second is called gomphosis, that is, when the boane is infixed in
like a nail, as the teeth in the iawe boane: the third is called Harmonia, as
the nose with the head, the boanes of the face which are joined together like a
live.


CO. You have told sufficiently of articulation, now tell me of natural
union, and how many ways it is done.


LO. Two ways, either without mediation, but by succession of time grows
together, as the nether iaw boane, which manifestly is distinguished in
children, or else by mediation, and is done three ways, to wit, the
cartilage, as the boane pubis: secondly by the nerve or tendon, as the sternon
and as illium are joined together: thirdly by flesh, as the teeth are fastened.
This, as also all the Anotomie is most perfectly declared by Robert Achymutie
Chirurgian of Edinburgh, sometime Chirurgian in the great Hospital of Paris.


CO. Paul. lib. 6. c. 3.
What is Dislocation?


LO. It is an outgoing of the boane out of the natural seat, which lets
the moving.


CO. How many differences are there of Dislocations?


LO. Three, of the which the first is called complete, when the boane is
altogether out of the place, the second is imcomplete, when the boane is not
altogether, but a little out, the third is distortion, elongation or peruertion
of the ligament.


CO. How many ways is Dislocation complete done?


LO. Celsus. lib. 8. cap. 20. Gal. com. aph. 2. et lib. 1. de articulis.
Four ways, before, behind, outward and inward, some up, some down, but not
often seen.


CO. How many differences has incomplet?


LO. It has three, the first, that the ligament in the joint and about it is
relaxed, as chances in the haunch, the second, when the ligament is forced
by great violence, as the leg or foot in making a wrong or crooked step:
the third is, when by little and little the ligament relaxeth and brings the
boane after it, as chances in the back.


CO. How many differences has the third, which is called distortion?


LO. No difference, but only the boane is made longer from the other.


CO. Which are the causes of luxation?


LO. Two, to wit, externe and interne.


CO. Which are the externe?


LO. Falls or strokes* and too violent extending of the member violently
against the figure natural. Gal. de causis morborum ca. 2. and artis paruae
cap. 58. com. apho. 26. et lib. 1. de articulis. Celsus. lib. 8. cap. 11. com.
apho. 1. lib. 11. de officin medici.



CO. Which are the interne?


LO. Great abundance of humor pituitous, gathered in the ioynture, which
humecteth the ligamentes, and makes them soft and humide, so the boane goes
out, or by the extenuation of the muscles about the ioynture.


CO. How know you Dislocation?


LO. By the extraordinary tumor of the place, by the emptiness of the place,
where the boane was, by the privation of the moving, accompanied with dolor.


CO. By what judgment or sign know you those that are easy and those that
are difficill, and those which are incureable and mortal?


LO. I judge by the kind and diversity of the Dislocation, and body, as for
example, the (...) is easy to go forth and to go in, also the finger, in
like manner members lean, and where the nerves and ligamentes have store of
humiditie and moistness, the arm difficill to go forth, and hard to put in
again, and in gross, fat and tender people, those with fracture and
apostume are evil to heal, those are very difficill, that have the sides
broken, Paulus lib. 6.
those which have been long out, are almost impossible, the two uppermost
vertebres of the neck being out, Celsus
lets the spiration, and so the party dies within the space of three days.


CO. What method use you for the cure hereof. Cure.



LO. The method general for all Dislocations has four intentions: the first
is, to put the boane in his own proper place, the extension of the member
first made, with hands or machins: the second intention is to coatinue it in
the place by good medicamentes and bandages as in Fractures: the third is, to
put the member in right situation: the fourth, to give order to the accidents,
as by good diet, purging, Celsus. lib. 8. cap. 2.
and bleeding if need be, and reduce the Fracture, before the inflammation be
come, otherwise stay, till it be past, when it is near whole, or the
accidents past, we shall use things to corroborate and comfort the part with
certain simples sodde in wine, next, the emplaister oxycrosiu^, or ad
fracturas. Albucrasis. To.



CO. If the Dislocation chance with Fracture, what is to be done?


LO. First reduce the Dislocation, next the Fracture if it be possible, some
reduce the Fracture, next the Dislocation, it being reduced and the Dislocation
simple, foment with oil of roses, whites of eggs, and cloth wette in
oxicrate, Guido. 2. doct. cap. 1. Hip. apho. 65. lib. 4. de artic. Hip. lib.
citato. Celsus. lib. 8. cap. 2.
with splintes, putting it in good figure, with as little pain as may be. It
must not be stirred, till the 7. day, except inflammation or some evil accident
do fall, at which time foment it with hot water, thereafter, the astringent as
in Fractures, keep good diet, eat little for 4. or six days, till the
inflammation be past. If the Dislocation be composed with causes interne, as
abundance of humors, which loses the ligamentes, we use astringent and
drying medicines, if it be accompanied with dolor and inflammation, cure it, as
ye have heard, if fever, use good diet, purgations and bleeding, in the end
of the cure corroborate the part with decoction of roses, wormwood and wine,
thereafter the emplaister of oxycrosium.


The fourth Chapter, of the embalming of dead folk.
SEeing that embalming of the dead is an ancient custom, as appears by the
old and new Testament, and also profane histories, and that the same is used
in these our days, as well of Christians as infidelles, I will show the usual
manner of it, used in this our time. First we lay the body o^ a table, and make
incision from the clauicles to the os pubis, next lift the sternon, as also the
musces of the inferior belly, taking out all which is contained therein as
also the brains, having first opened the pan with a saw, which all shall be
presently buried in the earth, saving the heart, which shall be embalmed either
with the body, or alone in a box of lead, as the friends shall think good,
^hereafter, thou shall make long deep incisions in the arms, thighs,
buttocks and legs and other fleshie parts, chiefly where there are veins
and arters, to the end they may the better avoid, which thing being done, thou
shall diligently wash the three venters, as also the parts incised with
strong vinegar, wherein has been sodden Worme-wood, Allom and Salt,
thereafter with Aqui^itae, or fine spirit of Wine do the like, then dry all
well with Lynnen clothes or sponges and fill up the three bellies with pouders
and a few flocks and sow them up again the incision shall be filled only
with the pouders and sowed up likewise, the pouders are commonly of Roses,
Camomill, Meliot, Mint, Worme-wood, Sage, Lauendar, Rosemary, Marioram, Time,
Cipres, Gentian, Iris of Florence, all being dryee and beaten to fine powder,
and mixed with Nutmeggs, Cloves Cinnamon, Pepper, Bengewin, Aloes and Mirre.
Some use only for this purpose a few the most common of those herbs, with a
little quick lime, ashes of bean stalks, and of the Oak tree: thereafter
enroll the Corpse in a cered cloth, and tie him in all parts, with small cords,
and put it in a coffer of lead well closed, This is the common way to preserve
dead bodies either under or above the earth for a certain time, but if thou
would embalme them to continue Fourescoore years, or more thou shall find
an easy and perfect way to perform the same in the poor man's Guide.

THE EIGHT TREATISE OF diverse operations Chirurgicall and contains Seven
Chapters. By Peter Low Aerellien
Chapter 1 Of bleeding and things therein to be observed. Chapter 2 Of boxing,
ventousing and their effects. Chapter 3 Of horsleaches and their effects.
Chapter 4 Of setons and the way to apply them. Chapter 5 Of canters actual,
potentiall and their effects. Chapter 6 Of bathes and their effects. Chapter
7 Of frictions and their effects.
The first Chapter, of bleeding and things therein to be observed.
BLeeding which the Greeks call Phlebetomia and the Latins venaesectio or an
incision of the vein arificially done, to euacuate, retain and diuertise the
blood and other humors contained with it in the body, of the which there is
great difference acccording to the veins and blood as in the head, legs or
feet com. ap hori^. 25. et 47. Hippocrrates.
Is a thing most necessary to be known of all Chirurgians not only for the
healing of maladies, but also for conservation of the body from sickness,
sometime both for healing and preserving, for the which it is most nenessarye
to know the number of the veins, also the true situation, to the end he take
not one for an other, because sometime the situation is variable, and in parts
not accustomed very uneasy to be opened, we must also know the way to open
them and what it is to consider before and after, for the effects, that follow
thereupon wtich are these. It quickneth the spirrits, helps memory, makes the
senses more subtle, clarifieth the voice and sight, causes digestion,
euacuates the evil blood and is an euacuation natural of the humors of our
bodies, by the which infinite maladies are cured as is ample proved by
Gualterus and Rufus. Heliogabilus ^ sermon. parti^ ^.
The number of the veins which we open ordinaly, for Maladies is 41. to wit,
17. in the head, 6. in the arms, 3 in each one, 6 likewise in the hands, 4 in
the fundament, 2 in each side, 8 in the legs, and must be opened 3 ways, the
great long ways, the little overthwart, in the typ of the nose in pricking it,
not lifting the skin.

Rules to be observed in bleeding.
Sometime bleeding is used for the preservation of the body Age.
which is not commonly done in Children before Fouretenth years of age, nor in
old people after Fourscore, because the abundance of blood is not great, nor
the forces strong, nevertheless for the healing of sicknesses, which is the
second commodity of bleeding, Rasu^.
we let blood both Children and old folk, and sometime rather the old than
the young, as one of Threescore, will sometime better endure bleeding, than one
of Thirty, and a Chi^^e of a year old twice in one day, and one of Thirty
Ten times in a day. Secondlye we must weigh the strength, for in strong
Strength.
those that are feeble and extinuat not so much, although Gaelen and others
counsel in vehement dolor and carbuncles, Hip. li 1. apho.
to draw blood vsque ad animae defectu^, the which come great accide^nts, so
not to be done. Lib. 2
If the blood be evil and inte^perate advise for the correction hereof, with
some l^arned Phisitia^, and also with Henricus. Habitude
If the body be of good habitud nourished with good those that are of a weak
and ill temperature and have the veins small, Gal le sangui. missione.
and little blood, are to bleed less. Those Country. Lanf^an. Gal. li. de
arthritide.
then those in cold countries* and their blood is more hot, so much more
subject Time. Hip. 7. apho.
which is used for preservation of health, ought nos ^o be done, neither in
winter, nor in summer, but in the spring time* in which time many sicknesses
are cured, as also the gout as testifies Galen, Oribasi. arnold
and must be done rather in the mornimg, than any other time: yet that which
is used for the healing of sicknesses may be done at all times and hours
according as the sick requires. Gal. de curandi ratione per sanguine m^ssion.
cap. 21.
If we are ordinarily accustomed to let blood when the hemorroides, and
purgations in women are retained otherwise, then they ought, Use and custom
otherwhiles in the leg and foot, as it shall be fond expedient: and being
accustomed to let blood for preventing of certain diseases, do it before the
disease come. The Astrologians are of the opinion, that the stars, planets and
Signs.
as the sanguine by Taurus virgo and Capricornus, the phlegmatic humor by
Aries and Sagittarius, the chollerick by Cancer and Pisces, the melancholic by
Libra and Aquarius. According to their opinion and sometime Physicians also,
also Constantinus Aefricanus, we must not let blood that part where the sign
is, which things are not observed of the most learned Physicians and
Chirurgians, as Hipp. Gaelen, Oribasius, Sardinius, Aetius, Paulus, Rasis,
Auicen, Haly abbas, and diverse others Latins Greeks and Arabes. For when the
body is grievously oppressed with malady, we must not stay for the course of
the celestial signs. There are some, who observe the course of the Moon,
except in great necessity, and the new Moon is better, than the old, yet it
must be considered, by reason of some other euacuation, for the which old
women must be bledde in the old of the Moon, and young women in the new: as
notes Gordonius in these words.

Luna vetus veteres, Iuuenes noua Luna requirit. If he whom we would
bloudde, be constipat, give before bleeding.
if the meat he has eaten, be digested, and if the blood be gross, use
frictions to subtilize it and make it run, Lanfrancus.
if any great malady has preceded, or great euacuation, either of
hemerroihdes or monthly course, flux of the belly or vomiting, waking, or
great using of women, in these cases bleeding should be defeerred, except for
great occasions, and then it must be moderately done. The sick must have his
mind free from passions, chiefly fear, which retireth the blood to the
center of the body: if he fear fainting, he must eat an egg before, or a
toste in wine and lie in his bed.

Of the situation of the 17. veins in the head, the way to open them, and
their effects.
THe first is called vena frontis preparata or recta, and proceeds of the
Iugular interne, situated in the venapuppis situated in the temporalis*
acotheres or sterilis and takes his origin from the Iugulars, situated on
the temples, and has many branches, and is opened for the Migrim, dolors of
the ears, and Opthalmie and watering of the eyes. auricular, situated behind
the ears, open it as the others, shave the hair and rub the part with a
hot clo^h^, Albucrasis.
till the vein appear, and it is good for deafness, pain in the ears,
old Catarres, Hemicranes, all ulcers malign: Lib. de aere et aqua.
if these veins be cut, they cause a man to be sterile, as says Hippo,
Which thing was practiced amongst the Schites to effeminate them, and serve
them like occular, and proceeds of the interne Iugulars, situated betwixt
the eyes and nose, in opening it: beware to go to deep, for fear of the
muscle that moves the eye, which being offended, often draws the eye aside,
as also Fistula. All the veins of the head should be opened with Flambettes,
for fear of going too deep. The opening of this is good for maladies of the
face, Auice^. Haly Abbas.
affections of the eyes and eyeliddes, scabbes and redness nasall, situated
on the tippe of the nose, betwixt the Cartilages opening it, go deep with
the lancet, and it is good for heaviness of the head, fluxions on the eyes and
all redness of the face, yet it is not usual, neither was it opened by Galen,
nor any labier, situated in the inner side of the lip, the opening thereof
is good for corruption of the gummes, fissures in the lips, ulcers in ra^^ull
under the tongue, proceeding of the interne Iugular, and is opened overthwart,
not going deep, for fear to make the tongue immobill, because of some nerve
motive, which is near to these veins, it is good for the Squinancie,
inflammation of the Amigdalles, H^ly Abbas.
Vula and other affections of the mouth and throat, also for such as become
dumb and loose their Iugular, taking the origin from the vein cave, good for
the Squinancie, fluxions on the throat, Suffocation, Leprosy, melancholicke
Maladies, and malign Ulcers, and corrodent Hemicrane and Reume. Remember that
all veins of the head must be opened after rest. Auicen is of the opinion,
that the veins of the head being opened, lets generation, because of the
animal spirits which dissippe.

Of the situation of the three Veins in the arm, the way to open them and
their Effects.
THe first of the three Veins in the arm is called cephalica, spatulina or
capitalis, or humeralis as says Galen, Albucrasis. li. 4
in opening of the which make a good issue, otherwise it is in danger to
apostume, because that often there remains lappered blood, for the thickenesse
of the flesh, it is good for all dolors and pain of the head, eyes, ears,
throat and Epilepsie. The second is called mediana, or vena matricis or
matricalis, mediastina, cardiaca, or purpurea, it is composed Rafis. Oribafius.
Auicen. Haly Abbas.
in the midst of the arm, under it is a nerve, or tendon of the muscle
biceps, sometime both, for the which we must be wary and take good heed in
opening it, for fear of Gangren or conuulsion, or dolor, it must be opened
athwart, and is good for all diseases that happen to the body, both superior
and inferior. Once I saw in opening of this the nerve pricked, of the which
within the space of four days after there came a soft tumor in the omoplat,
with a relaxation of the joint, as also all the joints of the body, for the
which the deep perfounding is forbidden by Auicen and Rasis. The third is
called basillica, or hepatica, venainterna, iecorina, regia, or vena axillaris
and is situated low down in Gal. Ra^^s.
for the which you must have a great care and beware of Auen^^isme. Rasis
forbids to bleed in this vein, but in great necessity. It is opened for
the obstructions of the liver, inflammations in all the body, Lib. 28
as also parts under the head, hardness of the liver, dolor of the stomach,
pleuresie, difficulty of breath.

Of the three veins in the hands, their situation, the way to open them and
their effects.
THe first of the three veins is called cephalica, or ocularis, Lib. de
sanguinis miss.
Galen says, that the veins in the hands give not much blood, because they
are but little branches and therefore were not opened by the saluatella,
titularis or asellaris, Gal. de secti-
and is only a branch of the basilicke, it is situated betwixt the middle
finger called medius and the third finger, called auricularis, and is good for
the Iaundise and maladies of the liver, being bledde in the right hand, and the
other in the left hand, called splenetica, for the affections of the milte.
The third is called, funus brachij, cephalicke, situate on the finger medius,
opened in default of the other two. These veins must be bathed in hot water*
in opening of them, as those in the feet.

Of the four veins in the Fundament and their Effects.
IN each side of the Fundament are situated two veins hemerroihdalles, and
are opened for affections, or melancholicke maladies.

Of the four veins in the legs their situation and effects.
THe first of these four veins is called Popletica and comes from the vein
Femorall, as all the rest, it is situated Saphena, situated within the foot,
nere or above Gvlen says that all veins in parts neruous must be opened
longwise, and are not so much subject to evil accidents: this being opened is
good for af^ections of the kidneis, matrix, gonorrhea maling that returns in
again,, and provoke the purgation in women. Be circumspect in blooding the
foot, for it weakeneth more than any other, as says Auicen, therefore I use
always to wommen a tablet cordial or else they eat somewhat before. The
third is called Sciatica, situated above the anckle, and is opened athwart as
ye have heard, good for Medium or renall, and is situated under the bending
Arabes call Salsores, and say if the ^^ick be bled in them, he dies presently,
anh Galen is not of their opinion.

Things which are to be considered to bleed well.
FIrst the Chirurgian must be in a light place either naturally, or with candle
also his own sight should be good as says Haly Abbas, and must have a
ligator, Lib. 9.
that goes twice about the arm, an inch broad, also he must have a tound
staff to hold in his hands, in like manner a little oil to rub on the vein to
make it souple, also anoint the lancet with sallet oil, before the blood
which will appease the pain, he must have diverse lancets, of the which some
are large* some round pointed, when the pain is superficial, also when need
is to make a good issue and euacuation, Rasis.
which we use in putride fevers, and when the blood is thick and the sick
strong: some must be long sharp pointed to open when the veins are deep and
hidden, as also to make little issues in small superficial veins, and when
need is to make deriuation as if the person spit blood, or bleed at the nose.
The issue you make, must bleed long to divert it, we make the issue little in
people, that are out of their wits, that the issue may be soon consolide, by
reason that such people lose the bandage, ^asis. ^^tapallia.
and often blod much. The incision must be made one of 3 ways, to wit, in
length, breadth and oblique, making always an incisio^ in midst of the vein,
not cutting it altogether which if it be, the blood comes not well, but
along the arm, and the extremity of the veins retireth one from another.
Aetius lib. 3. Haly Abbas lib. 1.
Then let him make the issue as it should be, and cause the blood come well
out, rub first the arm, thou would blod ge^tly with a hot cloth or thy hand,
the^ knit it with thy legature a little above the elbow, let the binding be
steady, and show it self the better, then the sick party shall close his hand,
that the veins may show the better, thereafter if it be the right arm the
Chirurgian shall take it with left hand, near to the part, where he intends
to make the issue, holding his thomb on the vein that it stir not, for
oftentimes it rolleth, and slydeth from the launcet, sometime it yeildeth being
full of wynd. This being done he shall mark the place, with the foremost finger
of the right hand, making a little mark with his nail on the verine, then he
shall take the launcet betwixt the thomb and the foremost finger in the midst of
it, and to the end that he tremble not, he shall leave the other three fingers
on the arm and leave the finger and thomb, that holds the lancet on the left
thomb, which holds the vein, then open the vein softly slyding the point of
it in the vein not suddenly, if the vain be not opened at the first time,
prick suddenly again a little above or under the first, ye may do the same if
the hole be not great enough to let out the blood in a reasonable quantity. The
vein opened in that manner, Guliel. de salu^to.
the party shall hold the staff in his hand, that he may rest his hand, and
the blood come out the better. Having drawn such quantity of blood, as the
cause requires. He shall press out that which remains, if there come out
any fat, as often happens in gross people, thou shall put it in again, that
done, put a piece of c^oth in 3 or 4 fingers double on the wound, and wet it in
water, bynd the arm with a band of an inch broad, that goes 3 or 4 times
about the arm, winding it about above the elbow, and under that it neither be
too straight, nor too slack. If the veins be small blood the^ after meat,
rather than before, for the^ they are more full of blood, Gal. Auic Auerois.
do not eat nor drink of an hour after.

Things to be considered after the vein is opened.
OFtentimes chances after the vein is well opened, that the blood comes well
forth and afterward sudde^ly does cease, happens through too straight ligature
says Auerrois, or else for an apprehe^sion and sometime through wrong and evil
situatio^ of the arm, in these points ye must slack the ligature, comfort the
party and situat the arm right sometime the cause is in the thicknes and
grossnes of the blod for the which rub the place incised with a little oil. If
the party be weak, which shall be known by the changing his coulor and the
blood running along the arm, in this ye shall loose the legature, close the
wound, lay the sick on his back, cast water in his face and vinegar to smell to
give him a little wine, within a while after loose the band and let him blede,
till ye have got such quantity of blood, as shall be requisite, stir not
nor labor thy arm that carry it in figure triangulare sleep not two hours
after. Let the blood stand, to know the nature of it, for in our body, there
are diverse sorts very vatiable, accordinh to the diversity of the age, the
complexion, country, kind of the sickness and parts of the body. Arist. lib.
2. de partis anmal. cap. 4. Gal. lib. de atra bile et de simp. med.
We shall judge the nature and quality of the blood three ways, first by
coulor, by the taste, and substance. As for the color good natural blood should
be red, sweet as phlegm natural, and me^ne substance, when it congealeth
not, it is a sign that some of the other humors are with it, when it is read
clear and gluttering, it signifies abundance of choler, when it is blackish,
abundance of melancholy natural or adust which stops it to congeale, the
fatnes of the blood keeps it also from congealing.

Of Arteriotemie or in incision of the Arter.
LIke as for diverse maladies we blud the veins, so we do in some arters.
Arteriotomia is a detractio^ of blood by the division of the arter, Caelicis.
which was not used by our auntie^ts save only Menodotus, but is greatly in
use now, chiefly those in the temples and behind the ears, for great fluxion
of of catarrs on the eyes, breast, and maladies of the head inge^dred of a hot
fluxion inueterated, and vaparous spirrits, as are contained in these arters.
In opening them, first I shave the hair and rub the part the neck with a
napkin as the vein, making a little incision in the body of the arter, as in
the vein, not cutting it altogether, draw such quantity of blod, as is
needful, then stay it, and put on the wound an emplastrum of mastick, or
half a bean cloven, with a compresse and bandage. Some fear this kind, for
that the blood is ill to stay and also for an Aneufrisme, it is good in long
dolors of the side, Gal lib. 1. chro. Paul. lib. 6.
and all dolors, that proceed from a hot pituitous substance, also for swining
giddines and long defluxion on the eyes.

The 2. Chapter, of Boxing and Ventousing.
VEntousing which the Latins call Ventosatio, is no other thing but
application of an instrument, either for the euacuation of some humor under the
skin, or to diuerte the course of an humor to some other part, and to draw
away such things, as is hurtful, that nature cannot chase forth, and also to
draw out wind in some part of the body. It is called cucurbitula, or pixis,
made of brass, Albucrasis.
horn, glass, wood or earth in diverse forms some short, some long necked,
for the most part wide bellied, and are called ventoses a ventre, as says
Auicen: some are big, some less, according to the proportion of the member,
the mouth is reasonable wide, the lips round and thick, and are applied most
commonly in diverse parts of our body. They are sometime applied with
scarrification and extraction of blood, otherwhiles without scarrification, as
also on diverse parts of our body, according to the cause, as to draw out some
hurtful humor of the body, with scarrification and extraction of blood. First
we apply them in the neck to euacuate the humor from the head, for heaviness
of the head, fluxions on the eyes, affections of the face, and stincke in the
mouth: secondly we apply them on the midst of the neck behind, for
difficulty of breath and cough: thirdly under the chinne and sides of the
neck for dolors and ulcers of the mouth, corruption of the gummes and Migrim,
Opthalmie, sore teeth. Fourthly on the shoulders for diseases in the Thorax,
pleuresie, spitting of blood, affections on the shoulders, of repletion, for
many affections of the head and throat. Fifthly on the region of the reins,
good for apostumes and dolors of the reins and liver. Sixthly on the midst of
the arms, for dolor in those parts, and in stead of bloudding, and is used
both in old and young. Seventhly on the os sacrum and thereabouts, and is good
for the hemerroides, and fistules in the fundament. Eighthly on the midst and
roots of the thighs, and is good to provoke the monthly course, for
Strangurie, dolors of the matrix, bladder and kidneis. The ventouses without
scarrification, which we call dry ventousing, are applied for the most part in
a xi. places. First on the open of the head, for 15. therapeutic.
and to stay the rheum, as says Galen. hypocondres, to diuerte the bleeding
at the nose, as says Galen, when the right nosethrill bleedeth, put the
ventouses on the region of the liver, if the left side, on the milt, so in like
manner on all parts that bleed, we put the ventouses on the part opposite
for the communication that the vessels have one with an other. Thirdly
Bartapallia.
Fourthly in the beginning Cuido.
Sixthly on the flancke for ventositie of the Auicen 3. canod
Eighthly we Haly Abbas. lib. 9.
Tenthly, if any where there is mattir deep, to draw it out to the superfice,
as in bubons venerians, also in parotides malign, or in any other part where
need is to draw any thing to the superfice. Eleuenthly,

Things requisite before the applying of Ventouses.
FIrst, if the body be plethoricke, it must be taken away by bleeding,
otherwise the ventousing is noisome, next, if the blood or humors be thick, we
use to foment the place with hot water, and rub it long with a hot cloth,
that ye never scarrifie, except the application of the dry ventouses have
preceded, Gal. Auicen.
because the blood must first be drawn to the place, before it be vacuated,
that it be not applied in the bath, but an hour or two after.

The way to apply the ventouses.
THe Ventouses are applied with hardes being fastened to the bottom with a
little wax, or emplaister, to hold it, that it fall not on the skin, that
being done, light them and apply them on the part, Some use two or three
piece^ of wax candles put on a piece of a card, money or gold, the breadth
of a crown, being lighted, set them on the mids of the part, thereafter
apply the ventouse, and being applied a certain space, ye shall, for to take
it away, press the flesh under the lip of it, Albucrafis. Haly Abbas
to let in the air, and so it shall fall, which being done, make certain
scratches in the skin with a launcet, sometime many, otherwhiles few: in
delicate folk and children, Galen.
we make few scarrifications, if the blood be thick, make the
scarrifications profound, if the humor and blood be subtle, the
scarrifications must be superficial, and apply the ventouses as before, let
it remain a reasonable time, and euacuate the blood, as ye shall find
expedient, if not sufficiently at one time, ye may reiterate twice or thrice,
always scarrifiyng, especially when there is venenositie or malignitie in the
place, by reason of the blood being thick and gross. That being done, it
shall be very necessary and expedient to dry the place with a soft cloth,
annoint it with oil of roses, butter, cerat Galen, or rosat Mesnes, Albucrafis
li. 2.
and sleep an hour after.

The third Chapter, of Horsleaches or Bloudsuckers and their Effects.
THese little beasts, which the Latins call Sanguisuga or Hirudines, in our
toungue Horsleaches, are little worms, the length of two inches or three,
great, like to a goose quill, well known to all Chirurgians, engendered in
fresh water, pondes, pooles, of the which there are two sorts, the one
malign, as those which are bread in rotten standing water, where carrion has
been cast, of the which come great accidents, as tumor, inflammation, ulcers,
apostumes venenous, as we read of one Messelinus, who dyed by putting one on
his knee. Therefore we must abstain from those, that have the head greater
then the rest of the body, and are green colored, glittering, with blew rays
on the back, the rest of the body being black: we must choose such as are
found in clean water, in pondes and sandy ground, that have their head little
and bodies small, round, Arnoldus de villa noua. Haly Abbas.
red bellied, the backs rayed like threedes of gold, such shall be kept a
day or two in clean water, to purge them before they be applied, as also to
cause them draw the better. Some keep them ten or twelve days, changing the
water once in two or three days, after the which manner they may be kept a
whole year in glasses or pottes of earth, Auicen. Theodocritus.
changing the water once in x. days, we use them for the same purpose, as
scarrifications, and in such places where ventouses cannot be applied, as in
the lips, gummes, legs, fundament, mouth of the matrix, and such parts as
are empty of flesh, as nose, fingers, toes, also about old ulcers, and
apostumes of the emunctoires and others that are venenous, rubbing the part ye
put them on, till it grow read. Albucrasis lib. 11.
They draw only superficially the blood which is in the flesh, and so are good
pro morbis subter cutaneis, if they be applied on the fundament, they make
euacuation from all the members. The part where we apply them must be clean,
4. apho. cem. 1.2.3. et 12.
otherwise they will not bide, thereafter take them with a piece of clean
cloth, handle them softly, not touching them with the bare hand, hold their
head to the part you would have them bite, for the more easy doing thereof, we
put a drop of Pigeons or Chickins blood, on the part, or prick the part a
little to cause the blood to come out, then if you would have them draw much,
cut the ends of them with the sheeres to let the blood run, otherwise, when
they fall of, apply fresh in their place, or put on two or three in the
beginning* as ye find expedient. To make them fall sooner, ye shall put a corn
of salt, or drop of vinegar on their head, or a few ceudres, or separate them
with a horse hair. If after the fall, the place bleed much, we apply cotton,
or burnt cloth, or cloth wet in cold water, or half a bean cloven and bound
on it. If there be venenositie in the part, Albuc. lib. 5.
after they fall we foment the place with water and salt, sometime a cornet, or
little ventouse.

The fourth Chapter of Seton, the qualities of it, and way to apply it,
SEton, which the Latins call Seta is no other thing, but a little cord. which
in old time was made of hair, or thread, and now of silk or cloth, or woollen
yarne and is drawn through the skin with a needle for the purpose, in sundry
parts of our bodies for diverse occasions as ye shall hear. First and most
commonly we apply it in the neck, Skinkins.
Guido.
and other parts of the body. Secondly we apple it on the navel, when it or
without fire, Hip. Albuc.
as now is commonly done, for the doing whereof we set the sick in a chair,
then one taketk the neck behind or other part where ye will apply it, equally
in his hands, neither more on the one side, nor the other, the one hand lower
down and the other more upward, leaving a space betwixt the hands. Then the
Chirurgian shall take hold of the same with his pincers for that purpose,
thereafter p^rce it with a sharp needle through both the holes of the pincers,
being first threaded with the Seton or Cord, beware ye prick not the Muscle of
the Neck, thereafter holding the skin with the pincers cause the sick move his
head, so ye shall easily perceive if the Muscle be taken hold of, and if it be,
let go the gripe, and take only the skin and draw through the Needle and Seton
which shall be an ell in length or there-abouts, great like a Goose quill, take
the Needle and let the Seton remain, and rub it with digestive, fresh Butter
or Cerat Galen with an emplaster of Cerat or such like for Two or Three dayas,
thereafter Diapalma or Beronica, some put only Woodbynd leaves, drawing it a
little every day in the Morning and at Night it being almost near the end, ye
shall draw it the other way by this means it will serve a Month or Six
weeks. When ye will change it, sow an other new Seton to the end thereof in
such sort, that it slipp not in the through going, so cut away the old, and
leave the new, and so continue so long as shall be expedient, that is till the
humor be well euacuated, using in the mean time some meet remedies until the
humor be diuerted, intercepted and euacuated. Some use this a year or Two
according to the greatness of the disease, purge the body before ye apply it, and
after it is taken away.

The fifth Chapter, of Canters Actual and Potentiall.
CAnter called by the Latins Canterinum is a thing which has virtue to burn
the flesh, bones, or any part, where it is applied, whereof there are two
sorts to wit, actual and potentiall. The actual is that which actually does
burn, and is made of Gold, Silver, brass, Iron or Lead, in diverse fashions,
Albuc. Cel. Hip
according to the malady and part, where they are applied as ye have heard in
wounds and ulcers, yet most commonly they are used for Four causes, first in
staunching of blood in veins and arters, secondly for Gangrens and
Mortification, Carbuncles and Bubones excepting always when there is no
inflammation in the part, thirdly in bones that are rotten, for it is enemy to
rottennts and helps the separation of the bones, fourthly in maling ulcers,
and biting of venomous beasts. Albucra^^s.
The canter potentiall, which the Latins call Canterium Potentiale, or
Pyroticum is that which has the force by extreme heat to burn the part
where it is applied, but actually as the other and is composed of diverse matter
that are for the most part, extreme hot, like as Cartharide^, Vitrioll,
Tartar, Arsnic, Orpiment, Sublimat, strong water, oil of vitrioll, Cloves,
Sage, and Brimstone, or of diverse other things, as the ashes of the Oak or
Fig tree, of Vines, or Bean stalks, quick lyme, salt Nitre, Armoniack,
Axungia vi^ri, Granley, all which ye may use together, or some of them in
water, which we call Capitellum or Lixiui^um, and is either strong or weak,
according to the Ingredientes. For the making of the which, ye shall take a
certain of these things, and steep them in water three or four days,
sturring it Morning and Evening, the^ pass it through a cloth, and sees it on
the fire in a pan of brass, till it be co^gealed to salt, which being taken
from the fire shall be cut in little pieces, and put in glasses close stopped that
no air enter in. The way to make diverse sorts of Canters is thus, take the
ashes of the vine, quick lyme, graneley, axungia vitri, an. half a pound,
allom and vitrioll roman of each 6 ounces, steep them in 15 pintes of water in
an earthen pot the space of 5. or 6. days, stirring it every day as ye have
heard, then power out the water and leave the grounds keep it in glasses, or
sees it, till it grow to salt as ye have heard, if it grow thick put thereto
half an ounce of opi^^ dissolved in aquauitae, which both appeseth the dolor
and makes the scarre soft. An other excellent way is, Rec. axungiae vitri li.
se. salis gemmae onc. 6. sublimati onc. se. cineris sarmentoru^ et truncorum
fabarum an. li. se. aquae li. 10. infundantur et fiat capi tellum, Le fort de
Lenry.
in fine coctionis ^dde drag. 2. opij. Otherwise thus take ashes of oak and
vine, graneley, stalks of beans an. like quantitye, steep them in water and
make your Capitell, putting thereto a little quick-lyme, this Canter is
commonly used by Seuerinus Pineo and Hierome de la Now Doctors in Chirurgerie.
S. Pineo. H. Delanow.


Cantion in applying of Canter.
THe Canters are appyed in diverse places, taking heed to the complexion of the
person, and nature of the part, by reason it works sooner in one part than an
other: in bodies Cacochymick, purge and bleed before ye apply them, beware of
neruous and membranous parts, ends of the muscles, veins and arters.

Certain places where Canters are applied for sundry diseases.
THey are applied for the most part in all the parts of the head for diverse
diseases, as on the forehead at the joining of the suture sagittall with the
coronall, penetrating to the boane and is good for Fluxion on the eyes, the
Migrim and other dolors of the head, the Epilepsie, difficulty of breath,
Opthalmie, redness of the face, pain of the teeth, ears and ^quinancie. We
apply them behind and above the ears, taking heed of the muscle cratophite,
for the more assurance of the which cause, the sick must close and open his
mouth, that we may perceive where the said muscle ends by the motion
thereof. We apply in the neck and arm for Catarrhes and distillations of
the head, to draw it away, and stop it from falling on the thorax or some
chief Part, and are put on the inside of the arm, about the midst, near
the veins and arters, but not touching vein, arter, nor nerve, for assurance
of the which, hold your finger on the part, cause the sick to move his arm,
so ye may easily perceive if there be any thing under it. We apply them on
the legs, within 3. inches to the knee, either on the inner or outside, as
the disease requires, and is good for the Sciaticke and ulcers in the legs
and feet. They are also applied in diverse other parts of the body to give
issue to the matter contained, and where there is vehement dolor, or humor or
malign vapor, and in the emunctoires to give issue to the humor, which shall
be done before the ripeness thereof.

The way to apply Canters.
FIrst mark the place with thy finger or a spot of incke, next, make a little
emplaister, having a little hole in the midst, either broad or long, as ye
shall think good, put on the emplaister in such sort, that the mark of the
incke appear through the hole, and then apply your canter, according to the
quantity ye would have the issue of, and put an other emplaister above, and
bind it, letting it remain, till it work the effect you require: if the
first has not gone deep enough, apply another on the same after the foresaid
manner, which being done take away the emplaister, and lay on the place to
separate the burnt from the whole, a little oil of roses, turpentine, butter
and a little iris of Florence, or otherwise a little butter alone, or
basilicon. Some after the first emplaister is taken off, cut away that which
is burnt with a Bistorie, others cut it cross wise, thereafter put to the
medicament, and it falls easily of it self, being fallen, the issue must be
holden open, till such time the sickness be whole, Celsus. lib. 4. cap. 22.
for the which it was made. Some to hold it open, put a great peaze or balle
of gold or silver, of the same greatness. I use certain balls, which last
six months and are made thus. Take wax onc. 3. verde greece, orpiment, and
hermodactes an. onc. 2. sublimat. and powder of cantharides an. onc. se. with a
little res^n. In stead of the emplaister, I use a certain cloth made with
certain stuff, which lasts five or six months, likewise wiping it, and
using sometime one side, sometimes another, and is made thus. Rec. empl^stri
triaformacili, se* cerae albae onc. 2 camphorae onc. 2. litargiri auri
puluerizati onc. 2. spici nardi onc. 1. olei oliua^um onc. 1. se misce omnia
simul: thereafter dippe a cloth therein, and cut it in pieces to serve, as
ye have heard, it is good for cold humors vlcered. Sometime we are
constrained to continue these things longer, and every year we place them
sometime higher, lower and sidewise, that the mattir may avoid the better.
Sometime they wax hard and callous, which is consumed by such remedies as ye
have heard set down in callous Ulcers, the excrescence of flesh which
sometime grows, is taken away by such remedies, as ye have heard in Ulcers.

The sixte Chapter, of Bathes and their Effects.
BAthing, as by the learned Hierodotus is at large declared, is a washing and
steeping of the whole body, for the better preservation and conservation of
man's health, and recovery of that which is lost, which was had in great use
and custom amongst the Auncientes, as among the Greeks, also among the
Arabes and Latins, and is also very much used and practiced in all Nations in
these our days: whereof there are two sorts, one natural, and an other
artificial. The natural are said to be such, as come and proceed naturally
out of the ground, Natural bathes
and are always warm and hot of themselves, but yet are reported to be of
diverse sorts qualities and virtues according to the diversity of the places,
from whence the water comes and proceeds, as if it come from Salt, Allom,
Sulphur, Brass, Copper, Gold, Iron and such like. Salt. c.
The Salt is good for pi^uitous, cold and humide Maladies, Hydropsie, dolors,
pains and aches of the belly, stomach, matrix and kidneis, also it is good
for all Catarrhes, Epilepsie, dolors of the bladder, head, stomach and ears,
whites of women and scabbes generally through all the body, as is at large
discoursed and s^t down by Galen. Alluminou^.
The Alluminous are drying and heating, and is good for all cold and humide
diseases and sickenesses, vomiting of blood, staying the hemerrhoides, the
monthly course of women, aborting with child, varices on the legs*
hydropsie, malign ulcers, ^otten waterie ^umors, for all sorts of vomiting.
The Sulphurous are drying in the 4. degree, Sulphuro^^.
and heal the parts neruous, which are cold and humide, soften the hard
parts, appease dolor, and comfort the stomach and milte, they are good for the
stone and strangu^ie, for all cold and humide maladies, Palsies, Hydropsies,
Apoplexies, yet they must be moderately used. Those, whose mineral is iron
and steel, are cold, Ironand steel.
stipticke and dry, good for hot and humide maladies, as Gow^es, and dolors
of the articles debillitie, and softness of the stomach and milt, apostumes
in the ears, monthly course, flux of urine, hemerro^hdes, outcomming of the
fundament, and all ulcers in the bladder, as says Fuchius. Copp^rous.
The Copperous, which heat, resolve, cleanse, consolide, are good for cold
and humide diseases, dolors of the guts, malign ulcers, and members
contused, also for maladies in the mouth, inflammation in the throat and
amigdalles, all sickness of the eyes. Those that have their mineral gold,
Gold.
are hot and dry and good for the collicke, voluulles, fistules, gowte,
malign ulcers, cold stomachs, the stone, rupture, scabbes, leprosy,
diseases of the eyes* stincke in the mouth, palpitation of the heart, as says
Fuchius. Lead.
The Lead being the mineral, they are good for all malign ulcers, canckers,
fistules, diverse affections of the skin, kidneis and blader, whites in women
and hemerroihdes. There are some mixed with diverse of these together, as in
Lorraine, Burgundy, and diverse parts of Almaine and Italy, of the which
W^ckerus and Fuchius have amply written. Artificial bathes.
The artificial bathes are artificially made, by imitation of the natural, to
supply the want thereof, as of running water and mixtion of one or more of
these minerals, diuersifiyng and appropriating them according to the disease,
sometime to heat iron and steel read hot, and ^lake it in the water, and
so it participateth the virtue. Some time by mixing of herbs, flowers,
roo^es, sometime simply, sometime the decoction of them, sometime of milk or
wine, according to the disease, as to appease dolor, to soften, to open the
conduites, to loose or bind in all these sorts. Gal. de sauitate ^uenda lib.
3. Hip. Celsus. F^chius.
Sometime we use water called balneum aquae dulois, of the which come great
effects, so that it be always warm, it is good for all outward affections
of the body, it heateth, appeaseth dolor, opens the pores of the skin,
tempereth and euacuateth ill humors provoke the purgations and hemorrhoides
in women, discusseth and dige^eth the excrements, softneth the hard parts,
humecteth all the parts of the body, provoke sleep, corroborateth the
ventricle, and helps the concoction and natural heat, good for all
affections of the matrix, inflammation of the lights, good for all intemperie,
except the humide, dolor of the head and eyes, maladies of the lights,
lassitude of the stomach and back, for all fluxions and members vlcered, for
all scabbes and vices in the skin of both old and young, it softeneth the
articles, clarifieth the voice, moves urine, brings the flesh and skin in
good temperature, it mundifieth and is good for hectic fevers and phrensies as
says Hippocrates, it discusseth flatnosities, and sharp excrements, the watee
must not be too hot, for it heals and closes the pores, and so lets the
excrements under the skin to come forth.

Caution before Bathing.
NOtwithstanding of the great benefit, which comes of it, it must be
moderately used, the excessive using hereof offends the heart, causes
syncope, takes away appetite, loses the joints, resolves the natural
heat, provoke nee^ing, it moves humors and offends the ulcers as says
Galen. The bathe must be made in this sort, first there must be a vessel of
the length of the party of two so b^e broad, of height two and a half or
three, it must be almost full of water. After he has remained a while in the
bath, fill it with warm water, the vessel above with a couerlet, shee^e, or
some such like thing, having remained therein as long as is needful, the
party shall come forth of the bath and dry himself with hot clothes, put a
hot sh^^te about him and cover all his body warm, so he will swea^e, which
being dried he shall rise and hold him warm all that day. If he will he may
afterward do in like manner the after noone, Hierodotus lib de temediis
foris abhibendis.
and so continue three or six days as shall be thought expedient, entering
sometime once a day, otherwhiles twice, add commonly to the water chiefly in
the spring and summer, when they are in virtue these herbs, mallows,
marsh-mallowes, violetts, parie^arie, fumit^rie, Dragon or Buglossie, Plantine,
patience, agrimonie, bear foot, hearts tongue, betonie, toses, which all or
some of these may be sodden a little before they be put in the bath.

Things to be observed before ye enter into the Bath.
Antillus.
FIrst as counsels Antillus a very ancient medicine, the party should be
fasting, or else four hours after meat, Hip. apho. 54.
for as says Hippocrates, a man must not enter in having his belly full of
meat and drink, so it is meetest time in the morning, or four hours after
noone. Next ye must beware that no noble part be offended, nor much
debilitated, for if the humor be moved by the bathe, the pores and ways
dilated, the humor goes easily to the part offended. The party must also
before he enter be purged, no weak body should enter the rein. While he is in
it, he must keep himself warm, the bathe must be meanly warm, neither too
hot nor cold, for if it be too hot, it closes the pores of the skin, lets
the forth coming of the excrements, Hypp.
and heateth the blood. Hippocrates cou^selleth to be silent in the bathe and
in no ways co^moned, if he wax feeble, he may take a little wine or a sop of
bread dipped in it, or some pruns to quench his thirst, as cou^selleth Cassius
in his problemes, let him dry the sweat of his face and temples and behind the
ears. He must not stay so long the first day, as the rest, Hierodotus.
Hierodotus counselle^h to remain half an hour at the first, afterward an
how^^ or two. After the coming forth, the party must be well dried chiefly his
head as counsels Hippocrates, for humidity is as great an enemy to the head
as cold, he must have the passage open to the natural excreme^nts, and not eat
of one hour after he come forth of the bathe.

The seventh Chapter, of frictions and their effects.
OF rubbing and frictions Galen has amply written in his books de tuenda
sanitate, as also Aetius, Paulus, Paulu. Oribasins.
and Oribasins, with sundry other learned men, who have used them for diverse
occasions, and in diverse manners, sometime with oyntmentes and oils, which was
in great use amongst the Romans and Greeks. Those who were old used rubbing
with oil of irinum, camomelinum and nardinum. Hippocrates commends the same
very much, for, says he it has the force to bind, loose, Hippocrates.
increase flesh and diminish the same, for hard rubbing does loose and
mollify, much rubbing diminishes the flesh, mean rub- does augment and
increase flesh. They are used for diverse other occasions, as ye have heard,
namely to loose and open the pores and conduits of the skin, to make thyn
humors, and avoid all obstructions, for the diuerting of fluxion from any part
of the body, and especially from the head. They must be done with a cloth or
sponge, first softly and easily, sometime to continue till the flesh swell and
become red, and may be done at all times, and chiefly in the morning, beginning
at the lower parts, so to ascend to the head, which is accounted general
rubbing. If any particulare part be diseased, rub only the place affected
whereby in sundry diseases diverse effects are wrought.

THE NINTH TREATISE OF Antidotaries chirurgicall which contains Thirtenth
Chapters. By Peter Low Arellien.
Chapter 1 Of medicaments in general. Chapter 2 Of medicaments Anodins.
Chapter 3 Of repelling medicaments. Chapter 4 Of medicaments attractiues.
Chapter 5 Of medicaments resolutiues. Chapter 6 Of remollient medicaments.
Chapter 7 Of suppuratiues. Chapter 8 Of mundificatiues. Chapter 9 Of
incarnatiues. Chapter 10 Of Cicatrizantes. Chapter 11 Of medicaments
agglutinatiue. Chapter 12 Of medicaments Catereticks. Chapter 13 Of medicaments
that stanch blood.
The first Chapter, of medimentes in General.
IN this Treatise, we will speak of diverse sorts of medicaments commonly used
by the Chigians the which we shall first show the definition and division of
every on seuerallye both simples and composed, whereof they proceed and take
their original, as of plants, trees, beasts, earth or sea. Of the parts of
plants, as of the leaves, flowers, bark, root, seed, gum, juice or oils.
Of beasts as of Vipers, Serpents, Cantarides, Froggs, Cats, or of the
dissimilare parts of beasts, as the Liver, Lights, Heart, or Brains, also of
the excrementes, as of the Hair, Horns, Dung and such like. Of mineralls or
earth, as Stones, Mettells, as Orpiment, Sandaracha, Sulphur, Cadmia, Litarge,
Quick silver, Argent, Calcites. Of the Sea and waters, as all kind of Salt,
Sponges, Asphaltrum, Nitre, Amber, Bitumen, Pissaphalen, Garinum, Alcionium.
The compoundes may be made of these simples diverse ways, as oils, Unguents,
Liniments, Cerates, Cataplasmes, Emplasters, distilled water, Fomentatio^s,
Vaporatio^s, Suffumigatio^s, Gargarismes, Bathes and such like, but for the
better understanding of this matter, we shall show the degrees of medicamentes,
and next the measure and weight. There are four degrees of medicines, hot,
cold, dry and humide, and have four qualities, as heating, cooling, drying,
and humecting* but not manifestly, and so little, as is scarsely known by the
sense. The second degree is heating, cooling, drying, humecting manifestly, as
is apparent to the judgment. The third degree is heating, cooling, drying and
humecting, offending the senses, but not extremely. The fourth degree is hot,
burning, and makes a scarce and corrupts the senses, as quick lyme, all
caustickes actual and potentiall, cold, which mortifieth and obtundeth the
senses, as opium and all stupefactiues, or dry, which burn like Canters
actual: humide is not so vehement, as the others, for humiditie is not
vehement, except it be joined with cold, of the which Galen has made no
mention. After this manner the medicamentes were put in degrees, before Galen,
as reports Dioscorides.

Medicamentes temperate in hot and cold.
The Medicaments that are temperate in heat and cold, are faba, lens, hordeum,
fructus et folia brusci, species capillorum veneris, axungia, snilla, oleum
dulce, cera, sac, vitellus oui, lytargirus, adiantum, cadmia.

Medicaments hot in the first degree.
Aristolochia rotunda, althaea, amigdalae dulces, (...), castaneae, ficus
brassica, absinthium, apium, ^uparatorium, buglossa, borago, mercurialis,
morsus diaboli, saluia, scolopendria, ebulus, spica ^ardi, aloe, triticum,
fennigrecum, s^men Lini, mel, butirum, sac charum, serum lactis, melilotu^,
vinum nouum.

Medicamentes hot in the 2. degree.
Guaiacum, Cyperus, Calamus aromaticus, Peonia, Nux Indica, nux muscata,
amigdalae amarae, enula campana, branca vrsina, consolida mayor, sanicula, dens
leonis, eruca, gariophillata lauendula, cardamomum, marrhubium, mentha
domestica, petroselinum, seabiosa, feniculum, thus, mirrha, mastiche,
sarcocolla, bryonia, betonica.

Medicamentes hot in the 3. degree.
Gentiana, Aristolochia longa, Polipodium, Pyrethrum, raphanus, satyrion,
acorus, gingiber, iris, apium risus, artemisia, cherefolium, cupressus,
helleborus, scrophularia, nasturtium, origanum, saluia, ciclamen, dictamus,
opopanax, rosmarinus, galbanum, Iuniperus, anisum, hissopus, abrotanum,
salyrium.

Medicamentes hot in the 4. degree.
Allium, Cepa, Tithimallus, Sinapi, Euphorbium, Piper, oleum petroleum,
pyretthrum, Anacardus.

Medicaments cold in the 1. degree.
Castanea, Malua, Granata dulcia, Spina alba, Gramen, hepatica, lilium,
conuallum, hordeum, atriplex, pira, poma, viola, ^osa.

Medicamentes cold in the 2. degree.
Pomum persicum, Cucurbita, Cucumer, Asininum, Sinoglossum, primulaueris,
pulmonaria, mala granata fetida, psillium, balaustia, acacia, plantago.

Medicamentes cold in the 3. degree.
Virg^ pastoris, Acetosa, Endiuia siluestris, Tormentilla, portulaca,
vermicularis, semper viuum, solanum hortense.

Medicaments cold in the 4. degree.
Papauer, Opium, Cicula, hiosciamus, mandragor^.

Medicamentes moist in the first degree.
Enula campana, Malua, Buglossum, Borago, Spinachiae, an^igdales, ininbae, nux
indica, semen lini, buti^um, viola, pisa.

Medicamentes humide in the 2. degree.
Lilium Conuallum, Lenticulapalustris, Nimphaea, Lactuca, branca vrsina,
cucumera, asininus, portulaca, primulaueris, eruca, dactili, psillium,
ammoniacum.

Medicamentes humide in the 3. degree.
Satyrium, Endiuia siluestris, Fragria, Cucurbita, brassica.

Medicamentes humide in the 4. degree.
Argentum viuum.

Medicamentes dry in the 1. degree.
Feniculum, radix Althea, morsus Diaboli, Sambucus, mala granata, Ebulus,
castanea, hordeum, fennigrecum, camomilla, mellilotum, crocus, thus, arg^nti
spuma, sarcocolla, faba, fumus ^errae, tormentilla, acetosa.

Medicamentes dry in the 2. degree.
Aristolochia, Guaiacum, Cyperus, Calamus Aromaticus, Cynamomum, Anethum,
Abrotanum, Ce^e folium, Consolida mayor, Opium, Centaureum, virga pastoris,
Cynoglossum, San^oula, dens leonis, Hissopus, Genista, Marrhubium,
Petroselinum, Scabiosa, Pimpinella, Cardamomum, Amigdales amaroe, Millium, Nux
Indica, Nux Muscata, Myrrha, Orobus, Mel.

Medicamentes dry in the 3. degree.
Lauendula, Cyclaminus, Alcorus, Raphanus, Piretrum, gentiana, galanga,
serpentaria minor, Absynthium, artemesia, Apium Risus, betonica, chelidonium,
cicuta, helleborus, scrophularia, ^igus^^um, ^a ^^urtium, origanum,
pentaphillon, rosmarinus, Sabima, A^nisium, nigella, Agnus castus, allium.

Medicamentes dry in the 4. degree.
Piper, tithimallus, anacardus, saturea, oleum pethoselum, Sinapi, euphorbium.

Of the Weightes and Measures of Medicamentes.
Lib. a pound, that is to say twelve ounces.

Onc. Signifies one ounce, which is eight drammes.

Drag. Signifies a dram which is three scruples.

Scr. Signifies a scruple, which is twenty grains of wheat.

Denarius and Dram is all one.

M. Signifies manipulus, and is as much as one can hold in his hand.

P. Signifies pugill, which is as much as one can take betwixt the thombe and
the two foremost fingers.

Ciathus. Signifies so much as one may easily drink at one draught.

The second Chapter, of medicaments which appease dolor called Anodins in
Greek.
Dolor is a grievous feeling like as pleasure is a joyful feeling the which
is cured, first by knowing the cause, Gal. lib 2. de locis effect. Gal. 12.
metho.
next by the ablation of the same. The cause of dolor is either distemperature
or solution of continuitie which is either hot, dry, or humide. The hot
causes vehement pain. The dry causes pain but not so vehement. The humide
makes almost no pain at all, Gal. lib. 5. ca. 1^. simpl.
medicament Anodins called bp the Greeks Paogonta are those that have force by
their temperate heat to appease the dolor, of the which some be propers, some
be impropers. The propers Anodins are those which be a contrary quality open
and take away the cause of dolor, like as oleum laurium in cold dolors, violet
in hot dolors, hyd^^elium in dry dolors. The Anodins improper are these which
not by themselves but by accident appease the pain and are called by the
Greeks Narcoticks the which stupifie the feeling of the part and make it more
heavy: The office of the proper Anodins is to euacuate, digest, rarifie,
extenuate the evil humors which be sharp, thick, vaporous, and cold.

The Anodins proper are either simple or Composed.
Simple like as oleum amygdalaru^ dulcium, butiri, lini, ouorum, hyperici
axungia, galline, anatis, auseris fol malne, violar^^, parietarie, medulla
vituli, et cerni, aqua calida. semen lini, camomilla, fenu grecum mellilotum,
folia hyoschiami.

The compounds of these are oils, unguents, linime^ts, and plasters,
fomentations, cataplasmes, and such like, which may be made according to the
va^le^ie of the disease.

Anodins hot.
Oleum, Anetinum, Camomellinum, Amygdalarum, dulcium, lumbricorum, lini,
vulpinum, mellinum, triticeu^, de vitellis ouorum, sambuceum, cerae,
terebinthine, irinum, hyperici, laurinum, iuniperinum, sulphureum, piperum,
masticinum, rosmarinum, petrol^^m: Of these all mixed together, or some wax
mingled with them, ye may make linimentes, vnguentes, as occicrosium, nicolai,
de althea, resumptiuum, ^nulatum ^ine mercurio, martiatum, arragon, agrippae,
cerati filij zacari filagri^, cyroneum emplastrum, cera^um, andromachi, fotus
aqua vitae, panuus calidus inea mersus et admo^us ista valent in sed audis
doloribus que procedunt a materia frigida. vnguentum comitissae is proper for
the matrixe, martiatum for the nerves, ba^cae lauri for the belly.

Linimentum callidum.
Rec. Oleum, Amygdalarum dulcium, Sambutinum, an. vnc. 2. ladani vnc. 1. croci
drag. 1. se. muscilaginis seminis alteae, et lini extracte aquae melliloti vnc.
2. cere vnc. se. seminis anethi vnc. 1. se. succi caulium vnc. 3. bull. liant ad
succorum consumptionem fiat linimentum.

Aliud.
Rec. Picis Burgundiae vnc. 3. Theriacis et Mithridati, an. vnc. 1. pulueris
seminis anisi, dauci an. drag. 1. se. olei irini et camomillini an. vnc. 1.
Fiat ceratum.

Cataplasma.
Rec. Florum melliloti in sapa coctorum vnc. 4. Ouor^i vitella 4. ad duritiem
in a ceto cocta, olei anetini et camomillini an. vnc. 1. se. Fiat Cataplasma.

Aliud.
Rec. Baccarum lauri, Iuniperi pulnerisatarum an. drag. 3. coquantur in vino
veteri et oleo rosato optimo fiat cataplasma.

Anodina frigida.
Oleum omphacinu^, Papanerum, Rosarum, Violarum, liliorum de hyosciamo
vnguentum populeum de litargyro refrigerans galeni, santellinu^, mu^^lago
psilij, cydonioru^, opium, cum croco, emplastrum de mineralibus, vnguentum
desic catiuum rubeum.

Comppounds.
Rec. Cere albae vnc. 5. Olei, Camomellae, et Rosarn^^ an. vnc. 2. ouorum,
lutea 8. succi coriandri et papaneris albi an. vnc. 2. croci et opij an. scr.
2. misce cum oxycrato fiat linimentium.

Aliud.
Rec. Ouorum vitella, foliorum Violarum vnc. 2. Opij drag. 1. croci drag. 3.
fiat linimentum.

Cattaplasma.
Rec. Medullae panis albi, in lacte vaccino Infuse lib. se. farine, fabarum,
hordei et orobi, et lentium, an. vnc. 1. omnia disso^atur foliorum hyosciami et
coqua^tur ad crassitiem deinde add olei rosarum violarum, oxyrhodini an. vnc.
1. opij, croci an. drag. 1. fiat. cataplasma.

Vnguentum.
Rec. Vnguenti rosati vnc. 6. pepuleonis vnc. 2. muscilaginis seminis psilii et
cydoniorum an. vnc 1. se. fiat vngue^tum.

Of Narcoticks which are Anodins Impropers
Like as in taking away pain there are 3 things to be observed to wit the
cause of the pain, the pain it self, and the part where it is for the which
Galen has set down three kinds of medicaments. Gal. lib. 3. de facul. simpl.
cap. 18.
Of the which some take away the cause, some the pain and not the cause,
others neither the cause nor pain but only the feeling of the part and by
accident the pain. Of the which some be simples, others composed, Galen
forbids the usage of such except the body be purged and in no ways in weak
parts and near the noble parts. Gal. lib. 13. met


Narcoticks simples.
Mandragora, Hyosciamus, Papauer, Lactuca, Succus opij, semperuiui solani,
camphora, oleum iu quo torpedo vi^a fuit extincta, cicuta.

Composita.
Philon^^^ Romanum, Pillulae de Cynoglosso, Oleum hyosciami, papa^eris,
mandragorae quibus opij nonnihil diluitur.

Lyuimentum.
Rec. vnguenti populeonis, olei violacei an. vnc. 1. seminis hyosciami,
corticis mandragore opij an scr. 1. cerae quantum sufficit fiat vnguentum.

The third Chapter, of medicaments Repercussiues.
THe medicament Repercussiue called by the Latins Repercutients or Repellens is
that which by the cold quality puts back the humor, Ga^. lib. 5. cap. 18.
simpl.
or else by the astric^ion corroborateth the part or by one or both lets the
fluxion of humors* Nicol. Alexan.
of the which there are two viz. simples and composed.

The Simples with small or no astriction like as ro^a, endiuia, lactuca,
acetosa, vmbilicus veneris, portulaca, ^io^a, nenuphar, aqua frigida, ^erum
lactis, coriandrum, arnoglossum, trifolium, parietaria, hioscramus, poma, pira,
albumen oui, cauda equina, caprifolium, (...), virgula pastoris, bursa
pastoris, plantago, solanum, semperviuum, melones, cucurbita, ci^^uli, lens
palustris, psilium, ompha^inum, cidonia, mirt^^, malicoria, balaustia,
mandragora, acacia, sanguis draconis, papauer, opium, bolus armenus, cerusa,
terra figillata, antimonium, plumbum v^tum et non vstum, consolida mayor,
far^^a lupmo^um et or^bi, vitrio^um, tapsus barbatus, nux cupressi, oliui folia.

The Compoundes.
Oleum rosarum, Omphaci^um, Absynthium, Oliuarum, masticum, mandragorae,
papaueris, cidoniorum, myrtilorum, vnguentum citrinum, populeum, album rasis,
deficcatiuum rubeum ex litargiro, ^antellinum, rosatum, bartholomeum,
refrigerens galeni, pectorale, album camphoratum, aqua rosarum, camphoratum,
oxy^rodinum, diamoron, syrrupus ros^^, violariu^, aqua, in qua verbena fuit
decocta*

Linimentum repellens.
Rec. Muscilaginis, seminis Psilij et cidoniorum in aqua rosarum et plantaginis
extrractae onc. 1. pulueris saentali albi, rosarum rubrarum, seminis
plantaginis, an. drag. se. cum pauco cerato refrigerantis galeni et oleo
rosa^^^. fiat linimentum.

Aliua.
Rec. Olei rosati et omphacini an. onc. 1. vnguenti popul^onis et comitis^ae
an. onc. se. agitentur simul in fucco plantaginis et solani ad fuccorum
consumptionem.

Ceratum repellons.
Rec. Vnguenti rosati drag. 6. Santali rubei drag. 5. Santali albi et citrini
an. drag. 2. se boli armenici drag. 3. Spodij drag. 2. camphorae drag. 1. cerae
albae onc. 2. olei rosati lib. se.

Cataplasma.
Rec. Musci^^^nis, Psilij et Cidoniorum in aqua vel fucco plantaginis et opi^
extractae onc. 3. farinae hordei onc. 2. fiat Cataplasma.

Aliud.
Rec. Succi Oxalidis, Oxylapathi an. onc. 4. farinae hordei onc. se. coquantur
et fiat Cataplasma.

The fourth Chapter, of Attractiues.
THe Medicamentes Attractiues which the Greeks call Electica, by the Latins
Attrahentia, are contrary to the Repercussiues. For So Much as they draw from
the Center to the circumference, and are of temperature hot and substance
thin, to the end they may pearce more easily: and may be divided into three
sorts. The first draws by the natural heat, the second by putrefaction,
the third by an hidden property, Gal. 5. simpl.
some add the fourth kind, per fugam vecui like as in ventosing, boxing,
sucking, by bandages, frictions, horsleaches, vissicatories, medicamentes
caustickes, the which indeed be not properly called medicamentes Attractiues.
Of the foresaid there are two kinds, viz. Simples and Compoundes.

Simples.
Like as Sabina, C^epa, Aristolochia, Tapsia, Hermodactilus, bryonia, omnes
titimallorum species, radix lil^^, abrotanum, vrtica, serpentaria minor,
gentiana, asphodellus, bdellium ^popanax, gummi rutae, calx^iua, nasturtium,
assa fetida, Xilobalsamum, ca^^balsamu^, ^hus, mirrha, maiorana, flos
rosmarini, narcissi radix, radix brioniae, brassica, aqua vitae, aqua marina,
berula, brassica, aristolochia.

The Compoundes.
Oleum Hederae, Viscus quercinus, Eupho^bium, pix liquida, terebinthina, oleum
philosophorum, vulpium, laurinum, ^^^aceum, Anetinum, petrol^um, de castoreo,
de tartaro, de hyper^^^o, de nuce indica et muscata, de sulphur, vnguentum
Aragon, martiatum, fuscum, nicolai, agrippae, theriaca, sapa, mithridatum,
confectio anacardina, emplastrum diachilum magnum et paruum, de meliloto,
apostolicon nicolai, oxycroceum. Those which draw by putrefaction, Stercus
omne, presertim columbinum, caprinum, fermentum, caseus ve^us. Those which
draw by property occult: omnia medicamenta purgantia, amb^a, paeonia, magnes.

Vnguentumattrahens.
Rec. Ammoniaci, Galbani, Sagapeni an. onc. 1. dissoluantu^ in ace^o, vt artis
^st colentur, deinde add terebi^thinae, onc. se. olei veteris parum fiat
vnguen^^m.

Emplastrum.
Rec. Spumae argent^ae, Cerusae, Salis an. onc. 2. omnia s^orsim trita cum oleo
veteri, subigantur et coquantur, deinde vsui seruentur.

Aliud.
Rec. Radicum arundinis onc. 2. florum Angelicae, man, radicis brioniae,
altheae onc. se. contundantur simul et melle accipiantur et admoueantur parti.

Cataplasma.
Rec. Ficus pingues N. 6. passularum mundatarum onc. 1. coquantur, add postea
c^parum sub cineribus coctarum, capitum liliorum alborum, an. onc. 3. Misce cum
fermento, sale et vitellis ouorum, fiat Cataplasma.

Dropax.
Rec. Picis liquidae, Ce^^, Colophoniae, an. onc. 2. olei veteris lib. se.
^itri drag. 2. sulphuris vini. drag. 1. se. pip^ri^ albi, Euphorbii an, drag.
1. Misce simul, fiat Dropa^.

The fifth Chapter, of Medicamentes resolutiues.
THe Medicament resolutiue, which the Greeks call Diaphor^^ium, the Latins
Resoluens or Digerens, and commonly called Carminatiuum, the which rarifieth
and euaporateth by insensible transpiration, the humors, and opens the pores
of the skin, and is of quality hot and are divided into two sorts, to
wit, the Proper which is weak, and Improper which is strong.

The Propers.
Like as Oleum Camomilinum, Auetinum, Irinum, Nardinum, lumbricorum, vitellus
ouorum, semen^ini, Althea, aqua callida, vinum, lana succida, oleum lau^inum,
vulpium, euphorbium, baccae recentes, oleum dulce, omne oleum igne calefactum,
abtora^um, adianthum, medulla ceru^ na (...) aristolochia, brassica, brio^niae
radix, furfu^^, fenigrecum, galbanum, hordei, tritici, lupinorum, farina erui,
malua cum toto, melilotum, menta mercurialis, piper, resina, sulphu^^, ^^ercus
omne therebinthi^a, ade^s anserinus, anatinus, galli^aceus, ceruinus,
leoni^^us, case^s ve^us.

The Impropers.
Semen vrticae Dictamum, Cic^amen, Caepa radix Cucumeris agrestis, apium, flos
rosmarini, spuma nitri, acetum, (...) calida, (...), ^herefolium, (...) sabina,
(...), pulegium, absynthium, anyseum, spica nardi, piper, stercus caprinum.

Compositaresoluentia.
Oleum Camomille, Aneti, dulce, vetus, ol cerae mirrhae therebintinae,
hypericonis, maioranae, violarum, de cera, de croco, de bombace,
therebinthinae, Sinapi, sulphureum, petroleum, tartarum, lumbricorum,
stomaticum, diachilum mag number, Iriatum, de vigo, de melliloto, Philippi
philagrei, vnguentum resumptiuum, martiatum, arragon, enulatum, neapolitanum,
oxycroceum, mesuae, agrippae, gummi amoniacum, dellium, opoponax.

Vnguentum resoluens materiam calidam.
Rec. olei Camomille, Liliorum et violarum an* vnc. 1. buriri recentis sine
sale drag. 3. cere quantum sufficit, pulneris camomella drag. 1. fiat vnguentum.

Vnguentum resolueus frigidam materiam.
Rec. olei Liliorum, seminis lini et erini, an vnc. 1. se. emplastri de
mu^ilaginibus, de melli^o^o, an. vnc. se. p^lueris ireos, betonicae an. drag.
1. fiat vnguentum.

Cataplasmaresoluents.
Rec. Earinae fabarum, lini et fenegreci an. vnc. 1. disso^antur et coquantur
in oxycrato ad pultis crassitiem, add pul^eris florum camomillae et melliloti
an. drag. 1. ouorum vitelloss 3. croci drag. 1. olei camomillae et aneti an.
drag. 3. but^ri recentis vnc. se. fiat cataplasma.

Ad flatulentum tumorem.
Rec. Olei anetini, et Liliorum an. vnc. 2. Olei rutae et laurini an. vnc. 1.
succi rutae vnc. 2. bulliant ad succorum consumtionem, cerae quod sufficit vel
loco succi ad^^e tantillum aquauitae ad penetractionem.

Adhydropicos et ^quos^s humores
Rec. Stercoris Columbini, Caprini et vaccini an. P. 1^ flo^um rutae,
camomillae recentinum, seminis lini et anethi an. P. 1. fermenti veteris vnc.
2. nitri drag. 2. bulliant omnia simul in aqua decoctionis apii, deinde
pistentur et super lanam succidam been carpinatam cataplasmatis instar
extendantur, deinde calido ventre, hydropico aut hydrocele applicetur.

The sixth Chapter, of medicamentes Emollientes.
THe medicaments Emollientare called by the Greeks Malactica, and by the
Latins Emollientia, the which have the virtue to soften the hard parts and
bring them to their natural estate, of the which some are common and some
proper. Gal. 5. simpl.


The Common.
Are those which have the virtue to soften the hard parts which is done either
by congelation, extenuatio^, or drynes.

The Proper.
Are those which soften the hardness done by congelation and are meanly hot or
else dry and humide, for if the hardness be done by congelation the medicament
must be hot and dry. If it be drougth as often chances in schirres the
medicament must be hot and humide, always whether it be hot, humide, or dry,
it must be more moderate than the attractiue and less than the suppuratiue. In
the usage of these remedies two things are to observed, the one if any of the
noble parts be hard we apply no mollientes except they be mixed with
astringentes, Gal. 13. metho lib. 5 simpl. cap. 1.
neither they be used in tumors scirrous the which are either simple, or
composed.

The Simples.
As Medulla cernina, Equina, Canina, Vitulina, Vaccina, vrsina, haedina,
leporina, humana, porcina, gallina, caprina, leonina, anserina, anatina,
vulturina, butirum, gummi amoniacum, bdellium, ^^popanacum, galbanum, odanum,
terebenthina, resina, colophonia, pix, herbae remollientes, malua cum toto
violaria, parietaria, mercurialis beta, narcissiradix, radix brioniae,
cucumeris agrestis, semen lini, et fer^^ greci, ficus pinguis, hordei et
tritici farina, caput et p^des ari^tis cocti, cum pelle in aqua vel lacte.

Composita emollientia.
Oleum Liliorum, Lumbricorum, Amygdalarum dulcium, camomillae, vulpinum,
iuniperinum, oleum vetus, althea, ceratum fili^ ^a^hariae, vnguentum agripp^^,
resumptiuum, nicolai, diachilum magnum, cum gummis, triapharmacu^, de
musilaginibus, de althea, ceratum philagrij, oxycroceum, ceroneum, de uigo sine
mercurio, oleo liliorum et irino dissolutum, hydrelium.

Emplastrum remolliens.
Rec. Emplastri de musilaginibus et Diachilon communis an. vnc. 2. emolliantur
cum oleo liliorum, fiat massa emplastri, add pulueris Ireos et sulphuris parum.

Aliud.
Rec. Cerati Filij Zacha^ae et philagrij an. vnc. 3. vngue^ti vigonis sine
mercurio, emplastri de melliloto et diachili ireati an. vnc. 1. se. ammomaci in
aceto dissoluti vnc. 1. pulueris seminis vrticae drag. 2. misce cum vnguento de
altea et oleo camomillae, fiat ceratum, et valet ad tumores gutturis, parotidis
et aliarum partum.

Emplastrum remolliens et resoluens.
Rec. Vng^enti de althea vnc. 1. emplastri de musilaginibus et diachili iriati
an. vnc. se. emplastri oxycrociae, melliloti, et ceronei, an. drag. 2^
malaxentur cum oleo liliorum ^t camomillae et parum cerae si addideris
amoniacum, bdelliu mayor vis erit.

Cataplasma emolliens
Rec. Farinae hordei vnc. 1. foliorum ca^lunn coctorum et praeparatorum
manipulos duos, vitellos ouorum duos olei liliorum quantum sufficit fiat
cataplasma.

Aliud.
Rec. Furfuris macri triturati manipulum vnum, amoniac^ in oxymellite dissoluti
vnc. 2. misce et fiat cataplasma.

The seventh Chapter, of medicaments Suppuratiues.
THe medicaments suppuratiue, or maturatiue called by the Greeks Peptica, by
the Latins Maturantia are those, which by there natural heat sees and bring
the blood and humors superfluous into matter, Hipp. 6 epidimiorum.
of the which two sorts, some be emplastricks which by closing of the pores
augment the natural heat. So the matter being retained makes generation of
Pus, the other kind is hot according to the proportion of the natural heat of
the part, affected of the which they are simples and composed.

Simples.
Like as Aquae fotus modice c^lens Althea, Liliorum capita, violarum, mal^a,
acetosa, farina triticia, hordeacea, medulla panis tritici, fermentum vetus,
adeps por^inus vitulinus, vaccinus, butirum, pix, resina, semen lini, fenngrec^
(...) lossi, radix bricniae, cepae, branca vrsina, poma, (...) vitellus ouorum,
mel crudum, amoniacum, galbanum.

Composita.
Oleum, Liliorum, ol onorum, Butiri, Hyperici, Lumbricorum, Hypericonis,
resine, vnguentum basiliconis vtrumque diachilum magnum, et album, macedonicum,
triapharmatum galeni, de muscilaginibus, vnguetum resump^uum, emplastrum de
fermento, democriti, macedonicum.

Cataplasma suppurans,
Rec. Farmae hordei, tritici an. vnc. 1. Mellis rosati et violati an. vnc. se.
cum oni vitello. fiat cataplasma.

Aliud.
Rec. Olei violati vnc. 1. se. cum oui vitello, agitetur cu^ vngue^to basilici
parum, et admoneatur parti, multum valet in corporibus puerorum.

Aliud.
Rec. Altheae cum toto* foliorum parietariae, malnae violaru^, brancae vrsinae
an. M. se. seminis malnae bismalnae, lini et fenne greci an. drag 3. ficuum
pinguium numero 4. coquantur in aqua, deinde been contusa c^^brar^t^r et
pas^e^i^r par setac^um quibus add farirae fabarum ^t hordei an. onc. ^. olei
liliorum et butiri recentis, et exungiae suillae an. onc. se. fiat Cataplasma.

Vnguentum.
Rec. Diachili magni et albi an. onc. 1. vnguenti resump^i^i onc. se. basilici
onc. se. olei lumbricorum parum. siat vnguentum.

Aliud pro partibus neruosis.
Rec. Farinae hordei onc. 1. se. ouorum vitellos duos terebinthinae et olei
liliorum an. onc. se. fiat Cataplasma.

Aliud.
Rec. Olei nucum, Axungiae suillae veteris an. onc. ^. cerae flauae onc. 1. se.
mellis communis fiat vnguentum his omnibus simul liquatis.

The eight Chapter, of Medicamentes mundificatiues.
THe Medicament cleansing, called by the Greeks Rip^icon, and by the Latins
Detergens, is that which has the strength to separate and draw away the
excrementes purulent from the center of the ulcers to the circumference, Gal.
lib. 5. (...)* lib. 2.
the which is of temperature hot and of substance thin: and is of two kinds,
the one is weak, domesticke, and is either sweet or salt, as farina fabarum,
hordei, cicerum, semen lini, saccarum, oxymell, terebinthus, thus, mel
despumatum, amigdalae amarae, erui farma, radix indicus, nitrum inustum, n^tri
spuma, pumex, and diverse other which Galen has written at length in the
Chapter above mentioned, and are divided in simples and compound^.

The Simples.
Like as Farina fabarum, Hordei, Lupinorum et Oribi, absynthium, agrimonia
betonica, ^^ium, myrrha, thus, sarcocolla, aloe, abrotanum, flos aeris, fellis,
leporis, s^ecas, terebinthina, iris, centaurea minor, solani radix,
arnoglossum, ^^^tiana, marruhbium, calxlota, helleborus, aes vstum, calchantum
crudum et vstum, auripigmentum, allumen, serum lactis, butirum, stercus
caprinum, amigdalae, Aristolochia vtraque

The Compoundes.
Oleum de vitellis ouorum, Mellis, Mirrhae, Guaiaci, Terebintinae de tartaro,
vnguentum^uscum, diapompholigos, vnguentum viride andromachi, emplastrum
diuinum, de appio, apostolorum, aegyptiacum, puluis mercurialis, farina
frumenti, hordei, mel solutum cum oleo rosato.

Emplastrum detergens.
Rec. Terebinthinae venetae onc. 7. Gummi Elemnij. onc. 3. resinae onc. 1. se.
liquefiant omnia simul, deinde refrigeratis quodammodo, add pulueris
Aristolochiae longae onc. se. sanguinis draconis onc. 1. se. fiat Emplastrum

Medicamentum blande detergens.
Rec. mellisrosati onc. 1. vitellum vnius oui, farina hordei quantum sufficit,
terebinthinae in aqua plantaginis lotae drag. 2.

Vnguentum detergens.
Rec. Olei Hipericonis onc. 2. Gummi Elemni onc. 1. se. cerae onc. se.
terebinthinae onc. 1. misce et fiat vnguentum.

Aliud.
Rec. Picis Resinae lib. 1. Picis grecae lib. se. butiri recentis lib. 1. se.
viridis aeris drag. se.

Aqua detergens.
Rec. Florum aeris vsti onc. 3. Tutiae preparatae in vino albo onc. 1. vini
albi odoriferi onc. se. aque plantaginis onc. se. misce omnia simul.

Aliud.
Rec. Vini albi onc. 2. Floris ^ris drag. 1. auripigmenti ^^ag ^misce ^^mul cum
aqua rosarum.

The eight Chapter, of Medicamentes Incarnatiues.
THis Medicament which the Greeks call sarcoticon, the Latins Generatio
carnis* and has the force to dry and change the blood which comes to any
part, into flesh. It dries without mordication, it thickneth it, and
conuerteth it into flesh. Such medicaments by the abstertion and desiccation
moderatly done, help nature. Gal. 3. method. et 2. de compositione
pharmacorum. Gal. de simpl.
It should be dry in the third or fourth degree, to the end the two
excrementes which are gross and subtle, which are contrary, viz. abstersion
and desiccation may not let the action of nature in the generation of flesh. Of
the which there are three kinds, viz. weak strong and very strong.

The Weak.
As Olibanum, Mastix, Aloe, farina hordei, fenogreci, et d^bent applicari
corporibus humidis et delicatis.

The Strong.
As Aristolochia, Iris florentiae, farina Lupinorum, Calcantum vstum et debent
applicari corporibus siccis.

The most Strong.
The most strong are proper to be applied in deep ulcers as centaureum,
plumbum et antimonium vstum, glutinum adustum, limaces, mirrha. If a wound or
ulcer be dry, yet in a manner be very humide, the Medicament must be dry in
the first degree. If the wound or ulcer be charged with great humiditie, and
the part nevertheless very dry* the medicament must be dry in the second and
third degree. Of the which some are simples, others composed.

The Simples.
Olibanum, Masticha, Aloe, Borax, colophoniae, farina lupinorum, orobi, hordei,
fennogreci, fabarum, lentium, tritici, aristolochia vtraque, radix iris
florentiae, vitriolu^ vstum, pix liquida et sicca, mirrha, sarcocolla, mel,
antimonium, plumbum vstum, oleum omne, pompholigos vtraque, betonica, succus
pilosellae, bursa pastoris, squamma aeris, hypericon, centarea minor, sanicula,
verbena, scabiosa, pimpinella, lingua canis, ceruina, thus, dragagantum,
terebinthina.

The Compoundes.
Oleum rosatum, Absynthir, Masticis, Irinum* Omphaci^um, thuris, sarcocollae,
vnguentum aureum, Basilocum, Mesues, emplastrum gratiae Dei, croceum,
comitissae, de betonica, diapalma, triapharmacum, ceruse, pretiosum agu^done
descriptum, de i^nua.

Emplastrum Sarcoticon.
Rec. Centaureae minoris manipulos tres, macerentur viginti quatuor horis in
vino albo, deinde coque ad mellis crassitiem, add lactis muliebris onc. 1.
terebinthinae onc. 6. cerae nouae onc. 2. resinae onc. 1. thuris, masticis,
gummi arabici an. on^. se* fiat emplastrum.

Vnguentum Sarcoticon.
Rec. Pinguedi^^is anferis, po^ci, gallinae et mellis an. onc. 1. aloes et
calcis vinae tantillum, succi brassicae quantum sufficit, misce et fiat
vnguentum.

Aliud rob^stioribus corporibus.
Rec. Pulueris Aristolochia rotundae, co^^is Ire^s, thuris an. drag. 3. aloes,
mirrhae, cadmiae, masticis an. drag. 3. me^lis quo satis erit.

Aliud ex Aetio*
Rec. Farinae tritici drag. 2. colophoniae, drag. 1. misce.

Aliud.
Rec. Rasurae panni linei been mundati drag. 5. opopae^^cis drag. 2 mellis,
olei rosatum an. drag. 5 litargiri, aloes, sarco^ollae an. drag. 1. se. fiat
vnguentum.

Puluis Sarcoticus et Cephalicus.
Rec. Pimpinellae, Beto^^cae, Gariophila^ae, Valerianae, an. drag. 1.
pilosellae drag. 5. fiat puluis quo canum v^cus inspergatut.

The tenth Chapaer, of Medicamentes Cicatrisants.
THe Medicament Cicatrisant, called by the Greeks Epiloticon, by the Latins
Cic^trisans, is that which has the power to make and cicatrize by his dryness
and astriction without a ^^imonie drying the flesh. In such manner and makes
it in substance like to the skin, yet not according to the first intention, by
the reason that parts Spermaticks do not engender in all points as before.
This medicame^t is hot in the third degree and i^ divided in simples and
composed.

The Simples.
As allumen vstum, vitriolum galla, spongia vsta, lythargirum, polipodium terra
sigillata, sqammae eris, aristolo^^ia rotunda, centaurea, malicorum, oliuae,
apii semen tritum, ^^os mali granati rosa an^^^um vstum, aloe, caries lignorum,
pompholix, spodium, nux cupress^* nalx lota es vstum, mineralia vsta et lota,
mirrha, thus, plumbum, radix cucumeris siluestris.

Composita.
Emplastrum de cerusa, de minio album rasis, Vigonis, desiccatinum rubeum,
diapompholigos, aqua aluminosa et pluralia descipta in c^pi^ibus de vulneribus.

Emplastrum Epiloticum.
Rec. Lapidis calaminaris, terrae sigillate an. vnc. 4. cerae nonae vnc. 5.
olei rosati vnc. 2. olei hyosciami et papaneris albi an* vnc. 2. se. olei
violarum vnc. 4. aquauirae drag. 3. fiat emplastrum.

Puluis.
Rec. Sarcocollae, Glutinis piscum, Crysocolle, plumbi vsti* ^^uamae ferri an.
drag. 1. misce, fiat puluis.

Vlceribus pudeudorum citra morsum siccani^.
Rec Aloes loti et aeris vstian vnc. se. pulnerisentur tenuissime cum pulu^^e
mal^corii et balaustiorum et vsui seruentur.

Aliud.
Rec. Olibuni, Aloes, Sanguinis draconis an. drag. 3. Aristolochiae rotundae,
ceruse corticis pini, centaurei minoris an. dran. 1. gallarum, balaustiorum an.
drag. 2. fiat puluis.

Aqua Epilotica.
Rec. Sucei po^tulacae, Caprifolii, Acetosae, Arnoglossae an. lib. 1. albumina
ouorum vigenti, aluminis rupis puluerisati lib. 3. vitrioli romani vnc. 6.
misce et distilla.

The eleventh Chapter, of medicaments Adglutinatiues.
THe medicament Adglutinatiue called by the Greeks Symphiticon, by the Latins
Adglutinans, is that which has the virtue to dry the humiditie that is
betwixt the lips of the wou^d and are dry in the second degree, of the which
some be simples, some composed.

The simples.
Mastix, Sarcacolla, Thus, Mirra, Colophonia, T^^ebentina, terra sigillatae
sanguinis draconis, hypericon, flos rosemarinus, succus centinodiae, maioranae,
baliamum natural et artificiale, sanguis humanus combustus gummi dragaganti,
elemuii, hederae, olibanum, terra lemnia, fotus vini rubei, consolida, petrea,
verbena, mellefolium, argentina, talietrum, anoglossa, herba roberti, sanicula,
consolida minor, morsus diabolicaprafolij, tela arane^^um, cauda equina, nux
coclearum, sine limacum terrestrum, ebulus, sam^u^us, pentaphilon.

The Compounds.
Emplastrum nig^grum, diapalma, de centauria, vnguentum regis angliae,
vnguenrum de vermibus, oxeleu^ galeni.

Liquor pro on^^ vlcere, aut vulnere cauo.
Rec. Terebenthinae venetae lib. 1. Aqua vitae lib. 3. vitrioli romani vnc. 4.
herbae primulae vtris M. 3. distilla in alem bico vitreo^

Balsamum D. S. Iohannis.
Rec. Olei lini, et ol^arum an. vnc. 4. Terebenthinae venetrae lib. 1.
aeruginis aeris et vitrioli romani an. drag. se. bullia^t paru^ lento igne et
seruentur, si volueris accomodare vlceribus vice olinaru^ et samburi accipies
parum portione mercurii sublimati diligenter puluerisati.

The tweft Chapter, of medicaments Cathereticks, Septicks, and Causticks.
THe medicament which the Greeks call Catheretieon the Latins Carnis
Co^sumtiuum, is that which has the force to corrode, and putrify in digering
the substance of the flesh and skin and may differ in 3. manners vz. weak,
strong and very strong. The weak is called Cathertick, or Corrosiue, the
strong is called by the Greeks Septicon, and by the Latins, Putrefactiuum,
the very strong is called Escareticon and by the Latins Causticum. The
Cathereticke has the strength by vehement drying to consume the excrescences
of flesh, as Polypus, Tuberculum, verruci, and is applied commonly in wounds
and ulcers putrides or where there are excrescences of flesh, the which cannot
be taken away neither by digerents nor astringents, and it is of two sorts,
Simple and Composed.

The Simples.
Radix Aspidelorum, Hermodactilorum, Piretrum, Oxileum, calx mediocriter lota,
vitrioli omnia genera, squammae aeris, flos aeris, allumen vstum et non vstum,
sal torrefactus pompholix, plumbum vstum, antimonium si^e stibium, hydrargyrus
sublimatus et praecipitatus, ^nabrum, lana succida, v^^a, et in puluerem
redacta, squammae aeris, ae^ugo.

The Compoundes.
Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, vngue^^um omne detersiuum cui permixtum fuerit aliquid
ex praedictis his medicamentis.

Puluis Cathereticus.
Rec. Cerusae vstae, Lytargiri, Corticis Piny, mirrhae, gallarum omnium an.
drag. 2. puluerisentur vt alcoal.

Medicament putrefactiue.
The midicament Septick is stronger then the Carherick: for by the great heat
and thyn substance it has the force to v^cer the skin, Gal. 5. simpl.
likewise the flesh, yet with little dolor. Nevertheless this kind of
medicaments is somewhat dangerous, like as arsenicum, auri pigmentum, purum tum
sublimatum, brioniae, crysocolla, sandarathus, appium radix, sigillum beatae
mariae* Omnes lithimallum species, sinapi, ^uphorbum, cantharides, ranunculus,
appium risus, appium regale.

Medicamen^ Caustic.
The Caustic which the Greeks call Escaroticon is very strong because it
consumes not only the soft parts but also the hard making ascarre after
diverse manners as ye have heard in the Chapter of Canters, the which are hot in
the fourth degree. Like as calx vina, arsenicum sublimatum, nitrum, vini f^^x
vsti, lixinumfo^^e, calcautu^, falui^ trum, thapsis.

Escaroticon ex Aetio.
Rec. Sulphuris, Radicis brassicae an. vnc. 2. Axungi^ porci veteris vnc. 4.
misce simul.

V^ssicatorum.
Rec. Cantharidum abiectis capitibus et alis drag. 3. succi flammulae vel pedis
coruiui vnc. 2. se. ferme^ti veteris vnc. 2. piperis longi drag. 1. se. misce
fiat emplastrum.

Aliud ex Bartapallia.
Rec. Fermentum non siccum et fac ipsum tenerum fortissimo aceto deinde accipe
cantharides qua^titate que sufficit et pone superfermento et appone loco
affecto est mirabilis iuuamenti in humoribus trahendis a capite et vento
fitatibus dissoluendis a fatie.

Aliud.
Rec. Flammulae m. 2. contundantur diligenter et partae applicentur: Item fieri
potest de persicaria, de appio filuestri, radice ranunculi, et de viburno.

The thirteenth Chapter, of Medicaments which stay the Flux of Blood.
BEcause the Blood is the treasure of life, it is most needful when it
flows excessiuely, to stay the same, otherwise death shall follow. This
medicament is of nature and quality cold, and is either simple or composed.

The Simple.
^olus Armenus preparatus, Terra sigillata, sanguis Draconis, crocus martis,
veneris calx, testarum ouorum, colcothar simplex, colcothar dulcificatum,
cerusa, cadinia, lytargirum, gipsum, thus, aloe, mastix, resina, gluten,
Amilum, grana passularum rubrarum, portulaca, semperviuum, ^a^da equina,
auricula muris, vmbilicus veneris, psilium, farina volatilis, Corallum
vtrumque, lapis haematites, calcantum vstum, dragagantum, sarcocolla, gummi
arabici, pili leporis vsti, sanguis humanus vstus, antimonium, centinodium,
tela araneorum et alia quae audiuisti in Capite de vulneribus venarum et
arteriarum.

Puluis astringens.
Rec. Thuris partem vnam, pilotum Leporis minutim incisorum partemse. fiat
puluis.

Aliud.
Rec. Balaustiorum onc. 3. alluminis onc. 1. vitrioli vsti onc. se. misce, fiat
puluis.

Aliud.
Rec. Thuris partem vnam, sanguinis draconis partem se. calcis vinae, partem
tertiam, fiat puluis.

Cataplasma.
Rec. Thuris, Aloes, Sanguinis draconis, Boli armenici, an. parts aequales
omnibus cum oui albumine ^^ceptis, cum pilis ventris leporis minutim incisis,
fiat Cataplasma.

Hemoragia desperata ex Auicenna.
Rec. Vitrioli vsti onc. 2. se. Thuris onc. 2. Aloes et Glutinis sicci an. onc.
1. arsenici onc. se. gipsi puluerisati onc. 2. se. misce et fiat puluis, qui
aspergatur pluma ceolis.

As for those which make a skarre like as the Canter actual, they be of diverse
forms, and are applied in diverse manners as ye have heard. And so we end
this Treatise in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Amen.

FINIS.
THE BOOK OF THE PREsages of deuyne Hyppocrates divided into three parts.
Also the protestation which Hyppocrates caused his Scholars to make. THE WHOLE
NEWLY COLlected and Translated by PETER LOW Arellian Doctor in the faculty of
Chirurgerie in PARIS.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot, 1597.

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble and his most esteemed Lord, Robert Lord Sempile,
Sheriff of Renfrowe, and Baily of the Regalitie of Pastlay, Knight of his
Majesty's most noble Order, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel, P, L. wishes increase of all honorable Virtues.
WHEN I had turned into our vulgar language this little work, Right Honorable,
I considered with my self, that in ancient time, and also in this our Age,
men have accustomed to dedicate their travels unto such virtuous Personages as
they have honored: and I examining my self, unto whom I might address this
little labor of mine, I thought good to presume to your goodness, and present
the same to your Lordshippe, as a pledge of my zeal and humble duty toward
you, your honorable and matchless virtues derived in part from your noble
Parents, but more plentifully enriched by your invincible mind, valiant
prowess, and rare martial exploytes, in prosecuting all venterous and hardy
attemptes which was experimented at your being in France, to the terror of
your enemies, honor of your country, and immortal Fame to you and your
Posterity for ever: wherein you manifest to the eye of the world the true
Idaea of perfect Nobility, leaving to succeeding posterity a memorable
remembrance of your neuer-dying Fame. If your Lordship vouchsafe to patronize
my endeavors (not worthy so honorable a Patron) I shall be surely protected
from the venomous teeth of all carpers and bear with ease the burden of their
reproaches: my labors wantes not their reward, if they win your good will,
nor my mind his desire, if you vouchfafe to favor. I cease, wishing your
Lordship as many happy years as virtues: commending my labors to your
honorable protection, I humbly take my leave.

From London the 20. of April. 1597. Your L. most duetifull to command. Peter
Low.

The life of Hyppocrates.
HYppocrates the son Heraclides, as Galen does affirm in the first Book of
Regiment of hot fevers, but as others says the son Esclepius, was bred and
borne in the Isle Cos, his Master and Instructor was the great Pythagoras. His
natural inclination was toward good, for he hated, loathed, and abhorred all
pomp and worldly pleasures, and venerral lusts. He constrained also his
scholars by an oath to be silent and keep taciturnitie, modesty,
affability, and humility, as well in manners as in apparel St. Hierome
testifies. He restored the science of Physic being almost lost Five H^ndreth
years viz. since the time of Esculapius. He was little in body and stature,
but fair and exceeding well favored: he had a good and strong head: he went
slowly and softly: he was very pensive and of few words: he was no great
eater nor glutton: he lived 95. years, he used oftentimes this sentence. He
that will live in liberty let him not desire that which he cannot obtain, and
he who would have that which he desires and covers let him desire nothing
but that which he may obtain. Furthermore he who would live peaceably in this
mortal life, let him conform himself to him who is invited to a feast who
gives thanks for all which is laid before him, and grudgeth not at any thing
which is omitted. He lived in the time of Eliachim, of Malachias, of Pereno and
Socrates.

The protestation and oath of deuyne Hyppocrates.
I Hyppocrates vow, promise and protest to the great God Appollo and his two
Daughters Higine and Panadie, and also to all the gods and goddesses to observe
the the contents of this oath, or tables wherein this oath is carved, written or
ingraued, so far as I can possible, and so far as my wit or understanding
shall be able to direct me viz that I yield my my self tributarie and debtor
to the Master and Doctor who has instructed me and showed me this science
and Doctrine, even as much or rather more then to my Father who has begotten
me, and that I shall live and communicate with him and follow him in all
necessities, which I shall know him to have so far as my power shall permit,
and my goods shall extend. Also that I shall love and cherish his children as
my brothers, and his progeny as mine own. Further that I shall teach, show and
demonstrate the said science gratis without reward or covenant, and that I
shall give all the Cannons rules and precepts, freely, truly, and faithfully
to my Master his children as to mine own, without ^yding or concealing any
thing, and to all other Scholars who shall make the same oath or protestation
and to no others. Also that in practicing and using my science toward the
sick* I shall use only things necessary so far as I am able and as my
spirit and good understanding shall give unto me and that I shall cure the
sick as speedy as I may, without dilating or prolonging the Malady. And that
I shall not do any thing against equity, for hatred, anger, envy or malice
to any person whatsoever: Moreover that I shall minister no poison, neither
counsel nor teach poison, nor the composing thereof to any: Also that I shall
not give nor cause to give nor consent that any thing be applied to a woman
breeding or big with child, to destroy or make her void her fruit. But I
protest to keep my Life and Science purely, sincerely and inuiolably, without
deceit fraud or guile. And that I shall not cut nor incise any person
having the stone, but shall leave the same to those that are expert in it: and
furthermore, I shall not enter into the Patients house, but with purpose to
heal him: and that I shall patiently sustain the injuries, reproaches and
lothsomnesse of sick men, and all other base raylings: and that I shall
eschew as much as I may, all venerious lasciviousness. Moreover I protest, be
it man, woman, master or servant, who is my Patient, to cure them of all
things that I may see or hear either in mind or manners, and I shall not
bewray that which should be concealed and hidden, but keep inviolable silence,
neither reveal any creature under pain of death. And therefore I beseech our
Gods, that observing this Protestation, Here Hippocrates shows that the
place of blessed is eternal, and the pain of the wicked infinite
promise and vow entirely and inuiolably, that all things in my life, in my
Art and Science may succeed securely, healthfully and prosperously to me, and
in the end eternal glory. And to him that shall violate, transgress or
become perjured, that the contrary may happen unto him viz. misery, calamity
and eternal maladies.

The end of the Protestation.
The first book of the Presages of divine Hyppocrates.
Prologue.
ANy Medicine Chirurgian desiring to purchase glory and honor, the love of the
people, and some wealth by his Science, ought to show himself skillful and
expert, and that by declaring to the Patients the signs past, present and
future of their Maladies, and showing the things over past by the sick men,
and aduertising or reducing to their memory things forgotten: which the sick
persons knowing will the more confidently commit themselves to their hands,
presuming and thinking that he has general knowledge of all Maladies, and
that they shall be spedily cured, the which is true: For having such knowledge
of things past, present, and future, he may more easily help the Maladies
although it be impossible to any Medicine Chirurgian to cure and heal all
diseases: for it should be a greater thing then to foretell the future
accidents. For it sometimes happens that t^^e sick die by the violence or
malignitie of the Malady before the Physician be called: some die shortly
after the Chirurgian is arrived, the same day: also one or two days after
before that by his science and diligence he may correct and take away the
peril and dangerous accide^ts. Therefore he ought to endeavor and enforce him
to know the nature and peruersitie of such sickness, also the strength of the
sick to the end he may avoid defamations, opprobries and reproaches: which he
shall do and make himself admirable and more divine then humane, presaging
death to one, health to another, having likewise regard to the quality,
goodness and malignitie of the air as we particular, vz. which circumuirons
the sick as the universal, and the times on their qualities and the year,
also the good and evil aspects of celestial bodies, which foreseing he shall
eschew dishonor, and shall get renown and friends.

Here he begins to Presage by signs of the Face.
NOw to foretell well, to foresee or presage by signs in dangerous and
vehement Maladies. It is requisite to consider and contemplate the Face of the
sick. First to know if it be such as in health, or but a little difference:
and if it be so, the medicine Chirurgian may have a good presagement and hope
of Recovery. But if it be greatly altered and changed as follows, he shall
esteame it peril and danger of death, when the nose and nostrels are
extenuated and sharpened by the same Malady, and the eyes hollow, and the
temples viz. the parts between the ears and forehead are lean, and the
skin of the brow is hard, dry, and loose, and the ears cold and shronke, or
almost doubled, and all the face appears black, pale, liuide, or leaden and
greatly deformed, in respect of that which it was in time of health: When these
things before mentioned appear in the Face, or the most part of them, In the
beginning or first days of the Malady he must enquire (if he cannot know by
any other token) if it happen not by watching too much, viz. that the Patient
has not had time nor opportunity to sleep, or if he has had a natural flux
of the belly, or if the said things have happened by famine: for if it be so,
he ought not to fear danger. On the contrary, if the Face appear such and
continue, and the Patient says that the said things do not proceed of
watching, loosenes of body, nor by fasting, the Medicine Chirurgian may
assuredly presage death approaching and if the malady has already continued
three or four days, after having considered that as is above mentioned it
behooued him to contemplate by other signs, as by the eyes and other parts of
the body.

To presage by the signs of the Eyes and Lips.
JF the Eyes cannot see the day or light, and weep or power out tears against
nature, and against the Patients will: Also when it seems that they are like
to fall out of the head, or that the one is evidently given less or
diminished, or that the white of the eyes is red, and the veins appear red or
liuide, or that they are bleared or dim, or trembling and very moveable, or
deep and sonck in: also when the sick becomes squint eyed and looks over
thwart, and has a terrible and obscure look, and has the visage all
disfigured and fearful: all these signs are pernicious and mortal. Also
when the Patient sleeps with his eyes half open (he does not so by custom)
and the white of the eye show it self, the eye lids being only closed, and
this happens not by the flux of the body, nor by laxatiue medicines, it is a
sign of death. Also when the eye lids, the lips, and nose seem to be crooked
and drawn awry, also mortified and liuide: these signs with the preceding
foretell death to the sick. Likewise when the lips are lean, hanging down,
cold and pale, against the nature of the sick, the Medicine Chirurgian may
presage and prognosticate death to approach.

To presage by the manner of Lying and Reposing.
AS for Lying it is a very good sign when the Patient reposeth and rests on
the right side or left at his ease having his hands upon his stomach or
elsewhere, not being stiff, nor his legs but flexible, and to repose as in
health is best. For to lie with neck, hands, and feet stiffly extended and
unflexible is an evil sign. Likewise when the sick turns, wrings and
tosseth up and down often times with starting either in sleep or waking, and
making the beds feet where the head should be, casting himself down, not
knowing what he does, is an evil sign: Also if he often uncover himself
having no great heat in the extremities, and that he casts forth his arms,
legs, feet and head, so^time on this side, sometime on that, it is a sign that
he is in great anguish and distress: also it is a pernicious sign to sleep
with the mouth open contrary to nature: likewise to sleep with the face
upward having the legs enterlaced and folded together as it were cords, and
that by the force and violence of the Malady, is a bad sign, or when they are
much enlarged against reason. Likewise he that sleeps contrary to nature and
custom with the belly downward laid close to the bed, shows and signifies
confusion and alienation of senses, or great rage and dolor of the belly. Also
whosoever in the day of Critication and force of the Malady constraines and
forces himself to rise and sit upright, and is impatient, puts himself in
danger, and it is an evil sign in all vehement and great Maladies, but worse
in pulmonick passions.

To Presage by the Teeth.
When one gnasheth the teeth (not as a man that has extreme cold) but with
collision in the Fever, and has not had it naturally, nor by custom, it
signifies tre^bling of the spirit and consequently death, and if he be shortly
after void of reason and alienated, it signifies death approaching.

To Presage of the sign of Death by the Ulcer.
IF there happen to the sick person any Ulcer Antrax or Carbuncle, whether it
go before the Malady, or come with the Malady: if the Ulcer dry up, and it
become neither green, liuide, nor black, and you perceive the sick to grow
worse, you may prognosticate death ensuing.

To presage by the Hands.
When the Patient sick of the burning Fever, or in the Malady of the lights
called Peripneumonia, or in bastard frenzy, and not perfect, or in great dolor
of the head, seeks hair, and there about below and upon the bed, as threads,
and haeres of the face, also feathers, or filth of the couerings, also straw,
rushes, and other things, and thinks to take hold of the seeling and walls,
the which are al mortal signs.

To presage by Breath or Respiration.
THe Breath or Respiration signifies often dolors or inflammations, or burning
in the spiritual members, as in the heart and lights, but when it is great and
rare, so that there is any long space betwixt the Respiration, it signifies
alienation of understanding and reason. And when the breath issues out of the
mouth and nostrils very cold, it foretells great peril of death. But gentle
Respiration in any hot Malady being joined and accompanied with a Fever is
sign of health in those that do end in forty days.

Of the Prognostication by Sweat.
THe healthful, commendable, and good Sweat in all hot Maladies, is that which
happens in the day of Critication and Judgment, and chifly when it is
universal and the Patient finds himself thereby eased and strengthened. And
if it happen not in the same day and be not universal, it is no good sign.
For the mortal Sweat is particular and cold as in the forehead, in the head or
face only, and this in the burning Fever and other Maladies declares
continuance of the Malady.

To presage of the Right side and Left.
WHen the Patient feels not any dolor, tumor, hardness, or Inflammation upon
the Ribs, it is a very good sign, and when the one side is as soft as the
other, without dolor. But if there be dolor, tumor, hardness, or
Inflammation on both sides, or on the one more then the other, it is an evil
sign. For if he feel great motion or pulsacion in one of the sides, one may
prognosticate great distress and dolor, or alienation and confusion of
Reason. If with this pulsation the eyes be very moveable, the Patient is in
danger of Frenzy and to be frantic, or to destroy himself.

To presage by signs of Apostumes under the sides.
THe Collection of Apostume in a burning Malady under both the sides with
tumor and dolor, is more dangerous then under one of the sides only, and
chiefly less dangerous under the left side then under the right: and if the
Patient die not in the first days, and if it continue xx. days and the fever
cease not, nor the Apostume diminish, it is a sign that it shall come to
maturation, and if it happen on the seventh day with the flux of blood at the
nose, it eases well, which the Medicine Chirurgian may prognosticate when the
Patient says that he has pain in the head or forehead, and that his eyes are
dim or obscure, and chiefly when the Patient do not exceed 30 or 35 years
of age. And when the collection or Apostume is soft and without dolor, and
moves or varieth when it is handled, it requires longer time to be cured then
the precedent, but it is not so dangerous. And if it continue 60 days, and the
Fever cease not, neither the tumor diminish, it shall come to maturation and
purgation: you shall prognosticate so much of Apostumes in the belly: the
Apostume then being hard, great, and with dolor, is dangerous and mortal: The
soft without dolor and volable from one place to another, is of longer
continuance, but without comparison less dangerous.

To presage of Apostumes in the bottom of the Belly.
THe Apostumes of the Belly do never become so great as those that breed under
the Midriffe, and yet they are less which engender under the Nauill, and most
commonly they come to suppuration or putrefaction: It is a good sign when they
purge by flux of blood at the Nostrels from the part of the Apostume: also all
such Apostumes by laps of time and in the end may come to putrefaction and
purga^ion by manner as follows. It is then convenient to consider that the
forenamed Collections or Apostumes come by diverse means to putrefaction or
purgation, for some purge altogether outwardly and are little, round, and
sharp or pointed, they are most healthful and feast mortal: The sarge,
gross, and flat, spacious and not round nor sharp, are dangerous: and those
which break and purge within the belly, although they make some tumors
outwardly, are more pernicious and dangerous, then those which make no
imminence outwardly, and which have not the skin discolored.

To presage what the matter ought to be that issues out of Apostumes.
THe Corruption and matter which comes out of Apostumes altogether white and
not unsavory is good and healthful: that which is otherwise, how much the
more it deflects from white, so much the more is vicious and bad.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book of the Presages of Hyppocrates, and first of Hidropsie.
ALl manner of Hydropsie with the hot fever, is dangerous and mortal: For the
Patient is molested and afflicted by any vehement fever and grievous dolor,
and therefore dies. This Malady often proceeds of the Hepatick passion
which is the Malady of the Liver: It happens also by passions in the Guts,
Intestines, and Entrals, Meseraick, raynes or melt, and inferior parts: That
which comes by the Entrals or Meseraick and inferior parts, is known by
Inflation in the feet and by long and continual flux of the body, albeit the
dolor of the belly is not mitigated nor appeased, nor the belly diminished nor
grown less. That which proceeds of the Liver, is known by the signs
following, viz, the Patient has a dry cough and spitteth almost nothing, and
his belly is hard and bound in such sort that there comes nothing from it, but
with great pain and travel: also his feet are swollen: Moreover there are
tumors and inflations sometime on the right side, sometime on the left: then
they depart and dissipate, that is, they go and return.

To presage of the signs of Life and Death in hot Fevers.
WHen the Patient is cold in the head, hands and feet, and that the sides and
belly are burning and vehement hot, it is a sign of an evil and dangerous
Malady. But when the sick person does easily turn himself from one side to
another without trouble: also when all the body is equally hot, and sauourie,
it is a sign of salubritie. On the contrary side, when all the members are
heavy, as the arms, legs, and all the body, it is to be feared. And if the
Nails be therewith liuide or leaden, one may prognosticate Death approaching.
But if the Nails, fingers and feet be altogether black, it is not so dangerous
a sign especially when any other good sign does appear, as if the Patient
feel no great dolor, and bears it strongly, and endures his sickness
without anguish, albeit that which is black will fall away, and the dim will
be euacuated by Apostume.

To presage by signs taken from the Geneters and Yard.
When the Genitors and Yard are shronke in and apparently diminished against
nature, it is a sign of great dolor and present death.

To presage by Sleeping and Dreaming.
AS for sleeping and slumbring, the one is natural and healthful, and the
other unnatural and vicious. The natural rest is taken in the night and
waking in the day: And although it is not altogether wholesome to sleep from
the break of the day to 8 or 9 of the clock at morning, yet notwithstanding
it is more profitable then to sleep in the rest of the day: But if one neither
sleep by night nor day, it is dangerous and a sign of great dolor, of folly,
of alienation of senses, reason and understanding present or future.

To presage by purging of the belly or fecall excrements.
AS for easing of the Belly and euacuating of superfluities and excrements, it
is best when the sick person follow the custom in Maladies which they did in
health, and especially according to quality and quantity of his diet. For how
much the more it is dissonant and different, it is so much the worse. The
natural egestion ought not to be too liquide or adust, but indifferently
proportioned and compounded in color to the meats, and that the Patient go
to stool without pain or dolor. And if the matter be liquide, it is not
altogether to be disliked when it comes without ventositie or violence, and not
often in a short time. For so it would make the person weak, debile, froward,
and in danger of swoonding, and death: It is also to be allowed about the end
of the Malady, that the egestion and excrementall matter become thick and not
too dry and of a good color, as drawing near to red or brown, and be not
very unsavory. Also if there come forth worms about the end of the sickness
with the excrements, it is a good sign. Likewise in every Malady the belly
ought to be fleshie and not round, nor full of wind, otherwise it is no good
sign. Furthermore the egestion and excrementall matter being liquide and
waterie, white or pale, greatly red or froathy, is dangerous: the mortal is
black and liuide or green, unsavory and slimy. And if it be of diverse of the
forenamed colors together, it is no less dangerous but of longer continuance:
also when there is peeling of the guts or Carnuncles and little skin, all
such are mortal.

To presage of Wind in the Intestines and Matrice.
THe ventositie enclosed in the belly issuing forth gently and voluntarily
without making noise or sound and without strayning the Fundament and inferior
parts, is the best and most wholesome. That which comes forth unconstrained
making a noise is better then to retain it. But if it goes out with sound and
noise against the Patients will, it signifies dolorous tortion in the belly,
or alienation and confusion of reason.

To presage of Ventositie causing Inflation.
THe dolours Recent in the belly by Inflation and tumors, and the Inflation,
burning, and heat making noise, rumbling, and motion in the belly, are cured
especially by the benefit of the belly or by expulsion of wind downward, or by
Urine, or if they change the place and descend downward.

To presage by the Urine.
THe Urine that is healthful in every Malady, ought to have the Residence in
the bottom white or pyramidall, having the figure of a pear or little fine
apple, being thick, then it signifies brevity of the sickness, and the more
that it perseuereth, the more it is to be allowed and sure. And if sometime and
for certain days in the Malady it be such and in some days without
Residence, it signifies proli^itie of sickness and less security, and the
more it differs from the first, the worse it is. The Urine being red or high
colored with the Hypostasie or light and equal residence signifies the
Malady to be longer then the precedent where there is no Hypostasie, but
less dangerous. Also when there is gross Resolutions as bran or dust in the
bottom of the Urine, it is an evil sign, and worse where they are like
scales of fish. The Urine white and subtle is exceeding bad, albeit the
forementioned is worse where there is gross resolutions. The cloud hanging in
the Urine signifies security if it be white, for the black is dangerous:
moreover the Urine being yellow and very clear and subtle in the Malady
shows continuitie of sickness, gross in digestion and crudity. Therefore it
is to be feared least the sick person decay before the humors come to perfect
concoction, and least the Patient die. The Urine significatiue of certain
death and infallible is unsavory, slimy and muddy, as dirt and mire, and is
tauny, brown, black, and thick. Furthermore the black as well in man as woman
is always bad, and the subtle and the clear as water is also mortal in
little children. The Urine being raw, clear and undigested, perseuering so
long in the malady without other evil signs, but with good and healthful,
shows a future Apostume lower then the Diaphragme or ribs: The Urine having
as it were a cobweb swimming above signifies that the person shall die, Dry
and etick shows consumption of the body: you must also consider the place and
color of the cloud, for if it be near the bottom of the Urine it is a good
sign having the color near unto white. And if it be swimming above and on
the top and black, it is dangerous and uncertain. Finally as for the
Judgment of Vrines, take heed above all that you be not deceived by the
Bladder: For they may appear such by the diseases of it: And if the Bladder
be not diseased, thy judgment shall be certain, therefore take heed.

To presage of Vomiting good and bad.
AS for Vomiting the most healthful and allowable is composed of Phlegm and
choiler not too thick or too viscous or superfluous: The chollerick or
phlegmatic only, is vicious: the vomiting being green, liuide, or black, is
dangerous, and if it be compounded of green liuide, and black altogether it is
mortal. Likewise if it be unsavory with one of these forenamed colors, it
signifies death approaching: For the Ius is vicious in all vomiting and every
excrement.

To Presage of the Spittle.
AS for Spittle it is said to be commendable in all pulmonick diseases and
Maladies under the Ribs when it comes early in the first days and begins
after the malady without great pain and labor being of a redd coulor or
mingled with blood and well digested not viscous. But if it come not in the
first days but afterward with a vehement cough it is no good sign, also the
red not being mingled with the healthful and commendable is pernicious. The
white spittle vicious and globy is dangerous, but the pure red (...) worse. The
green and fleshie gives notice of a dangerous and bad malady. The black
above all is mortal moreuoer when the matter which ought to be purged by
spitting, remains within the Lights and troubles the windpipe, there is no
security: The spittle also being clear or red, sanguinolent in apostume and
pulmonick inflation coming in the beginning of the malady promises in the
first days security and health to the patient. But if such egestion continue
to the seventh day or more it is suspicious and uncertain. Also spittle
whereby the dolor does not cease but persevere is not commendable but vicious.
And although the black as we have showed before is mortal, notwithstanding if
the dolor do thereby cease it is less dangerous and more healthful.

To presage of Neesing.
THe Neesing in all hot Maladies and other how dangerous soever they be (except
they proceed of the Lights) at any time is commendable and profitable. But
being with rume and distillation at the nose. In Maladies of the Lights whether
it comes in the malady or presently after it, is dangerous.

To Presage of Suppuration.
THe dolor above mentioned which cease not by spitting, nor by the benefit
of the belly, nor by phlebotomie, nor by laxatiue Medicines, or good Regiment,
signifies that the Apostume comes to Suppuration, and Matter. And when the
Apostume breaks and purges, the Spittle being choleric, whether the matter
of the Apostume come with the Spittle, or issues out above it is perilous,
especially when it comes and begins in the 7 day or after, it is to be
feared that the Patient shall die on the 14 day, if there happen no other
healthful and commendable signs.

To Presage of the signs of good hope and commendable in the foresaid Maladies
and others.
WHen the sick person does strongly endure the grief, and if he draw his
breath lightly and at ease, if he breath easily without dolor, if he feel
not any pain, if he spit without difficulty, and remove his whole body and
all his members at his pleasure without grief or weariness, and that he has
no exceading and supe^fluous heat in him without great thirst and dryness:
Moreover if the Urine and excrements in all the Conduits are in due quantity,
and quality of any commendable color and substance, as the matter fecal,
also of good consistence and not too hard, but as in health: the sweat
universal is hot with ease, also the spittle gentle and commendable, the
sleep in the night and so of others as we have spoken.

To Presage of the signs opposite of despair.
JF the sickness be intolerable and doloure insupportable, burning heat,
extreme thrist, continual cough, stiffness of members, languishing
aspiration, filthy spittle, and unsavory Urine of a small quantity, the
matter liuide, liquide, or watery and slimy, and often particular sweat and
cold without rest of the day or night, the hands, feet and forehead cold,
tossing to and fro, and all other evil signs taken in the face: By all which,
or many of them, thou shall prognosticate sudden or lingering death without
discredit or dishonor, but shall be in great reputation and estimation.

To Presage of the signs of the time and day of the Rupture of the Apostume.
SOme Apostumes break and appear on the 20 day, others differ unto 40, others
to 60 days. Therefore to presage well thou shall enquire out the first day and
the beginning of the Malady, viz, when the Patient did first feel heat and
the fever, also stiffness and standing up of the hair, heaviness, and also
dolor and pricking: Then thou shall begin to reckon the days, and by this
means thou may prognosticate infallibly. Thou shall also presage if there be
Apostume on the one side or both by this means: ask the Patient if he feel
dolor on the one side more then the other, then cause him to lie on the side
which is sound, and if he feel heaviness and ponderositie, it follows, that
the same side where the ponderositie is, is Apostumed, and there is the
collection and matter: and if he feel dolor, heat, and heaviness on both, it
will follow, that both sides are Apostumed: Thou shall know the Apostume and
collection to be ripe and broken, and the matter retained in the part
Apostumed, when the fever does not cease, and it is less by day then night,
and that the Patient sweates abundantly, and cease not to cough, and voides
not almost any thing: likewise if his eyes sink in his head, and cheeks are
red, the nails crookes, and the ends and extremities of the fingers turn, and
the appetite decays, and the feet swell, and there is almost through all the
body pimples and pustules, these signs do appear when the matter and Apostume
is of long continuance, and are certain signs of future health. Therefore to
prognosticate whether the Apostume will break soon or late, consider that
spoken of before: for if the cough in the beginning and first days do
oppress the sick person with dolor and often spitting and egestion with
difficulty of breath, I judge that the Apostume will break within 20 days,
and if the contrary happen that the signs be hindered, the rupture will be
prolonged: and as the signs be strong or feeble, so the ruption is
inueterated or shortened. And to know if there be peril or danger, or
probability of health, consider the day whereon the Apostume breaks, if the
fever and thirst cease, and the appetite return, and if the fecall matter be
solid, and if the matter of the Apostume be white and equally soft, and come
forth without doloure and without coughing: these things are faithful signs
of health. Otherwise when the fever does not cease, or presently return with
great thirst, without appetite, and the fecall matter be watery, the spittle
liuide, green, and slimie, and in part phlegmatic, thou may prognosticate
death. And if there happen some good signs, some bad compare the one with the
other, and diligently advise before thou presage, to the end thou may avoid
infamy. For some die presently, others are prolonged and then die in the end,
others at length return to their health.

To Presage of Apostumes that come about the Ears in pulmonick passions.
WHen the Apostume happens between or under the Ears to the sick person
with difficulty of b^^ath and that the same Apostume comes to maturation and
purges and ingendereth a Fistule, it saves the Patient. And to prognosticate
when it will come, note this which follows: when the Fever continues in the
said Malady, and the color is permanent, the Spittle impertinent and not
commendable, and the belly do not his duty, euacuating the choler or liquide
matter, and the Urine is in small quantity with abundance of Residence, but
all other good signs showing security are present, then thou shall presage
the future Apostumes to be near the Ear, especially when there is
Inflammation under the sides and Diaphragme. And if there be no Inflammation
nor doloure in the said place, but the Patient has difficulty of breath, the
which goes away without manifest cause, then the Apostume comes above the Ear.

To Presage of Pustules or Apostumes that come in the Feet.
JN vehement and perilous Maladies of the Lights, there happens for the
profit and health of the Patient little pustules in the Feet, and especially
when the spitle is suddenly changed from red to white, it is a most certain
sign of health, for by such spittle the pustule and dolor cease, but if the
spittle turn not from red to white, and that the Urine be not good, nor the
Residence commendable, the Patient shall be in danger to become lame by
contraction of the nerves and iointures where the same pustule is. If the said
pustule or little Apostume in the feet be hidden and vanish away, or that it
go and come without purgation or maturation: Or else if the Apostume in the
side called Periplineumonia (for it is in the Lights) be not purged by
commendable spittle, and that the Fever remain, the Patient is in danger to
loose his understanding, and thereafter to die. Furthermore of the aforesaid
pulmonick maladies those which are aged, but not extremely (as of 50 years) die
more often then they who are younger. And young persons die most commonly of
another kind of Apostume: Moreover the person having great doloure in the
belly lower then the Nauill, or drawing near upon the thigh with any fever: if
the dolor leaving his place, do ascend up toward the Ribs, it is very
dangerous. For then one or two evil signs do foreshew death, but if there be
many good, as easy spitting, white and not unsavory, it is a sign of
evasion: the red and unsavory is mortal: and if there be not any evil
sign, there is hope that the thing will come to suppuration and matter.

To Presage by the signs of the Bladder.
THe hardness and great dolor of the Bladder is mortal specially with
quotidian fever, and it is often with constipation, therefore it is mortal
without Remission: But if the Urine be like the matter of the Apostume with
Residence white and pointed, and thereby the dolor cease, there is hope. But
if the dolor be not assuaged, and the bladder mollified, and the fever taken
away, by such Urine judge present death: and this happens more to Children of
Seven or Fourteen years of age, than to any others.

Here ends the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF Presages of divine Hippocrates.
To presage of Fevers.
THE End of the Fever happens to one, and that with death, and to an other
with life in the same day. And if it tend unto life, all good signs do
appear in the first days, whereby thou shall prognosticate the end in the 4.
day or before. And if the Fever be mortal, all evil signs give notice of
death in the 4. day or before the first period and day of judgment or
cretication, and the end or term of the Fever is (as we have said) in the 4.
day: the second on the seventh: the sixth on the 20 day, the which number does
augment by quaternaries and is produced to the 20. day in the Fever and hot
maladies, and they ought to be nombred by whole quaternaries. For the year and
month cannot be counted by number of whole and complete days, as by this
computation, we make three weeks of 20. days, which is called one month or
year of the Moon. So after this computation and augmentation, the first shall
be the 20. day, the second the 40. day, the third the 60. day, and it is to be
noted, that the cronile maladies are of long continuance, and of more difficill
indicature, knowledge and prognostication. Therefore it must be looked unto
more exactly. For their beginninges are secret and show no sign of digestion.
If therefore you will diligently contemplate it you shall be able to
prognosticate to what end the Fever shall come. Likewise the quartan Fever
observes the foresaid matter in his cretications and iudicatures or weeks of
Judgment. For that which is done in others by number of days, in this is done
by number of sittes and periods. The short and brief maladies are of more
easy presagement and knowledge. For it changes presently, and in the first
days from good to better, or from badde to worse. The healthful signs are
known by this, that the patient has good easy breath and feels no dolor,
and sleeps in the night, and other wholesome signs. The mortal or dangerous
are known, when the patient has difficulty of breath and great dolor, and
rests not in the night, with other badde signs, whereby one may
prognosticate death* To the end thou may presage well, thou shall consider
all the signs of digestion, the time, hours and days in which the sick are
most afflicted. And if the Malady happen to women in childbirth, or soon
after they be delivered, begin to reckon from the day of her delivery, and
not from the day wherein the fever began. Also to speak generally, when one
feels vehement dolor in the head continue with any Fever. If there happen any
evil sign with the foresaid, it is a sign of death. But if the dolor and
fever continue and persevere to the 20. day, thou may presage flux of blood
at the nose or apostumes in the inferior parts of the body if there be no
other sign. Sometime also there happens in the beginning and first days
flux of blood at the nose or apostumes principally when the dolor is in the
forehead and parts near adjoining. And it is to be noted, that the said flux
of blood happens most often to persons of 30 or 35. years of age. And
apostumes or collections to those which are elder. Also if the patient in the
continual fever has great dolor and apostumes in the ear, it is a dangerous
sign. For often times the person loses his understanding and dies.
Therefore one ought well to speculate the good and evil signs in the
beginning of the malady: for young persons sick of this malady, do often
die in seven days: But old persons die not so soon. For the Fever cannot be
so hot in them, nor the alienation of the spirit so vehement. Therefore the
Apostume comes to maturation, suppuration and mattir: But if old persons
have the relapse, they commonly die. And the young die before that the Apostume
of the ear come to maturation, except that which comes forth be white and
digested with other good signs, then they recover their health. Also if there
happen in the continual fever and hot malady, vlceration of the throat or
windpipe, it is most dangerous and badde, especially when there happens other
malign and mortal signs.

To Presage of the Squinancie.
ALl manner of Squinancie is dangerous, for it kills the person presently,
especially when there is no appearance of apostume or tumor upon the neck or
in the throat and that he suffers grievous dolor, and cannot aspire nor
respire or draw his breath. Then it kills the patient in the first, second,
third or fourth day at the furthest. Also when eminence and great redness
appears with vehement dolor, it is no less dangerous but more tardy and of
longer continuance. But where there is eminence and redness upon the neck or
throat, but especially in the breast, it is more tardy and less dangerous then
the 2. superior kinds. And if it do not hide it self and go in again, it is a
good sign. But if the said Squinancie and tumor does augment in the day of
cretication, and that it do not purge outwardly or by the spittle, although the
diseased person feel himself eased and without great dolor: it is an evil
sign and mortal, or sign of Relapse. It is It is then a better sign and
less dangerous when the tumor and redness appears outwardly. For if it
descend unto the lights, the patient is in danger to loose his understanding
although sometimes the said collection come to suppuration, mattir and
purgation.

To Presage of the V^ula, Gargarion or Collumella.
IT is a thing dangerous and mortal to incise the V^ula, Gargarion or
Collumella being swollen, gross or read. For either it is found in an
Apostume and inflammation, or else there follows great flux of blood.
Therefore one must labor to heal and cure the patient by some other means.
And if he cannot, and that it be liuide or pale and that the superior part be
little and not tumified nor swollen, but the inferior part tumified and
round, you may without danger incise and open it, and so cure it. And if you
know that the patient is not in danger to fall into suffocation and so die,
the chief thing shall be to purge the belly, if you have the opportunity and
time.

Here that divine Hippocrates returns to speak of fevers
WHen the hot Fever does not cease nor give rest to ye Patient in one or more
days of cretication, without other good signs thou may prognosticate
Relapse. And in the Fever with healthful Signs, as when the patient is not
molested with great dolor nor labor, and there is no other manifest cause,
thou may prognosticate apostume and inflammation in the winters and inferior
parts and speacially to those who do not exceed 30. or 35. years.
N^uerthelesse the same apostume does not often happen before the 20. day of
the Fever, specially to those who are aged: although that the fever continue
longer to old persons then to young: such apostume also does happen commonly
in continual fevers, which keeps no order nor manner of access or fittes,
called wandering or uncertain fevers. viz. afflicting twice or thrice a day,
then ceasing as much, and afterward they return without observing any order:
Oftentimes they change into quartan fevers, especially about harvest. And as
the foresaid apostume does happen most often to young persons, so the quartan
fever happens to men and women that are in years. And as for the nature of
the Apostumes, they do most usually and commonly happen in winter but are most
slow and prolixe and less subject to relaxe.

To presage by signs of vomiting in Fevers.
WHen it seems to the feb^^citant that their is flies and black things appear
before his eyes with dolor in the head without other bad signs or mortal,
thou may presage vomiting of yealow chollor especially when the patient
feels dolor at the mouth or opening of the stomach. And if he feel stiffenes,
chilues or cold with it, in the inferior parts under the Hypp^condria, the
vomiting shall be so much the more hastened. And if the patient do the^ eat
and take repasse he shall presently vomit. And to presage most apparently when
the dolor of the head molesteth the person in the first day of the fever and be
augme^ted the fourth or fifth day, the fever will end on the seventh and the
person shall be cured. And if the dolor begin the third day and augment in the
fifth or seventh, the fever shall end the Nynth or eleauenth day. And if the
dolor begin the fifth day with convenient urine and other good signs it shall
end the 24. day and this happ^neth as well in women as in men, and especially in
tertian fevers to persons 30. years of age, and to young persons in continual
fevers and perfect tertians. And when there do not appear flies in the fever
with dolor of the head nor black things coruscant and resplende^t or shining
as lamps and splendour or brightness and that the patient feels tortion or
tumor or inflation under one of ye sides, he shall have in place of vomiting of
inflammation and of dolor flux of blood at nose and this happens chiefly to
young persons under 30 years, and to older most commonly vomiting. And young
children under 7. years old fall into a sound by hot fevers especially when
they are bound or constipated in the belly and sleep and change color,
sometime pale, then red, green, or liuide, but those which exceed 7 or 8
years they fall most often into a swound. If there hap not some perilous and
dangerous signs as of Frenzy.

The Conclusion of the whole Book.
Now then for final conclusion let the Mediciner, Surgeon and Physician
labor to know the sick persons and maladies: also the good and wholesome, the
evil and mortal accidents of them, as well in young folks as old, and in all
infirmities, especially fevers, to the end to presage life to one and death to
another: also the brevity and prolixitie of every malady and the
transmutations and other inconveniences, collecting and accumulating all signs
good and bad, and considering and comparing the superior and inferior, which
are able to overthrow or save the patient, and that by urine, fecall matter,
spittle, sweat and other excrements and superfluities coming out of the body.
Moreover let him practice to consider and speculate or note as well the time of
days present as past, viz. the variation of weather by winds, cold, heat,
drought and humiditie, and the condition of the whole year and four parts:
as the Spring, Summer, Harvest and Winter. For although that all maladies may
happen at all times, yet some do more commonly happen at one time then
another. And some signs that be good or badde, come and happen rather in one
day hour or moment rather then another. And to the end thou may not doubt
to presage and prognosticate according to the doctrine and prescribed
instructions, know that we have here experimented these things in Aethiopia,
Mauritania, Lybia, in the I Will of Delos, in Hesperia and Scythia, briefly in
the orient, occident, south and north: and have found it true as we have
shown. And therefore do not despair, but take courage and endeavor thy self
to know the said things, and thou shall easily attain to greater knowledge of
things then thou can imagine, and shall marvel how these things can so
well concur and succeed so rightly. And if thou do well ponderate my
principles, doubt not at last that there can happen any malladies to thee,
whereof thou may doubt, or cannot have the knowledge of: and that by the
said instructions, if thou do understand them well, and especially in these
which observe days of affliction and manner of paroxisme, and which end in one
certain number of days and certain space as we have said, if thou will
speculate exactly, and take mature deliberation.

FINIS.

