

Imprinted at London by Abel Ieffs, dwelling in the forestrete without
Crepelgate, at the sign of the Bell. Anno. 1587.

The Second part and Knitting up of the Book entitled Too good to be true.

Wherein is continued the discourse of the wonderful Laws, commendable
customs, and strange manners of the people of Mauqsun.

Newely penned and published, by THOMAS LVPTON.

AT LONDON: Printed by Henry Binneman. ANNO DOMINI. 1581. Cum Priuilegio.

Septembris 6.





TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR WILLIAM CICILL, OF THE NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER
KNIGHT, BARON OF Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, and one of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
AS THE first Styrpe whereof we did spring (Right Honorable) was bewitched by
that wily and wicked serpent: Even so the same wicked serpent has never since
ceased, to enchaunt and bewitch her posterity, knowing them to be her dear
darlings, and sweet mouthed like their mother. For who is it that feeds not
where fancy does favor? And what favors fancy, but sweet pleasant
poison? That flattering feend, was the first founder of our fond affection, and
entised EVE did spinne the threede of our thraldom: but ADAM (alas) did weaue
up this woeful web. And has not his pieuish posterity delited ever since to
prowle for their pleasure, though it work their own woe: yea beside wicked
praise and private profit to the hurt of other. And to make it more manifest,
what thing has been done from the beginning, or is now daily practiced
(except of a few) but only for self pleasure, wicked praise, or private profit?
Examples hereof are as rare to be found, as to epsy one wink that sleeps,
nothing almost has else been esteemed, and what else at this time of us is
embraced? But if we will not wilfully wink, but willingly see, the public
pain such pleasures have preferred, the perilous practices such praise has
permitted, and the pitiful penury such profit has procured: that it will
make us loath that so many has loved, cause us detest that so many have
desired, and fear us to favor that thousands have followed. LVCIFER the
ringleader of this dance practicing for his pleasure to be higher than God did
appoint him, brought him self and many thousands of Angels to endless
sorrows: EVES pleasure in the forbodden apple, wrought the greatest
displeasure to man that could be: DAVID'S pleasure in the beauty of a woman
cost VRIAS his life: the pleasure of HOLOFERNES in IVDITH, was the loss of his
head, and the spoil of his army: many a giltlesse child was murdered for the
pleasure of HEROD: the pleasure that ACHAE had in a little vineyard, caused
NABOTH be killed: NEROES vile pleasure, made his mother be murdered, his
sister deslowred, and Rome to be burned. Wicked praise likewise has bin
preferred to the great grief of both godly and other: for did not PILATE to be
praised of the people, save a murderer and condemn innocent Christ? did not
HEROD to be praised for the keeping of his wicked promise, cause JOHN BAPTISTS
head to be cut of? Did not CAMEISES to be praised in his drunkenness* shoot his
good Counselors child, through the heart with an arrow? Besides a great number
of mischiefs wrought only for wicked praise. And has not private profit also,
to the hurt of many bin esteemed, and that of such that ought chiefly to have
abhorred it? Yes I trow: for BAALAM the Prophet of God, through greedy gain,
did curse the people of God: IVDAS one of CHRIST'S Apostles, for private profit
did betray CHRIST his master: what made ALEXANDER go about to conquer the
whole earth, but a private commodity and a regal rule to himself? What cities
have bin betrayed? what countries consumed? what people spoiled and murdered,
what poverty vnhoused, what right perverted, what towns decayed, how many
perjured, what widows wronged, what fatherless defrauded, and what poor
oppressed? and al for private profit? These are the blossoms that such branches
do bear, these are the floods that flow from such fountains, and these are
the grapes that grow on such grafts. But if this self pleasure (which hurts
many and does good to none) were changed into godly pleasure which helps
other though it hinder it self: and if wicked praise, which makes truth be
often troubled, and much wrong to be winked at, were altered into honest and
godly report, which judges uprightly, and favors no falsehood: and if private
profit, which undoes many to make a few rich, were turned into common
commodity, that enricheth many and impouerisheth none: then many displeasured
should live in quiet, many that want should then have enough, and thousands
that are wronged should then have their right. Which godly change (most meet
for Christians) is smally preferred, not much procured and a great deal less
practiced. Yet the Ethnikes (not knowing the gain of godly life as we do) so
much did prefer the pleasures of other before their own, honest praise above
other riches, and public wealth before their own profit: that it is wonderful
to hear, strange to be told, and hard to be credited. CVRTIVS to pleasure
the Romans, in ceasing the infectious fume, left all his own pleasures, lept
into a stinking pit, and so died him self: MVTIVS SCEVOLA to profit his own
City, did burn his arm stoutly with a courageous heart: ZOPIRVS to come in
credit with the Babylonians his enemies, did cut off his own nose, ears, and
lips, whereby being made Captain of Babylon, did after deliver the same to
DARIUS his Lord and master: PHILIP king of Macedon, father to ALEXANDER the
great, esteeming equity and honest praise before his own private profit, gave
to a certain man, so much money out of his coffers, as by wrong vndaduised
judgment he gave from the same: AGESILAVS preferring the profit of his
subjects (the Lacedaemonians) before his own gain, did give all king AGIS
treasure among the poorest of them.

Now seeing these Ethnickes and many mo, with the loss of their lives, the
dismembring of themselves, and with their liberal gifts, have showed
themselves by their deeds, rather Christians than Ethnickes, making pleasure,
praise, and profit, three virtues: then these Christians, that hurt and
displease other, to pleasure and profit themselves, do show by their deeds,
that they are rather Ethnickes than Christians, turning pleasure, praise, and
profit, into three vices, whereof there are no small number. But that
pleasure, praise, and profit, were used as they ought (not as they are) I have
with some pains and study facioned and framed, not only of late a work for
that purpose, called To good to be true, but also now newly compiled and
finished a Second part thereof. Whereby it may appear if my will were to my
wish, the same three frequented vices, should be changed into three
unaccustomed virtues. But seeing I can not perform it, I would feign procure
it: and therefore for that I can not profit my country with my purse, as I
wish: yet I mean to pleasure the same with my pen, as I may. Which Book,
as it is not to be numbered among common gifts, so I do not give it as common
gifts are given. For common giuers appoint the receyuers of their gifts,
before their gifts be bought: but I have made my gift before I appointed the
receyuer. And whereas they choose a meet gift for their receyuer: I have
chosen a meet receauer for my gift. And that is your Honor: allured thereto
through the common fame of your great wisdom, affability and clemency.
Protesting unto you: that I have dedicated it to your Honor, not to reward
me, but to know me: and not to do for me, but to think well of me. And though
this gift is to simple for you to receive: yet it is the best that I am now
able to give. Trusting you will not respect the workman but the work, not the
pe^ning but the meaning, and not the defect but the effect. The Method and
meaning whereof, is plainly described in the Epistle of the first part:
which if you have not seen already, then I beseech you at leisure to peruse
the same. And if your Honor shall take in good part this my simple gift: I
shall think my self better recompenst, than if I had a bountiful reward of
many other. Thus ceassing any further to trouble your Honor: I wish you here
a prosperous long life, and an endless life in the kingdom of Heaven.

Your Honors most faithful and humble to command THOMAS LVPTON.

To the gentle Reader.
AS many have not such recompense for their gif^es as they look for (gentle
Reader): even so many have not such thanks for their gifts as they deserve:
And as a great sort are better rewarded for their gifts, than either they
hope or deserve: So, many are never a whit rewarded therefore, clean contrary
to their hope and desert: yet some (rather by luck than learning, and by
chance than cunning) have been rewarded for their gifts far above their
expectation, as the poor Cobbler was of the Emperor Augustus for his Crow, by
an extraordinary means when all hope was past. Which pleasant example is
this: A poor Cobbler brought up a Crow with great travel and pain to make
him speak these words, All hail worthy Caesar and victorious conqueror,
(which was immediately after he overcame Anthoninus) which bird was so dull
of learning, that he did beat her cruelly, and in beating her he said many
times (when she would not talk as he taught her) All our labor and charges is
lost. At last when the Crow had her lesson something perfectly, the said
Cobbler understanding that the Emperor would come through the streets, waited
purposely therefore, and when the Emperor came by him, the Crow by and by
(having some privy warning when to tell her tale) suddenly uttered, All hail
worthy Caesar and victorious conqueror: whereof the Emperor made small
account, saying, I have such Saluters enough at home (for he had birds given
him before that could speak the same words,) and as soon as the Emperor
had said so, The Crow answered (contrary to the expectation of the Cobbler)
All our labor and charges is lost. Whereat the Emperor smiling, he then gave
more to the said Cobbler for that Crow, than he gave for any other bird
before: though by the Emperors first words he was without hope of any thing.
Among which number of giuers I account my self, for as the poor Cobbler had
brought the Emperor a Crow not trained up without travel, to pleasure him,
without hope of any reward therefore: so I have presented to you a Book, (not
pende without pain) to pleasure and profit you, being utterly in despair, to
be gratified therefore of every one with my wished reward, (though it be not
much that I crave for the same) for though the Cobbler gave his gift for a
great reward but to one: I have given this my gift for a small reward to
many. (which is, good will and thanks). But if this my Book declare unto you
a profitable extraordinary talk, as the Crow uttered to the Emperor a
pleasant extraordinary tale: I trust you will as willingly give me great
thanks for my Book, as the Emperor gave the Cobbler a rich reward for his
Crow, which if you should not do, I then should be enforced, to say with the
Crow, then all my travel and labor is lost. But so to say, I hope I shall
not be driven, for I doubt not, but that many will therefore thank me: though
some should vncortuouslie discommende me. Such as reward good gifts with
deprauinges and detractions, are not of so good nature, as this worthy
Emperor Augustus was: who on a time when a cert^ine Greek had given him a
few fine verses, (hoping thereby to have some good reward) The Emperor then
with his own hand, wrote very apt verses in Greek, and sent them to the said
man (coming toward him) and so the Emperor gave him verses for verses. Thus
such ought to learn at Augustus, to gratify their giuers of Books, with
writing again as good, or as well as they can, or at least to thank them and
not to detract or deride them. But as the said learned man politikely, to
allure the Emperor to give him a reward, did take out of his purse a few
pieces of silver, and did offer them to the Emperor for his verses that he
gave him, saying: It is no reward for your estate (worthy Emperor) but if I
had more, more would I give: wherewith the Emperor called his purse bearer,
and commanded a thousand marks forthwith to be given him. Even so if any
should do, (as many have done) write and set forth Books, for my commodity:
if I could not reward them with my purse, I would (as I have done) thank them
with my tongue, whereby I would learn and allure them to gratify me and such
other with the like. And now for that many did well accept and thankefully
take, my Book called Too good to be true, I have the rather, newly framed and
published the Second part thereof, called The knitting up of Too good to be
true: which I have only done, to please, pleasure, and profit many, and not
to displease, displeasure, or disprofite any. Craving (most gentle Reader)
nothing of you therefore, but good will for my gift, love for my labor, and
thanks for my travel: which is more easy for you to give unto me, than for
me to make this that I have given unto you. And thus I wish you as well as my
self.

THOMAS LVPTON.

THE SECOND PART OF Too good to be true.
I MUSE who this is that comes thus speedily, if he knew how vain his
coming hither were, he would not make such speed in a speedlesse errande.
But let me advise my self, unless my senses deceive me and my sight does
fail me, it is Siuqila that dwells in that famous Island Ailgna, to whom I
revealed of late the marvelous manners, customs, and orders of this our
country of Mauqsun. Truly, the more nearer he approaches, the more like him
he is: surely, I am out of all doubt that it is he, whom, for his prompt wit,
for his learned talk, and for his godly zeal, I so favor and esteem, that I
will not only tarry for his coming, but also will satisfy his desire in what
I am able, whereas if it were not he, I would fly from him as speedily, as he
comes hither hastily. My friend Siuqila of all other most welcome, what
wind has thus suddenly blown you hither again?

Siuqila. Forsooth, as the wind of natural necessity (which is hunger and
sleep) of force drove me from you sooner then I wished, so the wind of
affection to hear more of your comme^dable customs, has blown me hither not
so soon as I would.


Omen. Well Siuqila, though you could not come hither so soon as you would,
yet you are most heartily welcome as soon as you come. But I pray you how did
you for vitailes when you went from me in the deserts? thinking that hunger
made you more desirous of meat, then sleep of a fetherbed.


Siuqila. You may be right sure of that, for if hunger could find out food so
soon, as sleep can prepare a bed, poor wanderers and travelers should not
sleep so often supperlesse. But I may say (through the great goodness of God)
that I had my supper as well without cark, as I had my bed to sleep on without
care.


Omen. The faithful man can never want food, nor the godly traveler can
never lack lodging, if God be as strong as ever he was, as rich as ever he
was, and as favorable to the faithful as ever he was (as he is in deed):
then who will not firmly believe, but that he will provide you your supper, as
well as he prepared for Daniel his dinner? But I beseech you tell me (for it
was very late when you departed from me) by what good fortune got you your
supper so speedily? for in that Wilderness where you went, there dwells none
but wild Beasts, at whose hands you had but small entertainment, (I think)
who would rather devour you than feed you.


Siuqila That is very like, but my faith is so firm, that God my heavenly
father does love me, and all other his obedient children so dearly, that
rather than we should perish for want of food, he will make these wild and
cruel Beasts, to bring us our suppers, that use to devour and eat the wicked
for their suppers. For as the Bears did devour the wicked children that
mocked the godly Eliseus: eue^ so the Ravens did feed the godly Elias.


Omen. Surely Siuqila, I must needs affirm this, that rather than you and the
godly should lack food, GOD would send you meat from heaven, and drink
out of the hard rocks or stones. For if he did so to the wicked Jews, that
did murmr and dysobey him: how much more will he do so to you, that are
paciente, godly, and do obey him? But now forgette not to tell me, of your
good luck in getting your supper in the Wilderness so happily.


Siuqila. Nay rather by Gods good providence so mercifully: truly it is a
very vain thing, and far unmeet to be used among Christians, An unmeet
thing for Christians.
to apply that to Fortune which the Heathen took for a blind God, which
only is to be attributed to the living and eternal GOD, the maker of Heaven
and Earth. Theramines did attribute his woonderful escaping from death, when
all his couuiuants were killed with the fall of the house, where they were with
him, but only himself, who though he should have thanked God for
miraculously saving of his life, he applied it to blind Fortune, which neither
did nor could save his life, The foolish saying of Theramines.
crying out aloude on this manner: O Fortuna cui occasioni me seruas? O Fortune
for what purpose do thou keep me alive? Such was his blindness that
served such a blind God: for though his woonderful and miraculous escaping
from death, contrary to all hope and expectation, should have driven him to
the knowledge of God, and to the amendmente of his wicked and tyrannical life:
he like a brute beast had no such consideration, but thereupon took an
occasion to think that his blind God Fortune had preserved him to work some
greater wickedness, cruelty and tyranny than he had done before. These are
the Berries that such Brambles do bear, and this is the goodness that co^mes
from such Gods. But seeing you are desirous to know how I did for meat in
the wild Wilderness, I will show you. You know that when I went from you it
was almost supper time, especially for him that had not then dyned: but as
soon as I was departed from you, I was so troubled with two sudden suitors,
that their balling and calling on me did no less weary me, than my
painful and fast traveling in the Wilderness did tire me.


Omen. I marvel that you should be troubled with suitors in the Wilderness,
for you may go twenty days there still forward, before you shall see either
man, woman, or child. But if you had any such suitors, rather than they should
have troubled me, I would have dyspatched them and sent them packing.


Siuqila. Yea, but what if you could not grant them their requests?


Omen. Then I would have sent them away without, even as they came. Me thinks
they were unshamefast suitors that would not be answered with reason.


Siuqila. Truly, they were so importunate, that they would have no nay.


Omen. But tell me one thing: Were their requests such, that you were able to
grant?


Siuqila. The one of them I could have granted very easily, but the other
very hardly.


Omen. Then would I have satisfied him with the easier suite presently, and the
other when I might at laisure and at time convenient.


Siuqila. I but the granting of the one would have been a hinderance to the
other.


Omen. Would it so? then I would have desired them to depart gently, if not, I
would have made them go away by extremity.


Siuqila. Truly, they were such strong and importunate suitors, that neither
gentleness could entreat them, reason persuade them, nor force could fear
them: and to say truth, they did so hold me and gripe me, that with all the
strength I had, I was not able to fling them from me.


Omen. They were very strange suitors, I think very long until I hear who
they were.


Siuqila. Seeing you are so desirous, you shall know. Forsooth, the one of
these suitors was mine Eyes, the other was my Stomach.


Omen. Are these the Suitors you meant off? you are a pleasant man, They are
such Suitors in deed that must not be denied, and to say truth, whom you are
loath to deny.


Siuqila. If I deny the^, it is because I am not able to grant them, they
cannot so soon demand, but I am as willing to perform, especially if it lie
in my power.


Omen. I believe you right well. If Princes, Rulers, Judges and other (that are
able) were as desirous to grant poor Suitors their needful and reasonable
requests, as you are willing (yea when you are scant able) to perform these
your Suitors demands, then many poor Suitors should not sue so long in vain as
they do, nor yet go home without penny or purpose. But I pray you what did these
your importunate Suitors desire of you?


Siuqila. Forsooth mine eyes desired me to go to bed, and my stomach earnestly
required me to go to supper.


Omen. The time and place considered, I think you were more able to perform
the request of your Eyes, then to grant the request of your Stomach.


Siuqila. Be bold of that, yet each of them did plead their case so reasonably,
and defended the cause so cunningly, that I could not well tell to whom I
might incline. Mine Eyes requested me most earnestly to lay me down to
sleep, saying, though you have no trim chamber to lie in, be content with the
ground which your first father Adam was content to take for his couch: And
though here be no house nor roof to defend you from cold, yet the Air is here
so temperate, that you can feel no cold: and yet your lodging is not without a
trim and goodly roof, A sure roof.
which is the heavens of Gods own making, which you are sure will not fall
down and hurt you, though the roofes made by men might fall down and kill
you. And as for a fether bed care not, for here is grass and moss whereon in
this your necessity, you will sleep as soundly, A preaty pleading.
as though you had the best bed in ye world. And then my Stomach said: Sir, I
beseech you consider, as it is meet to grant sleep to your Eyes, so it is
more meet to allow meat for your Stomach, which of us two you may best
spare, let him be last served. You may live if you had no Eyes, but you must
needs perish if you had no Stomach: and you may well live though you have
Eyes and see not, but you must needs die though you have a Stomach and feed
not. And as your Eyes persuades you to be content with the grass and moss
for your bed, so in this great necessity it is very simple food that will
not satisfy me, and be pleasant unto you. Then the Eyes replied again: My
liddes are so heavy that I cannot keep them open, and you see it begins to
be dark, whereby I can stand you in small stead, for if I were as willing to
wake, as I am desirous to wink, you should be sure to wander wrong: therefore
you were better here to sleep quietly, then to wander you wot not whether
daungerously, marry if you were as sure to get some food for your Stomach,
by traveling in the dark, as you are sure to get a sweet nap, by lying here
in the dark, I would not so earnestly persuade you. Then my stomach
answered: Sir, wey not these words, if you grant them sleep, then I shall
lack my Supper, and be a great while without meat: but if I have my supper,
your eyes shall not be long without sleep, nay thereby they shall be sure to
have the more sleep. Then said the Eyes very vehemently, the humyditie of
your brain is so much, that unless it be exhausted by sleep, I shall never
be able to hold them open to direct you in your way. Then said the Stomach,
credit not your eyes herein, for I have been so long empty, that the brain can
have no such humiditie, for the fume that ascendes from the Stomach, does
make the brain moist, now if the Stomach want food, whereof the fume does
grow, then how can there be any such fume, to breed such moisture of the
brain, and so your brain has no such abundance of moisture, as your Eyes do
allege, therefore I your Stomach have much more need of meat, than your
eyes of sleep, nay rather take heed of too much sleep, for by sleeping the
heat is thereby brought from all the external parts, to the internal parts,
whereby the heat being maruellously increased, will quicklye consume the little
moisture within you, and so the radical moisture will be in danger to be
extinct, and then farewell life: and thus if you grant sleep to your Eyes,
you may hap to bring death to your self. Then the Eyes said, I pray you
regard not his words, they are but fables, many would feign sleep if they
might, but you will not sleep when you may, remember I beseech you, that
many have run mad for want of sleep: then my Stomach answered again
quickly, but a great sort (...) have dyed for want of food. Then my Eyes said
to me very mourninglye, if ever you will have me to guide you, then grant me
some sleep: and then the Stomach most dolefully said, if ever you will have
me to feed and nourish your body, get me some meat. Then my Eyes said, of
conscience it is now time to sleep, for it is almost midnighte: then my
Stomach answered, midnighte is not to late for him to Suippe, that has
neither eat nor drunk of three or four days. And thus I was so troubled
with these two earnest suitors, that I could not well tell to whom it was best
to yield, but weying with my self the great danger I was in, for want of
food, I fully consented to my Stomach: and though it was very dark,
whereby my eyes could do me no great pleasure, yet God did presently help
me, to whom I prayed to succor me, for immediately my foot did happen into a
hoale, wherein I found young Rabbets, which I prepared as well as I could, and
so I played the Cook, and roasted them for my Supper.


Omen. But I pray you, how did you for fire to roast the^ withal?


Siuqila. Truly fire was more easy to get than meat, and drink was more
easy to get than fire: but bread to eat my Supper withal, was the hardest
to come by of all: for it was impossible to have any in the Wilderness,
unless GOD had sent it from heaven, as he rayned Manna for the children of
Israel. So that I was feign to eat my Supper without bread, and yet I
thought, I never fared better in all my life.


Omen. Yea but if you had had bread, you would not have liked your cheer the
worse.


Siuqila. No that is true, but I had such a pleasant sauce to my Supper, that
I never tarryed for bread, nor yet scantly remembered it.


Omen. Was your sauce so dainetie and pleasant?


Siuqila Nay it was more pleasant than dainty, for I seldom eat any meat
without that sauce, especially since I came out of my own Country.


Omen. May I be so bold to learn of you what sauce it was?


Siuqila. Forsoothe the name of the sauce, is called hunger, a great deal
better than Vinegar, which made every byt of my breadlesse supper more
pleasant unto me, then the most costlye and delicate bankets, with all their
sumptuous sauces, are to any Prince on the earth.


Omen. Marry sir, Hunger is the best sauce of all other.
that is the most pleasant sauce of all other, it is the most delicate sauce
for meat, and easyest to get, and of most virtue, and of least cost, none in
our Country of Mauqsun on pain of death may use any other kind of sauce but
that: if they in your Country would give over all sauces, and use that sauce
only, their bodies would not be so full of deseases, Mark this.
nor their purses so empty of money, but how did you for drink to your meat?


Siuqila. For want of wine I was glad to drink water, whereof I had plenty,
for there was a goodlye river did run, not far from the place where I supt.
Truly sir since my departing from you, God so wonderfully and suddenly aided
me in my necessity by his creatures, that thereby I was not only enforst to
praise God therefore, but also to muse and study of his miraculous works:
whereby in few words I have covertly couched three marvelous mysteries, that
few I think is able to resolve, yet so true and so plain, that if I should
reveal the meaning thereof, that none but would affirm the same.


Omen Then you need not fear to utter the words wherein is hyd your mystical
meaning, yet though they be never so dark, I believe I shall guess shrewdely at
them.


Siuqila. Nay I am sure you will quickly find out there meaning, which if you
could not, I would reveal them unto you.


Omen. Declare them I pray you, for I am desirous to hear them.


Siuqila. I will utter them in course as I had occasion to frame them,
therefore the first of them is this.


The foe does aid and help his extreme foe, A strange Problem.

Else foe at al no power or strength could show:
Which foe so helped yet none can feel or spy,
That he has shape, but only quality.
Omen. Surely, this is both covertly hid, wisely invented, and wittily framed,
if every one that have an over weening in their own wits, and discommendeth
other that are wiser than themselves, that cannot resolve this, or that cannot
invent the like, should give but the half of that they spend in waste, to
the releeuing or succoring of their pore neighbors, many would not be so hungry
nor so needy as they are. I understand your meaning therein very well, it is
marvelous, and I may say myraculous, though daily sight and common practice
takes away the admiration thereof. But what drove you to devise it?


Siuqila. Forsooth I will tell you, as I traveled in the wild wilderness,
being very hungry, through the goodness of God, I found a few eggs, but
what eggs they were, I know not (yet they were very like the eggs of a Turkey
Hen) which, when I had found, I was very desirous to roste, or to seethe for
my dinner, which there by no means I could do, for there was neither wood,
nor any other thing whereon to make a fire. And though I was extreme hungry,
yet I was very loath to eat them raw: but as I walked forward, thoroughe Gods
providence, I spyed a little shed, wherein I found quick^ lime unquenched,
whereof I was not a little glad, for therein I knew that I might roste my
eggs (having water) of which lime stones I took a good quantity, and carried
them to a waters side that was not far from thence, which stones I sprinkled
with water, and then they waxed very hot, as daily practice does prove: amongst
which lime stones I laid my eggs, which were well roasted, and that very
quickly, through the great heat of the said limestones, which the water that
I sprinkled on them caused them to have: and thus by this marvelous means, I
roasted ye eggs, wherewith I dined very well. Thus you may plainly perceive, yt
the foe did aid and help his extreme foe, for Water is an utter enemy to
Fire, for they are of clean contrary qualities: for Fire is hot and dry, and
Water is cold and moiste, yet Fire could not show his force or strength which
lay hid in the said lime stones, until Water, which was his enemy, was cast
upon him, yet though thereby he showed forth his heat, which is the quality of
fire: yet the brightness, shape, or form of fire, by no means thereby could
be seen.


Omen. It is most true, which is the wonderful work of God, yet many
thousands are so brutish, so senseless, so doltishe, and so thankles for these
Gods miraculous benefits; eue^ made for their daily use and commodity, that
they neither consider the great power of God that did make them, the
marvelous mysteries hyd in them, nor the great commodity they have daily by
them. You that have this consideration in the works of God, it is a token you
have a great consolation in God himself that made the works. Your first
Problem is so pretty and pithie, that I desire to hear the second.


Siuqila You shall, and that with speed, this it is, which is more true than
reasonable.


The stronger is led by force of the weaker: Another Problem.

Although of his bones he has been a breaker.
Omen. Truly this is very strange, and seems so repugnant to reason, that many
that are both wise and learned, will judge at the first hearing of the words,
that it cannot be truly applied to any thing. But by what occasion did you
frame it?


Siuqila. As I traveled in the deserts, I could find no perfect way, where the
thorne^ and brambles were so thick, that I was enforced very painfully to go
through them, which did so rent and tear^ my clothes, that I was constrained to
sow them as well as I could (for I seldom go without needle and ^hreed) and
whiles I was busy in sowing the same I suddenly lost my needle, for which I
was very sorry (for I had ^o mo, but only a broken needle that lacked a point,
wherewith I could not sow at al) so that I left my thread in the same place,
and went to seek a stone whereon to sharp my blunt needle: and as I was very
diligent in seeking a stone for my purpose, I found a very hard and heavy
stone, not of the color of other common stones, which I took, and then went
and sit in the same place wh^re I loss my needle: then I began to rub and whet
my broken needle upon it, but for all my labor I could not therewith so sharpen
it, that it would do^e any good. So that I layd^ the said needle and stone by
me on the ground, being weerie with rubbing the said blunt or broken needle
on the same. Yet being driven to a great necessity, and thinking at length
with labor so to sharpen the said broken needle on the stone that I found,
that it might serve my turn: I took up the said stone, whereon (to my great
marvel) not only the broken needle, but also the needle which before I had
lost, did hang, cleave, or stick, which when I saw, I knew that stone was an
Adamant stone, whereby I did as well give God thanks for his great goodness in
sending me such a mean to find my needful needle: as also did find out and
invent the said dark and true Problem thereof.


Omen. As before you reveled your practice and event, it seemed very dark and
false, so now since it is very plain and true. For though by the strength of
iron the Adamant stone may be broken, whereby he justly may be called the
stronger, and the Adamant the weaker: yet the Adamant stone (being the weaker)
by his nature draws iron the stronger unto him, as daily experience does
teach. Now I pray you let me hear the third.


Siuqila. You shall, which if you mark well, is as strange, and true as the
rest.


A thing there is that hunger can not kill, Another fine Problem.

Although a thousand years it sleeps still:
But once awakte it must feed by and by,
And still must eat, it dies else presently.
Omen. If it be as true as it is strange, then is it well worthy to be noted.
If every one of your country that of them selves can not find out the true
meaning of it in a month, should fast but a week, or else bestow their one
years vain and prodigal expenses, on such godly purposes as you could devise
and appoint: then many should have their right, that now are much wro^ged,
many that want should then have enough, many that go pecorkly, should th^n
go derently, many that live riotously, should then live moderately, and many
that die shortly by surffeting, should live long with temperate feeding. Surely
it is a very strange thing that can sleep so long and never eat, and when he
is once awaked, (...) or else die. If it be not very needful, and also such a
thing (...) can be spared, it were a great deal better, and more profit to
let him sleep still, than to awake him out of his sleep: For he must needs
be a very costly fellow to keep, that must be always a feeding. If he never
stinte eating, I think then he will out eat his gains, as many loytring
lubbers that spend more with their mouths, than they get with their hands.
But now show the occasion that caused you to devise it.


Siuqila. I will not let to do that. As I was traveling in the wild
wilderness (being very hungry) I suddenly espied a neste of young Birds
which were almost ready to fly.


Omen. But how did you for fire to roste them, for fire is there hard to get?


Siuqila. Nay, as I used the matter, it was harder to find food than to get
fire. I never go without a tinder box, (especially when I travel far,)
wherein I have a flinte stone, a steel, and burned linte with matches: so that
when I had dressed my Birds, I stroke fire out of the flint stone with my
Steel, the sparks whereof falling into the burned linte, did take hold of
the same, and then I did therein light a match, dipped in brimstone, whereby
having wood there enough at hand, I made a fire, and so I roasted the Birds,
and fed my hungrye mawe therewith: and after I had given God thanks for thus
feeding me, I fell into a great admiration of this marvelous work of God, and
considered how strange a thing it was, that Fire the most hottest Element of al
other, should be included in earth being a cold Element. And further, in this
deep cogitation I considered, A thing to be considered.
that God had as great a respect to the pore as to the rich, for Fire is such
a thing, that no man alive may want: and God of his infinite goodness has so
ordered the matter, that the rich can not defraude the pore of fire (that are
at liberty) for in every little flinte stone, it is to be found, yea and
there is enough in one little stone, for a whole Realm, which is a wonderful
simile in the deepest Philosophy that is.


Omen. This is such a wonderful work of God, and so necessary for all men,
that thousands, that daily see the same, and have daily a marvelous commodity
thereby, do neither tha^k God therefore, nor once consider gods miraculous work
therein. And as God has dealt with the poor for fire, so he has done with all
the other three Elements, Ma^ke well.
for the rich cannot defraude the poor of them, nor the envious person cannot
take them from his foe, as long as they be at liberty, for they are every
where to be had: well may the rich lock the poor from them, but they cannot
lock them from the poor: for as fire is common every where, and is to be
found in every flinte stone: so the air which is the next Element to fire, is
in every place, and is common both to man and beast. And the water is so
abou^dant both in Rivers and Springs every where, that ye rich cannot waste it,
the poor cannot consume it, nor all the beasts on the earth can devour it.
And as for the earth it is the only flower for all men and beasts to tread
on, so that in this point (though it be little regarded) God is not only
highly to be thanked, but also to be maruellously magnified, that he has so
louinglye and mercifully placed and distributed these his Elements, which is,
fire, air, water, and earth, (without which we cannot live) that the mightiest
Emperor on the Earth, nor the cruelst tyrant under the sun, cannot keep, nor
lock any one of the^ from the poorest wretch in the world, well they may lock
him from them as is said, but they cannot lock them from him.


Siuqila. Oh if we would consider these gods great gifts that he most
liberally has bestowed on ye poor, A marvelous immediating alliance.
as well as on ye rich, we should love him better tha^ we do: but mark what a
marvelous knitting or co^bynatio^, yea and immediating allia^ce, one element
has with another in quality: fire is hot and dry: he is hot of the nature
of the air which is under him, and dry, of the nature of the earth, which is
the extremest from him: Air is hot and moist, hot of the quality of fire
next above him, and moist of the quality of water next under him: water is
cold and moist, moist of ye nature of air next above him, and cold of ye
nature of earth, which is next under him: and earth is cold and dry, cold of ye
nature of water yt is next above him, and dry of the nature of fire, which is
next in order to him: And herein is great mysteries to be considered according
to philosophy.


Omen. God is marvelous, as well in these as in all other his works, in
numero, pondere, and mensura omnia fecit deus: now I see by the stricking of
the fire out of the flinte stone, you framed finely this pithie problem.


A thing there is that hunger cannot kill,
Although a thousand years it sleeps still*
But once awakte it must feed by and by,
And still must eat, it dies else presently.
In deed it is manifest that there is fire, and that great store, in every
flint stone, which will lie lurking there, longer tha^ you speak of, and never
die for want of food: but if you once awake him out of his sleep, and fetch
him out of his bed, you must give him meat immediately, and so you must
feed him continuallye night and day, either with tallow, wax, woodde, coals,
straw, or some other thing yt he ca^ eat, or else he will die by and by, for
farewell fire when his food does fail. This is so plain and so true, yt none
yt lives on the earth, yt have any discreation, but knows it. Before you
revealed the cause whereupon you devised it, it seemed very dark and a thing
impossible, but now it is very plain, and as a thing most palpable: if every
one in their iorneis at their meat and beds, had such cogitations and
considerations of Gods goodness, and benefits offered before their eyes, as you
have in your iourneis, at your meat or your bed: so many driftes would not be
devised, to defraud ye widow and fatherles, nor such shifts would not be
invented, to shoue the poor from their right. Truly I am of this judgment,
yt you ca^ see nothing on the earth, but yt you may gather thereby, to praise
god, to magnify god, and to love god. But now Siuqila me thought you said, eue^
now since you came, that the cause of this your now coming hither, was to
hear more of the customs of this our Country of Mauqsun.

S. I said so indeed, and yt is only ye cause of my returning so soon.


O. Yea but did you not say to me, when you departed hence, yt you were fully
satisfied, and that you had no more to ask me.


Siuqila. I remember I said so, and to say truth, long talk did so tyer me,
hunger did so assail me, sleep did so oppress me, and my memory did so
fail me, yt I could tarry no longer, and if I had tarried, I could not devise
what more to say to you: but since I (...) my stomach with meat, and my eyes
with sleep, me thinks I am as ready to enquire of the manners of your people,
and the orders of your country, as ever I was, my head is fraught so full of new
questions, yt I fear I shall weary you before I have half done, beseeching you
this once to satisfy me, for I will never trouble you hereafter, which I could
not well do if I would, for if I were now at home, I should never be able to go so
far again.


Omen. Well Siuqila for the good will I bear you, I will satisfy your mind in any
thing you demand of me, therefore be bold to ask what you will, for I will
resolve you in all that I may.


Siuqila. Then if I may be so bold to ask you, have your temporal Gentlemen
any spiritual livings?


Omen. No truly, The gentlemen in Mauosun have no spiritual livings.
neither our spiritual men have any temporal livings: our gentlemen and al
other of ye temporaltie are so godly minded, yt they would not if they might,
have any spiritual living in their hands: nay they had rather increase ye
Precher or Parsons living, if ye Prechers or Parso^s have to little for their
godly and necessary maintenance (as with us daily practice proves) for in little
and small parishes, where ye incu^bents living is so small yt he is not able to
relieve his poor neighbors: ye ge^tleme^, or the richest of ye parish, will
give for ever to remain to ye said living vj. or x. acres of ground, and some
will give a little close or a pasture, some an acre or two of meadow to ye
enlarging of their said living, other will give yearly some corn, others a
load or two of wood, and so some will give one thing some another, acording to
their ability: for they think it is a small matter to give temporal things to
the^, yt bestows spiritual gifts on the^, according to ye meaning of S. Paul
So yt the least spiritual living with us, is both sufficient to maintain the
Parson, and to relieve the poor.


Siuqila. They did so with us in ye time of blindness, but they rather pluck
from the^, now in ye time of light and knowledge. I see well there is a great
difference, between ye use of our country and yours, for many gentlemen and
other with us, have such broad consciences, yt they would if they might, have ye
whole or principal commodity of xx. benefices, not caring (but for shame of the
world) whether there were any pastor or curat to teach ye people or not.


Omen. Me thinks there should be none such with you.


Siuqila. Nay you may say there ought to be none such with us, but I am most
sure yt there are many gentlemen and other with us, yt the chief living they
have is by tithes and other spiritual commodities.


Omen. Why are they suffered so to do?


Siuqila. Our laws do permit now many of the^ therein: for it is most commonly
now of such spiritual livings and parsonages as were belonging to Abbeys before
they were suppressed, whereof the Abbots or Priours had before (not of a godly
consideration but of a covetous and greedy desire) plucked away by force from
the said spiritual livings.


Omen. The precious Prelates gave a good presidente to Princes, who might well
think, that it was as lawful for them to keep these personages still in their
hands, as these holy fathers to take them out of the parsons hands. But I
pray you sir, when they had spoiled the Church of the fattest of their living,
whom did they then leave there to instruct ye people?


Siuqila. Forsooth some sir Lawrence Lattynles* sir Cutbert Careless, or sir
Simon Shameless, yt cared more for pa^pring their paunch, the^ for feeding the
flock, yt had rather be typpling at the alehouse, than to sit at his book, and
that had greater skill in playing at Tables, than in preaching gods word. And
these chosen Chaple^s were called Uicars, and the Abbots or Priours were called
the Parsons.


Omen. It seems by this your talk, that the Parsons with you have best part
of the benefice, and take the least pain: and the Uicar has the least profit,
and the most trouble: whereby it appears that your parsons are above the
vicars and have the greater livings.


Siuqila. It is so in deed.


Omen. If this be true, it will not fall very well out, for there seems a great
repugna^cie herein.


Siuqila. Why so I pray you?


Omen. Because the Pope, as I do understand (who has bin esteemed as a
Lord on the earth) is (as he says) Christ's vickar, which being so, then
Christ must needs be be his Parson, and therefore in the Popes Uicarage Christ
ought to have a Personage: And so, if the Popes Uicarage be great, large, and
rich, then I doubt not but that Christ's Parsonage is as great and large, and
also by reason ought to be as rich or rather richer. Well, what yearly gain,
profit, and commodity Christ has had out of this his great Personage I
know not, but the wonderful profits, commodities, and the yearly treasures,
that the Pope has had by this Uicarage I know. For the great yearly
rentes for his possessions belonging to the same (though he came falsely and
deceitfully by them) the marvelous Masses of money for Pardons, both for
murders, fornications, and all other offenses, the great coffers of coin for
helping rich men's souls out of Purgatory, (for the pore must lie there still
for want of money, which shows he is a charitable Uicar) such heaps of
treasure for licencing Priests to keep Concubines and Harlots, (but in no
wise to marry) such yearly revenues called Peter Pence (though Peter never
had any such) the innumerable sums of silver and gold for allowing and
admitting of Bishops, Abbots and Priors, with many other, into spiritual
livings, whereof many were more meet to be Butchers than Bishops, Alecunners
than Abbots, and Pedlers than Priors: And also the great heaps of gold he
has got for restoring Emperors and Kings into their dignities again, that he
deposed for his pleasure, have bin such, The Popes Vicarage passes Christ's
Pars^nage.
that I am sure Christ had never the tenth part so much out of his
personage. And therefore it does plainly ^ppeare by this (whatsoever the
Parsonages are with you) that the Popes vicarage far passes, for dignity,
wealth and riches, Christ's Parsonage.


Siuqila. Belike the Pope has taken the Parsonage of Christ in farm.


Omen. If he have, yet he must be Christ's tenant, and so of force, Christ
must be his Landlorde, but who has ever heard or known, that the Pope
has paid Christ his landlord any rent, or once made him any account for any
of these wonderful, huge and inestimable profits and treasures that he has
thus received since he was his tenant. The Pope an evil tenant to Christ.
Truly Christ could not have had (in my judgment) a worse tenant than yt Pope,
for yt he has not paid him all this while any rent, for ye farming of his
Parsonage. If Christ had not bin able to have lived of himself: thus he would
have served him. But truly I cannot think, that Christ has any such Parsonage
or spiritual promotio^, whereunto any such rich Uicarage should be incide^t as
ye Pope has: for when Christ was here on earth, if he had the^ a Parsonage, it
was no such as was correspondent to the Popes Uicarage, for, if it had bin but
the hundredth part so profitable, so commodious, and so great as the Popes
Uicarage, he should not then have needed to be so pore, nor his Apostles so
beggarly. But it is very well known, that if Christ were then a Parson, his
Parsonage was so small, that it was not able to maintain a Uicar, especially
such a sumptuous Uicar as the Pope is. And moreover, if Christ had then any
Parsonage, I am sure it was not at Rome: For, if he had been a Parson, he was
so godly, so humble, so virtuous, and so desirous to feed his flock, that I am
sure he would have gone to his Parsonage and charge, and would have preached
among his parishioners and flock: and therefore because he went not thither
to preach among them, he was none of their Parson, neither had he any parsonage
there, for he was not like many of your Parsons, that would have livings and
be Nonresidents, Note this.
or never come there. Therefore, seeing he had no Parsonage at Rome, the
Uicarage that belongs to his Parsonage cannot be at Rome, and so the Pope
having his Uicarage at Rome, cannot be Christ's Uicar. And seeing he is not
Christ's Uicar, I know not whose Uicar he should be, unless he be the Devils
Uicar: for I am sure he thinks scorn to be a Uicar to any mean Parson, for
that he has borne rule above Emperors and Kings, that have kissed his feet,
holden his styr^op, led his horse, and have lain groueling, whiles he has
trodden on their neck.


Siuqila. You have proved very well, that Christ had no Parsonage at Rome,
therefore the Pope having ye chief place of his Uicarage at Rome, ca^ in no wise
be Christ's Uicar, for the Parsonage and vicarage must needs be both in one
place.


Omen. The Pope did wilily when he chose himself vicar under such a parso^ as
Christ is, for thereby he knew, yt he should not only come in great credit as he
has done: but also was sure, that the Parson of ye benefice dwelled so far
from him, yt he would neither come to receive his tithes, neither yet control
ye Uicar whatsoever he did, so yt thereby he is both Parson, Uicar, and al:
but yet ye Pope being called Sanctissimus (which is most holy) must needs have
such a good conscience (having such a great living under his said parson) yt I
doubt not but he has and does daily give a great deal thereof to the pore
friends of Christ his Parson: and so Christ is as well pleased, as though he had
bestowed it on himself, for he says, whatsoever you give to the pore, yt give
you to me.


Siuqila. If ye Pope did so, it were well, but I am sure, yt he does ye
contrary, for a marvelous deal of this his wonderful tresure, he most vainly,
voluptuously, and wickedly co^sumeth on himself and his train: and no small part
thereof he spe^deth on ye mortal enemies of Christ his parso^: and a huge deal
thereof he consumes, and ye most willingly to trouble, vex, empouerish, hurt,
murder, and kill the very friends of Christ his Parson.


Omen. If this be true yt you say, it is one of the greatest arguments yt can
be, that the Pope is none of Christ's vicar: for hereby it appears, that ye
Pope is Christ's utter enemy, for he yt loves Christ's enemies, and hates
Christ's friends, must needs hate Christ: and he yt hates Christ, cannot be
Christ's friend, therefore he must needs be his enemy: whereby it seems, that
Christ was maruellously ouereene, if he chose his enemy to be his Uicar: but
because we are most sure, yt Christ cannot be ouerseene, therefore he has not
chosen the Pope to be his Uicar: and so the Pope must needs hold his
Uicarage by usurpation, and not by any good title.


Siuqila. He may usurp a while, but Christ will bring him to an account one
day, for intruding himself into Christ's Uicarage. Well, we have bin so long in
hand with this holy and rich Uicar the Pope, that we have forgot the pore
Parsons and Uicars of our country.


Omen. I thought none but your Uicars and Curates had had simple and bare
livings, but because you named them even now pore Parsons, therefore it is
like they have pore Parsonages: have your Parsonages such small profits and
commodities belonging to them, that the Parsons thereof are not able honestly
and decently to find themselves and to succor their pore Parishioners?


Siuqila. There are few or no Parsonages with us, but that have sufficient
profits and commodities belonging unto them: But such greedy and covetous
Patrones are the giuers of many of them, Covetous Patrons.
that they will be sure, that they to whom they give them, shall yield them
yearly one fleece out of them: Some of them will have half at the least, some
I fear have more, though some have less, or else they will have some round
sum of money ere they will grant or present them.


Omen. Such buyers and sellers of Benefices do not well know what they do.


Siuqila. Though you think they know not what they do, I am right sure they
care not what they do, the danger thereof is not yet, but hereafter: which
before was sufficiently debated between us.


Omen. But I pray you sir, are these Benefice buyers learned or not?


Siuqila. Forsooth some of them are more learned than many, but not so godly as
a great sort.


Omen. No, for if they were, they would not come in by the window: but if one
should call them by their right name, they would be angry: yet Christ that
cannot lie, says they are very thieves: and what thieves are worthy to have, I
report me to true men. Thieves may escape a while, but yet most commonly they
are hanged at the last: Note this,
even so these Spiritual thieves, meaning as well the temporal that sell, as
the spiritual that do buy, unless they leave their theeuery, and repent
unfeignedly, will be hanged in hell.


Siuqila. That is the worse hanging of the two, one were better to be hanged at
Tyborne twice, than in Hell once.


Omen. Me thinks they that have learning and knowledge, should rather refuse
livings than to have them on that sort.


Siuqila. Yea but if the learned be covetous, what then? is not Covetousness
able to drive one faster to mischief, than Lerning is able to pluck him back?
what is Lerning without the fear of God? no more than a fine wit in a common
drunkarde. Too true,
If the spiritual man be greedy of living, and the Temporal man as covetous
of money: the one will think it no more sin to give, than the other think it
an offense to take: So that, if these two do meet together, the bargain will
not be long a making. But I know some that are godly learned, and fear God so
much, that will rather beg their bread, than buy a Benefice.


Omen. But how does the greedy Patron then, when such godly men will not
yield to his request? for he can not occupy the Parsonage himself.


Siuqila. Tush, he cares not for that, he knows, if one will not, an other
will: he will find one that has little learning and less honesty, for want
of living, that will be content that the Patron shall have the best part
out of it, thinking himself happy if he have twenty marks or twenty
pounds yearly, though the Benefice be worth a hundredth pounds by year,
seeing he had nothing to live on before. And I warrant you the Patron will have
him surely bound for bursting to enjoy the same, and but a few shall know
thereof. He that has his wares to sell in a fair, Note*
cannot lightly want a chapman. Where there are more sellers than buyers, wares
will be there cheap, but where there are more buyers than sellers, wares there
will be dear. Therefore Parsonages and Benefices are very dear with us, for
that there are more Parsons for Parsonages, than Parsonages for Parsons.


Omen. Yea, perhaps more evil Parsons than Parsonages: but I believe there are mo
Parsonages tha^ good Parso^s.


Siuqila. That is most true, for if there were as many good Parsons, as there be
Parsonages, then many would not have so many benefices as they have.


Omen. What? is there any with you that have any more benefices than one?


Siuqila. Yea that there be a great-sorte, some have two, some have three,
some have four, yea, some have had five or six at the least, I am ashamed to
go any further.


Omen. It is very strange that you tell, truly our Preachers with us have but one
benefice, and yet they think that one such a great charge and heavy burden, yt
they are scant able to bear it.


Siuqila. And contrary, many of our Parsons are so lusty and strong yt they
think two or three benefices is but a small burden: Strong Parso^s.
I think in my conscience, yt if some with us had half a score benefices on
their backs, they would not say they were fully laden, but would call for mo if
they might have the^.


Omen. Such (I fear) set their own souls to sale, and al ye souls of their
seely pore flock. Your parso^s are or should be, watchmen, whereof the Prophet
Ezechiel speaks: and is it possible for a man to watch in mo places than one
at once? one is not thought sufficient to watch a castle in the time of war,
therefore half a dozen or more are appointed to watch: Now, A good argument.
if so many are but sufficient to watch an erthly castle, and that against
worldly enemies, who^ they may see: then one can be no more but sufficient to
watch a spiritual tower against our enemy ye devil, who^ we cannot see. And
seeing that one can be but sufficient to be a spiritual watchman in one place
or parsonage: the^ one cannot be sufficient to be a spiritual watchma^ of 2.
or.3. places or Parsonages, much less of 5. or 6. parsonages or mo, specially,
where there is 20* 40. 60. 80. or 100. miles, between one Parsonage and another.


Siuqila. He that can des^ry all the dangers that may happen to all these places
at once, and also can then presently tell all the people that dwell there of ye
same, his sight is a great deal better than mine, and he has a louder voice
tha^ I have by a great deal. Christ had as good watchme^ (which were his
Apostles) as any had I believe: yet they never charged or burdened themselves
with so many sundry places for living, though they were as able to discharge
the^, as our parsons that have 3. or 4. benefices: but they were of an other
mind tha^ the most of our Parsons are, for they had great care of many, and
gain of none, and these our Parsons have gain of many, and care of few.


Omen. Yea but I think your Parsons do go often to their Parsonages, and do
preach to their parishioners.


Siuqila Some do, and some do not, some of the^ fetch 30. or 40. ^ and give the^
a sermon, and the^ away they go, and perhaps they shall see the^ no more of two
or three years: mary they shall be sure to hear from the^ once or twice a year,
when they send for their profits. And some do seldom or never come to some of
their benefices, but they will be sure to send yearly for their profits. I
heard one once say, yt they had a good quiet Parson, he did never trouble them,
A meet Parso^
they knew him not, for they never saw him, and yet he had bin their Parson 20.
years at ye least.


Omen. Such are pope-like parso^s, for they feed their flock neither bodily nor
ghostly, because they will be sure they will not fulfill the meaning of Christ in
feding his sheep: and therefore they do not love Christ: but at ye last and
terrible day of judgment, if Christ shall hate and reject the^, because they
loved him not, and then se^d the^ into hell fire to burn in torments for ever,
the^ they will find yt these are dear benefires, and yt it had bin better to
have fed their flock than to have famished their flock, and will wish then,
rather to have preached to their parishioners without profits, than to have
profits of them without preaching: but the^ it will be too late to will or wish.


Siuqila. Many of our parsons feed their flock a little better: for perhaps
they will lie at their benefices 2. or 3. months, and at an other as long, and
thus they will be sure to feed them all.


Omen. Yea, but not all at once.


Siuqila. I do not say so.


Omen. But who shall preach to the rest of his flock in his absence?


Siuqila. He fed them so well before, that they may farrye a while: he will
feed them when he comes to them again, which perhaps will be within
half a year, or a tweluemoneth.


Omen. The Parson will feed his own belly oftener I warrant him, for he will
be sure to eat once or twice every day at the least: for he knows full well,
that if his body should be without food but two or three days, it would be in
danger of famishing: Then, can the Parson think that the souls of his flock
can be half a year or a twelumoneth without food, and not in danger of
perishing? If the body be sick never so little, the Physician must be still
with it, to give it such medicines as is requisite for the health thereof: And
may the soul then which is always sick (for every sin that is committed,
is a sore and sickness to the soul) be without her Physician half a year or
a tweluemoneth, the preacher of Gods word, which is the only medicine that
heals the sickness of the soul? The soul has as much need of her
daily food for fear of perishing, as the body has need of meat and
drink, for fear of famishing: Nay, the soul has a great deal more need
to be fed for fear of Spiritual death, than the body has for fear of
worldly death: for, if the body dye for want of food, it shall rise again,
yea and live for ever, if it die in Christ: but if the soul dye for want of
food, it shall die eternally, and lie in hell which is called the second death.
Therefore these Parsons are marvelous careless that feed their bodies so
diligently, which must needs die at length for all their feeding, and suffer
their souls, and the souls of their flock for want of feeding to dye
everlastingly, which should live for ever if they would feed them* But if such
peevish Parsons should be constrained, to feed their own bellies no after with
meat and drink, Mark this.
than they feed their flock with Spiritual food: then many of your Parsons
would have fewer Benefi^es than they have, and preach a great deal ofter to
their flock than they do.


Siuqila. You may be sure of that, if that should be so, they would be
afraid to have one Benefice, least they should be constrained to fast when
they would faynest feed. O mad men, more brutish than Beasts, and more
senseless than Swine, that the love of their bellies can make them do more for
their flock, than the love of Christ can do, which has shed his heart blood
for them, to save them from Hell, and to bring them to Heaven. These great
beneficed Parsons do know very well, that one flock of Sheep is enough, and
enough for one Shepherd to look too, and keep safely: then four or five
flocks are too many. For if the Shepherd be not daily with his flock and look
very diligently to them, they will quickly go astray and be in danger to be
devoured. Nay will not some of them myscarrie and be in danger though the
Shepherd be still with them? yes be sure. Then if the Shepherd have three or
four flocks of Sheep in sundry places, he can not be still with every flock,
for though he be continually with one flock, yet two or three of his flocks
must needs be without a Shepherde, which shepherdlesse flocks must needs go
as^ray, and many of them in danger to perish. For some of those Sheep perish,
that have their Shepherd still with them: then many of them are like to perish
that have at all no Shepherd with them. Thus if one Shepherd be scant
sufficient for the keeping safe of one flock of Sheep, then one Spiritual
Shepherd can be but sufficient to keep one flock of people, which is Christ's
Sheep. And if it be requisite that every flock of Sheep have a Shepherd
continually to look to them, for fear of the Wolf: then it is much more
requisite that every flock of Christ's Sheep should have a Spiritual Shepherd
or Pastor always with them for fear of the Devil: Very true.
but how can that Parson be continually with his flock, that has more
Benefices then one, as before is sufficiently proved?


Omen. Surely Siuqila you have spoken both wisely and truly, I perceive if you
were of that function, as I think you are not, you would not burden your self
with many benefices.


Siuqila. If I should addict my self that way as advisedly and circumspectly,
as many runs into it both boldly and rashlye, I would rather desire much
learning to feed my flock, than great living to pamper my self: but many now
a days had rather have a living to loyter, tha^ knowledge to preach. Well now
let us leave our greedy Parso^s, that have never enough of spiritual livings:
and talk of your Gentlemen that are content with their own temporal livings:
I pray you sir, do they enhaunce their Rents with you?


Omen Surely the Tenantes with us, know not what enhaun^ing of Rentes does
mean, neither the Landlordes have any such thing in their mind: the Lands
with us are no hier rented, than they were four or five thousand years since.


Siuqila. I much muse thereof, the Re^ts are maruellously enhaunced with us.


Omen Why should you so? it is not to be mused at never a whit: if your
Gentlemen and Landlords, were content with a competent living, temperate
feeding, and moderate going as ours are, then they would enhaunce their Rentes
no more tha^ they do: but I perceive that many of your Gentlemen and
Landlords, have such ambitious minds, so desirous of honor, are so prodigal in
spending, so excessive in feeding, and so Princely in going, that it is no
marvel though their ancient rich Farmers and good housekeeping Tenants, be
turned into poor drudges, and miserable peasantes.


Siuqila. I am not deny it, your words are too true, in many of them, for to
say true, few degrees with us are content with their own estate or calling,
but wish to be higher, though some deserve to be lower ^the Ge^tleman would be a
Squire, ye Squire a Knight, the Knight a Baron, the Baron a Lord, the Lord an
Earl, the Earl a Marquis, the Marquis a Duke, and so higher if they might with
their safety.


Omen. And I pray you would not your Farmers be Landlords, and your Yeomen be
Gentlemen?


Siuqila. Yes I warrant you: and so through raking of riches together, they
come daily to promotion and authority.

I will not say, but that wealth joined with wisdom, is worthy of promotion and
authority, otherwise, poverty ought rather to be preferred: for a poor wise
man may get wealth and riches, but a rich fool will never get wisdom. O happy
are your Tenants that have such contented La^dlords. And our Tena^ts are
unhappy that dwell under such discontented cormorantes.


Omen. The Gentlemen and Landlords with us live so contentedly, so moderately,
and so godly, yt they have no occasion to rack their Rentes: and their
tenauntes are so neighborly, charitable, and such lovers of the commonwelth, yt
they never enhance the price of their corn, victuals, and other commodities.


Siuqila. Yet scarcity may constrain them, to raise the price of their corn
and victuals.


Omen. Nay we know not what scarcity does mean: for God does so bless the
ground, of our godly and contented Landelords, and the labors of the honest
and painful Tenantes, that we never have but great abundance of corn,
victual, and other necessaries.


Siuqila. We have had likewise such a continual plenty since we received the
Gospel, that I believe our Country never tasted the like so long together: but
we must needs confess that it has bin only of Gods great goodness and not of
our deserving.


Omen. So God will bless you still, if you perform indeed that you profess
with your mouth.


Siuqila. Then, I perceive, it is hard to find a raiser of Rents with you.


Omen. Yea verily, it is as impossible to find one enhauncer of Rentes with
us, as it is easy to find many with you: and to say truth, it were but a
folly for any to do so with us, for he should not find a Tenant that would
give one penny more than the old Rent. And if any should, we have never a
Landlord will take it.


Siuqila. If the tenants had done so with us, our Rents would not have been so
rackt as they are, but truly many of th^^ are so envious of their neighbors
prosperity, and so greedy of their own commodity, that they are the chief
occasion of the unreasonable enhauncing of our Rentes: for they have, and do
daily go to the owners of their neyghbors Farms (and some of the^, whom I
call their neighbors, dwell twenty or forty miles from them) and profer them
so much, that the Landlorde being suddenly grypte with the greedy worm, does
take his gentle and unsought for offer, and so thrust out his old tenant, when
his Lease is expired, and perhaps before, if many or might may do it.


Omen. They, whose Farms they so go about to take, may well be their
neighbors: but they that so uncharitably take their neighbors Farms over
their heads, are no good neighbors, but wicked cutthroats. But what harm
have they that so get their neighbors Farms, Ground, or Houses from them?


Siuqila. No harm at all, unless that be harm to enjoy quietly the Farm or
House, which he so craftily hired out of his neighbors hand: neither have we
any Law, once to punish or trouble them therefore.


Omen. We have such a Law for such takers, or hyrers of their neighbors
House or Ground, that none with us need fear the hyring of their Farms from
them. If you had such a Law with you, your Rentes would not be so enhaunced,
your Fines would not be so much used, your Landlordes would not be so enriched,
nor the pore Tenants and Farmers would not be so vnhoused, as I perceive they
are.


Siuqila. I pray you sir, what law have you therefore?


Omen. Forsooth a very straight law, but it is seldom or never executed,
wherefore few or none with us does know that we have such a law. This saying
or meaning of Christ ( Do as thou would be done unto) is so deeply printed in
our breasts, that we need none other law.


Siuqila. O happy are they that so regard the law of God, that you need not
the law of man, but I beseech you lot me hear your law in this case provided.


Omen. That you shall with all my (...) this it is: whosoever offers or takes
any fi^e, for any house or ground, otherwise than has been accustomed, he
shall pay the fourth part of his goods: the one half whereof shall be for a
fine to the king of our Country, the other half shall be sold, and given
equally to the poorest neighbors of him that offered, and that took the said
Fine: and this law is so straightly executed, yt none with us will offer any
Fines.


Siuqila. This is a very straighte law for offering of Fines.


Omen. Let none offer Fines, and then it is not straight


Siuqila. That is true, but yet it seems by your words, that there are fines
accustomed with you.


Omen. There are so, but none must either offer or give them but the Tenauntes
of the same house or ground, A reasonable fine.
when their Leases are expyred, and that is, but one years Rent toward the
maintayning of the Lord.


Siuqila. Oh I would to God none paid with us any greater Fines, than one
years Rent of their house or Farm: but the Fines of houses and Farms with us
are commonly so great, yea besides the new enhauncing of the Rents of ye same
houses or farms, that the years of their Leases will be almost expyred, ere
they can recover the same: and many of them are constrained to sell a great
part of their stock, which should maintain them in their Farms, for the
paying of the same Fines: that thereby they are utterly beggarde, and so are
feign, for want of Cattle and Corn, to let out the most of their Ground
to others, which do reap the chief commodity from them, without either
charge or Fine ^whereby they shall never recover or get again the one half of
their Fine, and thereby when their Leasses are ended, are far unable to pay a
new Fine and the enhaunced Rentes for the same: and so they are thruste out of
their Farms, whereby many that kept good houses, and relieved the poor, are
now verome beggars themselves.


Omen. Surely it is pitiful to hear, but more sorrowful to be suffered. Our
La^dlords are not of ye mind of your La^dlords, for all degrees with us yt have
lands to let, do not only refuse and abhor to take such Fines, but also will
lessen or lawne their Rents, if they set yt their Tena^ts are not well able to
live of ye same. Yea* and if their Tena^ts should by any myschaunce be unable
to pay them their Rent, they will not only forgiu^e the^ ye same, but also will
give the^ money to help them withal.


Siuqila. There may be such Landlords with us, but if there be, I fear there
are not many. But I pray you proceed, what is your Law for such as do hire
their neighbors House from the^?


Omen. Mark and I will tell you. Whosoever does procure to take his neighbore
House or Farm without his consent, his House or farm (if he have any) shall be
set or let to his next porest neighbor for ye space of.vij. years* and if it be
his own free la^d, the said poor Tenant shall pay ye ancient Rent of the same,
to the maintaining of the wife and children of (...) went about to take his
neighbore House or Ground. And none upon pain of forfeiting their House or land
to the King, shall (...) him either House or Ground for the space of the same
vij. years: And he shall wear on his back and bosom these words all that
while: ( This man went about to put his neighbor out of his House) and so he
shall be known what he is, whereby every one shall shun him that sees him. How
like you this Law, have you such a Law with you for such as seek to put their
neibors from their Houses?


Siuqila. We have none such, I would we had, but some would think that it
were too strait a Law.


Omen. The godly Father does not make the rod purposely to beat his Child,
but to cause him to shun offenses that he may not be beaten: so we have not
made this Law to make men be punished, but only to cause them not to hyre
their neibors Houses, that they be not punished. So that this law is not strait
to him that does not offend: and for him that will needs offend it is not
strait enough. I will tell you how one was served with us, that went about to
hire his neibors House from him: Mark it well, for the example is not very
tedious, nor the matter frivolous. There was one in our country (but it is long
since) that had a Farm of a Gentleman by the old Rent, which was y^rly worth
to ye Farmer (...) at least, he being both covetous himself, and desirous to
make his son and gentleman (as many Farmers with you I think do and have done)
and therwithal very rich, smelling and perceiving that a certain Gentleman by
him, being Landlord to one of his neibors, was both needy and greedy: went
with a bag of gold to him (knowing that gold was a good ^^yfe to catch such a
fish) and sayd^ Sir I understand that you are Lord of such a Farm, and for
that I perceive your tena^nt is not so beneficial to you as he is bound,
neither payth half so much Rent to you for it as it is worth: I am come to you
not only to offer you this purse full of gold for a Fine, but will give you as
much more yearly Rent as he pays. To whom the Gentleman said. You profer me
well, and I would grant your request but for fear of the law. You know herein
the laws, are not only set forth with great extremity, but also executed
with great severity: to whom the Farmer answered briefly: what sir^ are you
afraid of your own shadow? he that is afraid of every grass, must not walk
in a meadow: if you be not too tender hearted, or too spice co^scienced, or think
you have more than enough, this purse full of gold, and the yeerlie doubling of
your rent, will make you yield. To whom the Gentleman said: I could be content
to grant thy desire, but what a mischief should thou incur to give me such an
unreasonable Fine? thou know for offering of this Fine (if it were known)
thou should forfet the fourth part of all thy goods (the law therefore is so
strait): then how should thou be handled for giving, and I for taking of it,
if it be known? Tu^ said the Farmer, if you keep your own counsel I will keep
mine. Suppose, said the Gentleman, that we keep our own counsels for the Fine,
yet ye enhancing of the Rent could not be hid: Yes I could find a mean for
that, said the Farmer, our Lease should have expressed in it but only the old
Rent, and I would promise you by my faith, that I would pay you every Rent-day
during my Lease, as much Rent more as is set down in the Lease. I might happly
be deceived, said the Gentleman, if I should trust to that, for you that will not
stick to break Gods commandment in taking al your neibors living, A thing very
likely.
will not let to break your own promise in d^^^^^ding me of the one half of my
Rent, which is not the tenth part of my living, but if thou will do thus, said
the Gentleman, that is, make me a Bill of det, that thou owe me thus much
money, as the one half of ye Rent comes to during the time of the Lease, and
wilt therein grant payment to me at such days as the rent is to be paid, of
so much money as the several (...) of the Rents of the Farm amo^^teth to
the^ tho^ shall (...) what I will say unto thee* Yes that I will, said the
Farmer. Yea, but mark said the Gentleman, there is one mischief behind,
which will hardely be salued. What is that? said the Farmer. Marry that is
this, said ye ge^tlema^: though the Fine be kept never so close, and ye rackt
Rent hid never so pri^^lye, yet the hiring of thy neighbors house or farm
from him, must needs be known, for I am sure the Tenant will not keep (...)
Counsel. Sir, said the Farmer, you may be hold of that: but I know a salve
will heal that sore well (...). If you ca^ do so, said the gentleman, then the
matter will be soon at (...) Then (...) F^rmer: I can have two or three trusty
fellows for a little mo^^y, that shall witness if need be, that I had ^his
confente in the taking of this farm of you, and that he did take money of me,
that I might enter into his farm with his good will, after the end of his
(...) were best to take heed, said the gentleman, least your witnesses deceive
you* Nay said he, I am sure of the^, they will cleave to me like (...) for
money: well, it is good to be circums^^^^, said the gentleman, for the Judge
is so godly and so wise, that he will smell out a false knave and a false
matter quickly. Yea but said the Farmer that Judge is dead that you mean of,
we have and there (...) Judge (...) in his (...), that is neither (...) as he^
and moreover he is so nie me, that he will not take part against me, for he is
my own Son, so that if need should stand, he would lean a little on my
side, and (...) with the wrong. And to make him more (...) pleasure me and my
friend, I will present him (...) with such (...), that (...) after he may be
the (...) willing to take my part. Well, (...) the Gentleman, if you can bring
all this to pass as you say, I will here grant you my Farm, and will make a
lease thereof, and to enter on it immediately after my Tenants lease is expyred,
and thereupon I take this for a fine, so that it be al gold: Yes sir, said the
Farmer, it is all gold, and that good gold I warrant you. And then the said
greedy Gentleman told the gold, and so took it and carried it away with him.


Siuqila. What followed then?


Omen. Forsooth all this was wroughte as politikely as might be: but you shall
hear how the matter fell out: within two or three months before the said
Gentleman's Tenantes lease was expyred, according to the custom of our
country, the said Tenant went to the said Gentleman his Landlord, with a
couple of Capons for a good-wil present, not a customed gift: and said: Sir,
of good will I have brought you a couple of Capons, to whom the Gentleman
said, I think you are come rather of necessity tha^ for good will or
friendship, but go to, say on, what is your will with me? Sir, said the Farmer,
it is not unknown to you, that my lease of my farm is almost out, wherefore I
come to you, according unto the custom, to desire you to make me a new lease,
and lo, here is, besides the Capons that of good will I give you, one whole
years rent of my farm, as a fine for the same. A good custo^^ for Farmers.
Indeed said the Gentleman by the custom of our country, I ought to make you
a new lease of your Farm, paying to me one years rent for a fine therefore:
but you know every Landlord may let his Farm or ground to whom he list, so
that the Farmer that dwells in it does agree thereto: that is true, said the
Farmer, but what mean you by that? you know well enough, said the Gentleman
what I mean thereby, for I am sure you are not ignorant, that I have made a
lease of the Farm you now dwell in, to an other man, and that with your
consent: sir, said the Farmer I think you do but ieste, to prove my patience
withal, I had need to know of it before I consent to it, and it were more
meet I should know the party to whom I should consent, than to consent before
I know the party. You know him I am sure, said the Gentleman, you need not
make the matter so strange, he dwells not far from you, he is a neighbor
of yours. If any such, said the Farmer, has hired my house over my head
without my consent, he may be my neighbor, but he is no godly
neighbor. The truth is so sir, if any has hired my Farm of you, as yet I
neither know who it is, neither have I consented to any such thing. Then
said the Farmers Landlorde, I am sure, that I have let your Farm: and I am
certain, that you have consented to the letting of your Farm: whether you
were druncke or no when you consented to it, I know not, but he was sober
inoughe to whom you consented I am sure. Well, said the Farmer, all this your
talk is Hebrewe to me, for I know not what it means: Yea but, said the
Gentleman, you shall find it your own Country speech when you feel what it
is: go your way, you get no Lease of me, when your Lease is expyred, then you
shall know who it is that hired it: you know full well who has hired it,
but that you list to dally and work wiles with me. I pray God, said the
Farmer; that you work not wiles with me, for I use nothing but plainness
with you. Mark well.
Oh sir, said he, will you degenerate from your good ancestors? will you go
about to break the laudable customs of this our famous Country, that our
godly fore elders by great wisdom established, of their successors continued,
and now throughout our whole Country practiced? When I came now to you, I
made a full account, that you would not deny me: for who is it, through all this our country of Mauqsun, that l^ueth our King, obeys our laws,
esteems our orders, favors our fame, regards their own credit, and
wishes a general commodity to our Country, that once will presume to
violate or break our commendable customs? and will you, being a worthy
Gentleman, and of an ancient house of this our country, contrary to our good
orders and custom, put out me your loving and obedient Tenant, without any
just cause, who with my fore-elders, have thus many thousand years dwelled
quietly in the same? Let neither glistering gold entice you, neither any
Fines allure you, nor yet racked Rents procure you to do that in an hour, that
shall bring your infamy all your life. You see, that all your elders that
never put out their pore Tenaunts, did live with worship, and die with
fame: and will you by putting out your pore Tenaunte, live with disworship, and
die with shame? You know sir, that no country in all the world, has wiser
Rulers, iuster Judges, better laws, nor yet better executed than we have: you
hear of sewe that offend the law, but none unpunished that offend the law:
therefore foresee the danger, least when you would you cannot avoid the
danger. They that procure you to fall, I fear can not help you up. Then the
Gentleman said, (showing himself to be angry) away thou prating knave, do
thou tell me my duty? Divines are dainty, Note this:
when peasaunts do preach. Sir, said the Tenant, though I am too simple to
preach, yet I may be able to give good counsel. Every welthie head has not
wisdom at will, nor every poor fellow is not fraught with folly: wisdom is
not always tied to wealth, nor foolishenesse is not always knit to poverty:
therefore the wiseman will consider the talk, not the talker, but fools regard
the talker, not the talk: wherefore sir, the wiser you are, the willinglier you
will weigh my words. Good counsel may do good if it be taken in time: but if
it come too late it profits not. And now, for that perhaps you have denied
me my Lease only to prove me, I will not show my self obstinate, nor be
stubborn to you, at whose hands I have my chief living: Therefore as your
most loving and obedient Tenant, I humbly beseech you to let me have a
new lease from you of my Farm: and here again I offer unto you for a fine,
one whole years rent of my Farm. To whom the Gentleman said, get thee
hence, thou shalt have none other lease of me than thou haste, neither will I
take thy fine, nor accept thee long for my Tenante, and therewith the
sorrowful tenaunte went away.


Siuqila. But I pray you sir, did the tenant when his lease was expyred go
willingly out of his Farm, or did his Landlord thruste him out by force?


Omen. Forsooth neither, for he tarryed in it still, and would not go out, but
kept possession thereof, so that he that hired the said Farm over his head,
complained of him to the Judge who was his own son, thinking that he would
weigh with him altogether being his father.


Siuqila. It was very like so, therefore it was marvel that he durst stand
so against his Landlord, and against him that had hired his Farm, considering
the Judge was his son.


Omen. Yea you, and they of your Country may marvel at it well enough, for
perhaps some Judges with you would have favored their fathers cause,
though it had not been altogether right.


Siuqila. That is very like, for there have been Judges with us ere now, that
have wincked at the right, and have favored such as had neither right nor good
title in the thing they sued for, and yet was neither their father, mother,
sister, nor brother, nor any kin at all to them.


Omen. Then perhaps they greased them in the hands with the golden ointment,
which has as great virtue to allure wicked Judges as consanguinitie or
kindred. But this Farmer, whose house was hired from him, did assure himself,
that the Judges of Mauqsun are so righteous, godly, and fear God so much, that
neither love of their kindred, favor of their friends, nor yet bribes of
strangers, could make them once tread awry: besides that, he knew full well,
that if the Judge should weigh with the wrong, and do contrary to equity and
justice, that then we have such a loving, affable, diligent, and righteous
King, that if any poor man complain to him of wrong done to him by any
whatsoever he were, he would hear the matter himself, and whether he were
Lord, Ruler, or Judge that did the party wrong, he should be sure to pay full
dearly for it, according to ye law, without any hope of remission or pardon:
And therefore this Farmer did not fear his righteous matter at al, though the
Judge was son to his enemy: so yt when ye Judges father had co^playned to his
son, as is before said, making to his son a very plain and smooth matter of it,
as he told the tale: the Judge then said, father I much muse, yt the said
Farmer would first consent and be willing, The wise saying of the Judge,
yt you should have his Farm after his years were expyred, and now after his
lease is ended to withstand you, and not suffer you to enter into the same: and
so much yt rather, for yt he knows you are my dear father, and that I love
and esteem you above all erthly creatures, who may very well think, yt if I
will aid and help the widow, fatherless, and strangers that I know not, to
their right, yt then I will not suffer you to take any wrong: Therefore it
seems, yt either he is a noughtie obstinate or foolish fellow, or yt he was
dru^ke when he conse^ted and agreed to your taking of his Farm: or else it
seems, yt you go about to do him wrong, presuming yt rather to prosecute your
pretended matter against him, in hope to obtain your desire, for yt I am your
son yt must be Judge of ye cause: but father I have such a good opinion in
you; yt you will neither go about to do any man wrong, neither bring any false
matter before me: And therefore I am persuaded, yt the foolish Farmer of some
set purpose, does withstand and resist you: to whom his father then said, do
you think son, that I would seek mine own shame, and your reproach? be bold I
will not: and that you may credit my matter the better, lo here are three
witnesses yt were by, when he conse^ted and agreed, yt I should take a lease of
his Farm: and here is the Gentleman his landlord yt will affirm the same. And
then the Gentleman said to ye Judge, my Lord, you know we have a law, yt they
yt have any lands houses or ground here in ye country of Mauqsun, may neither
put out their tenants (but for certain great and vrge^t causes, which I am not
able to lay and prove against my late farmer) neither may take any fines,
other than ye accustomed fine, which is, one years rent: nor yet may enhance
their rents. Therefore seeing I cannot take any in-come of any, A s^ttle
saying,
neither raise or enha^ce my rents: to what end should I put out my Tenant yt
has paid my rent truly, and used himself honestly? unless he were willing and
consenting thereto? you say very true, said ye Judge, yt matter seems to be
very apparent: but I marvel yt he should be so willing before, and so
unwilling now. Belike said the Ge^tleman, he was either not well advised when he
did consent to it, or else it may he, yt he thought himself sure of some other
house or Farm to be in, at ye time of his consent, and now cannot have ye same:
whereby he repe^ts yt he so fondly agreed, and so thinks by force to keep it,
and to desude your good nature by one mean or other. Then the Judge said, it
were a folly for him so to think, for he may be sure that I am not such a
fool, but that I can find out the truth: and that I will not take his part in
wrong, to be against my father in right. If he had bin disappointed of an
other house (contrary to his expectation) it had bin his best way to come to
me, to desire me to entreat my father, to be good unto him, and to suffer him
to enjoy his Farm still, which I assure you I would have done, and I think my
father would have done so much at my request. Yea son said he, I would have
done more for you than that. Then said the Judge, I will send for the Farmer
hither, and see what he can say for himself. It shall not need, said his
father, here is evidence enough, therefore I pray you proceed according to ye
law ^ay father, said ye Judge, you shall hold me excused therein, yt better
evidence and witness you have, ye less has he: and our law will not suffer yt
any man be prosecuted or condemned, but yt he must have knowledge thereof, and to
speak for himself, or some other for him: You shall be sure yt he ca^ do you no
wrong as long as I am Judge: And therefore I will send for him: your three
witnesses here, besides your own credit and this gentleman's, will soon make an
end of this matter: And also I will persuade him to yield possession to you by
gentle means, otherwise I will tell him yt law will enforce him thereto, with
further loss whether he will or no. Then he said to his son, I pray you do,
and let it be as quickly dispatched as may be. And then the Judge immediately
sent an officer for him, at whose commandment he came by and by: whom, when ye
Judge saw, he said, I marvel Farmer, why you do not suffer my father to enjoy
and possess ye Farm you dwell in, which he took of this gentleman, let him have
possession therein quietly and speedily, or else he shall have it whether you
will or no: The^ yt Farmer was about to speak, but ye Judges father spoke
suddenly, and said^ you niyght be sure you folish fellow yt you have a wrong
match, and that you cannot be able to withstand me, A fair brag.
specially seeing my son is Judge where our matter must be determined. The^ ye
Farmer answered again very soberly: I know my matter is so true, and your son
so upright a Judge, yt I am right glad, that he shall have ye determining of my
matter, though you are his father, and I but a stranger to him. What Farmer,
have yt such a good opinon in me, said ye Judge? Yea that I have, said ye
Farmer, and none can make me believe, yt either father, favor, affection,
kindred, money, or rewards, can make you judge unjustly, or deal untruly: then
the Judge said, you art not deceived in me: therefore, for ye affiance you have in
me, and for ye good will I bear thee, yield up thy possession to my father,
and let him have his right with quietness, and I will be a suter to him to be
good to thee. Sir, said yt Farmer, by yt time that the truth is known, and al
things stand according to equity, you will not think yt he ca^ pleasure me.
This is very strange said ye Judge: if I may credit mine own father, this
honest Ge^tleman, and these three sober witnesses, you have co^se^ted and agreed
yt my father should take a lease in reuersio^ of this Gentleman. My Lord, said
the Farmer, as it is meet yt a man should be at his own marriage, so it were
requisite yt I should co^se^t to mine own agreement: and it were marvel, yt I
should be so obliuious, as to put away my whole living, and not to remember,
when, where, nor to whom: such a thing is not so soon to be forgotten: I might
then be counted to be more forgetful than Claudius, who in a fury, being
Emperor of Rome, commanded one of his familiar friends to be beheaded, and
called for the same man the next day to play with him at Chesse, forgetting yt
he had bid that he should be put to death. Wherefore, as you are a righteous
Judge, and know that the Judge of al Judges is in heaven, I beseech you, not
only to examine the truth of this matter thoroughly, but also to separate every
one of these that are come against me, whereby they may not confer any further
together tha^ they have done, and that they hear not one another examination.
To whom the Judges father said, do thou think that my son will do so much at
thy request? no I warrant thee. Father, said the Judge, be contented, if your
matter be true (as you say it is) then your separation cannot make you
disagree in truth: Therefore his request is both reasonable and lawful: and if
I should not grant it unto him, I should not only seem to deal unjustly, but
also every one might think I were partial, and fully bent to do him wrong to
pleasure you withal: so that my loving father, Note this.
be not displeased with me, for though otherwise you may command me, yet in
this case I may command you: you must consider, that I am now two kind of
persons, in respect of my worldly birth, I am your son, and ought to obey you:
but in respect of this mine office, I am your Judge, and you ought to obey me:
wherefore I command every one of you to separate your selves: and to the intent
my will herein may be the better performed, I command five officers belonging
to this court, to wait on you, and to keep every of you so far asunder, that
no one of you shall talk with an other, neither any of you hear ye
examinations of an other. Take them Officers unto you, and keep them
separately until I call for them. Ah son, said the Judges Father, do thou
use thy Father thus extremely? I would have thought thou would have
handled mine enemy thus, rather tha^ me: father, said ye Judge, be content, he
came willinglye as soon as I sent for him, and here is none, neither has he
brought any to be examined on his behalf, as you have done, neither do I
commit you into these Officers hands as prisoners, but only that he may
perceive, I am willing, to perform his reasonable request: to whom his father
answered, I will not be kept of any, I am able to keep my self, I would I
had never begot thee, An unfit speech to a Judge.
I am sorry that I came to thee to complain. And I am as sorry father, said
his son, that it is my chance to be your Judge. If your matter be right (as
I now fear the contrary) you would be as well content for my credit to
grant your adversaries lawful desire, as that I should Judge rightly on your
side. Then said the father to the Judge, I will trouble you no further, I and
this Gentleman my Landlord, with my witnesses will be gone, I will have it tried
in another Court: then said ye Judge, I could be right well content that you
should so do, if the Law would permit you: but our Law is, that no matters may
be determined, but only in that Court that is appointed therefore, and every
matter must be tried where they are first co^menced: and now for that you dwell
within the circuit of this Court, where I am Judge, and seeing you have comenst
your matter here against this Farmer, you can not remove it from hence if you
would. I marvel why you should refuse to have your matter tried before me your
son: for as you may think, that every one should here have their right, so
you may be most sure, that I being Judge, and your most loving Son, would
not suffer you here to take any wrong. Me thinks this Farmer whom you sue here
(that is neither kith nor kin to me) should rather refuse to have his matter
tried here, than you. But this I will do father, for the love I bear you, and
for the great care I have of you, I will give this Farmer an hundred mark out
of mine own purse, to let you enjoy his Farm quietlye, whereby neither you
shall need to trouble me nor the Law any further. Then the Judges father
said churlishlie, I have no need of thy money, I am able to pay for it my
self: but for that I have agreed with him once, as my witnesses ca^ testify,
I will not give him one penny more than I have done: then said the Farmer, if
you should give me but one penny more than you have given me, then you should
give me but one penie for my good will of my Farm, for I never had any of you
yet: and a penny were to little of conscience for such a Farm as it is,
which is sufficient to find me and my wife, and thirty persons, besides the
daily refreshing of my poor neighbors and diverse strangers: and if you
would give me five thousand pound for my good will of it, yet you should not
have it: for that I and my ancestors have dwelled in it time out of mind.
And if I should put such a good living away, which my ancestors have lived
on so long, from my children, every one might well say, that I am not worthy to
have such a living left unto me by my Parents: and whereas they might think
that as long as I kept it I had some wit, so now they might well
affirm, that I were a fool, or began to dote: And therefore I have neither
put it away, neither will consent to put it away. And though my
Landlorde be willing to have a new Tenant, yet I am content to keep still mine
old Landelord: Therefore seeing I have not offended him any way, nor yet his
new Tenaunte pleasured him by any means (that I know) I fear it will fall
out, (if the matter be well ripte, that either he has had some greater
Fine, than I have offered him, or some greater Rent than I do pay him, or
rather both. Well father, said the Judge, I perceive this man will not depart
with his Farm, unless he loose it by the Law. And for that I would have you
friends without Law (if it might be) I beseech you father let me entreat you
at this time to be ruled with reason: what would you have me to do? said he to
his son. Mark me and I will tell you: you have living enough, A virtuous Judge.
though you have not this ma^s Farm from him, which if you had, I fear you
would not keep the like house on it, that he does, therefore I would wish
you should release your title you have in it, from this Gentleman And if you
paid any Fine for it (which you may do with the consent of the Farmer, so
that it be but one years Rent) I will request this Gentleman to give it you
again: and this his old Farmer shall give him the same Fine again. How say
you Farmer, said the Judge, are you content therewith? yea sir, said ye
Farmer, at your request with all my heart. Then said the Gentleman, but you
were best know whether I will take it again of him or not. And then said the
Judges father, though you would so take it, yet perhaps I would not
receive my Fine again. I pray you father said the Judge, stick not herein:
So that you have your money you laid out for the Fine, you need not care: Yea
marry said he, so that I had my money that I laid out. Then the Judge
said, had he any more money of you, than one years Rent? I say not so
said his father, and if I had paid him any more, yet I set more by the
Farm than by the Fine: yea, but father said the Judge, I trust you paid him
no more, than one years Rent: the Gentlemanne said, no indeed did he not:
then the Judge said to the Gentlemanne, I pray you give my father his Fine
again, that he gave you: my Lord, said the Gentleman, I have it not, I have
spent it: the^ the Judge said again, are you so content that the Farmer
shall give him the Fine, that he should give you? I am pleased said the
Gentleman, so that your father will make me a general quittaunce: no said the
Judges father, I will make no quittaunce, I have hired my Farm, and my Farm I
look to have: then father, said the Judge, you are given more to will, than to
wisdom, and to gain, more than to godliness. Well seeing ye Farmer will take
no money to forgo his Farm, let me entreat you to release up your Leaf:
And because I would have all ended quietlye, I will give you forty pound out
of mine own purse, so that you will do it: Whereby you may perceive that I
would have the Farmer to keep his Farm, and you to be no looser, which
Judges use not commonly to do. I will have none of you said the Judges father,
No common use of Judges.
but if the Farmer will give me a hundredth pound to release my state and title,
I am content. Then said the Farmer, I will not give one penny for it more than
my ordinary Fine, I will break no good custom of this our famous Country. And
now my Lord, for that you have offered too much and all for quietness, which I
see is for the tender zeal you bear to your father, (though he cannot see it)
let the matter be tried before you, and he that winnes it by the Law, let him
wear it. Are you so stout? said the Gentleman, for my part let it be tried
by the Law: though you think my Lord Judge does favor you, yet assure your
self, our three witnesses and we two are sufficient to overthrow you. I trust
he will not go against a manifest truth: no said the Judge, but I would gladly
if it might be, have the matter taken up: yea said the Judges father, if the
Farmers matter were as true as my son knows it is false, he would not be so
ready to have the matter ended without Law: Spiteful words.
at which words, the Judge began to blush, saying, well father, this something
touches me, ye Farmer said true, when he affirmed that you can not see the
zeal I bear you: and now seeing you have urged me, let it fall out as it will,
for the Law shall try it, and now you shall see whether I will bear with
falshod or not: saying further, bring my father hither to the Bar, and the
Farmer also, but carry the rest aside until I call for them: and then the
Judge said, father it appears by your Bil of declaration, that such a day,
such a month, and in such a place, this Farmer received forty pound of you,
wherefore he did consent and agree that his Landlord should let you a Lease
of the Farm he now dwells in, and that you should suffer him, after the
end of your Lease, quietly to possess and enjoy the same. How say you father
(said the Judge) is it not so? yes truly said his father: then fear not
father, said the Judge (though you have something missused me) if this be
true, you shall have the Farm and all your desire. The^ said the Farmer, if
that be true, then I will yield and he shall have it, but my Lord if I prove
it false, then I trust I shall have my Farm still. Yea that you shall, said the
Judge, fear it not. Sir if it will please you, said the Farmer, to send for
three such of my neighbors, they will come with speed and something satisfy
you in this matter. Then the Judge commanded an officer to go for them, who
came presently to the Judge, and then the Judge examined every of them by
themselves: and they all agreed, that the same day the said Farmer and they
were all the day above half a dosen miles out of the town. And then the Judge
said to the Farmer, how say you sir, where were you the same day that is
mentioned in this Bill of Declaration? Forsooth said he, I was with the said
three men my neighbors all the same day half a dosen miles out of the town: and
if they have told you truly, they have said no less. In deed Farmer you and
they agree al in one. Then said the Judge to his father, how like you this
father? Then his father said: it was then the next day after I am most sure
thereof. Then said the Judge, if you are no surer of the truth of your matter,
than you are certain of the day when this bergaine was made, I fear it will
fall out but madly on your side. I pray you confess all where he was the next
day after mentioned in this Bill. And then the Farmer and his three neighbors
said al at once, that four or five days then together they were all at the
same place in the Country, making merry at one of their friends marriages.
Then the Judge said, Father, if your matter end no better than it does begin,
it will not go very well with you. Then his father said, all this can not
daunt me. Truly said the Judge you like your cause a great deal better than
I do. You know, said his father, he has but three witnesses beside him self,
and I have other three witnesses beside my self, and the Gentleman my new
Landlorde is the fifte, who is able therein to say something. And then the Judge
commanded the witnesses to be brought before him, whom he asked if they would
be sworn to utter the truth in a matter that he would demand of them. And
they with one voice said they would: then they took their oaths before the
Judge, at which time the Judges father would have sworn, but the Judge would
not suffer him. And when the said three witnesses had sworn, they plainly
confessed before the Judge and all the company, that they never heard the
said Farmer consent and agree to any such thing. How chances it then, said
the Judge, that my father does bring you as witnesses on his side? Forsooth,
said they, he offered each of us a good sum of money, to bear witness
against this Farmer in this matter, when he should will us: but we would take
no money of him, saying we would receive it of him, when we had done him
pleasure: purposing by this means, to save this innocent Farmer, if need
should require, from losing of his Farm, as I hope now we do, abhorring in our
consciences his wicked practice to betray the innocent. Then the faultles
Farmer held up his eyes to Heaven, and said: O Lord I thank thee: when I came
hither, I looked to have had none other witnesses on my side but only myself,
but now through thy goodness, thou haste raised six witnesses to help me,
besides a most true and virtuous Judge, whose father hoped to overthrow me,
through the help of his son, and three witnesses that he procured him self:
but thou haste brought his own witnesses against him, and they have made him
to fall, by whom he thought to stand. Then the Judges father hanged down his
head for shame, and the Judge his son did weep even for sorrow: saying, O
father what a doleful day is this? What meante you to commit such
wickedness? Why did you come before your loving son with such an evil and
shameful cause? Did you think that I, though I be young, am a Fool? Or did
you believe that by affection I would be woonne and enticed to do wrong? Or
thought you, that because you are my father, you therefore should allure me to
falshode? You know that a Judge ought to be a father to the fatherless, a
defender of the innocente, a succourer of the sorrowefull, a protector of the
poor, and a helper of those that be oppressed. Iusticia is portrayed with a
veil before her eyes, whereby is signified, that true Justice ought to be
blind, and not to respect the person with the eyes, but the matter with the
mind. And also she has a pair of Balances in her hand: signifying, that as
a true Balance does weigh equally, so true Justice should not weigh nor wring
on either side, up nor down, but equally, according to truth. Oh what a
grief is it to my heart. You knew full well that the matter was wrong: and I
partly smelled that it was not right. I mysseliked it when you would have it
proceed against him in his absence: You might be sure that when I offered to
give him money out of mine own purse to let you have his Farm, and also money
unto you to release your interest thereof to him (which I thought was but
small) that then I perceived your matter would not fall out very well. Oh
unfortunate father, that does hurste the heart of your woeful son. With that
his father fell down on his knees, and with weeping tears said: O son,
would to God I had followed your counsel, then this shame had never come to me:
saying to the Farmer, Oh Farmer forgive me, and desire my son to be good unto
me: The Lord forgive you said the Farmer, I would it lay in my power to
release you. Then he said to his son: O my dear son be favorable unto
me. Then the Judge his son said, Rise up father and kneel not to me, it
is rather my part to kneel to you: O father, when I offered and could have
pleasured you, then you would not: and now that you are desirous and would
have me to do you good, I cannot. You know we have a severe King, and our Laws
are extreme and may not be broken: so that if I should moderate Judgment
contrary to the Law, I should not pleasure you, but utterly undo my self. For
though I would spare and favor you, the King by his espials would hear of it;
who therefore would execute me with all extremity, and would punish you with all
severity: and so I should bring you to greater vexation, and my self to
destruction. Therefore father be content, for there is no remedy but that I
must needs give such Judgment on you, as your offense requires by the Law.
Separate my father a little aside, said the Judge, and bring the Gentleman
hither.


Siuqila. But by the way I pray you tell me, did the Gentleman understand how
the matter went?


Omen. No forsooth, which you shall perceive by the sequel: When the Gentleman
was brought to the bar before the Judge, the Judge looked on him as pleasantely
as he could, and said, sir I am sorry that this foolish Farmer has both
troubled this Court, you, and my father, with such a vain matter, for I
perceive by the witnesses, my father, and you, that he consented to the making
of my fathers Lease by you, though he will not fully affirm it: But will you
tell me truly of one thing that I shall ask you, said the Judge: to whom
the Gentleman answered, Yea sir that I will if I can: But do not fable with
me said the Judge, for if you should make a lie to me in this case, thereby
you should incur no small danger by the Law, if it be known: therefore
before you speak advise your self well: Were you present, or did you hear
this Farmer, when he consented and agreed that you should make my father a Lease
of his Farm? Where at the Gentleman mused, and stayde and said nothing: Then
the Judge said, I perceive you follow my counsel, for you take good
aduisement before you speak. Though I bad you be advised what you say, yet my
meaning was not that you should say nothing, and not to speak at all: Why do
you not answer to my demand? If you be sure that you heard him speak it,
what need you fear to say so? If you did not, then tell me accordingly. But all
this while the Gentleman would say never a word. It seems said the Judge,
that this my question does drive him to a narowe strait, for he thinks if he
should say that he heard him not speak it, and my father and the other
witnesses should before affirm the contrary, then he should bring a great
suspicion to his matter: If he should affirm that he heard him speak it,
and they before denied it, then he should be punished by the law for a Liar.
Gentleman, Gentleman, said the Judge, your being mute shows you are driven to
a mischief, and this your silence brings a marvelous suspicion. This is
very strange, that you are thus tongue tied so suddenly. Where some mar their
matter with speaking too much, you mean to amend it by holding your peace and
saying too little. Well, seeing you will not answer me, I will no further
trouble you therein. I perceive you did not hear him speak it: which you are
as loath to utter, least you should prove them liers, which has confessed it, as
to tell a lie, for fear of your own punishment. They needed not to have called
you for a witness herein, for they were four besides you, and fewer are
sufficient for the trial of truth be the Law, yet it had been most requisite
that this Farmer should have consented to your self, for the making of a
Lease to my father, considering you could not do it without his good will and
agreement, wherein I must needs say there was a great oversight in you. But
their witnessing of the matter is sufficient, whereby your Lease must needs be
good that you made to my father: but though before you would not answer by
demand, yet I beseech you to grant this my request: what is that? said the
Gentleman (being well comforted with the Judges pollitike words) forsooth said
ye Judge, this Farmer I perceive does mourn, for that he fears he shall lose
his Farm, and the more, for that he has never a house to dwell in, A good
policy to try him.
whose case I do pity: And for that I have gotten my fathers good will, that
he shall have it again, I beseech you do so much at my request, as to make
him a lease of the same, and he shall pay you your due Fine therefore, and so
you may repaie my father his fine again: Whereat he see^^d more sad than he
was, and paused a good while, and at length said: I am very loath to do it,
he deserves but small favor at my hand, neither have you any such cause to
speak for him, considering he knew that your fathers lease was made with his
consent, and yet refused your bountiful offer, saying that he would not yield
his good will therein (which as appears was as good as nothing) for five
thousand pound, though now he is like to lose it for a great deal less:
wherefore I beseech you persuade me no further therein, for he shall never have
it. Well seeing you will not do so much for my sake, said the Judge, I must
needs think my self the less beholden to you, the thing is your own, you may
do what you will, I cannot compel you: but hereof I am sure, if you could be
as well content to take him for your Tenant, as he is to accept you for his
Landlorde, you would not put him from it: and to say truth, in my hearing he
has courteously used himself toward you, and before as I am credibly informed,
whereby you have no cause to be so ernest against him. You know that none can
give you a greater Fine nor more Rent than he does, and therefore there is no
reason, why you should be so desirous, to put forth your old auntiente and
honest Tenant, No reason indeed.
for a new Tenant, without any commodity, whose conditions and honesty, you
have not so well tried. Mark the sentence of Christ, which is: Whatsoever you
would that other do to you, do even the same to them: consider if you were
his Tenaunte in this case, and he were your Landlord, would you be content that
he should turn you out of his house, and let it to another? I think you
would not: therefore as you would not have Christ to turn you out of his house
in Heaven, Good counsel.
so turn not this your poor Tenant out of your house on earth. Though I
would grant it him, said the Gentleman, I think your father would not
release his right therein: I told you before, said the Judge, that I had
gotten my fathers good will therein, therefore if you will grant him your good
will, I should think my self much bound unto you: sir, said the Gentleman,
for that he has yielded up his interest, I will be advised th^^in, it may be
that hereafter upon some better consideration, I may be allured, but as yet I
will not. Now said the Judge, that you have given me a full answer, I know
wheretoo to trust: but seeing you think you have done with me, I must
proceed further, for I have not done with you. Because you are so straight
laced against your honest Farmer, and that you are so desirous to have my
father your Tenant, and to put him out, it is impossible but something does
drive you to do it: for as I said before, if you have no great Fine nor more
Rent for it, than you had of this man, there is no reason to lead you to change
your honest known Tenant, in who^ you can find no fault (as you confessed
before) for a stranger whose conditions you know not: therefore I am fully
persuaded, yt you have or shall have a greater Fine, or more Rent, or rather
both, than you should have of this Farmer, as before he wisely surmised:
wherefore tell me truly and lie not, as you will avoid ye danger thereof, how
much did my father give you for a Fine? then the Gentleman said, he gave me no
more, tha^ one years Re^t of my Farm: take heed said the Judge, yt you make
not a lie: you were better to lie twice before some other than once before me:
Great presumptions.
lies are dear wares I tell you in this Country: because my father was so loath
to take this Farmers Fine, for ye Fine he gave you, it made me judge yt the
same did not amou^t to his Fine by a great deal: and because you required a
quitta^ce of my father, whereby you would have ye one discharge the other, it
showed yt the Fine received of my father, was much more than your Tenants,
which he should repay to my father, or else why should either you desire a
quittance of my father, or he refuse to make you a quittance therefore? The
presumptions are such, which before I have alleged, yt it is almost impossible
but yt the greatness of the Fine, did allure you to let it to my father* And
be^^ds yt, to tell you flatly, my father has be wrayde your Fine to me, which
I am sure in this case would neither lie on himself nor on you: therefore it is
but a folly to conceal it, for it was spoken before too many now to be hid.
Therefore tell me truly, and lie not, for if you do, you shall pay for a double
lie, which will be small to your ease: what Fine did my father give you to make
him a Lease? nay, speak the truth and shame the Devil, the sum was too great
for you to forget: you were better tell truth and to avoid the danger of lying,
than to tell a lie, and nevertheless the truth be known. Then the Gentleman
gave a great sigh, and said nothing. Gentleman, said the Judge, your holding of
your peace is as good as a grant, say either yea or nay, for I am indifferent:
but this I tell you before, ye Fine is confessed yt he paid, therefore it is but
folly to go about to hide yt, yt cannot be hid, answer me one way or other.
Then said the Gentleman, has he confessed it indeed? he has broken promise
with me: but seeing he has confessed he did give it, I will also confess I
received it. How much was there of it said the Judge, forsooth it was two
hundred pound in gold, said he: but if I had thought your father would have
kept his own counsel no better, he should neither have had my Farm, nor I
would have had his Fine. I doubt that this great Fine, said the Judge, went
not without enhauncing of the Rent, I pray you therefore tell me truly,
should not my father have paid you more Rent, than this your Farmer does: no
truly, said the Gentleman, and if you will not trust me, I have the
counterpaine of the Lease, here to show: and with that, he took out of his
bosom the Lease and showed it to the Judge, wherein there was no more Rent to
be paid, then the auntiente and old Rent, which the Farmer confessed to be
true: and then the Judge, espying the end of a Paper stick out of his bosom,
which was by the means of taking out his Lease, The hanging out of a Paper
brought out the truth.
said to the Gentleman, what writing is that, that hangs out of your bosom:
does not that writing belong to your bargain? at which time he durst not
aunsweare for fear of lying, let me see it I pray you? said the Judge:
whereto the Gentleman was very loath, but there was no remedy* the Judge
would needs see it: which when the Judge had read, he said to the
Gentleman: here is a great Bil of debt, it seems hereby that my father owes
you a great deal of money, but I fear either you cannot, or will not tell
wherefore he does owe it you. This is a very strange debt that is one and xx.
years a paying: I pray you tell me, wherefore does my father owe you thus much
as is contained in this Bill? the sum is not so small, but that you may well
remember what you sold him for it. Well seeing you will not speak, I smell
wherefore it is: Farmer, said the Judge, what Rent did thou pay to this
Gentleman every half year? forsooth said he, I paid ten Crowns at every
half year: and at what days, said the Judge, did you pay your Rent?
Truly, said the Farmer, at Michaelmasse, and at the Annuntiation of Marie the
Uirgin. Now I perceive I gest truly, said the Judge, for it is manifest
hereby, that this great Fine went not without enhauncing of the Rent, for, as
much Re^t as is to be paid by the Lease every half year, so much, and every
half year, at the same days and times during the Lease, is to be paid by
this Bil: which apparently shows, that this Gentleman has rackt his Rent as
much more as it was. It is not for nothing, that the Cat winketh when both her
eyes are out: so here it appears what was the cause that you and my father
were so loath to undo your bergaine and grant. If this great Fine and this
raising of the Rent had not been, you would not have been so earnest
against this your Farmer, neither yet would you have denied me my request as
you did: but now to be plain with you, whereas you thought that this Farmer was
overcome and vanquished by your witnesses, and that he should lose his Farm,
it is fallen out clean contrary, for the witnesses that you brought to
confound him, have condemned you, through Gods good providence. Therefore that,
that I did, was by policy, to make you believe you had ouercom this Farmer, to
fetch you further in and to see how you would have used him if you had
prevailed. Your denying of my request has gained you nothing: for if you had
gently inclined to my desire, and been willing to show this Farmer favor at my
request (though he stood in no such need of it) perhaps I would not have
sifted you so neerees I did. Thus you may learn, that the granting of a
trifle at some time, It is true.
is better than perfourming of a weighty matter at another time. And now
though you meante mischief to your Farmer: God has turned it and much more
to your self. You thought to have undone him by enriching your self, but you
have not hurt him, but shamed and empouerished yourself. Though my fathers
covetousness made him offer you such a Fine: yet you should have had more wit,
than to have received the same. O sir, said the Gentleman, there was a great
fault in him, because he did offer it: then said the Judge, as great a fault
was in you, because you did take it. Then he said again, If he had not offered
it, I should not have taken it. To whom the Judge said again: And if he had
thought you would not have received it, he would not have proff^ed it. You are
a Gentleman, and as I understand, of good knowledge and learning, whereby you
should rather have counseled him to goodness, than consented to him in
wickedness. O sir, said the Gentleman, it was long ere I would yield unto
him, and I told him all the danger of it. Then said the Judge, you have
bewrayed your own folly: heerby it appears that you were in more fault than
he, Mark this.
that knew the dangers, and did fall into those dangers: a foul shame it were
for one to give another warning of a pit, and to fall into the same pit
himself. He committed that evil to which he enticed you: but you committed that
myschief, which you advised him to shun. Then the Judge called for his father
to be brought before him, and when his father came, the Judge said: O what an
unfortunate son am I, that must be enforst to give judgment against mine
own father? natural affection wills me to pleasure my father: but the
obedience to my Prince does persuade me to punish my father. I am so wrapped in
the net of necessity, that there is no way to avoid the mischief. If I give
judgment on this Gentleman as he does deserve, and save my father from that he
deserves: then I shall not only be a partial Judge, and so a false Judge: but
also I shall thereby procure mine own confusion. If I give true judgment, as a
just Judge ought to do, then many will detract me and speak evil of me, yea and
when they see me go in the street, will point at me, saying: Behold the wicked
and hard-harted son, that gave cruel judgment against his own father.
Well, of two evils the least is to be chosen, I were better to please God, and
obey my Prince in judging truly, than to avoid slanderous reports of the
witless by judging unjustly. O how loath I am to do that I am enforst to do.
And with that, this young and notable Judge began to wax very pale, and so
swounded and fell out of his chair, whom every one then present thought to be
dead.


Siuqila. But he died not (I hope) for it had bin great pity he should, for
that he was both wise, learned, and a righteous Judge.


Omen. No, they recovered him at that time, but they were enforst to carry him
home presently, as one liker to die tha^ live.


Siuqila. What became then of the Gentleman, and his father?


Omen. They were both committed to prison until the next day, when another
Judge gave judgment against them. They had the law extreemly executed on them,
for their making hurtful lies before the Judge, A good judgment for those
that hyre Houses from their neighbors.
according as in our former talk I declared to you: besides that, the Gentleman
for taking that Fine, and the Judges father for giving ye Fine, gave the fourth
part of all their goods, whereof the King had the one half, and the other half
was sold and equally distributed among their poorest neibors. And the Judges
father for hiring his neibors Farm with out his co^sente, and the Gentleman for
letting it without his Tenants consent, had their Houses and Grounds
belonging to them taken from them, and were let to their next porest neibor for
the space of.vij. years. And because the Gentleman did dwell in his own
freelande, the Farmer thereof paid his Rent to the Gentleman's wife, for the
mainteining of her and her children. And there was a proclamation made, that
whosoever did let or set either House or Ground to either of them for the space
of.vij. years, should forfet their House they dwelled in, and the Ground
belonging to the same, to the King. And moreover, the Judges father did wear
on his back and bosom for the said term of.vij. years, these words
following: This man practiced to put his neighbor out of his House.


Siuqila. Truly he had been better to have been content with his old, than in
that sort to have hired a new House. Surely I like the law well, but I like the
executing of it better: I beseech you tell me, had the Gentleman no more Houses
to dwell in.


Omen. Yes he had one other of his own, else he should hardly have hired one:
for few would have been his Landlord, thereby to make themselves no Landlordes.


Siuqila. But what judgment was given on them for enhancing of the Rent?


Omen. Truly the Gentleman for the same was adjudged, to receive for.vij.
years but one half of the Rents of all his Lands: and the other half was
yearly so long employed on pore men's children, to train them up in
learning. And the said two Hundredth pounds that the Judges father gave unto
the Gentleman for a Fine, was equally given and distributed among the three
witnesses that vttred the truth on the Farmers side.


Siuqila. Out of doubt this matter was well and wisely handled, the young Judge
was worthy to be commended, the offenders had that they deserved, and the
three honest witnesses were condignely rewarded. Our country is not altogether
barren of good Landlords and Gentlemen, besides our famous and worthy Prince,
which do take very easy Fines, and never enhaunce any Rentes.


Omen. Then I perceive your Prince and such Landlordes can lack no Tenants, no
more than your great Benefices can lack Parsons or Uicars. I would judge, that
such as pay small Fines and have their Farms by the old Rent, that they are a
great help to the pore Artificers that dwell nigh them.


Siuqila. Wherein do you think that they should be such help to them?


Omen. Forsothe in the selling of their corn, cattle, milk, butter, and
cheese, with their other profits that do rise of their old rented Farms.


Siuqila. How so I pray you?


Omen. Because they do sell the same a great deal better cheap (as good
reason is) than they do, that pay such great Fines and rackt Rentes.


Siuqila. In deed it were great reason they should so do, but they that have
their Farms by the old Rent, do rather sell their corn and cattle more
dear than the other: sor they having no such need, Against reason.
do keep their corn and cattle, and other profits until they be more scarce
and dearer, and so do sell the fame to the most advantage. Yea beside that,
they are so greedy, that if they may have but one halfpennie in a Bushel ten
or twelve miles off, they will carry it thither, rather than their neighbors
shall have it that dwell within a mile of them, though sometime they have less
there than they might have had at home. And the poor Tenantes, that pay great
and excessive Fines, and rackt Rentes, are of necessity constrained to sell
their corn aforehande, yea perhaps half a year before it be ripe, whereby
for ready money they have not the half it is worth. And furthermore they are
constrained daily to carry their commodities to the market, as soon as they
are ready: so that theirs are all sold, and perhaps they are ready to buie,
before the other that have their Farms by the old Rent begin to sell.


Omen. Surely it is pity it should be so suffered: there rises a great
inconvenience thereby. They that should help to ease the poor, are an occasion
of empouerishing the poor: and they that have their Farms cheapest, do sell
their commodities dearest.


Siuqila. It is so: they that keep their corn, butter, and cheese unto the
last end, do say, that were it not for the keeping of their corn in store
with their other profits, the markets would be unserved: so that it is for a
Common wealth, and that therefore they are to be commended.


Omen. Their words show fairer than their deeds do declare. I would say that
they meant well, and that they did it for a Common wealth, if they did sell then
their corn and commodities by the same price (or cheaper) as the other sold
theirs that first served the markets, or that were driven to sell soon, to serve
their necessity. But because they sell them dearer, it is manifest that they
keep their corn and commodities so long unsold, rather for their own gain,
than for the commodity of their Country. Such an enormitie would not be
suffered with us.


Siuqila. That, and many more are daily permitted with us. Well, though your
Country exceeds all the Countries in the World, for good Landlordes: yet we
have diverse, as I said before, that are so godly and zealous, that they will
neither raise their Rentes, neither put out any of their Tenantes, unless it
be for some great and worthy cause. And amongst all others I will tell you
of one, whose example I would to God that many would follow.


Omen. You have told me of diverse abuses in your Country, tell me now of one
good example.


Siuqila. With all my heart. I heard it credibly told, that a noble man with
us of great fame, of good report, and generally well-beloved, had a certain
Tenant, who though he had his Farm without Fine, and by the old Rent, yet
prospered but meanly ther^^: nigh whom, or not very far off, diwelled one
more greedy than godly, An excellent example of a good Landlord
and more covetous than charitable, that went to the owner of the same Farm:
who when he came to him, said: It may please your Honor to understand, that
you have a Farm in such a place, and such a man dwells in it, if you will be
so good as to let me be your Tenante, I will give you thus much for a Fine. I
can not let it unto you, said the owner of the Farm, for there is a Tenant in
it already, who^ I would be loath to put out. Sir, said the fellow, he is a very
ill husband, and he does not thrive on it: and surely I think he either does
not pay you his Rent, or else shortly I fear he will not be able to pay it.
Trowest thou so? said the Lord of the Farm, belike he is an il husband, for he
has his Farm cheap enough. Well, said the Nobleman, come to me such a day,
and I will the^ talk further with thee. And so the same Caterpiller that desired
his neighbors Farm departed. After which the said Nobleman sent for his
Tenant, to whom he said when he was come to him: sir I understand that you
are a very ill husband, and can not thryue on the Farm that you have of me.
And moreover that you do not pay me my Rent: and that within a while you will
not be able to pay it, you run so far behind hand. I beseech your Honor,
said the Tenant, to credit no further of me than I deserve: the truth is, and I
must confess, that I have not much prospered on it, but the same is neither
through negligence nor ill husbandry: for my stock is much decresed through the
death of my Cattle, besides many other great losses and hindrances that I have
had: but as for your Rent, what shift so ever I made, I thank God, I have
always paid it from time to time, and never have been behind withal, nor I
trust never to be: which if you will not credit, your Bailie, I am sure, will
not deny, but that he has at every Rent day received it. Then said the
Nobleman, if it be so as you say, I am the more glad. I am sure you paid no
Fine for it, neither have I raised your Rent, therefore it would grieve me if
you should not thrive on it, especially through evil husbandry. As for losses
otherways, as the death of your Cattle and other casualties, you must be
content and give God thanks therefore: God can and will prosper you better when
it pleases him: wherefore take patiently and thankfully what he does send, for
poverty and riches come both from him. And if you decay or be empouerished, so
it be not by your own folly, you shall not want aid of me, therefore play the
good husband. The Lord save your life, said his Tenant. Then said the Nobleman:
thou may see I have dealt well with thee, for I have bin offered roundly, to
displace thee, which some would not have refused. And because thou shall be
sure this is true, come such a day to me, and thou shall hear more: but be of
good cheer, for neither money nor friendship shall allure me: and see thou fail
not to be with me as I have appointed thee. Wherewith his pore Tenant was feign,
and went merrily away.


Omen. What followed then? proceed on in your tale.


Siuqila At the day appointed they both came as he willed the^, but before the
greedy Fine-offrer came, the poor Tenant was placed privily behind a cloth,
where he might hear what was said. And then the Nobleman said: welcome my
friend, have thou brought me the money that thou offredst me for a Fine for my
Farm? to whom he gladly answered, Yea sir that I have: to whom the Nobleman
said, I perceive thou knew I lacked money, and so I do in deed, it could
not come in a better time than now. But I pray thee tell me one thing, is my
Tenante an vnthrist or an ill husband that now has it? Yea truly sir, said he,
he is a very poor man, and far behind hand, and it is thought he will not in a
while be able to pay the Rent. I tell you for good will and as you shall find
it. If it be so, said he, I am beholding to thee: well, it is meet to have
witnesses at our bergaine: and therewith his pore Tenant came from behind the
cloth, who heard all that was spoken: whom when the other saw, he was something
amassed, thinking then that al was not well. And then the Nobleman said to his
Tenante, you may see sir that I may have a good fine for my Farm of this
man, whereas I had none of thee, who though he give me a Fine for it, yet hops
to prosper on it, though thou without a Fine can not prosper thereon. Besides
that, this man tells me that thou art not able to pay me my Rent: nay it
should seem that it is unpaid already. Sir, said the poor Tenant, I have
heard every word what he has said, he speaks it rather of malice to put
me out of my Farm, than of any truth or good ground. I have tried that
already, said the Nobleman. Then with an angry countenance he turned toward
him, that offered him the Fine to put out his Tenant, Mark this saying.
and said: Ah Uarlet, have thou such an opinion in me that money shall make me
to do that which charity forbids me to do? Did thou ever hear, that I
was lover of brybes, or an vndoer of my Tenants, or so greedy of gain, that I
would hinder the poor? How durst thou be so bold, to procure me to that, that
I have always abhorred? Thou know that I have always desired to succor the
poor, and think thou that money can cause me to make my poor Tenantes
beggars? Thou might judge that I were maruelously changed, to beggar my
Tenants to enrich thee withal. What Devil did drive thee to de^^^^e this
drift? I understand that thou have too much living, and more than thou
bestowest well: and this my poor Tenante has to little, and bestow and that
w^ll that he has. Such cut-throwe as thou art have money enough to undo your
poor neibors withal, but you have none to do good: thou willingly wilt
give.xx. l. to thrust thy brother out of his Farm: but thou will (...) to
give.xx. grotes for the defense of thy Cuntrie. O if every one were of my
mind, and regarded your money no more than I do: so many should not be thrust
out of their Houses as be. Then the wicked Fine offerer said, I beseech you
forgive me, I am sorry I have offended you, this shall be a warning to me as
long as I live for going about to take any man's House or Farm from him. And
then he was about to depart: nay, said the Nobleman, I will not so leave thee,
thy fault deserves not so to escape: oh that there were a Law to hang up such
as thou, who in my conscience deserve more to be hanged, than the thief that
does steal for need. They steal through necessity, but thou and such as thou,
steal with superfluity. And the thief through need does rob a man of a little
money in his purse, but thou and such as thou steals needless, and robbes a
man, his wife, and children of all the living they have. Therefore by your leave,
you shall not escape my hands so.


Omen. What did he with him then I pray you?


Siuqila. He caused him to be openly set in the stocks, whereby his doings was
not only blased abroad, but also manys wondered at him, for his uncharitable
doing.


Omen I think none that heard of it would proffer any Fines to ye worthy
man, to displace any of his Tenants. Does he that handled ye Fine-giuer thus,
favor Gods word or not?


Siuqila. Yea that he does, and that mightily.


Omen. It appears Gods word takes root, and works great effect with some
of your Country.


Siuqila With some say you? nay with a great sort thanks be to God, and I hope
it will work more effect ere it be long. I would feign know of you, whether
any of your Landlordes, exact on their Tenaunts, to give them certain boon
days to plowe their ground: and to be ready when they command the^, to help
with their Weanes or Carts to carry home their Wood, Hay, Corn, or other
things when they stand in need.


Omen. Truly none with us know what boon days do mean, They of Mauqsun
know not what boon days do mean.
none with us do trouble their Tenaunts, to carry any thing for them: for
the Gentlemen and other of greater livings, have carriages of their own, to
serve their own turn: for they think their Tenants stand more in need of
help tha^ they, marry they use their tenaunts so courteously, and love the^
so heartily, that their Tenants offer of their own good wills to help them
with their carriage, but they most commonly refuse it, and will not suffer
them to do it, unless in a time of great necessity, for they will not hinder
their Tenaunts to pleasure themselves. They know that one days carriage
(especially at some time) will hinder a poor man, therefore if they have not
carriage enough of their own, to do their business, they will rather hier
other men's Carts with their money, than to hinder their Tenaunts, Few Landlords
do so.
to save their money: nay, there are many Gentlemen and other of higher degree
with us, that have mo Carts and Plowes, with Cattle to furnish the same, than
will do their own business, even purposelie to aid and help their pore
Tenantes and neighbors therewith, when they stand in need: and a poor man
cannot so soon have an Ox, a Horse, or a Cow, miscarrie, but well is he that
can bring them first another Ox, Cow or Horse, to help their want withal.


Siuqila. And is this commonly used with you?


Omen Yea truly almost in every place.


Siuqila. And with us it is almost in never a place: I perceive that all
degrees follow Gods word so earnestlye and zealouslye with you, yt therefore it
exceeds all the countries in the world. I will not say but there may be some
one good man here and there with us, yt if a pore man have an Ox, Cow, or
Horse, miscarrie, whereby their Plow is like to stand still, or their children
want milk, will lend the^, or perhaps sell the^ upon a price, to be paid at a
day, a Cow, Ox, or Horse, to supply their necessity: but to give the^ a
Horse, Cow, or Ox in that case, I fear there are very few. Marry I think
there are mo, that are so greedy of their Rent or of their debtes, that if a
poor man be behind with his Rent, or lack money to pay his debtes, will
rather pluck away one of his Kine from him, or an Ox, or Horse from his
Plowe, whereby his Plowe shall stand still, or his children want milk: of
this sort I think we have more than of the other. I perceive then that the
Tenauntes with you are not much troubled with their Landlords, for carriage.


Omen No verily, I have told you the very use of our country therein. I
would all the Tenants in your Country were no worse used in this behalf, nor
in any other than ours be.


Siuqila. I would they were not: some of our Tenants would think they were
well, if they were but half so well used. But though some with us be well used:
yet I am sure that al with us will never so well be used. I will tell you a pretty
story touching this matter if you will be content to hear it.


Omen. Yes I will both hear it, and mark it attentively: therefore begin it
when you will.


Siuqila. There was a Nobleman had a great deal of timber or stone, to be
carried, for certain buildings yt he had in hand: whereupon he was constrained
to send to all his Tenants that were any thing nie him, and other of his
friends besides, to request the^ to help him with the carriage: which to do, some
were very loath, and some promised with a fair outward show, though inwardly
they were unwilling, but few or none durst denay, for fear of his displeasure:
whereby at ye day appointed he had a great company of Carts, yt brought the
stones or timber for his said building: and when they had al vnloded, he
called unto him them that came with the Carts one by one, saying unto the^: I
thank you my friends, for the pains and travel you have taken with me this
day. And the^ he said to one of the^: now tell me truly I pray you, whether did
you help me with your Cart to day, for love or for money? forsooth my Lord said
he, I came to you for good will and love: I thank you said he, carry him in
and let him dine ere he go, (for he had prepared a dinner for all the^ yt came
to him for love and good will) and then he said to another of the^: I pray you
flatter not with me but tell me truly, whether you did come to help me this day,
for love or for money? forsooth said he, I came to help your Lordship only for
love and good will: I thank you said he even with all my heart: carry him in
and let him dine ere he go. Then he asked another whether he came to help him
for love or for money: my Lord said he, I am a very poor man, and I might
very ill have come this day but for pleasuring your Lordship, therefore I came
for money: and money shall thou have said he, and god a mercy too: and then he
gave him money for his labor: carry him in, said the Lord, and let him drink
ere he go, and so he drunk ere he went. So that they dined yt came for love,
and they drunk and had money, yt came for money, and thus he went through and
asked a great sort: and some said they came for love, and some said they came
for money. At last he came to one of the Carters, and said: I pray thee good
fellow tell me truly, whether did thou help me this day for love or for
money? shall I tell you truly my Lord? said he: yea I pray thee heartily said ye
Lord: truly my Lord said he, I came for neither love nor money: did thou
not said the Lord, wherefore came thou then? forsooth my Lord said he, I
came for fear: now god a mercy good fellow, said the Lord, I think thou
haste told me truer than all the rest, I perceive thou haste not fabled with
me, though many of them have flattered with me: carry him in, said he, for
he shall have both money and meat, and see in any wise yt he sit at the upper
end of the Table: and so he had both meat and money and great thanks of the
Lord, for his true saying.


Omen. Now surely he was a good fellow, I dare say he spoke as he thought,
whereas few of them thought as they said. There are many I think in your
country, that help their La^dlordes with their Waines and Carts, more for
fear than for money, and more for money than love: but all the Tenants every
one in our country (none excepted) do help their Landlordes only for love,
and neither for money nor fear.


Siuqila. Surely it appears thereby (if you had said nothing else) that your
Landlords are godly, and your Tenauntes are loving. Now sir let me go further
with you: do your Ge^tleme^ and rich men take and enclose their Commons, from
the pore Artificers, Laborers, or from them that dwell in small Tenements and
Cattages?


Omen. I marvel why you do ask me such a question: I told you before that our
Landlordes and al other, did not only so remember the short sentence of Christ
and follow it, (which is) Do as you would be done unto, that they will do
nothing to their Tenaunts, nor to any other, but as they would that they should
do to them: and do you think that if they were Tena^ts and their Tena^ts their
La^dlords, that they would wish they should enclose their Commons from them? no I
warrante you. Naie our Gentlemen and Landlords, do not enclose their Commons
from their poor Tenantes, The enclosing of the Commons in Mauqsun.
but enclose their Commons for their poor Tenants.


Siuqila That is very strange, I pray you let me hear your further meaning
therein.


Omen. The taking in and enclosing of the Commons with us, is such a commodity
to the pore Tenantes and Farmers, that they are marvelous desirous to have
their (...) enclosed.


Siuqila. And contrary, much enclosing of the Commons with us, is such an
empouerishing of the pore Tena^ts and many Farmers, that nothing does vex or
grieve them more than the taking in of the Commons.


Omen. Yea, but if your Gentlemen, Landlords and your inclosers of Commons
would do as they do with us, then your pore men, commoners and other
Farmers, would desire to have their Commons enclosed and taken in as well as we.


Siuqila. I pray you tell me, after what sort therefore, is your Commons taken
in and made several?


Omen. I will tell you: but first by the way, when politic heads and wise
wits, had considered and found out, that it would be marvelous profitable
for our country, to have their Commons enclosed, they began to procure to
bring it to pass, but it seemed so hurtefull to dull heads, for the poorer
sort and the Farmers, that they in no wise would grant unto it, for that
they had all the commodity thereby, and the Lords of the soil and Gentlemen
had little or none: thinking they would have al or the best part from them, if
they should be enclosed. But the Lords of the soil, and the Gentlemen with
the wiser heads persuaded them, Good counsel.
saying: You see good fellows, and our loving Tenants, we have ever loved you
and used you well, and as we would do to you, so we would have you to do to
us, if we were in your case: be not therefore wedded to your wil^es, but rather
regard good counsel and reason. We see you have among you much ground and
little gain, much toil and small profit: Summer can scant get you that
which Winter consumes: If each of you had but the third part of your ground
enclosed, that you have now in Common, it would feed you more cattle, bring
you more hay, yield you more corn, and last you much longer: whereby you
should have more profit, and less pain, and more pleasure, and less toil.
Some of you that have store of fodder, would stay from putting in your
cattle into the Commons, until the grass were well grown, and fully sprung:
other of you that have not to feed your cattle withal, will not consent to
^arry so long, being driven through necessity to put your cattle on the
Commons before it have a head: so that suddenly you shoue on such a number of
cattle, on a great deal of ground, but a small deal of grass, that, what
with their hungry eating, and their great trampling, your Commons is consumed
in a month, the third part whereof enclosed, would have served well a
quarter of a year. And whereas the one half of your Arrable ground and
Meadows, are common every year, for every man's cattle to go and feed on: if
the same be enclosed and several to your selves, your Medows will bear you Hay
every year: and you may sow your Arrable land every year, or as often as you
list, according to the goodness of your ground: so that by this enclosure,
you shall have yearly a marvelous commodity and profit, more than ever you
had before. Wherefore, if you will be ruled by us, as you may well credit us,
Few such Landlordes.
(for we fear God so much, that we had rather hurt our selves than hinder
you) we that are Lords of your soil and Ground, will be content to set men on
work, to enclose al your Commons and Ground in such parcels as we think meet:
and we, of our own costs and charges, will pay for the enclosing thereof:
partly for that we would have you to prosper and thrive on our Ground: and
partly for that many of you have not money to lay out: and if we be too much
burdened thereby, you may, if you shall think good hereafter, of your own
good will, as you are able, (not that we can claim it of duty) something
ease us. And if when it is enclosed, you mislike our dealings therein, or that
we have not done unto you, as we would in the like case you should do unto
us, throw down the ditches then a Gods name, and keep it in common, as you
did before. And when they had made an end of their saying, their Tenants
hearing them speak so reasonably, and offering the^ such courtesy, said al
with one voice: O worthy Gentlemen, and our most loving Landlords, do
whatsoever seems good unto you: if you lack Ground or any thing that we have,
take what you will, and leave us what you list, for we are sure you mean us no
harm, but pretend our profit.


Siuqila. What did the Gentlemen and their Landlordes then I pray you?


Omen. What did they say you? as though they would break their promise.
Though you think that many with you promise much, and perform little: there
are none with us but that will promise little and perform much. And therefore
you need not doubt, but they did as they said: for when the time of the year
did serve, they set a number of pore men on work, which did not only
ditche it in such convenient parcels, pastures and closes as they did appoint:
but also they did set the same with quicke-sets, and so they paid them their
hyre out of their own purses.


Siuqila. The quick setting of it might have been spared, until they had seen
that their Tenauntes would have liked well of their doings or distributing the
Ground, or not.


Omen. No, they never doubted their misliking of it, for they were sure, that
their Tenauntes were so reasonable, so tractable, and of such contented
minds, that they would not throw it down again, but accept their doings
most thankfully and lovingly.


Siuqila. So they might well enough: yet I believe there are some with us, Note
here
so unreasonable, so insensible, so intractable, so incredible, so wilful, so
mistrustfull, preferring will before wit and custom before reason, and
regarding their confused Commons, that bring poverty and pain, more than
necessary enclosure, that brings profit and ease, that if wisemen should
offer them so, or their Landlords should proffer them so, that would not take
it thankefully, but refuse it obstinately. What distribution was made thereof
among the Tenauntes, when the same was enclosed?


Omen. Such as I am sure you will not mislike. The division of yt enclosed was
on this sort: every one according to ye proportion and stint of the cattle
allowed him to keep on the Common, (which stinte was such, as that Commons
should not be ouercharged) had so much enclosed ground allotted and appointed
to his house or Farm, as would very well keep and find so many cattle
more, A good distribution.
as he was allowed or stinted to keep on the Commons: as if he might keep ten
Kine or Oxen, he had so much ground of ye enclosed common as would keep or
find xx. kine or oxen: and if he might keep six horses on the Common, he had
so much Common in pasture, as would keep or find twelve horses. And if one
might keep an hundredth sheep of the Common, he had so much enclosed Common
allowed him as would very well keep and find two hundredth sheep: And if a
poor Cottager might by his stint keep a couple of Kine on the Common, then he
had as much of the Commons enclosed annexed to his Cottage, and so to
remain for ever, as would keep or find him four Kine. And thus every
Farmer, and every Tenant, Cottager and other, had so much enclosed ground of
the Commons allowed them to belong to their houses and Farms for ever, as
would very well keep and find so many cattle more as he was allowed and
stinted to keep on the bare unclosed Commons, and that such enclosed ground as
lay most nearest and necessary to their house or Farm. And every Farmer and
Tenant besides, had all their arrable land and medowe enclosed that did
belong to their Teneme^ts and Farms, which before lay open and in common: so
that by this enclosing of their ground, they had and have yearly, a marvelous
commodity and profit, more than ever they had before. And for that thereby
their commodities were so much increased yearly, out of every twenty acres of
Medowe and arrable land that belonged to any Farm, was taken and reserved one
acre: and out of every ten acres, half an acre: whereof every Cottage that
had neither arrable land nor Medowe belonging thereto, had two acres of
enclosed Arrable land, and one acre of Meadowe enclosed, annexed to the same,
to find the pore Tenant bread corn, and Hay to succoure his Kyne or other
cattle withal.


Siuqila. Hereby it seems, that the Lords charges of the soil was very
great, in the enclosing of al these Commons and other ground.


Omen. Their charges were not so great, but the gains were greater: for all
the rest of the enclosed ground that did remain, the Lords had the same
freely to themselves: which besides the great profit to the Tenants, was no
small commodity to them. For some Lords of the soil, had within their
Lordships, two or three thousand acres of waste or common ground, whereof none
knew any particular portion belonging to their house or Farm, which before
was little or no profit to the Lords of the soil: but being enclosed it was
no small portion that came to their share. And thus they got themselves much
ground which they never had before: and made their Farmers and Tenantes
livings better than ever they were.


Siuqila. Surely this order of enclosing of the Commons in your Country, The
commodity of enclosing in Mauqsun.
is a great gain to the Lords, an enriching of the Tenauntes, an increasing
of corn, a great breeding of cattle, a pathway to plenty, an augmenting of
wood, a power to your Prince, a strength to your country, and a common
commodity. But let me ask you one thing: In some Lordships perhaps (where the
ground is very fertile) there is little or no Commons, but arrable and
Medowe, with small portions of grass ground, which are portions appointed or
limited to Farms and Tenements: so that there was little or nothing to spare
for the Lord.


Omen. There, every tenant does enclose his own ground, of their own charges:
yet their landlords, if they lack money, do lend them money therefore, until
they be able to repay them again: and the Landlords are so godly and good,
that of their own costs and charges, they commonly do enclose the Meadow and
Arrable land that is taken out of the same, appointed to the Cotages, as is
before mentioned.


Siuqila. Truly it is a very godly deed, but I fear the greatest mischief is
behind: for it is to be thought, that the Lords do raise the rents of their
Farms and Houses, to whom these new commodities do belong.


Omen. Trust me, these Farmers and Cottagers, though they have greater
profits and commodities than they had before, do pay neither Fine, neither
any more Rent than they did. Do you think that the Tenauntes with you, could
be content to have their Commons turned into pasture in this order, as we have
ours?


Siuqila. Yea I warrant you: but our Landlords, or rather Lords of the
Commons, will not be in haste to do as yours do, though it would be a very
great commodity to them. Our inclosers of the Commons are not so kind
hearted as yours, for they must have all or none: many of the^ have so
enclosed the Commons, Greedy inclosers.
that they have closed themselves in, and shut all the rest out: but if they
would take enough for themselves, and leave part for every one of their
Tenauntes, as your inclosers of the Commons do, many that are now most
earnest against enclosing of the Commons, would then be vehement procurers for
the enclosing for the Commons. Surely, their insatiety is far contrary to
true Christianity. As the Commons are now used: they have nothing, and their
Tenauntes have something: Mark this well.
but if they could be content with reason, or with less than all, they might
have too much, and their Tenauntes enough. What harm were it for them to have
an C. acres more tha^ ever they had, and their pore needy neybors to have an
acre or two more tha^ they have? what were they yt worse to suffer their
neibors to have a simple breakfast, and themselves to have a sumptuous dinner?
truly, they are more than churlish that will either eat all, or else eat not
at al: or else will not feed unless their neighbors fast.


Omen. They would evil do, as many do with us, that dwell in towns, whereto
there belongs no Commons.


Siuqila. What do they I pray you?


Omen. If a pore Artificer have many children, or a greater charge than he is
able to maintain with his trade, by and by one goodma^ or other will buy him a cow
or two, and give him the^.


Siuqila. It is very charitably done, but how shall he do for grass to keep
them?


Omen. He may better hyre grass having Kine, than to buy Kine, and hyre grass
besides.


Siuqila. That is true, he may so indeed.


Omen. Yea, but this good man does not leave him so, for if he have no grass
nor pastur of his own, he will hire sufficient grass for them and pay for the
same: and also buy Hay with his own money, to feed them withal in winter. They
yt would enclose all the Commons from their Tenauntes and the pore, will not, I
trow, be taken with such a fault as this.


Siuqila. No I warrant you, they, their wife and children should perish
rather. Sir, you have told me of many famous, wife, and godly Judges of your
country, is there never a corrupt Judge to be found in all your whole land?


Omen. No not one, it is as hard to find a corrupt Judge with us, as a good
Usurer with you.


Siuqila. There cannot be a good Usurer with us, nor in any other place.


Omen. Neither can there be an evil or corrupt Judge with us: for the short
sentence of Christ (which is, Whatsoever you would that other do to you, do
even the same to them) is so graven in their hearts, that it bridleth them from
bribes, and winds them from wrong. And because Christ persuadeth the^ to do it,
therefore they perform it. Besides yt, reason teaches the^, yt if they were
oppressed or had wrong, and ye oppressed were Judges, the^ they would be
willing to have their matter heard with equity, prosecuted without briberie, and
determined speedily. And though our Judges be such, yet we have a very severe
law for the punishing of partial bribing and corrupt Judges.


Siuqila. I beseech you show me the law therein.


Omen. Our law is, The law of Mauqsun for Judges that take bribes.
that if any Judge take any bribe or reward, or any other for him by his
consent, for any matter depending, or to depend before him, and does conceal
it four and twenty hours, and so judge contrary to equity on the parties
behalf that gave him the reward, he shall die for it without any redemption.
His death shall not be according to the execution of the common offenders: For
first his hand shall be cut off, wherewith he received the bribe or reward:
which hand shall be nailed on the seat or chair where he did sit, to fear
the Judges that shall sit there after him to do the like: And his tongue shall be
cut out of his head, and shall be nailed just over against the Judges seat,
and this shall be written under it: This is the tongue of the wicked Judge that
gave false judgment: that the Judges that shall sit there after him, may
thereby beware.


Siuqila. Your law herein is very severe: yet surely corrupt and bribing
Judges are worthy to be so served.


Omen. How many Judges hands and tongs are nailed in your Judges seats?


Siuqila. Not one.


Omen. It every Judge with you had been thus used, that have rewards or bribes
in this case, for wresting the right and wringing with the wrong, but for the
space of four or five hundredth years now paste, and let all the rest go: I
fear that few of your Judges seats would have escapte without a hand or a
tongue: but your laws herein are not so straight as ours: and if they were, they
would not be so well executed.


Siuqila. You never spoke a truer word in your life: proceed I pray you,
how is the rest of their execution?


Omen. Forsooth all the gold and silver, that he shall receive to do wrong or
to judge contrary to equity, shall be melted, and then his mouth shall be
holden open, and it shall be powered down into his throat: whereby the money
that he took to defraude the Innocent of their right, shall bercaue the
covetous and wicked Judge of his life.


Siuqila. The money might be put to a better use than so, and not to be lost on
that sort.


Omen. It was not to be so lost, but that it will be found again I warrant you:
for though it kill the wicked, it does pleasure the honest and needy: for when
he is dead, the same gold and silver is taken out of him, and sold by weight
to the Goldsmith, which shall be given to him that did reveal it.


Siuqila Now surely, though this law seem severe, yet me thinks it is
necessary: for what thing is more odible to God, and more hurtful to man? than
suppressing of right, and perverting of Justice? and what law can be too
extreme for the offenders therein? and is not bribes or gifts, the mean to
this mischief? for Munera peruer^u^t Iusticiam, G^ftes pervert Justice* now if
gifts, bribes, or (as some call the^) gentle rewards, is one of the chiefest
causes of this wickedness, then no law can be to severe, for such bribed or
corrupt Judges. Oh if al Judges would well way and consider the great oaths
they take, and the marvelous charge is given them, when they are made Judges:
they would (if they had any spark of the fear of God, or were not utterly
determined to go to the Devil) abhor bribes, refuse rewards, revile the
bribegiuers, nay punish such offerers, hear the poor willingly, determine
their cause speedilye, use no parcialitie, and give judgment with all
equity. Well, though some Judges have little regarded this: the Judge of all
Judges will one day do this. But sir, is there no Law with you for them,
that do offer or give bribes?


Omen. Yes that there is, and I think a better law than any you have in such
case. Whosoever offers or gives any gift or reward, For bribegiuers.
to any Judge for any matter depending, or after to depend before him, shall
forfeit the one half of al his goods, and the Judge to whom the gift is
offered or given, shall have it freely to himself, if he reveal the same
within a day after. And if he do not so reveal it, then the first reuealer or
bewrayer thereof, shall have it. And the King shall have ^ne fourth part of his
forfeited goods: and he against who^ the bribe or gift is given, shall have
another part: and the other half shall be sold, and equally given among the
poorest neighbors of him, that offered or gave the reward.


Siuqila. If we had such a law with us, and so well executed as yours, there
would not be so many gifts given, to pervert right as there be. But sir, may
not one write to ye Judge, in the behalf of his friend, to request him to be
good unto him?


Omen. We have a law, that whosoever writes to ye Judge, or speaks to him in
the behalf of any in this case, he yt so does write or speak (except as a
witness in ye same matter) he shall be imprisoned three months. And shall find,
on his own cost and charges, two of the porest prisoners of the same prison,
meat and drink, during al ye same time. And if ye Judge to who^ he does so
write or speak, do not reveal the same within xxiiij. hours, he shall be
displaced out of his office, and also shall find, on his own cost and charges,
two children of his poorest neighbors during a year after.


Siuqila. Out of al doubt this is a worthy and necessary law: I would we had
the like with us, and so well executed as your laws are: and if it were
sharper it were not amiss: For there have bin more matters delayed, mo
judgments staide, more falshod boulstred, mo true matters wrested, and mo pore
Clients hindered, through letters, and sending of rings and tokens, with us in
one month, than there is with you in a hundredth years.


Omen I believe you very well: but there is a great fault in the^ ye send
such letters or tokens to ye Judges, and a great fault in ye Judges yt accept
the^: but a greater fault for satisf^yng them that sent the^. I told you, in
our first talk, of a worthy Judge yt received a letter in the behalf of his
friend, who feeling by the weight yt it was a brybers letter, and knowing it
was only to wrie with the wrong: he put it up into his bosom, and would never
look on it, before he had given judgment on him, on whose behalf it was sent.


Siuqila. I remember it very well, you told it me at my first being with you:
surely he was a famous Judge: if Judges would not read ye letters, in such case
sent unto them, or wink as though they had not read the^, until they determine
the matter, or pass judgment thereof, so many matters yt have past by law on
poor men's sides, should not be so long without their right as they are. I
heard a woman say with weeping eyes, that she had a matter hanged in the law
seven years, before it could be tried and pass on her side, and it was then
eight years after, and yet could not have judgment thereof. So that she
thought, yea and said, that one that comforted and promised her fair, was the
chief occasion of her stay from her right: but I believe that he has spedde
never the better therefore. A pitiful thing: if it were her right by the
law, why should judgment be staid? and if it were not her right, why did the
law give it her? Surely before God, it is as great a fault, to keep one from
his right, as to defraud one of his right: does not he withold a man's right, yt
will not give him judgment, whereby to have his right? At the last day God will
not delay the time, between the trial of our sins, and his diffinitiue
sentence, as some of our worldly Judges have done: for as soon as he shall
say to the wicked, When I was hungry you gave me no meat, when I was
thirsty you gave me no drink, when I was naked you clothed me not, etc. And
as soon as they shall say: we never saw thee hungry, thyrstie, naked, etc. by
and by he will give judgment on them, and will not stay judgment three or four
years after, neither for letters, brybes, rings, nor for any man's pleasure: at
which time he will say: Go ye accursed into everlasting fire prepared from the
beginning. So that hereby it appears, that he will give judgment most
quickelie and speedily, both on the wicked and godly, as soon as their cause
is tried and determined. Therefore ye judges of the earth, were best to learn of
Christ to give righteous and true judgment, as soon as any cause is truly
tried by the law: for if Christ did think yt it is necessary and good to
stay Judgment, then he will do it. And though Christ shall have many thousand
thousand matters to decide and judge at the last day, he will decide, end
and judge them all in one day: but some earthlye Judges have had some one
matter hang before them four or five years, and yet when it was ended, and the
Law has determined it, it has been as long (perhaps longer or not at al)
ere he has given Judgment thereof. Many live not a tweluemonth after they
have begun the Law, and can a man be sure to live a doozen year, to see his
matter ended? the great delays, long suits, and unreasonable expenses, make
many that are maruellously oppressed and have manifest wrong, either not to
begin the Law, or through their importable charges, (which they are not
able to continue) are enforste to cease the law, which their adversaries, that
maintain themselves with their goods, know well enough.


Omen. Yea but we have a notable Law with us, for Judges, that keep matters
long before they end them, or give judgment on them.


Siuqila I beseech you show it me, for such a law is very necessary.


Omen. If any matter whatsoever it be, A law in Mauqsun that no matter shall
hang in suit above three months.
be not determined and judged within three months, after the Bil of complainte
be once answered, the Judge before whom the same depends, (if it be through
his default or negligence) shall immediately upon just proof, be not only
displaced out of his said room, or office, and never permitted again to be
Judge: but also therefore shall be imprisoned for the space of one whole year:
besides that, he shall forfit the one half of al his goods: and the party whose
matter was so delaide and prolonged, shall have the one half thereof, and the
other half shall be sold, and the money shall be equally distributed, among
poor Suitors, having then matters or causes, in the same Court, to help to
relieve them, and to prosecute matters withal.


Si. What a worthy country have you? you have a medcine for every mischief. I
would we had ye like with us, i^ it might conveniently be: but our Judges sit but
at certain times, and many of the parties that have matters before them, dwell
so far off, and besides that, they are troubled with so many matters, that it
is impossible for them to end every matter in so short a time.


Omen. Yea but if you had as we have, A good and easy order for t^yall of
matters speedily.
then they might end them easily within that time as we do. For we have
throughout our whole country certain Judges appointed and limited for
certain towns, villages, and parishes, and none dwelling in these towns or
parishes shall sue or commence any cause in any Court but only in that
limited and appointed unto them. And also the Judges, or some of them do sit
every day twice: that is, three hours in the forenone, and three hours in the
afternoon (except certain days) and the matter is so ordered, that never a
man, woman, or any that have any matter or cause to commence or to complain,
shall therefore go above a dosen miles at the furthest: whereby the Judges
may very easilye determine and judge every cause, be it never so doubtful,
within that time.


Siuqila. Surely you make all your orders and laws with a marvelous good
consideration: but it may be, that the matters are delayed through far
dwelling of the witnesses, or through their purposed absence, so that the
Judges are not to be blamed therein.


Omen. That is true: but who so ever are to bear witness for any matter with
us, shall never need therefore to travel far, but shall be deposed and examined
before those Judges within whose precinct they inhabit or dwell: and for every
time that any such witness, shall make default and not appear before the said
Judges, to be deposed and examined upon such interrogatories or articles (if
they be not sick or impotent) they shall forfeit therefore one Hundredth
pounds: or if they be not worth so much, then the one half of all their goods:
the one moitie whereof the party shall have (for whose hindrance they refuse to
bear witness) and the other part shall be equally divided among the Judges,
before whom they should have been deposed and examined. And if the witnesses
be poor, and have little goods or none, they shall be emprisoned, until they
be deposed and examined touching the same cause. And likewise if any of the
said witnesses have any matter or cause to be tried by witnesses during the same
time which they so refuse to be deposed and examined, no witness shall be
suffered or permitted, to be deposed nor examined in their behalf.


Siuqila. O famous Country, O worthy Lawemakers, but most worthy Law
obseruers: happy is that King that has such Subjects, that live as though they
needed no Law. But what if any of them that should bear witness, take
bribes, money, or gifts, whereby they refuse to be deposed or examined?


Omen. You need not ask that question, there is none such with us: have you
any such with you?


Siuqila. Have we any such, quoth you? if I need not ask you the one, you need
not ask me the other: for whereas you affirm that you have none such, I am out
of doubt that we have many such.


Omen. If you had such a Law, and so executed as we have, then you would not
have so many such as you have.


Siuqila. What is your Law for such, I pray you?


Omen. Forsooth the same Law is for them, that is for the Judges that receive
bribes or rewards. Their hand they received the Gift or Reward withal, shall
be cut off: and their tongue shall be cut out, because they would not utter
the truth therewith, and shall be nailed in the Court where they should have
been examined, to make all the other witnesses take heed of taking Bribes or
Rewards. And lastly, the money shall be melted, and so poured into their
throats, and they shall be so killed as the brybed Judges ought to be.


Siuqila. But what if their Gift or Bribe be no money, how then?


Omen. Then the same shall be sold, and the money received therefore, shall be
molten and given them to drink.


Siuqila. A small deal of such drink will quench their thirst. If every one in
our Country that have deserved such a draught of drink by your Law, had
drunk it: so many true matters would not be suppressed as there have bin, nor so
many false causes could not carry that credit they do. Because you can tell me
of no Bribed Judges with you, whereon to execute this your late told excellent
Law: I will tell you of a most wicked Judge, of whom I heard by the way as I
traveled hither, that was dressed even as he deserved: who was as young as the
Judge you told of, that boulted out the truth against his own father, but
nothing so good as he was.


Omen. Tell it, and I will give you the hearing: I know you will not report
it unless it were true, nor yet stand about to tell it, unless it were
strange.


Siuqila. There was a very young man, not very far from the Country where I was
borne, A notorious example of a detestable Judge.
who for his great learning, rare wisdom, commendable conditions, and modest
manners, was, by the Magistrates and Rulers of that Country, chosen to be a
Judge, who used him self for a while in his Office, so uprightly and so
godly, to the judgment of every one, that none but were glad that they had
such a Judge. In whose time, there happened two Gentlemen to be very
conversant together, and to love one another deerly, even as though they had
been sworn brethren: and whiles they were in this frendshippe, the one of them
began to cast his love an a certain Gentlewoman, who being a great suter unto
her, and yet could not obtain her love as he wished, began to languish for her
love, and was so sad and sorrowful thereby, that the other Gentleman his dear
friend, did not only much muse and marvel thereat, but on a time, enforced
through very sorrow to speak unto him, he said thus, or the like: Sir, I
thought you had esteemd me above al other, but now I perceive, that you love
some other better than me. What occasion, said the other, have you to say so
unto me? Have I depraved you to any man? you know my secreates more than
any: and you have my company more than any: and these are not tokens that I
love any better than you. Well said the other, though these do argue, yet do
they not prove. Your body is sick, as it is like, for you eat little or
nothing, your sleep is taken from you, and your mirth is clean gone, which if
they be not arguments that your body is sick: then they are manifest
prouffes that your mind is not well. And if your body be sick and you hyde
your disease from me, or if you be sick in mind, and conceal the cause from
me, especially from him that you know will not spare the best blood in his
body to heal your body, nor his goods, counsel, nor travel, to ease your
mind: then I must needs think (say you what you will) that you love me not as
you profess, nor esteem me as I deserve. Then said his friend again: I
know you love me, and therefore I love you again, and that is, as well as my
self. If you do so, said the other, then you ought to let me know what so
ever you know your self: unless you think that your self will bewray your
self, except you doubt your self will deceive your self, and unless you think
that your self will betray your self. Nay that follows not, said the sorrowful
Gentleman: for though I love you as my self, that makes not that you love me
as your self: be not angry I beseech you, I speak this rather to answer your
argument, than that I doubt your love. In deed there are very thoughtful
matters in my mind, I would I had changed them for diseases of my body. And
for that I have kept them close, to my great grief, I will now reveal them
to you, as to my chiefest friend, I hope to my comfort: not doubting, but that
as I tell you where my pain is, so I hope you will procure some plaster to ease
it. Then his friend said, both vehemently, and as it seemed, faithfully: I
protest here before God and you, if my pains may pleasure you, or if my pursse
may profit you, assure your self of it, and lo here is my hand: if I may know
the root of the thing that works you this sorrow, I will pluck it up, (and
that with speed) if al my strength be able to do it. Well, said the other,
seeing you say so, I will no longer hide from you the woe that does wound me.
You know that I said not long since, that I loved you as well as my self, but
now I must confess unto you, that I love another better than my self: yea, and
such a one, that I fear when she knows it, she will rather frown than
favor me, hate than help me, and cut me up than comfort me. If I may know her
name and where she dwells said his friend, I hope I will find a salve that
will heal this sore: oh if you could, said the other again, I would never
forget your friendship. And then he uttered her name, and where he should have
her. Seeing said he, you are in such a perplexity for her, I will not tarry
the writing of a letter, but let me have your Ring for a token: but I pray you
first tell me, are you well acquainted with her? very well, said the sorrowful
Gentleman, and she loves me very well: but I fear, not so well as to marry
me. I am glad you have told me thus much, said his friend* I will not therefore
tell her that you are sick for her love, but of some other malady, and desire
her to come and speak with you: who not knowing the matter, I doubt not but I
shall persuade her at first. The^ said the sorrowful Gentleman: if I doubted no
more of her love, tha^ I doubt of her coming, I know I should be hole of my
disease within this hour: what, said the other, do you think she will come
so soon? yea I am sure of that, said he, if you deliver her my Ring, but in
any wise tell her not that I am loue-sicke: no I warrante you, said the other.
And so he went to the Gentlewoman with speed.


Omen. I pray you what good news did he bring again?


Siuqila. For want of good news he brought the Gentlewomanne her self: who
wept for sorrow, that he was so sick.


Omen. It seemed by her speedy coming, and by her sudden weeping, that she
loved him well.


Siuqila. Yea and better than he thought, and after as well as he wished: but
at that time though she favored him inwardly, she showed it not outwardly, but
as one friend would do to another. At which time the sick Gentleman said:
surely Gentlewoman, I must needs think my self much beholden to you, for
this your speedy coming to me: but a great deal more for so quickly easing
me. Many Phisitio^s cannot help their patients though they take their
medicines: but you have half cured me without any medcine: therefore I must say,
though your cunning be not great, yet your luck is very good. Sir said she, I
have half cured you without knowing your disease, and without giving you any
medicine, then it is very like I should thoroughly cure you, if I knew your
grief, and did minister unto you. That is very like, said he: and seeing your
physic does so much ease me at the beginning of my diseases, I mean you shall
be my Doctor still unto the end of my sickness. Sir, said she, if only my
coming without cunning can help you, you shall not long lie sick. Then said
he again: if my service may pleasure you, you shall not long lack a faithful
servant. I thank you for that, said she: and therewith she gave him his
Ring, that he sent unto her. Nay, said he, you offer me now discurtesie,
though it be not a sufficient recompense for your coming, yet I beseech you
keep it, until you have a better reward: for seeing Physicians take as much
as this of their patients, for their coming to them, though they do the^ no
good, then you deserve a great deal more than this, that with this your once
coming have half cured your patient. You know sir, said she, that
Gentlewomenne use not to take money for their Physic: no more do I, said he,
offer you any, a gold Ring is no money: and though you will not take it for
a reward (though you have deserved it for such a speedy cure) yet I
beseech you take it with you and wear it, that thereby you may remember to
come and see your patient. I am content with that, said she, so that you will
take another Ryng of me, that when you begin something to wax strong, you
may remember to come and see your Physician. I am very well pleased with
that, said he: and so they made a change, and one of them to^e another Ring,
and then for that time the Gentlewoman his Physician took her leave, and so she
departed.


Omen. The best learned Doctor of them al, could not have eased him so
speedily, and cured him so quickly as she did. When he sent the Ring to the
Gentlewoman, he thought she would not be so easily won to be his
Physician, though he knew her cunning was able to cure him: I doubt not, but
if his Physician plied him as she began, he was not long in curing.


Siuqila. You may be bold of that, for the same night he fell to his meat,
and was so suddenly merry, that every one that saw him, before like for to
dye, so suddenly ^euiued and most like to live, did maruellously muse thereat.
But the Genman that carried his Ring to the Gentlewoman, and brought her with
him, was not very merry: whom the other Gentlemanne his friend comforted as
well as he could, saying: my friend be merry, and whatsoever I am able to do
for you be bold of me, and I will recompense your gentleness if I be able, I
would be loath you should be sick. Then he feigned that he was not sick, but
that his head aked a little. The morning next after, the Gentleman that carried
his Ring, and that feigned himself sick, went to the said Gentlewoman: how
does my patient? said she: very well, said he: you wrought an excellent and a
speedy cure of him: I would to God you could help me so quickly: what are
you sick? said the Gentlewoman: yea, said he, and therefore I am come to crave
your help: though I helped him said she, more by chance than by cunning: yet
perhaps your disease must be helped rather by cunning than by chance. And I
do not think that you have his disease: yes verily even the very same: yet
(said she) though your disease and his be al one, perhaps your complexion and
his are contrary. I am like the grimde Priest, for as he could say mattens on
no portuse but of his own, so I can help no complexion but one: therefore,
said she, you were best to seek you another Physician, for I am sure that I
cannot help you: and take this for an answer, if I could I would not help
you. The best counsel that I can give you is, in any manner of wise to take
heed that you get not cold, for fear of coughing: and thus fare ye well,
for I mean to minister no more medicines to day: and so she whipte away from
her new patiente, whom I think she made rather an impatient.


Omen. She was a good wise Gentlewoma^, she smelt quickly wherefore he came: he
feigned that he would have her minister to him: but his meaning was to have
ministered to her. He had quickly forgot his faithful promise to his friend:
but tell me came she again to visit her patient?


Siuqila. Yea that she did, within three or four days after.


Omen. It was marvel that the patient went not to ye Physician, seeing the
Physician tarried so long from the patient.


Siuqila. His old grief began newely to grow, for lack of his Physicians
Counsel or rather company: whereby he was urged to go to her, who bad him
welcome merrily, and asked him how he did pleasantly: whom he answered again: I
am better than I was, when you came to me, but not so well as I was when you
went from me: I knew that your honesty was so good, and your care so great to
perform your promise, that you would not give over your patie^t, yt you had
promised to cure: wherefore I feared least you had bin sick, and thereby
constrained to absent your self, thinking yt though many have cunning to help
other, yet they have least knowledge to cure themselves. Wherefore though it be
something paineful, and dangerous for me to come far, yet I was so bold to
adventure, least I should perish for want of Physic. Sir, said she, you could
not dye for want of physic, seeing the City is so full of Doctors of physic.
Then said he: there is no Physician does like me so well as you, neither any can
give me so good medicines as you: and moreover you have one good property yt
many of the^ have not, for many of them take money and do no good: but you do
good and take no money. I am glad, said she, you like me so well: and therefore,
because you have so good opinion in me, you shall not want my travel nor pain
thoroughly to cure you, at the least if it lie in my power: yes said he, it
only lies in you and in none else. Sir then, said she, if I chance to cure
you of this disease (as I do not doubt but I shall,) I trust you will not
use me currishlye for my using you curteouslye: neither seek at any time a
new Physician, in your health to make you sick, and refuse your old Physician,
that when you were sick made you whole? No, said he, if ever I do so, I would
not wish to be helped of any disease if I chance to be sick. Well sir, said
she, your word to me is as good as a bond: therefore if you will go with me
into the next Chamber, where three or four of my special friends are, I will
give you such a medicine before them, that you shall never be sick of the same
disease again. Say you so? said he, your words have so comforted me, that I
feel my self almost hole already. If my words, said she, have made you almost
hole, I trust then my medicine will make you thoroughly hole. And then she carried
him into the Chamber where her friends were, and there they were betrouthed
together: which medicine was of so great effect, that it cured him perfectly
and presently.


Omen. But did the Gentlewoman tell him how his friend had served him?


Siuqila. That she did not, she had more wit than so: for if she should, she
feared that it would have renewed his Sickness. Therefore she thought it
better, to increase his health by concealing it, than to procure his grief by
revealing it.


Omen. I pray you proceed, for I think long to hear the sequel.


Siuqila. Within a while after, the Physician and Patiente were married
together: wherewith the Gentleman whom her husband took for his faithful
friend, was not well pleased: and though he requested him to be at his marriage,
yet he absented him self, faining him self sick of one disease, though he were
sullein of another. But the Gentlewoman knew his grief well enough, though
she concealed it from her husband, who on a time said unto her: My dear and
faithful friend is marvelous sad, whatso ever he aileth: if he be sick, I would
I could ease him: if he want aught, I would I could give it him: and if any
has misused him, I would I knew him. Sir, said she, do you think he is your
faithful friend in deed? Yea that I do, said he, and whosoever ever should say
the contrary of him, I should like the worsse of them. Then you would like
the worsse of me, said she, if I should say so? I take you as my self, said
he, and I my self would speak nothing of him but that were true, whereas I
might surmise other would say that were false. Be sure sir, said she, that
whatsoever I speak, I would be able to prove. And certainly, though I cured
your disease, as you know by practice: so I am certain I know his disease by
speculation. I am glad of that wife, said he, for when the disease is known,
it is sooner cured. Yea but, said she, his disease can not be cured though it
be known: and though he was a mean to cure you of your grief, yet it lies
not in your power to help him of his disease. That is against reason, said he,
it seems then that he has a very strange disease. So strange it is, said
she. His sickness is such, that within this month no man on the earth
could help him: and now his grief is so far grown, Mark this.
that neither man nor woman can cure him. You know that your disease was such,
that you cou^de be help by none but by me: and as no medicine could cure you
but one, so that medicine could be made but once. And what if your supposed
friend have the self same disease that you had? would not he desire the same
medicine? And you know, you had that medicine to cure you withal, and it can
not be made again. And if I could make that medicine again, as I can not,
yet I would not make it, nor bestow that only medicine on him. And therefore
seeing his disease and yours is all one, and the only medicine bestowed on you
that would heal him: then he must either mende without medicine, or end for
lack of a medicine. Wife, said he, though you speak parabolically, yet I
understand your meaning perfectly: but I pray you, know you this by prouf, or
by hearesay? said he. Trust me, I know it by trial, said she. Has the
Uilleine, said he again, under color of frendeshippe, gone about to defraude
me? Could he so falsify his faith, that I having but one Jewel in all the
world, he would steal it from me? Ah husband, said his wife, if I had
thought you would thus have taken it, I would have been better advised
before I told it. I uttered it unto you, to shun a dissembler, not to frette
at your foe. Wisdom wills us to hear things advisedly, to take them
pacientely, and to mende a myschiefe politikely, or if it be paste help, to
avoid the like wisely. Therefore good husband, take him as you find him,
scrape him out of your Book of faithful friends, and write him in the scrowle
of false forsworn dissemblers. Your counsel wife, said he, is very good, if
I could follow it: but my heart is so full, that the next time I see him I will
be revenged on him. Then his wife with weeping tears, fell down upon her
knees, and said unto him: O husband, will you wound her that has healed your
wound? Will you give her poison that has given you a preservative? And will
you procure her death that has saved your life? Remember your promise unto me
that you made before we were betrouthed. Wife, said he, I both remember it,
and will perform it: the wounding of mine enemy is not the hurting of my
friend: my friend does not feel the smarte of my foe: therefore if I cut my
enemy, yet I wound not my wife. Yea sir, said she, but if you kill your foe, do
you not kill your self? And if you kill your self, shall you not kill your most
loving wife, which is your own body and your self? Can furious fighters so
moderate them selves, yt they can strike where they li^te, and hurt no more
than they mean? And can fury persuade them, to stay their strokes when they
list? You know that few fight with patience, nor strike with reason. Anger
and reason seldom dwell together, the one can not abide the other: Where Anger
is, he dryueth away Reason, and where Reason is entertained, he does drive
from thence Fury. But if Fighters were fenced with Reason, as they are armed
with Anger, then so much harm would not come of fighting as does. Therefore my
good husband, seeing Fighters seek rather to sheade blood than save blood, I
beseech you take heed you fight not, neither give any quarrel to fight. You
know if you fight and kill, you shall be sure to die therefore: and if he
that you fight withal kill you in fighting, what are you the better though
he be hanged therefore? There is none so mad I think, that would be killed
to have their foe hanged: and thus, if you kill or be killed, were not your
sorrowful wife better to be killed with you, than in sorrow worsse than
death to live after you? Therefore my dear husband, hear the good counsel of
your most loving wife. Banish anger and embrace patience: expel fury and be
ruled by reason. Content your self wife, said he, for your sake, I will
refrain from that I was determined. Will you perform that, said she, in deed,
that you promise me with your word? Yea that I will, said he, you have given
me too wise a lesson, to fight with such danger. And so they left off for that
time.


Omen. Did he perform the promise he made to his wife?


Siuqila. He did not, though perhaps he meant to perform it. For within a
while after, it was his chance to meet the said Gentleman, that would have
been cured with his medicine: whom when he saw, he drew forth his Sword, and
without any further debating of the matter, he fought with him, and so at the
length killed him.


Omen. His wives wise talk was manifested by this: he had been better to have
performed his promise that he made to her. What a mischief thereby wroght he to
himself, and what sorrow brought he to his wise and loving wife? It was marvel
that it killed her not, as soon as she heard it.


Siuqila. Truly when she heard that her husband was in prison, and what was
the cause, she swouned presentely: and they that were about her had much a do
to get any life in her. Was not here a goodly gain that he got by his
fighting? As she said, neither patience nor reason was with him, when he gave
the other his Deaths wound. Here we may see that all wisdom lies not in men,
and al folly and mischief is not in women. But after, like a wise woman, she
brydled her sorrow as well as she could, and went about to mend the mischief
as well as she might, according to the lesson she gave her husband before,
which is this: Wisdom wills us to hear things advisedly, to take them
patiently, to mende mischiefs politikely, A saying to be noted.
or if they be past help, to a^oide the like wisely. And so with as much
convenient speed as she might, she got her to the said young Judge before
mentioned, in whom (for his wisdom, godliness, and piety,) she had such a
good opinion, that she thought through her humble suit and pitiful moan, he
would find some one mean or other to save her husbands life. And when she
came before him she kneeled unto him, and with weeping tears said: O worthy
Judge, as you are counted a most wise and merciful Judge, now show that in
effect, which is bruted of you in talk: and save an Innocents life that lies
in your hands to destroy. To whom the Judge said: stand up Gentlewoma^, it will
grieve me to see you stand, much more to kneel: therefore without any more
bidding sit down by me, and I will not only hear you, but also help you if
I be able: so that equity do allow, and justice do bid, hoping that your
matter is such, that both these will agree unto it, for that me thought your
request was to have me to save an Innocents life: and to save an Innocents life
a small suit shall serve. And therewith he took her gently by the hand, and
caused her to sit down by him: who said to the Judge then: In deed sir I said
so, for I am that Innocent touching any law of Death, that lies in your hands
to save or to kill: not that any matter is laid against me worthy of Death,
but my life (being an Innocent) in this case, hangs on another man's life
that is not innocent: whose life to save lies only in your hands. I pray you,
said the Judge, tell me your matter and cause as briefly and plainly as you
can, and what I may do lawfully, I will perform it willingly. The truth is
so, said the Gentlewoman, I am the wife of such a Gentleman that killed a man
of late: whose cause I come not to defend, but for whom I come to crave mercy.
I now know your matter, said the Judge, I lament his missehap, and I pity
your case. You know Gentlewoman, it hardly lies in me to save whom the law does
condemn, especially him, whose fact is so manifest, and which by no means
can be denied. O sir, said she, it were very strait, that you being a Judge
so well thought of, and of such great authority, that you can not show
justice with mercy, and law with favor. You know, said he again, I am
sworn to do equity and justice according. And you are not ignorante, that
both Gods law and our law wills, without any redemtion to kill him that
kills, and to shead his blood that shead it. And should I do justice if I
should save your husband, who willingly killed a Gentleman of late, that was
not determined to fight with him? who unawares set upon him, and so he was
slain, whom the law would have favored in defending himself? Therefore
Gentlewoman cease your suit, for it lies not in my hands to help you: but if
I could I would not. For if I should save your husband in this case, I
should get more shame and slander by this one thing, than I have gotten
good report by all the justice and equity that I have done since I came in
Office. I blame not you, for suing for your husband in so evil a cause,
which you do for love: but every one would blame me, for granting your
request in so evil a cause, A lamentable suter.
which they would say I did for money. O sir, said the Gentlewoman, (and began
again to kneel, but he would not suffer her,) the Gentleman is dead, and
the death of my husband will not make him live again: which if it might do
so, I would not be so importunate herein: therefore I beseech you, as ever you
came of a woman, or as you will have Christ to be merciful to you that was
borne of a woman, kill not two more for one that is dead already. For I assure
you, I love my husband so deerly, that if he die, I am most sure that I shall
not long live. Oh I would to God that one friend might die for another, as one
man does pay money or is imprisoned for another: then I that am most woeful
would quickly be joyful. For then he should not die, but I would die for him.
But seeing that can not be, O most worthy Judge, stretch out your power and
find out some way or mean to save my husbands life. What so ever you ask me
you shall have: and what so ever you will have me to do, I will do it. Let
my vehement words penetrate your merciful heart, if there be any spark of
pity, or any drop of mercy in you, show it now upon me your most humble
servant, which am ready, (if herein you pleasure me) to run at your
horse heels, or to do the vilest drudgerie that you can set me too. Surely
Gentlewoman, said he, you are the most importunate suter that ever I knew. I
perceive where you may have yea, you will have no nay. If your husband should
escape, he is bound to make much of you. I think if you were in his case,
he neither would, nor could sue so earnestly for you. O yes, said the
Gentlewoman, it is his great love he does bear me, that causes me to sue
for him so vehementlye. You know sir what I have said, from which I will not
swerve: therefore I beseech you send me not away without some comfort, for
if you do, I am most assured, that unless you make good haste, I shall be
dead before my husband. Then the Judge took the Gentlewoman by the hand, and
said: I will advise my self this night what I may do, and what way I may
best pleasure you: be you of good comfort therefore in the mean space. But
as I will not promise you, so I will not denay you. And come to morrow hither
to my house, about this time, and I will be here ready to speak with you,
when you shall know of me, whether I can, or will pleasure you, yea or no. At
which time, the Gentlewoman took her leave of him, something better heartened
than when she came to him.


Omen. I have not heard a more earneste suter for her husband than she: I
pray you how sped she after?


Siuqila. The next day, I warrante you, she brake not her hour, but went
unto the Judge, as he had appointed her: and when she was come before him,
he made her to sit down beside him, and caused all the rest that were there,
but they two, to go away: and then he carried her into an inner Chamber with
him, because no body should hear what he said unto her, and then thus he
began to say: Gentlewoman, the more I have considered your case, the more I
have busied my self to help you, I assure you, (through your pitiful moan
and most earnest suit,) I am determined to do more for you and grant you more
favor, than ever was in my thought to do for any: I must hazard that for
you, (if I satisfy your desire) that I would not have ieoperded for mine own
self. And for as much as you said (to pleasure you, and to save your
husbands life) you would give me what I would ask, and also do whatsoever I
would will you, I will be brief and make few words with you: If you will have
me to save your husbands life, then you shall do thus: You shall give me six
thousand Crowns (for I know you are able well to spare it, considering your
husband is of such a great living as he is) which you shall bring me hither to
morrow at night. The time is very short, said she, and the sum is very
great: but if there be no remedy, I trust to make shifte for it. You know,
said the Judge, that if I be not good unto him, and find some means for him,
he must be executed within these three or four days: and therefore you
must make great speed therein, for I will have it, before I do deliver him
or save him. Well sir, said the Gentlewoman, you shall have it: Yea but, said
the Judge, there is another matter behind, which if you do not, your
husband is like to die, for I will not receive the money without it: What is
it sir, said she, and according to my promise, I will do it if I can or may?
I know, said he, you will be loath to do it: this it is, to morrow at
night you shall bring your money unto me your self alone, at which time, at
such a privy door of my house I will receive you my self, (for I will trust
none other with this matter) and then when you have delivered me so many
Crowns, you shall tarry with me still, and lie with me all night: for I
assure you, that if I desired the company of your body no more than I esteem
your Crowns, I would not have promised to save your husband, The Gentlewoman
was so suddenly grypte with such a grief, that she was ready to sink down,
but the Judge took her up in his arms and comforted her, saying: Gentlewoman,
now is no time for you to fall in a trance, nor for me to trytie: if you had
not earnestely of your own free will offered me, that you would do
whatsoever I willed you, I would never have required this at your hands,
neither put you in any comfort: therefore either perform your promise, and
save your husbands life: or else be false of your promise, and thereby procure
his death: for I assure you, there is none other way to save his life, but
this. You know your lying with me shall be so secret, yt none in the world shall
know of it but you and I: and as I will keep it most secret, Mark well.
so I trust you will not utter it: which words when she heard, she suddenly
clapped her down on her knees: but he would not suffer her to kneel, but took
her up by the hand: to whom she said: a sir, in what a strait have you me
now? either I must lose my husband to whom I have given my faith, or else lose
my faith that I have given my husband: my husband I can never get again if he
dye, and my faith I can never recover again if I once break it. Therefore I
most humbly beseech you, ask me what you will (this thing only excepted) and if
I perform it not, if I be able, most willingly and quickly, then let my
husband die without all redemption. I am borne to some inheritance, all which,
both I and my husband will most willingly release unto you: and all my Jewels,
Rings and other ornaments, I will fetch with speed and deliver them to you,
which will do you more pleasure, stand you in more stead, and comfort you
longer, than one nights lying with a woeful wretch that had rather be buried
than to go to your bed: and besides all this that I offer you, take freelye
to your self those six thousand Crowns you request of me. Make no more ado
Gentlewoman, said the Judge: either get you hence with your gold, or tarry
here and perform my desire: for I am determined none other way to save your
husbands life but thus. Oh good God, said the Gentlewoman, how am I wrapped in
woe, on every side: if I deny this, my husband shall die: and if I perform it,
I betray my husband. How can I love my husband, that so treacherously use my
husband? Then said the Judge, and how can you love your husband, that rather
than you will lie with me one night, that never shall be known, will see the
death of your husband? Oh sir said she, if my husband should know it,
would he not kill me? yes, and thereof I were well worthy: nay, said the
Judge, he would the more love you, that did that, for the saving of his life,
which you preferde before your own life: therefore, said the Judge, tell me
what you will do, for I will be quickly at a point. Well sir, said she, will
nothing content you but this? No, said the Judge: and I will tell you
moreover, if you perform this my demand now, I will save his life: but if
you refuse it, then, though you would, I will not: wherefore, now you may save
your husbands life, or within these two or three days, be most sure of his
death. To whom the Gentlewoman said, (preferring her husbands life before all
other things in the world) well sir, seeing there is no remedy, I do yield
unto you, beseeching you (for that I buy my husbands life with such a price,
that all the treasure on the earth is not able again to redeem) to be sure,
that my husband be not only saved from death for this fact, but also, that
all our lands and goods may be ours, in such order as they were before the
offense was committed: and also, have a great respect, that this my promise
thus secretly performed, be not openly uttered. To whom the Judge said,
assure your self Gentlewoman, all this shall be done, fear you not: which way it
shall be, I have devised already. Then said she, I will be here at your privy
door to morrow at night, when I will, not only bring you al your Gold, but also
(though sore against my mind) will perform the rest of my promise. And so ye
Gentlewoman took her leave of the Judge, as one that was lifted up with joy on
ye one side, and pulled down with sorrow on the other side.


Omen. Surely, that cruel hearted and wicked Judge, drove that loving
Gentlewoman to a marvelous mischief. But proceed, I would feign hear what
followed.


Siuqila. You shall, and that willingly: ye Gentlewoman brought ye gold at her
hour, by such privy means as she thought convenient, and the Judge received
both it and her, being then something dark, and so she did lie there al yt
night with ye Judge: to whom he said in ye morning before she went from him:
now Gentlewoma^, I thank you. And though you have performed your promise very
unwillingly, yet you shall well understand, yt I will perform mine most
willingly. And for yt I would as well have you to be of good cheer, and to be
quiet in mind, as also not to trouble your self with any pains or travel: my will
is, yt you stay at home and* go not abroad: and whereas your husband should
have bin executed to morrow in ye morning, I will dispatch him, and send him
home to morrow unto you before noone at the furthest, if it be not before: and
therefore play the wise woman's part, and be secret: and though your husband shall
be delivered so quickly, show not your self to joy therefore too suddenly.
Wherefore keep your self close in your own house, and be merry in mind, though
for a show you seem to be sad. Well sir, said ye Gentlewoma^, as I have
satisfied your desire in an unreasonable demand, so I will obey you in this
reasonable request. And for yt I am most sure, that my husband shall now have
his life: I wish most earnestly, yt the time were come, that he were delivered.
Then said the Judge, yt time is not long, to morrow you shall have him safe and
sound with you. And thus she departed from ye Judge, very merry for ye saving of
her husbands life: but yet something sorrowful for the breaking of her faith to
her husband.


Omen. The joy of ye one did mitigate the grief of the other, she thought long
I am sure for ye time appointed by the Judge: and was the time for his
execution the next day after?


Siuqila. Yea, and the day of his execution too: for the next morning about 8,
or 9. of the clock, this sorrowful Gentlewoma^s husband was put to death:
which, after it was done, A most cruel deed.
was ryfe in every man's mouth. And then the said Gentlewoman standing at her
door, saw one come running in all the haste, who seeing him coming toward her
so fast, was very glad, thinking that he came to tell her of her husbands life:
but it fell out otherwise, for he came to tell her of her husbands death. And
when he came something nigh her, she said: I pray thee what news? is my
husband delivered? delivered, said he, no, he is executed. Executed? said ye
Gentlewoman, I am sure you do but jest. The^ he said, you may take it now for
jest, but shortly you will find it in earnest. Yet the Gentlewoman would not
believe him, she had such a trust in the treacherous Judge: but this unlooked
for news of her husbands death, did so pintch her, that she could not be quiet,
til she were better certified: whereupon she would tarry no longer in her
house, but went forth, to enquire further of the matter: and within a little
while after, not far from her house, she met with two or three of her friends,
that told her they came from the execution of her husband, saying, they would
have bin loath to tell her thereof, but they were sure she was not ignoraunte of
it. Oh said she, may I credit you? is this true that you tell me? yea said
they it is too true: Heavy news.
we had rather have told you otherwise, for we see him both quick and
dead, and there was great have made in the executing of him. With that the
good Gentlewoman fell suddenly to the ground, whom all they had much ado to
recover: and they carried her home to her house, and so she lay in a trance
for the space of two or three hours, and knew no body that was about her:
but after when she came to her self, one of her friends that was nie her
said: you have been always counted, since you were of years of discreation,
to be both wise and godly in the time of prosperity, show your self so now
in the time of this your calamity: it is no great masterie to guide a Ship
in calm weather, but it is a weighty matter to rule a ship in a storm or
Tempest: therefore now guide your self with reason and patience, in this time
of sorrow. If your sorrow would get him again, I would wish you to use it:
but seeing that cannot be, I would wish you refrain it. You may procure
your own death with grief: but you cannot get his life again with sorrow:
therefore make not two mischiefs of one. I will not, said she, I thank you for
your good counsel. Ah woe worth al treacherous villains, said she: once this
morning I would have laid all my goods to a groate, that I should have had
my husband safe and sound home to me this day before noone: but now for that
you (who^ I credit) have told me that he is dead, and that the time is past I
was promised to have him here quitte and alive, my chief practice and delight
shall be, to be revenged on mine enemy: as before, al my travel and labor was
to release my friend. Have you such an enemy, said ye other, that his deeds
toward you have deserved death? then she being a wise woman, loath to make any
privy of her practice, said: truly the death of my husband so greeueth me,
that I speak I wist not what: therefore take no hold nor effect at my words,
for I have no such enemy I hope, if I have, I know them not, and it is also
without my desert. And so she pacified hirselfe for that time as well as she
could.


Omen. This was the vilest and most treacherous part of a Judge or of any
other that ever I heard: but I consider his privy meaning in executing her
husband, for he thought by his death to have married the Gentlewoman, thinking
that she, when she saw that her husband was dead, whose life by no means she
could get again, would be allured to him by little and little well enough:
judging also, that she that was so loath to commit that fact secretly, for the
saving of her husbands life, would be more loath to utter it to her own shame
openly, after her husbands death, when there was no hope of his life.


Siuqila. Well, he was clean deceived, in that she was otherwise bent and
fully determined: for she weighing with hirselfe, how treacherously he had
served her, not only in defrauding her of six thousand crowns, but also
bereaved her of two of the greatest Jewels she had in the world, that was
her husband and her honesty, which by no means again could be recovered;
that thereby such a detesting and abhorring of him did enter into her heart,
that nothing was so pleasant to her, as to procure his mischief: and had rather
work his death by opening her own shame, than to hide her infamy by saving his
life, as the sequel does plainly show: for as speedily as she could, she
got her decent mourning attire, and with convenient men to wait on her, rode
in all the haste where the Magistrates and the chief Rulers of the Country
did sit: who knocking at the Counsel Chamber door, within a while after was
let in, when they knew who she was. And when she came before them, she
kneeled down: and lamentably and pitifully desired them that she might have
Justice, for that was the only thing she craved: and as all my suit of late
(said she) was chiefly for Mercy, now al my request is only for Justice.
Then said the chief of the Counsel, Gentlewoman, we may perceive, that some
great matter has driven you hither to require Justice, therefore tell us your
matter truly, and you shall be sure of Justice, and that with all expedition.
Then she humbly thanked him, and told in every point and hid nothing, how
the wicked Judge did use her. Which when they heard, they were maruellously
astonished thereat, at which time they asked her, if she had any other witness
herein than her self: to whom she said, no, for the fact was so shameful,
that it rather required a secret place than open witnesses: but I can show
you such privy marks and tokens, as well of the bags wherein the Gold is,
and of the place where they lie, as also of the privy stairs, where he
himself alone brought me up into his Chamber, and of the sh^etes, pillowes,
couerings, and curtains of the bed, where I was enforced to grant to lie with
him, for the saving of my husbands life, and other secret tokens, that they
will bewray the matter as well as any witnesses in all the world: No better
witnesses.
and the opening of mine own shame before your Honors, me thinks may be
allowed for a sufficient witness. Then they commanded, that all the tokens
she could name, should briefly be written: And so they were. Then said the
chief Ruler to her as follows: we will send one with you with our Commission,
not only immediately to discharge the said Judge and displace him, but also
that he be apprehended and committed to prison, where he shall remain until
such judgment as we shall think meet to be executed on him. And furthermore,
you shall bring this Commissioner into his Chamber, to whom you shall show all the secret tokens there, before us described and by you mentioned. And then
they commanded the Commissioner to seize all his goods, and to scale up all
the doors of his house, and that he and she should ride thither as speedily
and as secretelye as might be, least the Judge having foreknowledge, might
fly away before they came. And he said moreover, that the Gentlewoman
should have Justice as she required, commanding her to stand to, and obey
their judgment therein: to whom she promised she would, and that most
willingly: and so they gave her leave to depart.


Omen. This was very wisely wrought of the Gentlewoman. The Judge little
thought of this mischief that was so nigh him: he had been as good to have
given Gold to have lain with another, as to have taken her gold and li^n with
her. But did the Commissioner find the Judge at home when he came?


Siuqila. That he did, for the Judge thought himself safe enough: and so, when
the said Commission was showed to the Rulers of the City, the Judge was
dismissed out of his office, and straightway was committed to prison: and then
the Commissioner with other appointed, took the Gentletlewoman with them as a
guide: to whom she showed the posterne gate where he received her into his
Chamber, and also all the marks and privy tokens with the place where the Gold
she gave him did lie, even as she had told the Counsel, and there they
found all the Gold which he had of her.


Omen. I have heard of men that have given Gold, to allure unwilling women to
be willing to lie with them: but I never knew that unwilling women, gave gold
for willing men to lie with them. I see no pleasure that he did for her,
unless his lying with hi^s^ sore against her will was any pleasure, for I am
sure she took no great pleasure in the putting her husband to death. Well,
though she could not get her honesty, nor her husbands life again, she
might have her Gold again: but had she it again or not?


Siuqila. You shall know that hereafter, in a place more fit to be told. When
the Commissioner and his other associates, had found all the tokens and
marks true as she had declared, they locked all the doors in his house, and
sealed them up: mary all the gold, silver, plate, and jewels that they
found, was committed to other that was charged safely to keep it. And so the
Gentlewoman went home to her house: whose great sorrow was mitigated, for
that she hoped shortelye to see the confusion of her most mortal enemy. And
the Commissioner departed with speed to the chief Ruler of the Country and
the Counsel, unto whom he revealed how the Gentlewoman had told them truth in
every thing. And then soon after they consulted among themselves, what
judgment were meet to be given therein: and which way that good and loving
Gentlewoman might not be defamed, by that unwilling and constrained fact: and
how the peoples mouths might be stopped, for uttering the same to her infamy:
and how it might not be a slander to her, nor a hinderance to her marriage.
Whereupon, with long debating of the matter, they agreed, that her honesty
could not be saved, nor the infamous talk suppressed of her lying with the
Judge, but only by marrying of the same Judge: and so they concluded, and gave
judgment, that (seeing he had done her such a shame and villainy) such a day
by them appointed, he should prepare him in the best manner he could, to marry
her, with an other secret judgment besides, which was privily uttered by the
Commissioner: who was appointed, not only to see the marriage celebrated
between them accordingly, but also the other secreate thing performed, in all
points as the Counsel had decreede. Which Judgment was carried down
thither where the Gentlewoman dwelled, by the said Commissioner. And when the
day of the marriage approached, the Co^missioner came into the prison to the same
wicked Judge, and said, that the Ruler and the Counsel, had given judgment,
forasmuch as he had taken a Gentlewomans good name from her, by lying with her,
Better than he looked for.
that he should prepare himself in the best manner he could to marrye her,
thereby to make her amends: which, when the treacherous Judge heard, he was
ye gladdest man in the world: for that was the only thing he desired, and the
cause why he executed her husband. And so he prepared himself against the
day appointed to marry her. And then the said Commissioner went to the said
Gentlewoman, whom when she saw, she was marvelous glad, saying: sir, you
are most heartily welcome: I pray you what judgment have my Lords of the
Counsel given on my behalf against the wicked Judge mine enemy? Forsooth,
said he, as they think, a very good and necessary judgment, though it be
not altogether as you desire: but in my opinion, it is as wise and righteous a
judgment as can be. Well sir, said she, though it be not according to my
contentation, yet I must be obedient, knowing, and being well assured, that they
are so wise, righteous, and godly, that they will give none other judgment,
but according to equity, justice, and reason: and therefore, as I have
promised their Honors, whatsoever judgment they have given, I must be
content, and will. It is very well said of you, said he, there is no
resisting of them, and therefore, the more willinglier you take it, the better
they will like of you. I pray you sir, said she, what is it? though I am
loath, said he, to utter* it unto you, because it will not well like you: yet
I am enforced to tell you of it, because the Counsel have commanded me. Spare
not I beseech you, said she, to declare it unto me: for, if it be any thing
that may move my mind, I am determined to arm my self with patience. I pray
you do so, said he, for you shall see, that God at the length, will turn all
things to the best: now thus it is: the chief Ruler, and the rest of the
Honorable Lords of the Counsel, have given their judgment, and fully
decreed, that against such a day you shall prepare your self, in most sober
and comely wise, to be married unto him: for they think, that the infamy you
have received by him, Worse than she looked for.
can be salued by no means so well, as by being his wife, and to be married
unto him: therefore prepare you for it accordingly, for there is no remedy; but
you must perform this their decree and judgment: which, when she had
heard, she waxed as pale as was possible: whereby it appeared, that inwardly
she was not a little vexed and troubled. And within a while after she said:
shall I now marry him that has cruelly killed my loving husband whom he
promised me to save, and spoiled me of my faith and honesty, which I can
never recover again? to have the life of my husband, made me to go to his
bed loathfully, and can the death of my husband make me to lie with him
willingly? Oh, I would to God, that the Counsel had not respected so much
mine honesty, as to make me do that I deteste more than death. I had rather a
thousand times live in shame, than to marry him that is cause of my shame.
Then said he to her again. Did not you tell me, that you would arm your self
with patience, though I should tell you that did trouble your mind? I said
so indeed, but when I said so, though all things were not so well as I would,
yet I did not think that it was so evil as it is: to marry him is the thing
he most desires,: but to be married to him, is the thing that I most
abhor: whereby he shall have a joyful life that has deserved a cruel
death: but thereby I shall have a sorrowful death, that ought rather have a
joyful life. I hoped that the day appointed for his marying with me, should
rather have been the day of his death, for so shamefully abusing me. Well, I
will obey their commandments, trusting thereby, that my sorrow shall end:
and whereas that night he thinks, that I shall be bedded with him, I hope
that then I shall be buried by my self. There was never a sorrowfuller Bride
than I shall be: but look what you have willed me, I will do it, and what the
Counsel have judged I will perform it. And then he took his leave of her and
departed.


Omen. This was not such a judgment as she looked for, nor yet as the wicked
Judge did hope to have. But did she come at the day appointed to be
married unto him?


Siuqila. Yea that she did, though it was full sore against her will: for in
the same morning he was ready at the church a good while before she came, for
if he had been so unwilling as she, he would not have come so soon as he
did. And at the last, she came in her mourning apparel, thinking the would
wear the same at her own doleful marriage, that she did wear at her
husbands death. And so to conclude, they were both married together, whereof he
was as glad as she was sorrowful. And when they were married, and as he was
about to go home with his new woeful wife, the said Commissioner said: sir
you must stay a little, this Gentlewoman your wife has performed all the
judgments that on her part are to be done: but though you have done some,
yet you have not done al, there is one piece yet behind for you to perform.
What is that? said the Judge, for I will do it willingly: then said the
Commissioner, not so willingly I believe as you were married, unless you are
willing to go to your death: whereat the Judge was astonished: and then the
Commissioner said to him: A wise and worthy judgment.
nay, there is no remedy, the Counsels judgment is, that immediately after
you are married, you must be executed: therefore prepare your self, for I
must see it done presently. And as for you Gentlewoman, said he, you were
best go to dinner, and not tarry for your husband, for he has an other
part to play. O, said the Gentlewoman, blessed be God that has given us
such wise and godly Counselors, that have given such a worthy judgment:
the death of my first husband did not make me so woeful a Widow, but the
death of my second husband does make me as joyful a Widow. Here was a
sudden change, for whereas before the Bridegroom was merry and the Bride sad:
now the Bride was most merry, and the Bridegroom sorrowful, and so she
went to her dinner, and he to his death. Whose execution was not very long
in hand, for she was a Widow again that day before she had dyned. And
to comfort her the better, she had not only all her gold again, but also all
the Judges her second husbands goods: for the Counsel commanded that he
should lose none of his goods, whereby this Gentlewoman his wife enjoyed them
all.


Omen. Truly they were godly and wise Counselors: their judgment was with
great equity, justice and reason. I am sure she was gladder that he should
go to his death, than with her to dinner.


Siuqila. That is most true, and contrary: he had rather have gone with her to
dinner, than to his death. Surely, it is a vile thing for one to take money, for
getting of a pardon to save a man's life, and to do nothing in it: but it is a
most wicked and detestable thing, to take money for the saving of a man's life,
and then to cause him be speedily put to death. I pray you sir, have you any
law for such as take rewards for bringing matters to pass, and make men
believe that they travel therein for them, and do nothing at all?


Omen. We have a law for such, but we need no law for such, for none with
us will take any reward, though they do them pleasure: and then, do you
think they will take any gift or reward for doing them no pleasure?


Siuqila. What is your law in that case?


Omen. Forsooth, whosoever takes a reward for doing any thing, and does
promise fair, but does nothing at all therein, our law is, that he shall pay to
the party of whom he received it, A worthy law.
three times as much as he received, and he shall be imprisoned for the space
of a quarter of a year, and all the while he is imprisoned, none, upon pain of
the like forfeiture and punishment, shall do any thing for him, for any matter
or suit, or bring any thing to pass that he would have them to do. And he shall
wear on his sleeue a whole year after, a paper, whereon shall be written:
This is a dissembler.


Siuqila. But what say you to them that are put in trust by their friends, to
procure and to get a thing for them, and then they Iudaslie deceive them of
it, and get it for themselves?


Omen. Marie I say they are false Harlots, and I think them as well worthy to
be hanged, as thieves that steal through necessity. For such we have a
worthy Law. But friends with us do deal so truly and justly one with
another, that the same was not executed of a great while.


Siuqila. Then belike it was once executed, whereby it appears there was once
an offender therein with you.


Omen. Yea that there was: And now I will tell you the History thereof, if you
will hear it.


Siuqila. Yes that I will, and that very gladly.


Omen. There was one that was something sick, An excellent example of one that
deceived him that putt^ him in trust.
and not very well at ease, that had never a house to dwell in that he could
trust to abide in long: for he had no Lease in it, but occupied it during the
absence of a Gentleman, and no longer could he have it but until he came home:
which sickly man, not well able to travel, and knowing that within four or
five miles of him, there was a Lease of a good Farm to be sold, sent for one
whom he took for his very and trusty friend: when he was come to him, he said
as follows: Neighbor and friend, for the great credit and trust I have in
you, I am ensorced at this time to crave your help. Then said he to him
again: Neighbor, what so ever I can do for you, to my power I will do it:
And therefore though it be never so weighty a matter, nor so great a secret,
fear not both to utter it unto me, and also to put me in trust to travel
therein, as I would do for my self. Godamercy said the other. You know
neighbor, said he, that I dwell in a house here, wherein I have neither term
nor certeintie: for as soon as the Gentleman comes home, (who has none
other house but this to dwell in himself) I look to be houslesse, and how
soon that will be I know not, for I look almost every day for his coming
home. And now for that I understand there is one within four or five miles,
an old man, and that has neither charge of wife nor children, which will sell
the lease of his Farm, (and that, as I understand, very resonably) therefore I
shall desire you to do so much for me, as to go thither to morrow, and not
only to enquire of it, but also in my behalf and for me, if you can, to buie
the same: but get it as reasonably as you may, and whatsoever you appoint to
be paid for it, I will pay, and that at such times and days as you and he
shall agree: which if you be content to do for me, what so ever charges you
shall be at thereby, I will not only allow, but also I will pleasure you as
much if I be able. To whom his neighbor that he sent for, answered again and
said: neighbor, if it were more than this I would do it for you, therefore
take you no care, for if he will sell it (as you think he will) I will drive the
price, and buie it for you as well as if you were there your self, and to
morrow (God willing) I will go about it. Do so, said the other, and I pray you
let me hear how the matter goes, as soon as you can: and so he took his
leave. Two or three days past on, and yet he could not hear of his neighbor,
and then he sent again to him to desire him to come and speak with him: who
sent him word that he would come by and by. And as soon as he came, the sickly
man said: Neighbor, I looked for you two days since, marueling that you tarried
so long seeing your iourny was so short. Neighbor, said he again, a short
journey may have a long business, and a short business may have a long
journey: the distance of the places we know, but the time of dispatch we know
not. We that do travel are sure of our selves, but we are not sure to find them
at home to whom we travel. Therefore be content good neighbor, I came but even
now home, and now I am come to you, which I had done though you had not sent
for me. I am as desirous to tell you, as you are to hear, what I have done.
Well neibor, said the sick man, what have you done therein? or how have you sped?
Not so well as I wish, for your sake, said he. I went thither the next day, as
I promised you, but I found him not at home, but they thought he would come
home that might, for whose coming I tarried so late, that it was to far for me
to reach home by day light, and yet for all my tarying for him he came not home
that night at all. Which grieved me that I tarried there al night, and was
thereby never the nearer. The next day I tarried for his coming till almost
night, so that I meant to tarry no longer there, but to come homward. But as I
was going out of the house, I met him coming in, whom I told how long I had
stayed only to speak with him, desiring him to talk with me in some secret
place, where I might utter my mind unto him, for that I made haste to be gone.
Sir, said he, if you will have aught with me, you shall tarry with me all
night, and at leisure you and I will talk together, for I am something weary,
assuring you, that I had rather sit and warm me by the fire, than to stand
and talk in the cold. Therefore determine your self to tarry all night, and
though your Supper be but simple, your bed shall be the better. Whose gentle
offer I could not well refuse, and the rather, to dispatche your matter, and to
bring your purpose to pass. And so I both supt well, and lay well, and also I
slept as well.

As soon as we were up the next morning, and had broken our fast, the Good
man of the house said unto me: come and walk with me, I am more willing to
talk with you than I was yesternight. What have you to say unto me? Forsooth,
said I, I understand that you mean to sell the Lease of this your Farm you
dwell in: and if you be so determined, I have a very honest neighbor that is
now destitute of a house, who will give you as much for it as it is well
worth. The truth is so, said the other, I was determined within this month to
have sold it, but now my mind is altered, for I have no such occasion to
occupy money now, as I had before, and therefore I am fully determined to keep
it still in my hands. Then said I, if you be not determined to sell it, I am
sure my neighbor will not be desirous to buie it. And so I gave him thanks,
and departed from him. And this is the very conclusion of al. Then said the
sick neighbor to him that he had sent thither: What remedy? that that a man
can not have, he must be contented to forgo. It was not worthy of thanks.
Saying also, I thank you neighbor for your pains, I will do as much for you
if it lie in my power. And so his neighbor went home.


Siuqila. What falsehod followed of this, I pray you?


Omen. More falsehode than faith, and more craft than true dealing: for within
a month after his said neighbor that was sent to buie this Farm for him,
came to him vnsente for, and said as follows: I am sorry that you can get
never a house to dwell in, and for that I would be loath that you should be
houslesse, I will sell you the Lease of my Farm that I dwell in, rather than
you should want one. I thank you neighbor, said he, but as you would be
loath that I should be without a house, so would I be sorry to make you
houselesse. Nay neighbor, said he, I do not mean to be houselesse my self,
though I sell you my house, for if you may spare it until your Landlorde come
home, I doubt not but by that time to get another house better than mine. I am
promised one if it will hit, and if he break promise with me, as I think he will
not, yet I hope to get another, for my friends will hearken about for me. How
far, said the sick neighbor, is the Farm that is promised you? Forsooth
above twenty miles hence, said he. Well, said his sick neighbor, if you can
get another house for your self then I pray you let me buie youres: yes that
you shall neighbor, said he, and I hope within this Seuenight to be so sure
of one, that I may bergaine with you for mine. I would be glad of that, said
the sick neighbor. And so for that time he departed home.


Siuqila. Did he come to him again within a Seuenight, as he thought?


Ome^. Yea that he did, and less, and then he said thus unto him: Now
neighbor I am come to you according to my promise. I make a full account now
to be sure of another Farm, and therefore I am come to offer you my Farm, if
you will have it, you shall have it before any other. And though there be
diverse that are desirous to have it, you shall forsake it before I do proffer
it to any other. I thank you therefore good neighbor, said he: now tell me
your price: You shall have it for forty pounds, said he, that is the lowest
price, I will not sell it under. O neighbor, said the other, that is a great
deal too dear, the other Farm that I sent you to buie for me, would have
been sold for half the money, as I was credibly told, and once the owner
thereof was fully determined so to have sold it, and it is twice as good as
yours, I am sure. Notwithstanding, for my necessity, I will give you as much
for it as it is worth, and something more: Well, to be short, said he again,
unless you will give me so much for it, you can not have it, and therefore say
now whether you will have it or no, for if you refuse it, it will be gone, I
can tell you that, and that for this price that I offer it to you for. Well
neighbor, I perceive because my need is great, therefore you make the price the
greater: nay if you say so, said the other, then you shall not have it: is this
all the thanks I have for my good will? and so was going away in a sum. Then
the sick neighbor called him back again, and said: Good neighbor be not
angry, I meant no harm, your unreasonable price made me speak so much: but I
pray you do one thing for me, let me pawse of the price between this and to
morrow at night: well, said the other, I give you leave to do so, but then I
pray you let me have a determined answer whether you will have it or not: you
shall not fail thereof, said he. And his said neighbor came unto him the next
night, at which time the bergaine was fully made between them, and so he paid
him forty pounds for his Lease. And the time was appointed in their writing,
when he should enter upon it. But now, you shall see how the matter fell out.
The Gentleman, in whose house this sickly Farmer dwelled, came home: so that
there was no remedy, but that he must dwell in his own house, whereby he that
dwelled in it, was enforce to remove, to his neighbors house, the lease
whereof he had boughte: and so he came to his neighbor and said, neighbor
there is no remedy, I must be so bold to enter and dwell in this house that I
boughte of you, for that my interest therein is already begun, but chiefly
that my Landlord is come home, to whom I must needs give place in his own
house. Well neighbor, said he, I can not deny but that I have sold it unto
you, but if I had known so much as I do now, I would not have put it
away: for the truth is so, I am disappointed of my house, which I told you is
above twenty miles hence, therefore if you would stay but one Seuenight, I
should think my self much beholden unto you, and in the mean space I will
lay out for another, and if I cannot get one by that time, yet I will make such
shifte, that then I will remove from hence, and suffer you quietly to enter on
your own: well, said his sickly neighbor, I do not doubt to get my Landlords
good will to tarry in his house so long, and therefore tarry you here this
seuenight, for I dare presume so much of him. And then at the seuenights end,
his neighbor came to him, at which time he was removing his goods and stuff
from thence, to whom he said then: now neighbor I perceive you are true of
your word. And so this sickly Farmer entered quietly on his neighbors Farm
that he bought. And at the last when the other had almost removed all his
goods from thence, this sickly Farmer said to him: now neyghbor tell me, are you
driven to lie within another man for the time, or have you got a Farm of your
own? no I thank God, said he, I have gotten at the last one of mine own,
which I have gotten within this seuenighte: for when you gave me leave to
tarry until this time in your house, I promise you I knew not then that it
would be sold, but as good hap was, a very friend of mine seeing me in such
a distress for want of a house, told me, that this Farm that I have now
got, would be sold: whereupon I made haste to the party that ought it, and
so I made short work considering my great necessity, and have now made it
sure though I paid for my pleasure. I pray you neighbor, said the other,
lies it in a good soil, and is it far hence? no, said he, it is within
this four or five miles, and it is very good ground, and lies in a good
soil. Whereaboute (said he) does it lie, and of whom did you buy it? wot you
of whom? said the other: no surely (said he) how should I know unless you
tell me? truly, said the other, I had very good luck to hit of it, it is the
Farm that you did send me to buy for you, which then by no means he would
sell, but now of late (whatsoever ye cause was) he was enforst to sell it. Well,
said the other, I would it had bin my chance to have known yt, for then I
would not have bought yours. And (said the other) I would not have sold you my
Farm, if I had not thought my self sure of the Farm twenty miles hence,
that was promised me. But I thank God now as it chaunst (said he) I happened as
well. Then said his neighbor that bought his, but now there is no remedy (said
he) God send you to do well of yours, and God grant I may prosper on mine:
and so they departed.


Siuqila. That fellow was a crafty Harlot, yt sold his Farm, for I smell the
circumstaunces of the matter, that he defrauded his neighbor of that at the
first, when he put him in trust to buy it for him.


Omen. He did so in deed: but his good meaning neighbor could not perceive
it, neither did mistrust him: but as craft and disceite have never good
end, so truth bewrays falshod by one mean or other: for not long after, one
that dwelled in the same Town, where this crafty fellow had bought the
Farm, chaunst to be in the company of this sickely Farmer, who (when he knew
that he dwelled there) said: one of our neighbors has gotten a good Farm
with you, as I understand, I pray you what paid he for it? forsooth said
the other, as I heard it reported, he had it cheap enough, for he paid
under twenty pounds for it: yea, said the beguiled Farmer, I would have
given thirty pounds a quarter of a year since for it, and I sent him word
by the same man that now has boughte it: but he would not then forgo it,
though before he was determined to sell it. Then said the other, he has sold
it now for a good deal less. And so there was no more talk of it at that
time: but as soon as this fellow came home, he went to him that had sold
the said Farm (for he bare him good will) and said, you have sold your
Farm very cheap as I understand: I would, said he, yt I had sold it
cheaper, so yt it had bin to such a one as would have kept touch with me, and
paid me my money at my day. Then said the other, did you not receive al your
money therefore presently? no nor sca^t half, said he. Then said the fellow: I
was in company of a very honest man of late, that would have given you
thirty pound for it, or more rather than he would have gone without it: then
said he, he should have had it, if I had known so much: he told me himself,
said the fellow, that about a quarter of a year since, he would have bought
it, hearing then that you were determined to sell it: and thereupon he sent you
word thereof: that is not so, said the other, or else if he sent unto me to
buy it, the message was not done unto me: can you tell, said he, by whom he
sent that message? marry said the fellow, he sent the message by him that
now has boughte it of you: is it even so? said he: then I smell a Ratte: who
is it I pray you, that told you thus? and that sent me word about the buying
of my Farm? and then he told him who it was, and where he dwelled: and so he
gave him thanks, and then the one departed from the other.


Siuqila. I believe he that sold the Farm thought long, until he spoke with
the same man that sent him such word, and that would so feign have bought it.


Omen. That is very true, for the next day after he went unto him, and
said: I understand that you sent a neighbor of yours about a quarter of a
year since, for the buying of a Farm for you that is in such a place. Then
the beguiled Farmer said, I did so indeed: I pray you said the other, what
would you have given for it with a good will? forsooth, said he, I bad him
offer in my behalf thirty pound for it, and more rather than fail. And what
answer brought he you again? said the other: he told me, said the beguiled
Farmer, that he would not then sell it, for he had no need, though before he
had an occasion so to do: and who was it, said the other, that thus you did
put in trust to make and conclude this bargain for you? forsooth, said he,
even he that boughte it of late, and that now does dwell in it. Do not you
understand, said the other, how long it is since he bought the same? yes
truly, said he, if I may believe him, for he himself told me that he bought
it not past four or five days before he came to dwell in it. Well honest man,
said the other, I am he of whom he bought the same Farm be now dwells in,
and to whom you sent him to buy it for you. You are defrauded, and I am
misused: why so? said the beguiled Farmer: for at that time when you sent him
to me, (which is a quarter of a year since at the least) he concluded with
me for it, and paid me ten pounds in hand, which is all I can get yet of
him for it: And therefore he told you a false lie, whereby he has defrauded
you of your Farm, and me of my price: but will you stand to this (if need be)
said he, that you sent him to me for that purpose? Yea that I will, said the
other, for I have good occasion thereto: I was the first that told him of it,
and put him in trust (because I was sick) to go unto you, and to drive the
price for me, through whose crafty and false dealing, it seems that both you
and I are deceived. Well, I fear, said the other, though he has deceived us
at the first, he will be woorsse deceived himself at the last. Therefore be
ready at al times when need is, I pray you: you shall not need to fear, but
that I will be ready to witness the truth. And then he that sold the crafty
fellow his Farm, departed and went home.


Siuqila. But would not this crafty fellow pay him the rest of his money?


Omen He would not pay it him, as you shall hear, for within two or three days
after he came unto him and said, I pray you pay me the rest of my money you
owe me for my Farm: For your Farm? said the other, I owe you none, I paid
you al your money in hand that I bought it for. Have you so? said he, you paid
me but ten pounds in hand, and al wise men might judge me to be a very fool
to sell it for so little, for it is well worth as much more as you gave me for it.
I trusted you upon your own word, without writing or witness, for the
paymente of the rest, therefore you do not honestly use me to deny it. If I had
as evil a conscience as you, I might as well claim three times as much as you
owe me, as you to deny all that you owe me. But as I claim no more than my
due, so I pray you deny me not of that is my due. If I owe you any thing, said
the other, then get it by law, otherwise you shall have no more of me than you
have had. I perceive, (said he that sold the Farm) you mean now to put me
to my trumpe, for that you are sure, I have neither Obligation nor Bil of debt
for the payment of the same, neither know any witnesses that heard the bergaine
between you and me: but if you were as godly as crafty, and as honest as you
are deceiteful, you would not use me so evil, for trusting you so well. But
there is no remedy, if I lose it, I may thank mine own folly. And so he went
away from this crafty fellow not very well pleased.


Siuqila. I could not blame him, but did he leave him so?


Omen No I warrant you, as he handled the matter, he had been better to have
paid him his money with quietness: for he did not only sue him by a byll of
complaint, for the rest of his money, but also revealed all his craft and
deceit to ye Judge, which he used, in defrauding his neighbor of the Farm:
which when the Judge heard: what, said he, have we such a fellow dwelling
among us? I would have thought there was not such a one to be found in all
our Country. If this be true that you tell (as I believe you know to whom you
speak) (for it is no small danger to tell aly to a Judge) I will make yt al they
hereafter, that shall dwell in the Country of Mauqsun, shall beware how they
deceive any. Therefore bring him before me, said the Judge, and I will dress him
according to his deserts. I thank you my Lord, said he that complained unto
him, it shall not be long before he shall be brought before you. And immediately
after he came home, he caused the said crafty fellow to be arrested. So that
there was no remedy but that he must needs appear before the Judge. And at
the day of his appearaunce, he came into the Court where the Judge did sit,
and he that did sue him, was there ready also. And then by and by the Judge
called for him by his name, and caused him to come before him. To whom the
Judge said: are you he my friend, that bought the Lease of a Farm of such a
man? yea my lord, said he: what did you give him for it, said ye Judge:
forsooth said he, I gave him x. l. But for how much did he sell it unto you,
said ye Judge? for x. l. said he: he yt sells such a Farm as I understand
that is, said the Judge, for ten pounds, either he knows not what he does,
or else will never thryue. Come hither you that sold the Farm, said the Judge:
For what sum did you sell your Farm to him? for.xx. l. my Lord, said he, of
which he gave me.x. l. in hand, and I gave him half a years day of payment for
the rest. Where is your Bill of det, or Obligation that you took of him for the
same? said the Judge: My Lord, said he, I have none, I thought him to be so
honest a man, and trusted his honesty so well, that I neither required it of
him, no^ yet he offered it to me. Then said the Judge: Have you any
witnesses, that he has not paid you all? or that he owes you any? No my
Lord, said he, as I trusted him without writing, so I credited him without
witnesses. Then said the Judge: I can see none other, for that you have
neither writing nor witness, but that you have all the money you are like to
have. Well my Lord, said he, if I lose it I know the woorste: I know in my
conscience he owes it me, which will be a burden to his conscience if he
deny it. And do thou say of thy conscience, said the Judge, that he does
owe thee ten pounds? Yea, my Lord, said he, and he knows of his
conscience, that he owes me no less. Mark well what I say, thou fellow
that boughtest this man's ^^rme, said the Judge, he charge thee deeply,
that thou know of thy conscience, that thou do owe unto him ten
pounds: A naughty conscience.
How say thou? do thou owe it him of thy conscience, or no? And then he
said: My Lord, of my conscience I owe it him not. The one of you, said the
Judge, has but a slender conscience. Take heed my friend, though for want
of Writing or other testimony, thou may bleare mine eyes: yet for all that,
thou canste not deceive God, which is the chief Judge of all. Though thou
should carry this matter clear, and be quitte of it before me thy earthly
Judge: yet thy matter must be ripped up again before Christ at the last
day, the heavenly Judge, who without either writing or witness, does and will
then know the truth quickly. And then (though now by fraud thou deceive
this plain dealing man of his ten pounds) if he find that thou do owe
unto him so much, thou had been better to have given ten times more than
thou owe him, tha^ to give him one groate less than his due. For I assure
thee, and trust to it, that the everlasting torments of Hell fire are prepared
for the wicked, and such as defraude their brethren of their right. Therefore
if thou owe it, pay it unto him, and drive not off till Christ the high Judge
compel thee to pay thy debtes to God: for then thou shall be always paying it
in Hell, and thou shall never come out, until thou have paid the last
farthing, which will never be paid. So that by defrauding this man of ten
pounds, which is but dross, and earthly riches, thou will bereave thy self
of the kingdom of Heaven, which is an everlasting treasure. Wherefore thou were
better open the truth now willingly, whereby Christ may be thy friend at the
latter day: than to have it opened before Christ against thy will then, whereby
he will be thy utter enemy and commit thee to Hell fire to be a companion of
Devils for ever. Therefore now tell me the truth, do thou owe him ten pounds
or no? My Lord, said the fellow, I owe him none, for if I had ought him any, he
would have had something to show. Well, said the Judge, seeing this way will
not serve, I will go another way to work, and if it be found that thou owe
it (as I doubt not but to sifte it out as I will use the matter) thou art like
to smoke for dissembling with me, and to pay dearly for every lie thou have
made. Sir, said the Judge to him that sold the Farm, did not you make him a
quittanie for the ten pounds he paid you? Yes my Lord, said he, for he willed
me to make him one for the receite thereof: and then I made him a quittance, and
sealed it, and delivered it before two or three honest witnesses. Lo, said
the Judge, the natures of these two are showed herein, for this man that sold
the Farm, of a good and honest nature, did ask him no bil of debt for the ten
pounds he had to pay him: but the other missetrustfull of him that trusted
him, did require a quittance for the ten pounds he paid him. Well, there is a
great difference between fraud and faithful meaning. Where is that quittance,
said the Judge, that this honest plain meaning man made you? Forsooth my
Lord, said he, I must needs confess that I had such a one, but I have lost
it. I perceive, said the Judge, A false shift.
that there is something in it, that will rather make against you than with you,
for that you feign you have lost it, and all because you are loath to show
it. But seeing you will not show your quittance, I will make you show it, or else
pay him his ten pounds again which you say you paid him: and then you had
been as good to have paid him the ten pounds you owe him, with your will, as to
pay him ten more against your will. We have a law and an order here, that al
aquittances and General quittances with diverse other writings must be recorded:
and if the same be not recorded, the acquittance is of no force, and it shall
be lawefull for the party that received the money (if he will) to claim it and
receive it again. Now if you had such a quittance, and the same not recorded,
then it is lawful for him to claim the ten pounds again that you paid him,
if he will. And if the same be recorded, then we will have it quickly out of
the recorded writings. And then the Judge commanded one of his Clearkes to
search the Records therefore, and with speed to bring unto him the true copy
thereof. Which the Judges Cleark did, who serching the Records for the same
quittance, found it and brought it to the Judge his master: which when he had
viewed well and red thoroughly, he said: I perceive it was not for nothing, A
good way to try the truth.
that you had lost your quittaunce, and that you were so loath to bring it to
light: here it is manifest that you paid this man ten pounds, but here is
another clause does follow, that quite condemns thee, which is, that thou
have paid him ten pounds in part of payment of twenty pounds, my Lord said
the crafty fellow, that is more than I bad him, and the other said, more than
I willed him to do: but indeed I remember when he was beginning to write the
quittaunce, he asked me if it should be a general quittaunce? and I said no:
and then he asked me if the ten pounds was in part of paymente, of any of the
sum or not? I told him then it was in part of paymente of twenty pounds.
Send for the Notarie that writ the quittance, said the Judge, and bid him
come to me with speed* so one went for him and brought him before the Judge,
who confessed the same words that the honest man had spoken before: and though
(said the Notarie) neither of the^ willed me to write it, yet I thought good to
set it in, for the better declaring of the truth if need should require: thou
have done very well therein, said the Judge, and like an honest and well
meaning manne, and as the matter falls out, A good Notarie.
it has brought the truth to light, which a false fellow here went about
to suppress: thou noughtie, varlet said the Judge, how durst thou make such
a manifest lie unto me, when I charged thee so vehemently on thy conscience to
tell truth? but rather how durst thou presume to take it on thy conscience,
that thou oughtst him nothing, before the majesty of God that knew thy
conscience? But though thou thoughtst to outface me and this honest man, Mark.
(thinking thy self sure that there was none to witness against thee) yet God
that will neither be mocked nor outfaced, has brought both writing and
witness against thee: my Lord said the Notarie, I read it before them both,
before it was sealed and delivered, and they sound no fault therewith: the one
sealed it gladly, and the other received it willingly. This is both manifest
and apparent, said the Judge, for this fellow confessed before, that he had such
a quitta^ce of him, which he would not have received unless he had liked it,
and it had bin according to truth. Therefore come hither sir, said the
Judge, and stand near, that you may hear your Judgment for your two
notable lies that you made before me, and for the defrauding of this man of his
money. You shall, according to our Law, keep silence and speak never a word to
any for the space of six months, that is, for either lie three months,
(unless you be required thereto by some Ruler or Judge, for some weighty
matter or cause) and you shall wear on your sleeue all the while, an H. and an L
for a Hurtful Liar: and yet you may say that I am a favorable Judge unto you:
for if I had put thee to thy oath (as I might have done very well) I know thou
would have forsworn thy self which fearing, I did not require thee thereto:
and then half thy goods should have bin lost, which the King should have had,
and thy tongue should have bin cut out of thy head, for a perjured person. Thus
thou may perceive I have used thee gentlye. And then, the Judge said to him
to who^ the debte was due, how long is it since you first required your
money of him? Note this Judgment.
forsooth my Lord said he, two months and something more: the^ my
judgment is, said the Judge, that he shall pay you your debte, which is
ten pounds, and for every month since so much as the debte is, that is for
every month ten pounds which amounts in the whole to thyrtie pounds.
This is my judgment, and see that ye perform it in any wise. And the man
upon whom the judgment was given, was going from the Bar: but the Judge said,
sir, you must stay a little, I have another thing to say to you yet: and then
he called before him the other man, who^ he defrauded of his Farm, and yt put
him in trust to buy it for him. To whom the Judge said: did you never desire
to buy the Farm that this fellow bought, of who^ I gave judgment of late? yes
my Lord, said he, I was very desirous to buy it, but I was sick yt I could
not go about it my self, and I spedde thereafter: did you put no friend of
yours in trust, said the Judge, to make the bargain for you? yes forsooth my
Lord, said he: who was it said the Judge? truly my Lord, said he, even this
same man that bought the same Farm, whom I requested (for that I was sick and
not well able to go, and because I had a greater confidence in him than in
any other of my neighbors) to do so much for me, to enquire of the manne
that ought the same, whether he would sell his Lease thereof or not, saying,
I understand that he means to put it away, and because I dwell here where
I have no certentie, and look every day to be put out of it, I will give
him for it as much as it is worth with reason: and if you can not get it
under thirty pounds, I will give it: and rather than I would go without it,
I will give him more: therefore I pray you, said I, drive the bargain for me
as nigh as you may, and make it up for me before you come home again if you
can. And then he promised me faithfully, that he would do more for me than
that, and he went thither, and when he came home, he told me that though
before he was determined to sell it, then he would in no wise depart withal:
were you the first that told him of it, said the Judge: yea my Lord said he,
thereof I am sure: well said the Judge, what house bought you then to dwell in?
forsooth my Lord, said he, within a while after he came unto me, and proffred
me his Farm, saying that he had another Farm promised him, above twenty
miles hence: and so, I for lack of a house was constrained to pay unto him,
his own price for his Farm, which was forty pounds, though it were not
half so good as the Farm that he has n^we, for which as I understand he
paid but twenty pounds: yea said the Judge, and if he might have gone
forward as he began, he would have paid but ten pounds: saying further,
this gear I fear will fall out but madly, for it begins very suspitiously.
How long was it after, said the Judge, ere you entered into his house? forsooth
my Lord, said he, a quarter of a year and more, and when I was enforst of
necessity to come thither to dwell, he desired me to stay from coming thither
for one seuenight, and to let him remain there so long, for said he, I was
disappointed of the Farm twenty miles hence, whereof I told you, but I hope to
get another shortly: and so I was content to let him tarry there for so
long, and when I came to dwell there at the end of the Seuenight, he had almost
removed all his goods and stuff from thence: and then I asked him where he had
gotten a house so quickly: marie neighbor said he, I have got the same Farm,
that you willed me to buy for you, the Lease whereof I bought but within this
four or five days. And thus as, he said, he got the Farm, which at the
first I desired him to get for me. Indeed said the Judge, a man may be in
good hope of a house, when already he is sure of one of his own: I smell said
the Judge this gear welynough. A Iugler by his trinckets is easy to be
known. Then said the Judge to the fellow (upon whom lately he gave
judgment) tell me truly and lie not (for lies are so dear that you were
better tell truth) how long is it, since thou boughtst the Farm thou now
dwell in? whereat he held his peace and spoke never a word: he is driven
into such narrow room, said the Judge, that he can neither go backward nor
forward, for if he say, he bought it when I think he did, then he bewrays
himself: if he say he boughte it at such time as he told his neighbor that
bought his Farm, then he that sold it to him (he fears) will witness
against him. Well, seeing you will not answer me, said the Judge, I will see
if another will answer me: tell me, said the Judge to him ye sold him his
Farm, how long is it since he bought his Farm of you? my Lord said he, it is
almost five months since, for on such a day, I received the ten pounds of
him for the same: then said the Judge to the other that bought the crafty
felows Farm, how long do you think it since you sent your said neighbor
to buy or conclude for the same Farm for you? forsooth, said he, my Lord I
am sure it was about the same time. Then, said the Judge, I have another
witness here that will I trow agree with you both: and then he looked on the
quittance, A good witness.
and he found that it was dated and sealed the same day that the man said he
received his money, lo, said the Judge, how iumpe and justly is truth tried by
trial: if falshod be not suborned with friendship, money, or gifts, she could
never prevail as in many places she does. These crafty and wicked wretches,
do tie one mischief to another, and link devilish practices together: for
when this crafty fellow had defrauded his neighbor that put him in trust
of the Farm, he left not there, but practiced to deceive this other man of
the one half of his money: and whereas he sold him his Farm, which would
bring him to wealth: he practiced to beguile him of his money to bring him to
poverty: therefore stand near, said the Judge, thou false and crafty
fellow, I must needs proceed again against thee in judgment, and the
second judgment will be worse than the first. And now for that thou did
make a lie to thy neighbor, which put thee in trust, telling him that this
manne would not sell the Lease of his Farm, whereby thou deceiuedst him, and
boughte it from him, (which lie was to his great hindrance, and the cause he
had it not) my judgment, is that for the space of two months more, for this
only, without any paying any thing to him (for yt as the matter falls out, he
shall be otherways reco^pe^st) thou shall not speak to any body, unless before
a Judge or Ruler, as is before said. And shall also al ye while wear on thy
sleeue, and an H. and an L for a Hurtful Liar: and because thou have deceived
thy neighbor of the Farm, which he put thee in trust to buy for him, therefore
my judgment is, yt he shall have the Lease of the same, and enjoy it as well as
though he had bought it: paying to thee again the xx. l. which thou have and
must pay for it: and because thou did give less than thy neighbor did offer
for it, by.x. l. therefore he shall occupy and enjoy thy Farm, which thou sold
unto thy neighbor, for the space of ten years. And see that thou perform this
judgment, as thou will avoid a greter danger. And as thou likest this, said
the Judge, deceive thy neighbor again, that does put thee in trust.


Siuqila. Out of al doubt he was rightly served, your law in this case is a
very good law: if we had such a law with us and so well executed, so many would
not be defrauded by them they trust.


Omen. Are not they thus handled with you, that beguile the^ that put them in
trust?


Siuqila No, no, we have no such law for the^, and I fear if there were, their
doings would not be so narrowly sifted, nor their offenses so duly corrected:
Nay rather with us, one yt is put in trust, may buy and enjoy any thing from his
neighbor with his own money, and the thing will be rather laughed at, than
lamented: and he yt is defrauded, shall be rather mocked than moned. I can tell
you as pretty a trick as this, that was done with us: but the defrauder was
not therefore so handled as with you.


Omen. I pray you tell it, and I will give you the hearing.


Si. I will not stick for yt. There was a Ge^tlema^ understood yt certain la^d
and other commodities would be sold, and yt very resonably, which lay so
necessary for his purpose, yt he could not have wished it better. And for yt he
was aged, and not well able to ride and travel: and also having a son both of
good wit, dexterity, and knowledge, being very well acquainted and able to make
good friends, called his son unto him, and said: son I understand that such a
house and Land with other commodities will be sold, and for that the same
lies so necessary for me as is possible, I would have thee to travel therein
for me: which thou may easlier do, and bring to pass than I, for that
thou art better able to travel, and have more knowledge therein: father, said
his son, I am at your commandment, and will travel therein as much as I am
able, I doubting never a whit to bring this your desire to pass. Then said
his father, if thou do well for me, thou can not do ill for thy self,
wherefore I would have thee to go about it with all speed, and thou shall
carry so much money with thee, as will purchase the same: and in any wise
purchase it in my name, to me and my heirs for ever. The^ said his so^:
father, in whose name else should I purchase it? the money is yours yt shall buy
it, then must the lands be yours yt owes ye money: therefore doubt not, I will do
al things herein for you in such order, yt you shall have a good cause to think
better of me (if it be possible you may) Well, said his father, I do not doubt
but thou will. And then his son took his leave of his father, and carried the
money with him for the purchasing of the same: who within a while after, what
through his travel, what through friendship, and what through rewards, he
purchased the same, and had it under seal, and so made him ready to go
homeward to his father.


Omen. But I pray you tell me, did he purchase it in his fathers name, or not?


Siuqila. Belike he had forgotten his fathers name, and therefore he put in his
own name, which he remembered better.


Omen. A good son, if he had bin hanged a while a sunning to dry: it must
needs grieve his father when he heard of it.


Siuqila. That is not to be doubted. Well, to proceed with this fraudulent son
to his faithful father, he made as much speed homewarde as he could, rather
glad of his Lands yt he had got falsely, than ashamed of ye defrauding of his
father. And as soon as he came home, his father rejoicing at his coming, said:
son, thou art welcome home: how haste thou spedde? forsooth father said
he, I have spedde very well I thank God, I have gone through with the
purchase: then, said his father, then I may take possession of it when I will:
No father, said he, you must not take possession, it is I that must take
possession: for to put you out of doubt, I pray you be not angrye, I have
purchased it in mine own name (notwithstanding it shall be at your
commandment:) which when his father heard, he took it so grievously
(especially for that his own son served him so) yt he lived not long after,
but dyed even for very sorrow.


Omen Such a son is better to hang than to hold, oh that he had dwelled in
our country, he should have been so handled and ha^pred that few or none for
fear durst have used their fathers in such order: and I do not think but that
he had some condign punishment for the same.


Siuqila. He was neither touched nor trubled therefore, nor had any punishment
for it, unless you call that punishment, to enjoy quietly the lands yt he so
falsely bought with his fathers money.


Omen Was yt all the harm he had? now surely it was great shame, yt he was
suffered: either you have no law for correcting such a fault, else the same is
not well executed.


Siuqila Truly many with us are so slenderly hard when they complain of such
like injuries, and such treacherous parts are so boulstred or borne withal,
that they think it is better, to rest quietly with ye harm or loss, than
with further trouble to spend and consume their money, and be never the nearer:
yea and perhaps his father would not complain of his son.


Omen Such notorious enormities should be redressed, and such wicked dealers
should worthily be punished, though ye party so misused did never co^plain, if
they were committed in our country.


Siuqila. How can that be? for if one complain not, how can he have remedy?


Omen. Yes welynough, for our King has his most trusty and privy Espials,
that travel purposely through his whole Dominions, only secretly to learn and
search out such notorious misdemeanors, who in their own persons, reveal
secretly to the King, all such notable mischiefs: as they have truly
learned, and surely searched out by their travel, and they do not only give to
the king in writing the names and places, where they dwell, that so offend: but
also their names and dwelling places, that are so molested and misused: to
which privy Spials the King gives great livings, and also bountiful rewards.


Siuqila. If such Spials were with us, out of doubt one or other would kill
them quickly.


Omen. Yea but how can they kill them before they do know them? These Spials are
charged on pain of death, not to utter or reveal the cause of their travel:
for none but the King him self does know them that are appointed for this
purpose. So that it can not be known, unless they reveal it them selves.
And moreover, these Espials dare not certify the King of any untruth, for if
they do, they shall die for it: therefore it stands them upon to learn and
search out the matter advisedly and diligently, and to be of a good and sure
ground, before they certify the King thereof. And to make the said Espials to
be the more diligent in their travel and trial out of such notorious
misdemeanors, and wicked practices: the more matters that they have to certify
the King, the more gifts and rewards they shall have of the King, for the King
gives every one of them a liberal reward for every such notorious fault,
practice, or misdemeanour, that they so declare unto him. And the King him self
in his own person, has the hearing, determining, and judging of every such
notorious fact or matter, that is informed him by his said Espials. And by
these means, wicked deceivers and devilish practisers are justly punished by
the King: and the opressed and defrauded are revenged, restored, and helped,
though they themselves do not complain.


Siuqila. What a worthy order and notable policy is this? whereby the wicked
is punished, the innocent helped, and truth and equity defended? Surely your
Prince is much to be commended, that bestows himself such liberal gifts to
such finders out of faults, whereby all this is accomplished. I would to God
we had such Spials with us, to travel abroad to learn and search out such.


Omen. By these Espials our King of Mauqsun did so speedily and earnestly
help a poor wronged Widow to her right, that therefore his fame will never be
quenched.


Siuqila. I beseech you to tell it, for I think the time long till I hear it.


Omen. As one of the Kings privy Espials was traveling, An excellent example
of the restoring of a widow unto her right myssused by her son in law.
he spied a poor woman sitting in her door spinning, who asked her the way to
a town he was traveling unto, and she told him the right way thither:
which poor woman perceiu^ng the man by his spetting to be dry, desired him
to drink a cup of her small drink: which he did not refuse, but thanked
her for her gentleness. And then she brought him into her poor house, and
did set before him bread and cheese, and brought him such drink as she
had, whereof he did both eat and drink well. And whiles he was sitting
there, he demanded of the said Woman, what Country woman she was? Who told
him, that she was not borne far from thence. And then he asked her if the got
all her living with spinning? Yea, said she, I thank God for it: for though
it be a poor trade, yet it is a true trade. But sir, said she, though I be
now in such a poor case, I have been in a great deal better. How then came
you thus empouerished, said he? Truly I will tell you, said she, the whole
matter, if it were not for troubling of you. Nay, said he again, it will be
no trouble to me, nor harm to you: therefore tell the truth in all points as
nigh as you can, for if I can do you no good, assure your self I will do you
no harm. Sir, I do not tell it unto you, said she, to the intent to have any
redress thereby, but only to show the simple state I am now in, and the case
I was in before, concerning prosperity or worldly felicity. It was my
chance when I was not past nine or ten years of age, to be carried by a
friend of my father and mother, a hundredth miles hence at the least, to be
brought up with a Gentlewoman, who loved me very well, because I was
something obedient and diligente unto her: whose service I changed not for
any, but tarried still with my said Mystresse until she died. I being then
about three or four and twenty years of age, my Master was made a Knighte,
whereby his Wife was a Lady at her death: Who a little before her death sent
for her husband to come and speak with her: and he (as she desired,) came
presently unto her: at which time she took him fast by the hand, and said:
Sir, I feel my self now so sick, that I know I shall not long be your Wife,
and I trust that you can not say, but that ever since our marriage I have been a
true, loving and obediente Wife unto you. And as I never requested any thing of
you of any great importance, so now at my death I pray you grant me a
boon, which you may easilye perform. And I assure you sir, said she, it
will be no evil, but good, and not to your hindraunce, but greatly for your
profit, joy, and quietness. What is it wife? said he, and then I will tell
you whether I will or not. Nay, said she, I beseech you grant it me before,
it will be no more harm to you than I have said, therefore if ever you loved
me deny me not. Which when he heard her desire so earnestly, knowing also
that she would will him to nothing, that should hurt or hinder him, said as
follows: Wife, for as much as I know that thou loueste me dearelye, and
wishest me well, I will grant it thee whatsoever it be, if it lie in my
power to perform. Yes sir, said she, or else I would not demand you to do
it. And now this it is: I have brought up a poor Girl a great while, and
though her friends or kindred are unknown to you and me, yet I know her good
conditions, her honest behavior, her modeste manners, and her diligent
service to be such, that I esteem her a great deal better therefore,
though she be of a base parentage, than though she were a Lords daughter
without the same. And you are not ignora^te sir, that she has so vnfaynedlie
borne such an affection to you, and favor to me, that she has loved our
children most tenderly. And for that I shall leave behind me two young
mootherlesse children, and an other that is our eldest son of riper years
(whom I beseech God, he may be as toward and well disposed hereafter, as he is
froward and evil disposed now) I am much afraid least the young babes, by a
stepmother should, be stepchildren: and that when you their father were
abroad, they should be misused at home. And as I have a great care for them, so
I have no small regard unto you, A strange suit.
fearing least you should marry one that rather loves your living than your
self, as you shall be allured thereto I am sure, whereby you should not only
much miss me, for your own quietness and ease: but also for the good
looking too and well bringing up of our children. And for that I know none
that will obey you, love you and regard you so much as I, neither make so
much of our children, and have such care of them as I, except it be this my
servant, of whose faithfulness, honesty, love, and modesty I have had
such trial, that it is very hard to find her match: therefore my most humble
and last suit unto you is, to marrye this my servant and Maid after my death,
at such time as you shall think convenient and meet, which I doubt not but you
will do, for that you have promised me. And then he said to her again: For
as much as I have promised you to perform your request, I will God willing
marry her, if it be your chance to die before me. And within a while after,
my good Lady and Mystresse died, and then my Master according to his promise,
did marry me, with whom I lived after above twenty years in great worship,
quietness, and wealth: whom I so loved and obeyed, that he thought he had
his first wife. And I brought up his children so carefully and tenderly, that
they never myssed their own moother. Then said the Kings Espiall, to whom
she told the tale: If this be true, then you are a Lady still, for though you
have lost your living by some missehappe, yet you can not lose your title by
any mischaunce. A poor Lady, said she, that is feign to spinne for her
living. And when I had been married to this worthy Gentleman and Knight more
than.xx. years, God took him away by a sickness that he had, to my great
grief and sorrow, yea, and to my utter undoing: as you shall perceive
hereafter. For my husbands eldest son, who neither esteemed his father nor
loved me, after his father was dead, brought me by fairs words, to walk with
him into my ground, and when he had me in a little grove of Wood, he,
stripped me out of all my clothes, and put upon me such simple attire as
he had prepared for the purpose, and said: a beggar my father found thee,
and a beggar his son will leave thee: thou haste had pleasure enough to be
a Lady these twenty years, therefore therest of thy life, thou shall play the
beggar, least thou forgette from whence thou came: do thou think to have
any of my fathers living? no I warrant thee. And as it has grieved me to see
thee in my mothers place all this while, so now it does rejoice me to see
thee in these beggars rags. And then I kneeled on my knees, and began to
speak unto him, but he would not suffer me, saying: if thou prate to me one
word that I like not, I will kill thee: therefore if thou will have thy life,
thou shalt promise and swear unto me, that thou shall never sue me in any
Court for any lands or living here, neither shalt thou complain to any
Judge of this that I now do to thee: and moreover, with as much speed, to
go out of this country, and that thou shalt not dwell within a hundred miles
of this place: all which, if thou will not swear to perform, here I will
dispatch thee and hereaue thee of thy life. And then I, A compelled oath.
for the safegarde of my life did swear unto him, that all this I would
perform, and so have I done ever since until this day: for I went then from
thence in all the haste I could, partly for fear of my life, but chiefly for
keeping my oath, and here I have dwelled ever since, without complaining to
any Judge of this great wrong and injury he has done to me, and without
suing or troubling him for my living (according to my oath) which he keeps
most wrongfullye and wickedly from me. And thus sir, said she, thoroughe
ministering of talk, you know by what occasion I am come to this pore estate,
yet as well contented withal, said she, as when I was in my greatest
prosperity. It is marvel, said he, that you do not find some means to get
your living or some part of it. Alas sir, said she, I never look to have any
of it, neither do mean, according to my oath, to complain to any Judge or
Magistrate about it. A constrained oath by Gods law and man's law is counted
as no oath, said he: therefore, I tell you truly, if it were my case as it is
yours, I would seek some remedy to ge^te it: what is the Gentleman's name;
and where does he dwell that thus did use you? said he. And then she told
him both his name, and the place where he dwelled. But I think, said she, he
is dead by this time: therefore, said she, God forgive him and I do, Surely,
said he, God will bless you the better; because you take al these injuries
so patiently. And now, said he, for your good refreshing of me I most
heartily thank you, And if it may lie in my power to show you any pleasure,
you shall be as sure of it, as you have given me drink to ^uenth my thirste.
And it may so chance, that I may do you some unlooked for pleasure. And the
Kings Espiall went on his iorny, and she^to her spinning.


Siuqila. She little knew, good woman, that he, she so courteously used, and to
whom she told her troublesome tale, was the Kings appointed Spiall for the
learning, searching and trying of such kind of matters, and that God would
prepare a remedy for her so soon as he did. It was only the Lords working,
that put it into his heart, to ask her the way, and that put it into her
mind to offer him drink. God works al things by marvelous means, if we
would consider it, for the helping of the innocent and godly. Now tell on your
tale I pray you.


Omen. This man, to whom this pore Lady declared the cause of this her
poverty, made his iorny through that country where she told yt her wicked son
in law did dwell. And when he came nigh to that place, he did not only
understand and learn of diverse perfectly, that the same Gentleman was then
living, and inhabiting there: but also, yt such a woman was his fathers wife,
and married her being his maid, at his wives earnest desire on her death bed;
and al things besides as she had before told: but whether she went, or what
became of her after the Knight her husbands death, they knew not; thinking
verily, that (...) was dead; for, said they, if she were alive, either she
would have come, or sent ere this: for a great living should belong to her,
if she were alive. Which being bolted out by them a far off, without any
suspicion, he made have to the Court, being very glad that he had such a matter
whereof to certify the King. And as soon as he came to the Court, watching his
time when he might most conveniently talk with the King he went unto him, as
he and the rest of his fellows might do most boldly: and then with diverse
enormities and wicked practices, he revealed the whole story, how this pore
Lady was missused by her wicked son in law, and to what poverty he brought
her. And then presently the king sent for this poor Lady, who^ the King used
courteously after she had told him al her matter, and appointed her to be kept
secretly in the court, and gave her meat, drink, and lodging, and bade her in
any wise, that she should tell no body wherefore she was there, nor declare
her case to any, nor yet to utter what she was. And also the King sent for yt
said Gentleman by a Purseuant, and for all the Justices of Peace that dwelled
near him, and also for the Judge yt was appointed for that soil.


Siuqila. I am sure the said Gentleman did not marvel a little, what should
be the cause that the King did so hastily send for him: and also the Justices
of Peace and ye Judge could not tell the cause why the King sent for them.


Omen. No, they knew no more thereof, than the new borne babe does know of
his mothers labor. When every one of these were come to the court: and when ye
king was certified thereof, he sent not for the^ all at once, but for one of
the^ after an other And first the King sent for ye said Gentleman that had so
used his mother in law to come before him who^ the king asked, what was his
name, and what was the place where he dwelled. The^ he told both his name and
also where he dwelled. And the^ the king asked him whether his father died
before his mother or not: and he told ye king, that his mother died before his
father: did your father marry again, said ye king, after the death of your
mother, Yea, and if it like your Grace, said he. What mind of woman was she?
said ye king: a maid or a widow, a Gentlewoman or a base borne? forsooth,
said the Gentleman, she was, as I judge of no high degree, for she was but my
fathers servant, and as for her kindred we knew not: it seemed by her attire
at her first coming, that her parents were but pore. How chanced it that
your father (said the King) being a Knight, and a man of so great a living
and good worship, would marry his servant, or one of so base a calling? Truly,
said the Gentleman, my mother on her death bed, for the great love and
affection she bare to her, desired my father to grant hirone request before she
died: who, thinking she would desire no such thing, granted her that he
would do whatsoever she desired, if it lay in his power to perform: and then,
when he had granted her, she required him to marry her maid after her death:
and so he did perform the promise he made to my mother. Then said the King,
your father was very good to her, for in one hour he made her of a pore
servant, a worshipful Lady, and of a pore maid, a rich Mistress. He did so,
said the Gentleman. Then said the King: Is she dead or alive? I think she be
dead, said the Gentleman. Do you not know perfectly, said the King? no, I
know not perfectly, but that I surmize, for if she were alive, she would
come or send to receive her Rentes, for her living should be great if she
were alive: for my father loved her so well, that he made her a Ioynter of more
than half his living: besides that, he left her worth in goods above two or
three thousand pounds, but she never had nor enioyde any of it: for soon
after my fathers death, she went away, but how, I know not, and I never
heard of her since. I like you well, said the King, that you tell me the
truth: it seems, that she had better luck during your fathers life than she
had after his death. How long was she married to your father? said the King:
forsooth, said he, above twenty years. Did your mother leave any more
children than you? yea, said he, she left two that were but young. And was she
a good mother to you, said the King, and used you and them well? Yea very well,
said he: our own mother could not have loved nor used us better. It is very
strange, said the King, that no body could tell neither of her death, nor yet
how she should be conveyed away: truly, said the Gentlemanne, I made as
great search and inquiry for her as I could possibly, but I could never
learn what became of her. The most wisest men have surmised, that some did, by
some wile, steal and convey her away against her will, for her great wealth and
living, and for that she would not consent, have killed her, fearing least
she should bewraye them, if they should have let her go away from them. It
may be so, said the King, it is very likely. Well, said the King, this is the
cause I have sent for you by my Purseuaunt: The King speaks politikly.
it was credibly told, (belike by some that bear you no good will, and
perhaps do it rather of malice than of any good matter) that you have
killed her, or caused her to be killed: but if you be sure you have not (as I
believe you would not, for that you told me how well she loved and used you)
assure your self to be without al danger. But least I be suspected, said
the King, of parcialitie, you must be content to be as a prisoner a while,
until I see that it cannot be proved, which I will quickly try, doubt you
not: therefore content your self, said the King, for they that have thus
slandred you shall dearly pay for it, if they cannot be able to prove it. Then
said the Gentleman to the King: God save your life, O worthy Prince, for I
never killed her, nor conse^ted ever thereto: therefore I am certain and sure,
that it can never be proved: wherefore I now rejoice, though I was sorry
before I knew the matter. And then the King sent him away to prison.


Siuqila. This was a very good policy of the King, to pretend her death
against him, which he knew was false, whereby to have a good occasion to send
him to prison, and thereby to keep him safe, and to make him the less suspect
the truth, or that she was alive, whereby he might be the mer^ier.


Omen. You say true: And after that the King examined the Judge and Justices
of Peace severally by themselves: and they al affirmed, that the Knight, the
said Gentlema^s father, did marry his maid at his wives request on her
death bed: but what became of her after the death of her husband, they knew
not. And he commanded after, that the said Gentleman, with the Judge and
Justices of peace should be brought before him: and when they were al come he
said to the said Gentleman: How say you? said the King, it is credibly told
me, that you have killed your mother in law: which is very like, for though
she used you and your brethren as her own dear and loving children: yet I
understand, that you did not only in your fathers time maruellously misuse
her, but also, your own loving father, whom you were most bound to love and
obey above all other. Now seeing you did hate and despise her whom your
father entirely loved in your fathers life, by displeasing of whom, you might
have been displaced out of al your inheritance and living: then it is like,
after his death when he could not disinherite you how cruelly soever you
handled her, that either you have killed her your self, or appointed some
other to do it. Then said the Gentleman, if it can be proved (O worthy King)
that either I killed her my self, or got any other to kill her, or was ever
consenting to her death, either do know of her death: then let me suffer the
most vilest death that can be invented. And I trust your Majesty, said he,
would not have me molested or troubled for her death, unless it be proved
that either I killed her, or procured her death, or consented to it. No, said
the King, as God is a righteous king in Heaven, so I hope I have been and will
be a just Prince in my kingdom on earth. Well, said the King, if I can not
bring a witness, that she was killed, yet I believe I can shortly have one to
testify, that she escaped with great fear: so that, if she be alive, it is
manifest then that you are not culpable of her death. I am sure, said the
Gentleman, there is none that can witness any such thing against me in any
such thing: neither, that I ever gave her any such occasion. I will not say
it was you, said the King, the witnesses, if there be any, can tell their own
tale. But I pray you, said the King, tell me one thing, and lie not. Then
said the Gentleman, if your Majesty ask me that I am able to resolve, I
will: then say unto me, said the King, whether had you rather your mother in
law were alive or dead? whereat he paused a little: Your pausing, said the
King, portendeth something, for if you were free from killing her, then her
death could not hurt you: and if you have not otherwise misused her, then her
life can not harm you Your Grace, said the Gentleman, does construe it one
way, but I meant an other way: for if she were dead, then by surmises and other
presumptions, I might incur great trouble and danger, whereof her life would
rid me: and if she were alive, I should lose a great part of my living,
which I now enjoy and possess. Then said the King, herein you have showed
rather a ready wit, than a good excuse: for you that are loathe to have her
alive that so much loved and tendered you, least she should enjoy half
your living: it is to be thought, that you could be content to procure
her death, whom you utter lie hated, to have all her living. And for as much
as the question seems so doubtful to you, that you know not whether it were
better for you to have her dead or alive: it is like, that you are guilty of
her death, or abused her in her life. Well, said the King, bring me hither ye
pore woman, we will see what she can say. And the^ ye pore Lady his mother in
law, in her pore attire, was brought before the King. And then the King asked
the Gentleman if he knew her: and he said, he knew her not. Do you know
this Gentleman? said the King to her: If it like your Grace, said she, I
know him well. Yea, said the King, it likes me well that you know him: But
perhaps it lyketh him evil that you know him: tell me truth, said the King,
when and where did you see him last? Forsooth said she in a Grove, not far
from his house where he dwells. What certain token, said the King, can you
show me, that then you saw him? then said she, I have such a sure token
that he cannot forgett^ it. Tell it I pray you, said the King. Then the pore
Lady said: it was my chance on a certain evening to be in the same Grove
gathering a few sticks, and suddenly I saw this Gentleman (though he saw
not me, for I did cover my self close in a bramble bushe) and his mother in
law was there with him, whom he then stripped of al her apparel, and put on
her back pore beggarly attire (I marvel where he had it) (where got the Devil
the Friar, said the King?) and did then threaten to kill her with his Dagger in
his hand, if she would not then faithfully promise and swear to him, that
she should not only get her self from thence in all haste, and never come
again within an hundredth miles of the same place: but also, that she should
never utter the same to any Judge, neither ever claim any part of her living
there. And when she began most humbly to kneel and speak to him, he said,
if she prated to him, he would thruste his Dagger in her. Then the pore Lady
was commanded to depart for a while. How like you this tale? said the King,
she might well be a good mother to you, but you showed your self herein a
stepchilde to her. Did not I say before, that his silence did show then,
that either he was guilty of her death, or abused her in her life? Then said
the King, what say thou to this thou wicked wretch? why do thou not
answer for thy self? Then he said, I beseech your Grace not to credit this
pore woman. As though, said the King none is to be believed but the rich:
and none to be discredited but the pore. I do not say that she is to be
discredited for her poverty, said the Gentleman, but I mean that her poverty
may make her to be allured with gifts and money, to bear false witness. It
is well known, said the king, that that good Lady thy mother in law, had
neither kith nor kin nighe thee, to sue, travel, or to search for her, and to
boulte out the truth. And moreover, can thou make me believe, that this pore
woman durst witness a falshode to me, or to accuse thee, (being of so great
living and wealth) of su^^ a crime, if it were not true? I do not say to your
Grace, that she is hired to bear witness against me, but yt it is very
likely, that through gifts and rewards she is allured thereto. Wherefore I
most humbly beseech your Majesty, not to believe, that I have missused my
good mother in law in this sort when she was alive. Do thou think, said
the King, that she is dead? I believe she is dead, said he to the King:
therefore let not me be troubled, for that I never abused her as this woman
reporseth.


Siuqila. Surely, this was very wittily handled of the King.


Omen. As he began very wittily, so he ended the same very wisely: for he
appointed, that after the said pore Lady should put on her trim apparel,
and show her self in such sort as she was in her prosperity. And then the
King said: though you refuse this pore woman for a witness, I trust you will
not refuse a rich Gentlewoman for a witness. Bring in that Gentlewoman, said
the King, before me. And when this pore Lady came in trim attire like a
Gentlewoman or a Lady, before the King: the King asked her, if she knew that
Gentlemanne. Yea, my most worthy Sovereign, I know him very well, said
she. Do you know this Gentlewoman? said the King to the Gentleman. Then said
the Gentleman very softely and sorrowfully, I know her. Do you know her?
said the King to the Judge and to the other Justices of Peace: yea, said they,
we know her very well, for she has made us very good cheer in her husbands
time: it was very well bestowed on you, said the King. This is a very strange
thing, said he, the rich and wealthy can not know the poor, but such as
are rich or equal to themselves. And if any come from wealth to poverty the^
they quite forget the^: but if they come from poverty to wealth, then quickly
they know the^. This Gentlewoma^ is the same woman she was herebefore, and yet
her trim apparel has made her another woman: she had the self same face,
arms, and legs, that she has now, and yet they knew her not: and for that
she has other aparel, that she had not before, now they know her. Well
Gentleman, I may well punish you for missusing her when she was alive: but here
before all this company, I acquit you for her death. Though these two women are
but one witness in deed, yet you your self have allowed them for two
witnesses. For the first that was here you knew not, and this gentlewoman that
is here you know: which argues plainly that you take them to be two several
persons. And thus they may be as two witnesses against you: but this good
missused Gentlewoman your mother in Law, is the most sufficient witness yt can
be brought against you in this case. But I pray you Gentlewoman, said the
King, why did you suffer this injury at his hands, all this while? forsooth,
said she, it may please your highness to understand, that partly I was loathe
to undo him, though he spoiled me of all I had: and partly I was so
scrupulous to keep my oath, though I was enforced to make it, that if it had
not been revealed by some other means than by mine own procuremente, he
should never have been bewrayed for me. I know thou say true, said ye King,
for if it had not bin boulted out, more by my means, than it was procured by
thine, thou should have lived poorly for want of thine own, and he should
have lived Lordlye, with that, that is thine. Then the Gentleman kneeled down
and began to excuse himself: wherewith the King was very angry, and said,
pratle no more to me, said the King, thou would have killed this
Gentlewomanne with thy dagger, for speaking in her right: and shall I suffer
thee to live, if thou presume before me to excuse thy self in wickedness and
wrong? will thou urge me to seek for further witness? bring me said he,
hither before me all this Gentleman's servants, that came up with him: And as
soon as they came before the King, he asked which of them did dwell with him
at the death of his Father, or at the time when the Lady his mother in Law was
so suddenly gone. And one of them which then dwelled with him, said: it may
please your majesty to understand, that at that time I was his servant and
waited on him: then said the king, look thou tell me truth in that I shall ask
thee, did thou know nothing of her departure? neither did thou see any
thing whereby to suspect thy master thereof? Truly said his seruante, I saw
my master and her walk together out of the house, on whom I would then have
waited, but he would not suffer me, and within an hour after, I met my
master, with some of her clothes in his arms, which I was sure she did wear,
when she and he went forth together. And I asked him what he had there, and
where he had left my Lady his mother: and he said to me again, what would
thou withal knave? she is none of my mother. And every one did mutter of her
thus soddaine absence: at the last I said unto him, sir it would be much
for your worship, to make search for my Lady: let her kindred and friends
search for her, said he, for I will neither go nor send, out of the doors
to look for her. And this is very true that I tell your grace, but more I
know not. This is enough, said the King, and more than I looked for, but not
more than God would: behold through gods providence, thine own man has
told such a tale that it has tried all yt rest to be true. With that the
Gentlemanne was ashamed and held down his head. Now, said the King, he
holds down his head, which in deed is more meet for him, than to hold it
up: he has used this good Lady so wickedly, and so trecherously, yt he cannot
well look up to take God for his father, me for his Prince, this Lady for his
mother, nor any good man here to be his friend. Ah varlet, thou have lost yt
name of a Ge^tlema^ by villainy, which thy ancestors got by well doing: doste
thou not know, that in this my Kingdom of Mauqsun are such good laws and
orders, and such worthy Judges and Officers, that wicked practices cannot be
unrevealed, fraud and falshode not defended or bolstred, and that the
offenders are not long unpunished? I tell thee, that God does so abhor the
wronging of the widow, the defrauding of the fatherless, the oppressing of
the pore, and the misusing of the miserable, that he will reveal it, though
the crafty worldlings, with all their policy and power do hide it, as by
this pore missused Lady does manifestly appear: for she of her self thought
never to utter it, but God of his goodness wrought means to publishe it. Well,
said the King, I will make thee a spectacle to al other: and now I will
proceed in judgment against thee. Mark the judgment of the King.
And first, because thou haste made diverse lies to me, and specially, one that
is notorious, to make us the better to credit thee, which is, that thou
made diligent search after this Gentlewoman, (which thy manne has
manifested to the contrary:) therefore, for it, and the rest, thou shalt not
speak any word to any body for the space of nine months: and thou shalt
wear on thy sleeue all that while, an H. and an L. for a Hurtful Liar. And
because thou did strippe this good Lady thy mother out of her clothes, and
put beggarly apparel upon her back, therefore I will see thee here before
my face, stripped out of thy attire, and beggarly rags, in stead thereof,
to be put upon thee.


Siuqila. Did the King himself see the same done?


Omen. Yea, what else? for as he had prepared before beggarly attire for his
mother, so the King commanded such like attire to be purposely prepared for
him: which beggarly attire, when the King saw on his back, he said: now thou
art dressed as thou should be: for as thou have done unto her, so I do
unto thee. And because, said the King, thou did spoil her of all her
lands, living, money, goods, jewels and plate, and turned her to spinne for
her living: so here I will take from thee all thy lands, goods, jewels, money
and plate, which she shall possess and enjoy all her life, and all her own
goods and jewels, to bestow where she will after her death, and so thou shalt
be turned abroad, to get thy living which way thou can. And whereas thou did
charge her upon her oath, that she should not dwell nighe thee by an hundredth
miles: so I charge and command thee upon thine allegiaunce, that thou shall
dwell from her an hundredth miles at the least. And for that thou did
vnlady her, by taking away her apparel, living, and goods: now I vngentleman
thee, by taking away thy apparel, thy lands, and thy goods from thee. But
though my judgment is, that thou shalt have none of thy goods or lands
during thy life: yet my will is, that thy children, if thou haste or shalt
have any, shall enjoy all the same, after this Ladies death. And all this my
judgment shall stand and be performed, and not be revoked. And now, said the
King to the Judge and Justices, I have to say to you: for as much as this Lady
was so suddenly gone away, the brute whereof you could not choose but hear:
and because you caused not enquiry or search for her, though none complained
thereof to you, which was your parts to have done, (for good Judges and
Justices ought to enquire and search privily for misdemeanors,) therefore
every one of you, as well Judges as Justices, I discharge of your Offices and
authority, commanding every one of you besides, to find two of your porest
neighbors children at school for the space of two years, allowing them all
that while, sufficient meat, drink, cloth, and all other necessaries, as
well for their learning, as for their finding, commanding every one of you to
do, and perform this my judgment, as you will avoid our indignation. For
which worthy judgment, the said pore Lady most humbly thanked the King:
and al other the Kings Subjects that heard of it, reioiced that they were
subjects to such a politic, diligent, righteous, wise and virtuous a Prince.
And then the King departed: the Lady to her own, living and goods was
restored, and to all her lands admitted: her wicked son in law of all
goods and lands dispossessed, and into a strange country banished: the Judge
and Justices out of their authority discharged, and pore men's children
nourished and well educated.


Siuqila. If two or three that missuse their mothers in law in our Country,
were but thus handled, or as their deeds do deserve, so many widows should
not be wronged as are. This order that your King uses herein, is a very
excellent way for him to know many abuses, and to redress many mischiefs.
And though it be costely and chargeable to the King, yet it is very
necessary and commodious, to his loving and good subjects.


Omen. Nay, the kings Espialls do also certify him, of vprighte Judges,
godly Justices, diligent Officers, and of the wise, godly and well learned,
that are of a good report, and are generally well commended, which are rather
content with pore livings, than with great dignities, with mean estate, than
with high promotion, with decent apparel, than with costely garments, and
with necessary food, than with sumptuous fare.


Siuqila. But what are such the better though the king know of them?


Omen. Forsooth, as the other that practice and commit wickedness, are
punished, and according to the law executed: so these are, by the king to
promotion and great authority preferred: and the other that are godly, wise,
and well learned are to one office or other promoted, though they be never so
pore: for the king thinks, that they that are content with a pore and base
living, and seek not to be exalted, will if they be in any authority, do
Justice and equity, and will abhor to take gifts and rewards.


Siuqila. Your king thinks truly: yet it is often times seen, that many
before they be in office and authority, do profess that with their tongue,
that when they are in office, they never perform in their deeds. But sir, as
you told me before, that the suitors in the law with you have not only quick
dispatch of their matters, but also have the^ ended and determined with small
costs and charges: eue^ so I think, that such as have an occasion to sue unto
any noble man or other, for any particular thing to themselves, are quicklye
dispatched either off or on.


Omen. That is most certain, for this order we have: as soon as any thing is
given or granted, either by any Noble man, Lord, or other, the same is
registered immediatelye, to whom it is given or granted (yea, and our King
himself does use that order) whereby none is put in hope of that which
before is promised, or given to an other: So that if it be promised or given
before, the suter has his answer very speedily, that it is given, or that
he can not have it. If the thing he sueth for be not given or promised: then
our order is, that they to whom he does sue, shall either give him an
aunsweare within a day after, or else shall appoint him an other day.


Siuqila. It may be, that the Suter dwells two or three hundredth miles from
the same place, wanting money perhaps to tarry long for an answer, or else
can not so well travail so far again for his aunsweare.


Omen. Nay, three days is the longest that any Suter with us shall be
constrained to tarry for an answer: for if he have not an aunsweare within
three days, he shall have the thing he sueth for.


Siuqila. There may a great inconvenience arise thereof, for thereby many
times the Suter should be driven to depart without his demand: or else
he, to whom the Suit is made, should be urged to give or grant that to
one that is unworthy of it: for that in such a short time it could not be
learned of what nature, quality, or condition the suter is.


Omen. If that be all the matter that you can allege, the aunsweare need not
be long delayed: for every one with us must of force bring a good Certificate
or Testimonial, that he is very meet and worthy of the thing he sueth for, or
else he cannot speed of the thing he sueth for: For good Report with us does
win that, that Money nor Gifts can never attain.


Siuqila. That is very well: but I tell you truly, with us it proves often
times contrary: for that which good Report or Deserts can not get in a year,
Money and Gifts will get in a day. Well, it is no great matter for a man to
stay three days to speed well. And to say truth, it is a great deal
better for one to tarrye three days, and then to have a flat aunsweare not
to trust unto it, than to be put in hope with fair promises a tweluemoneth,
and then to go home without it.


Omen. I dare say that there are none so evil used with you.


Siuqila. I fear there have been a hundred within less than a hundred
years, being fed with fair words, that have waited long, spent much
money, and given rewards, and yet have gone home without the thing they sued
for: and an other (perhaps not so worthy) in two or three days, with small
waiting, and little expenses has obtained it.


Omen. Surely, that is against all reason: it is a pitiful thing, to make one
spend his time, and consume his money, for that he shall not have. Long
delaying of suitors, has oftentimes made them lose and spend more, than the
thing has been worth they sued for or got, which is a great enormitie, and
against al reason. Now, if that be against reason, then it is much more
against both reason and equity, to make one through vain hope, to wait long,
to lose their time, to spend all they are able to make, for that they shall
not have, which is the next way to drive them to beg of other, of whom other
before did beg.


Siuqila. You say even truly, yet many with us have been so served: I pray God
it may so cease, and that none hereafter be so served. But I beseech you tell
me, how do pore Suitors with you, that have no money to spend during the time
of their suit or complaint?


Omen. Though there be few such with us, yet they that be such can lack no
relief nor lodging all that while. For many godly Gentlemen, Rich men, and
Merchantes of the City, do require the Porters of the same, to send unto them
such poor strangers and needy Suitors, as they epsy when they first enter in
at the Gates of the City: which godly Gentlemen, Merchants, and Rich men, will
not only joyfully receive them, but also will give them meat, drink, and
lodging, during all the time they sue, or are Suitors. So that no poor Suter
can so soon enter into any Town or City with us: but straightway they are
thus entertained either of one or other. Are they not so with you?


Siuqila. With us, quoth you? we would be loath to be taken with such a fault:
if they come without money, they are liker to lie on bare boords than on a
featherbed. And they shall not lightly surffet on their Supper.


Omen. I will tell you a true tale of a worthy Judge with us, and how he did
use a poor woman that had great wrong, and had no money to relieve her at all.


Siuqila. Tell it I beseech you, for I will give an attentive ear unto it.


Omen. There was a Judge with us that feared God, A rare Judge.
and loved equity so much, that diverse times he would walk in the streates
early and late, in unknown apparel, only to spy pore strangers and Suitors,
and to enquire of them the cause of their travel and suit: who on a certain
night met in the streate a poor aged Woman, who had a paper or writing in
her hand. To whom the Judge said: Goodwoman where dwell you, and what is the
cause of your coming hither? Forsooth said she, I dwell in the Country, and am
enforced to come hither to complain of a wicked Rich man that has myssused my
daughter and I have neither money to pay for food nor lodging. Do thou know
his name, and where he dwells? said the Judge: Yea that I do, said she, and
then she told him his name, and where he dwelled. Where is your daughter?
said he: she is in the Town, said the old woman. And then he did give her
money in her purse to pay for her supper and lodging, and willed her to enquire
the next day for the chief Judges house of the City, and to come thither with
her daughter, for, said he, I will speak my self to the Judge for you: and so
she was glad, giving him great thanks for the money which he relieved
her withal. And when the said Judge came home, he sent for his Porter into
his Chamber, to whom he gave strait charge, that when such a poor Woman with
her Daughter came unto his Gate, he should delay no time, but immediately bring
them both unto him.


Siuqila. I think the said poor Woman did not forgette, to come with her
Daughter the next day to the Judges house, as she was appointed.


Omen. No I warrant you. And when she and her daughter came thither, the Porter
brought them before the Judge presently: which poor woman when he saw, he
knew her well enough, though she knew him never a whitte. Tell me, said the
Judge, what occasion had you to come to me? whom she answered, saying: It may
please your Lordship to understand, that yesternight as I was walking in the
streate, a good man met with me, who did not only give me money to relieve me
and my daughter, but also told me that he would speak to you concerning my
cause and suit. Then he said: In deed one spoke to me, and said, that such a
Rich man has missused thy daughter, and to complain on him therefore was the
only cause of your coming hither at this time. In deed, said she, that is
true, therefore if it will please you to hear all the whole matter, and how
he has abused my daughter, I will declare it as briefly as I can. Tell it,
said the Judge, and I will hear thee willingly, for I am appointed to sit and
hear every bodies complaint that comes hither. Therefore be bold to
declar^ thy whole cause, and I will both hear thee willingly, and take thy
part in right most speedily. Then she said: The Lord save your life O
worthy Judge: but said the Judge, does not thy complainte tend altogether to
the myssusing of thy daughter? Yes my Lord, said she. Then it were more
requisite, (said the Judge,) that thy daughter should tell her own tale, for
none knows it better than she. That is true, said the pore Woman. And then
the Judge commanded her daughter to speak, and to reveal all the truth of
the matter unto him. And then her daughter said to the Judge as follows: My
Lord, this noughtie Rich and unmerciful man, which is my moothers neighbor,
walked of late through a Grove of his, in which (through my mothers
commandment) I was gathering a few old and rotten sticks, to make my
moother and me a fire at home (for it was very cold weather) who when he
saw me, he was in such a rage and fury with me, that my humble kneeling
on my knees could not once move him to forgive me, nor have compassion on me:
So that he took and tied me fast unto a tree in the same Woodde, and
suffered me to be there fast, and would not unbind me, but left me there
crying, wayling, and lamenting most pitifully: and there did I so remain all
the whole night, A tyrannous part.
fast bound unto the foresaid tree, where I think I should have dyed through
cold and for want of food, if (through the goodness of almighty GOD,) one
had not come the next morning and loosed me, that heard my pitiful
lamentation, mourning, and crying. At which time when I was unbound, I was
neither able to go nor stand: and then the man that unloosed me, seeing me
in that pittyfull case (being both a godly and a merciful manne) he did
lead me home to my mothers house, A godly man.
by little and little as well as he could. And for that he perceived my moother
to be a very poor Woman, he did then give my moother money to relieve her self
and me withal. Do thou know the man, said the Judge, that thus did loose
thee and lead thee home unto thy mother? Yea that I do, said she, and also
where he does dwell. Then the Judge said unto the poor woman, I will fence
for the man that thus has myssused thy daughter, and also for him that did
unbind thy daughter and brought her home, whereby they shall apere before me at
my next sitting in the open Court: and in the mean space both you shall have
meat, drink, and lodging in my house. And then the pore woman and her
daughter humbly gave him thanks.


Siuqila. This was a godly Judge in deed, he respected and regarded, that
there was and is a general Judge in Heaven, that will be merciful to all
godly and righteous Judges on Earth, and that will so judge the cruel
unrighteous affectionate and corrupt Judges, that they shall go to the
everlasting prison of Hell, where they shall remain in endelesse torments,
without any favor or mercy (unless they repent in time:) but what followed I
pray you? did the Judge send for them?


Omen. You need not doubt that: which men when they came before the Judge,
neither of them knew wherefore he sent for them, at which time the said
poor woman and her daughter were privily placed not far off. And then the
Judge said to the Rich man, that had myssused the poor woman's daughter: I
pray you tell me where you were such a day and about such an hour of the same
day. Whereat the Rich man being something amassed, said nothing: You do well,
said the Judge, to take good aduisement, for you know it is better (especially
in this place) to speak the truth leysurely, than to tell a lie rashly, why do
you not speak, said the Judge? Forsooth my Lord, said the Rich man, I can
not well tell, I have almost forgotten. Then said the Judge, if I had asked
you where you were a tweluemoneth or half a year since, then you might rather
forgette than remember it, but seeing this is so lately, not past three or
four days since, it seems that either your memory is very evil, or else
that the matter which you then did go about was not very good, nor in any
respect commendable. But I am of this opinion, that if you had bin robbed of
your goods, or your body well beaten, a quarter or half a year since, you
would have remembered the day and the very time of the day of the doing
thereof: therefore pluck up your wits, and remember your self well, but take
heed you lie not: my Lord, said he, I will not lie as nie as I can. And after
that he had advised himself a little, he said, my Lord I do not remember but
that I was at home all that day: then the Judge said, I must have a flat
answer, whether it be so or no: therefore if you say it certainly I am
answered. And when the Rich man perceived, that there was no remedy, but
that he must certify the Judge, where he was at that time, he said, (thinking
that none could or would witness the contrary) my Lord, I am sure yt I was at
home all that day, and neither road nor went from home. Well, said the Judge I am
answered, and then he was carried out of the Court until the Judge called for
him. Then the Judge commanded one to go for the rich man's servants, which
were but two in all, and to bring them before him, which was quickly done. And
the^ the Judge asked one of them whether his master was at home all that day
or not, for it is told me that thy master did beat a poor man at his door,
such a day, and such an hour, for asking alms: forsooth my Lord, said his
servant, he was at home all that day, until a little before night, but at that
time he was not at home, therefore they that say so, do belie my master, how
know thou that said the Judge? I know it said he, by a very good token,
for within a quarter of an hour after my master was gone, a friend of my
masters came purposely to speak with him: whom I answered yt my master was
newly gone forth, requiring him then to stay a little, for that I thought he
would not long be absente, who tarried there a long hour at the least, and
then he went away without speaking with him: how long was thy master forth,
said the Judge: Truly my Lord, said he, two hours at the least, then said
the Judge, is here all thou can say? yea my Lord said he: what say thou,
said the Judge to his other servant, which was a woman, was thy master at
home such a day all the whole day or not? truly said she, I am certain he
was not at home all the whole day. How know thou yt? said the Judge, forsooth
my Lord said she, he came into the Kitchen that evening something late, and
brought some dry sticks in his hand, and bad me roast meat therewith: to who^
I said, here is good dry wood, where got you it? marry, said he, I had it from
one yt gathered it in my grove, but she had bin as good, to have gotten wood a
mile off: and here is all that I can tell your Lordeship of my masters being
from home that day, therefore it is a false lie my Lord, that my master did
beat any at his door, for asking of alms, especially at that time, for I am
most sure yt he was the^ from home. And as it appears by his own saying, he
was the^, or about yt time, in a grove of wood of his own. well, said the Judge,
you have done like true and good servants, your witnessing of yt truth will make
your master anoyde much troble: but will you take your oaths, said the Judge,
that this is true? yea said they with all our hearts. And then the Judge
deposed them, and caused their examinations to be written.


Siuqila. Then the Judge very politickely used the matter, to make them
willing, and to draw them on to tell the truth.


Omen. He did so. And then the two servants and witnesses were commanded
aside, and not to come until they were sent for. At which time the Judge
commanded the Rich man to be brought before him, and then caused him to stand
among other people that were there, and not in the open face of the Court: and
then he sent for the Wench, that the Rich man had so wickedly handled: to whom,
he said: maid, where were you such a day, and at such an hour? forsooth my
Lord, said she, I was in such a groan, gathering of sticks for to make a fire
for my mother and me. Art thou sure thou wast there the^? said the Judge: yea
my Lord, said she, I have both a token to know it, and (...) cause to
remember it, yea and that such a one, as I shall never forget as long as I
live: belike (said the Judge) the token was either very good or very ill. Well,
seeing thou art sure, that then thou wast there, I am satisfied, thinking
verily yt thou telst me no lie. Then the Judge called for the man, yt loosed
the Wench from the tree and led her home to her mother, saying: I pray you my
friend where were you such a morning, about such an hour? my Lord, said he,
about yt time as me as I can guess, I was going toward such a place, and as I
was going I heard one groaning and making pitiful moan, whereunto I gave such
ear, yt by the sound, at the last I came to the place where a young maid ws
hard and fast tied to a tree, which doleful sight did so much grieve me, yt it
was not long before I unbound her, who was so frozen with the cold, yt then she
could neither go nor stand, and then as charity did will me, I helped her home
to her poor mothers house, as well as I could: and so, through Gods good
providence, I was made an instrument to save the Girls life. The^ said the
Judge, this is a very good token yt then you were there, and a certain sign,
that she was not far thence? and you did not so good a deed in loosing her
from the tree, but he did as wicked a deed that tied her to the tree.


Siuqila. The rich man that bound her to the Tree, had an evil quakyng heart
of his own all this while, when he heard the good man tell this tale: but what
said the Judge then further?


Omen. Mary he asked ye man yt vnbou^d her, whether he knew ye same maid, if
he saw her or not? yes my lord said he, yt I do, for this same is she yt
stands here, and I believe, said he, she has not forgotten me: no sir, said
the maid, I have a good cause to remember you, you are the man through Gods
goodness that saved my life. Then said the Judge to the maid, I perceive
thou know him yt unloosed thee from the tree: but I think yt know not him
yt bound thee to ye tree: yes sir, said ye maid, that I do, if I might see
him, I know him well enough. The^ said the Judge to her, look among all that
throng, and if thou can espy him bring him to me: and then the W^^ch looked
among the people, and espied him, on who^ she took hold, saying: my Lord I have
him here, this is he: who^ the Officers brought then before ye Judge: how say
you sir, said ye Judge, were you at home all ye day as you told me, or were
you at your Grove? this young Maiden, me thinks tells a perfect token that you
were from home: but he said nothing: why do thou not speak? said the Judge,
if thou art not able to speak for thy self, it will be hard to find ^^ye
other that can do it? your silence shows you are not altogether faultlesse,
this maid has complained to me that such a day and about such an hour, one
did bind her fast (belike for falling) to a tree, in such a grove (which grove
I think you will not deny to be yours) and for the better trial that the
Girl does say true, here is an honest man has witnessed that such a morning
it was his chance to hear her, and find her, whereby he vnbou^d her, and so
carried her home to her mother, for she was not able to go of her self: and to
say truth, both by her own sayings, and by this honest man's report, she was
thereby more like to dye than to live. And for that she flatlye affirms that
you are the man that bound her to the tree, I can not choose but believe it:
and the rather for that the grove is yours: Then said the rich man, my Lord,
though the grove be mine, that proves not, that I bound her to the tree,
neither her binding does argue that I did it: that is true, said the Judge,
but her knowing and accusing of you, is rather a proof than a p^^sumption. Oh
my Lord, said he, give not too much credit to the Gyrle, for she of purpose
no doubt, ^ameth this matter against me: then said the Judge, it may be that
she may feign of you, but I dare boldlye say, she fableth not of her self, for
here is one that witnesses, yt she was abused. My Lord, said the Rich man,
pleases it you to understand, that some noughtie disposed fellow meeting her
there, perhaps would have misused her, who not able to get her good will, and
fearing least she should discrie him, thought neither to kill her, whereby he
was sure to be without danger of the law, neither to set her at liberty,
whereby she should exclaim or complain of him presently. And for that (as it
does appear) it was something late, he might be the more bold to do it,
because afterward if she did escape, she should not very well know him, y^a
though she met him in the face: to whom^ the Judge answered, though the dark
might make her to forget him, yet the light has made her to remember you: but
I pray you said the Judge, let me go thus far with you, what dec^sion has the
Wench, to turn ye great (...) of her f^e, into a small fault of her self? Do
you think that if one had tied her to a tree because she would not suffer him
to abuse her, would she excuse him, and say she was bound to the tree for
gathering of sticks? Who will think or once believe, that a stranger or one
that had nothing to do therein, would therefore so handle her? So that reason
does fully resolve me, that none would so extremely use her, but only the
owner of the Wood. And now, for that you are the owner of the Wood, it is
impossible that any other should so cruelly handle her for gathering of wood,
but only you that are the owner thereof. O my Lord, said the Rich man, she
does this, I think, of spite: Can thou make me believe, said the Judge,
that she caused her self to be tied to a tree all a cold frostie night,
which was enough to kill her, only to spite thee withal, or to bring thee to
trouble? She might have found means to have troubled thee with more ease to
her self. But for as much as she complains that she was tied to a tree, and
this man confesses that he found her tied to a tree, and that she plainly
affirms that you tied her to a tree, and that you are owner of the Grove
where she was so bound to a tree: therefore it can not choose but that you are
the same man that tied her to the tree. And for the better manifesting of the
matter, you are taken in a trippe with your own tale, for you affirmed to me,
and that advisedly, that all that day you kept your own house and went not
abroad, which I am able to say is a manifest lie, for which you are like to pay
full dearly: for thy man has confessed and sworn to the contrary. O my Lord
said he, my man mystaketh the day: then said the Judge, if he purposely have
told a lie, then purposely he shall be punished for telling a lie: but there
is no reason why herein he should tell a lie, for in this case he could gain
nothing to tell a lie, but avoid great danger by speaking of truth. But you
perhaps (seeing your self in a snare) by telling a lie might shun a mischief,
and by uttering a truth might be driven to some danger. And now because thou
do stand so stiffely in such a shameful cause, I have another of thine
own servants such a witness against thee, that thou wast not only from
home at that time, but also that then thou broughtest dry sticks from thy
said Grove, to whom thou confessedst, that thou tookest the same then from a
wench, saying: she had been better to have gotten sticks, or wood a mile off:
wherein thou toldest truth, for her gathering of sticks there, had like to
have cost her her life. And when the wicked rich man heard the Judge speak
these words, as one confounded, he fell on his knees, and desired the Judge to
be good unto him.


Siuqila. And was the Judge favorable to him after he submitted himself?


Omen. You shall hear how favorable he was unto him. Ah, said the Judge,
thou crouchest when thou art constrained, and yeeldest against thy will, what
Devil did be witch thee? what spirit did inc^^se thee? or what feende did
enforce thee, so cruelly to use this pore gyrle, for succouring her self, by
not hurting thee? thou could have been content to have given two or three
loades of wood, to some one, that perhaps was warm enough, or that stood not
in need of it: and could not thou find in thy heart, to suffer this pore
wench to gather a few sticks to warm her self withal, whereof she stood in
great need? who makes thy wood grew but only God? and who gives thee thy
wealth but only he? And can not thou spare, out of thy great abundaunce of
wood (which thou can never spend all thy life) a handful of sticks (that
other ways would rotte and do no good) to save the pore member of Christ from
staruing? If thou were a pore traveler by the way, and very dry, not able to
buy thee any drink, and should take an Apple that were fallen from the
tree, whereon there were two or three thousand Apples, to quench thy thyrste
withal, would thou be content that the owner of ye Appels should tie thee to
the same tree therefore all night, yea though it were in Summer, when the
nights are most short, and also little cold or none? I am right sure thou
would not, nay thou would think (as thou might well enough) that he
that should so use thee, were a cruel cutthroat. Then what a wicked wretch,
and an unmerciful miser art thou, that have tied this pore girl to a tree,
leuing her there so bound a whole Winters night, yea, and in most extreme
cold, for gathering a few sticks among such a great number of thy trees, to
warm her self withal? how can thou look for mercy at Gods hand, seeing
this poor girl has found such unmercifulness at thy hand? Well, because thou
and such as thou can not find in your hearts here to give the poor wood to
warm them here withal: I am sure unless they repent and be more merciful, the
Devil will not be so niggardely to you, but will give you fire enough for
nothing in hell to warm you withal. Do thou not remember that Christ spoke a
little short Sentence, wherein consists the Law and the Prophets? which is,
Whatsoever ye would that other should do to you do eue^ the same to them. And
now because thou take thy self to be a christian, I hope thou have done to
this pore girl as thou would she should do to thee. Therefore accordingly I
will proceed in judgment with thee. But first, A righteous judgment.
because thou have made a lie to me, I will that thou speak not a word these
three months unless in such case as law does allow: and thou shall wear on thy
sleeue all that while an H and an L And for binding this wench to a tree in thy
grove al a cold night: my judgment is, to have thee bound to the same tree all this next night, from which none shall loose thee: and whereas the wench was put
in great hazard of life, for that thou neither any other for thee did unbind
her: but by the good providence of God she was unbound by one that came to her
through her pitiful moan: even so thou shall not be vnbou^d until some that
shall come that way through thy crying or calling, shall loose or unbind thee.


Siuqila. This judgment was hardly performed I think, for one or other hearing
it, would so reveal it, that some for friendship or money, would unbind him in
the night.


Omen. Nay that could not be, for the Judge gave that judgment very secretly,
for none knew of it but such as he might well trust. And also his judgment
was, that if he were unbound any part of that night, or contrary to the same
judgment, that he should be bound unto the same tree two other nights
more for the same, which judgment was privily told him when he was first
bound to the tree: and moreover he was well enough watched, that he could
not be unbound all that while.


Siuqila. That is another manner of matter: that was such a way for fear of
farther punishmente, that if any would have loosed him before the time, he
himself would have desired them not to do it. They say it is an evil bargain
that no body wins at: then this was no good bargain, for neither the Girl
nor he gained by it.


Omen. Yea but the Maid got more by it than he did, for it was judged besides,
that the Wench should during her life, enjoy and possess the fourth part of
all his Lands, to help her and her poor moother withal, because through the
great cold that she got that night, her legs and other limbs were so
benumbed, that they would not serve her to travel nor to get her living as
they did before.


Siuqila. But was this judgment performed in all points?


Omen. Yea, there was no part of it omitted or left undone.


Siuqila And if a Rich man with us should myssuse a poor Wench in such
order, I fear he should not be punished in such order. Well, though pore men's
wrongs with us are not so commonly heard, so quickly dispatched, and so
reasonably redressed as they are with you, yet I will tell you of one (for all
the rest) whose cause was presently heard, and speedily dispatched, by a
famous Judge with us.


Omen. Was he an inferior Judge, or one of the higher Judges?


Siuqila. He was the chiefest Judge of all our Realm, for it was the King
himself: which famous fact was not done so long since, but that some now alive
do know it for truth. And although no Country in all the World can compare
with your Country of Mauqsun, for godly Judges, righteous Judgment, and
speedy dispatch of matters, yet I will be so bold as to tell you this in the
commendation of our Country.


Omen. Begin I beseech you, for I will most wyllingly hear you.


Siuqila. As we have had more Lawyers, than well learned, and more greedy than
godly: so, A pleasant tale of a Country man that came to the King.
not very long since, we had a certain Lawyer, conversant among the rest,
whose lerning whether it was equal with the others I know not, but his gains
was not so great as theirs I am sure, whereby he was driven to change his place,
and to seek a new seat: and he understanding that in the West parts of our
Country, were many matters and few Lawyers, and many contentions, and few
counselors, went thither not richly apparelled, nor yet monyed. Who within a
while for his counsel (I will not say for his craft) was not only in great
credit, but also of good countenance: so that as be^^re he had scant money to
help himself, now he had more than enough to undo his neighbors withal: for
there was one neibor of his had a Farm or Holding, whose ground lay so nigh
him, that all his device was, which way to come by it, but his first drift was,
to buy his neighbors interest therein if it might be, but his neighbor by no
means would sell it: which practice when he saw would not perform his purpose,
he went to the Abbot, to whom the same did belong, and desired to take ye same
Farm in reuersion of him and the Covent: but then he could not allure the
Abbot thereto by any means. Yet after he being very importunate, (not dashed
with one denial as one more shameless than shamfaste) the Abbot said, (being
very loathe to let him have it) though I would grant it you, yet that is
nothing, unless the Couente agree thereto, which I believe you shall hardly or
never obtain. Who seeing that he could not get the Abbots good will, he
practiced with the whole Covent: who through his fair words, large proffers,
and goodly prese^ts, got them to grant him their good wills. So that at length
through his diligence, and the Couents procurementes, the Abbot was also
thereto allured. And when he had gotten a grant thereof, and also the same
confirmed under the Abbot and Couents Seal, he was not a little joyful,
thinking by one fraud or other within a while to hoyse the true meaning Tenant
out of his Farm. And after (watching to take him in a trip, as the Spyder does
to catch the silly Fly in her web) he comes to his neighbor and said,
sir thou have forfeited thy Lease, for thou haste cut down two trees,
therefore I charge thee quietly to avoid from thy House and Ground, and my Lord
Abbot and his Covent, do command thee to do the same, and if thou will not go
out by fair means, thou art like to be thrust out by force which. When ye
plain and honest Farmer heard, he said, though I have cut down two trees, I
have not forfeited my Lease, for I have done it only to serve my necessary
turn withal, wherein my Lease does warrante me: and therefore I will neither
go out of my Farm, for my Lord Abbot, his Couente, nor for you, do what you
can. Wherewith this Lawyer was not a little moved, saying, I will handle thee
well enough, seeing thou art so lusty, thou shall find in striving with me yt
thou have made a sorry match. And so the Lawyer departed from him, in a fume,
who made a full accoumpte (by his power and policy) within a while to make the
poor unlearned Farmer, both Houselesse, and Groundless. And because he would
not long delay ye matter, he got out processes, whereby the Farmer was enforced
priuilye to keep his house: which Farmer being weary thereof, and should thereby
be more weary at length, perceiving also though his matter were never so true,
that the Lawyer with his power and purse, at length would make it false,
determined with himself, not to tarry the trial of his matter in that
Country, but to go to him, that was the chief of all the Lawyers in the Land,
where he should have his matter quickly ended, truly judged, and with small
cost prosecuted.


Omen. I pray you before whom was that?


Siuqila. Forsooth, even before the King himself, who I am sure was the chief
and head of all the Lawyers of the land.


Omen. Whosoever gave him that counsel, did not counsel him much amiss, but
did he go to the King indeed?


Siuqila. Yea that he did: and I believe you will say that he had more law of
the King for twelve pence, than he should have had at home for a Royal.


Omen. It may be so, and it is a very like thing: but how got he out of his
house for fear of arresting?


Siuqila. Well enough, for he called his wife up early in the morning before
day, willing her to shut the door after him, for said he, I must go to ask
counsel of one, that I hope will help me out of my trouble: and therefore look
not for me again in haste, for I cannot tell how long it will be ere I come
again, but I will make all the have home yt I can And so he took his leave of
his wife, and went straight to ye Court, where the^ ye King did lie: and he
being a homely man of ye country, having a Bil on his shoulder, ye Porters
asked him who he was, and what he would have: and he said to the^, yt he would
speak with the King: to who^ one of ye porters said, may no worse man serve you
to speak withal but ye King? no, said he, my erra^d is to him, and with him
will I speak er I go: the^ I perceive, said ye Porter, there is no remedy but
you will needs speak with ye King: yea yt I will, said he: to who^ he said
again, what if ye king will not speak with you? tut, said the plain Farmer, I
know he will speak with me, if he knew I were here: therefore I pray thee Porter
said the Farmer, tell the King that I would speak with him. And if thou will do
so much for me, whenever thou co^mest into our Country, I will help thee to ye
speech of such a Gentleman, if thou stand in need, and the^ thou may say, I
have quit one good turn for another. At whose words the Porter began to smyle,
saying: do you think Father that the King is as easy to be spoken withal,
as one of your Gentlemen is? yea, why not, said the Farmer, he is but a man,
as another man is: that is true said thee Porter, yet though he be but as
another man is, he is able to do more than any other can do: I know that well
enough, said the Farmer, or else I would not have come so far to speak with
him as I have done. Well father said ye Porter. I would I could help you to ye
speech of him, but I cannot, for I am appointed to be one of his highness
Porters, so yt I must wait here upon my charge: but I am content you shall go
into the Court, where I warrant you, right quickly you shall meet with one or
other, that will help you to the speech of his Grace. I thank you good
Porter, said the Farmer. And then he went further into the Court, who within
a while after saw a Gentleman gorg^ously apparelled, to who^ straighte way he
went, saying: may I be so bold to speak a word with you master king? but the
Gentleman aunsweared him by and by, father you mistake me, my name is not King:
I think so, said the Farmer, but are you not our comely king and chief of
all our Land? no father said the Gentleman, that is to high a dignity for me,
I am but one of his poor servants: say you so, said the Farmer, you are a
goodly man, he goes not trimmer than you I trow: yes, said the Gentleman, that
he does, and thou never saw a goodlyer man in all thy life than he is. Would
you speak with the king? said the Gentleman: yea that I would, said he, and
if you will bid him come and speak with me I will give you a good groate for your
labor: ye Gentleman smyling thereat, said: I had rather bring you to the king
for nothing, than to bring the King to you for a groate. But father, said the
Gentleman, seeing you are desirous to speak with the King, if you will follow
me, I will bring you to him: I thank you, said the plain Farmer. And then he
followed the Gentleman with the Bil on his back.


Omen. I think he came sooner to the speech of the King by his playnnesse,
than some that were a great deal more curious.


Siuqila. Yea that I am sure he did, and then when the Ge^tleman came nie to
the Tennis Court, where the King was a playing, he bad the Farmer stay a
little until he came back again from the King. And then the said Gentleman
went to the King and told him, that there was a very homely Farmer of the
Country was come to speak with his Grace, for whom if his Grace would send,
and that he would speak with him, he would have very great delight in him: to
whom ye king said, bring him hither to me, and I will stay my play, to talk
with him. And then the Gentleman went to the plain Farmer, and willed him to
go with him, and he should speak with the King: that I will said the Farmer,
with a good will, and I thank you too. And so the Gentlemanne brought him
into the Tennis Court, where ye King was: which is our comely King said the
Farmer? that same is he, said the Gentleman, and pointed him to the King, who
then was in his shirte: you mock me, said the Farmer, that man goes in his
shirte: and the King, I am sure, need not go in his shirt for lack of
clothes. He does it for his pleasure, said the Gentleman, he has better
clothes if it please him to wear them: but if thou will speak with him, lo,
there he is, go to him. And then this plain and homely Farmer approached nigh
unto the King, with his Bil on his shoulder, and said: are you our comely
King? to whom the King answered: how comely I am, I know not, but that I am
the King of this realm I know: art thou come to speak with me? If you be
our King, said he, I am come to speak with your Maship, therefore I pray you
mock me not, for I will not conclare my cause to none but to the King his own
self. Whose talk, when the King heard, he smiled, and said: be bold to say
unto me what thou will, for I am the King indeed: none but my self, I
think, will be so bold to take it upon him. You may be the King, said the
Farmer, but this same manne that brought me to you, is more like a King than
you. But now sir, seeing you are our Master King indeed, I am come to ask
your counsel. For I tell you truly, the Lawyers are so dear, especially in
our Country, that they will have a Noble almost for nothing, and yet a man
shall be no wiser when he is gone from them, than when he came to them. And
because you are a King, I believe you are as well skild in the law as the
best of them al: And because I must needs pay money for Counsel, I had
rather your Maship had my money than an other. Wherefore I pray you, good
Master King, let me know your vise. Well Father, said the King, I am but a
sorry Lawyer. Yea sir, said the Farmer, you do well, to mispraise your self:
but I like you never the worse for that: for with us it is seen, that the
greatest crackers are the slendrest Clearkes: but I will say this unto you,
(take it as you list) if you be not well learned, the fault is in your self, for
my master your father was as able to pay for your schooling, as the best man
in all our parish. Think thou so said the King? I think thou do but
guess: nay it passes gessing, said the Farmer or else saving your reverence,
some have told me more tha^ truth: then said the King tell me thy mind, and I
will not only give thee the best council I can, but also do for thee what I am
able. Then said ye Farmer, God save your life good M. King, I see well now that
one were better go to ye head than to the feel, there are some with us, that
have not so much living as you by report, that are so full of curmosity, that
they make such poor plain me^ as I abasht to go and speak to them, therefore
I cunne you thank M. King, that you will so gently hear a poor man your
self. I pray thee good fellow said ye King, tell me wherein thou would have
my council, then said the Farmer, mary sir thus it is, there is a Lawyer with
us, that was not worth a gray grote when he came first into our country, and
he had such a threede bare gown that a lowse (I may say to you) could scant
take hold on it, but now he is so full of money, (through his crafty
counselling) that he is able to buy poor men's Farms over their heads, and to
make their leases end before they be half done. Has he done so by thee said
the King? yea and please your maship, said the Farmer because I would not sell
him the lease of my Farm, he has taken it in subversion, and I tell you it
lies so near his nose, that he troubles me with woortes, that I dare not
tarry at home, for fear of resting, so that he makes him self sure to heave
me out of it either by hook or crook. Then said the King, though he has got
it in reuersion, which thou call subversion, yet thou must enjoy thy years:
you have conclared it very truly said the Farmer, for even so I should if he
were an honest man: then said ye King, does he say thy lease is not good, or
that thou have forfeted thy lease? In deed he says that I have forfeated my
lease, because I have caused two trees to be cut down, which I did only for
mine own necessaties, for my barn and my cart. Therefore here is my lease, and
if you can read it, tell me whether I have forfeted it or no, by cutting down
of ye same two trees, nay it is a good fiste I tell you for one of my youngest
boys wrote it.


Omen. The King had good sport to hear the homely Farmer talk, I dare say,
but did the King stand all that while in his shirte, and did he also read his
lease?


Siuqila. Yea that he did, and when the King had read and perused his lease,
then ye Farmer said how likes your maship my leasse? to whom the king answered,
fear not, thy lease is very good: if thou had cut down half a score trees for
thy necessaries about thy Farm, thy lease were not forfeted thereby, say you
so, said ye Farmer, because you have clarified ye meaning of my lease so well,
you shall be my lawier an other time, and though it be but small, yet take this
as a fee for your pain, and therewith he took xij. pence out of his purse,
and would needs give it to ye King, and when the King saw that so importunatly
he threaped it on him, he took it and put it between his shirt and his bare
skin, which when the King felt, he said merrily, I beshrewe thy knaves heart, thy
money is cold. Then said ye Farmer, seeing your maship says that my lease is
good, upon your word I dare venture to go to the law, but the Courts are
costly, and the suits there so long, that I am loath to have my matter tried in
any of them, yet tell me said the King, in what Court would thou have thy
cause to be discust. I like the^ also well said the Farmer, that I care not if
I come in none of the^ all. Therefore I pray you good master King, help that my
matter may be in such a Court, where I may ^oone be dispatched and spend little
money. Because thou art a good plain fellow, said the King, thou shall have
thy matter tried in such a Court, as thou desire: but can thou be content
said the King that I shall be Judge of thy cause? content said the Farmer? yea
with all my heart: if thou will follow my counsel, said the King, thy matter
shall cost thee no money, and it shall be ended within this hour or two at the
furthest: marry yt is even it that I look for, but have you any Lawiers in
this speedy and easy Court that you speak of: no said the King, if there
were* but three or four such Lawiers (said the Farmer, as the Lawyer that
trobleth me, my matter would not be ended this two or three years. Well, said
the King, for this matter, at this time I will be thy Judge. I will, that as
soon as thou come home, that the Lawyer that thus does trouble thee, shall
not only suffer thee quietly to enjoy thy Lease, during the term thereof:
but also shall pay thee toward thy costs and charges, an hundred pou^ds. I
like this well, said the Farmer: but how shall I come by the money? I will
send a Letter or a Bill to him, said the King, that he shall perform this my
commandment: and also pay thee the same money. Tut, said the Farmer, he
cares for no Bills, I have seen Gentlemen send Bills unto him, and he has
regarded them no more, than I regard a Rushe. Then said the King, he will
regard my letter more, I warrant thee. Then said the Farmer, what if he do
not regard your Maships letter, how shall I do then? Thou need not doubt,
said the King, but he will perform my Letter as soon as he sees it: but to
make al things the more sure, thou shalt have an other writing with thee,
sealed with our Signet, which when he sees, he will not be long a performing
it. If this that you say, will make him to do it, I will give your Maships
horse a nights grass, when you come into our Country, and he shall fare no
worse than my wives kine do fare. God a mer^ie for that, said the king. Nay,
said the Farmer, you shall have a mease of Cream for your own mouth besides
that. I perceive Father, thou meanest to bestow some cost on me. Yea, said
the Farmer, you are not every man. No, said the King, for if I were every
man, then thou musie give every man's horse grass for a night, which all the
grass thou haste will scantly perform. And thus the King and he passed in
pleasant talk, whiles the writings were a making. And then the King set his
own hand to the Letter and Writing: and so they were sealed as is before
said.


Omen. The plain Farmer had good luck to happen on such a Judge, he might
have gone to all the Judges of your Country, and not have spedde so well.


Siuqila. That is most true. And then the King said, Father, lo, take this my
Letter, and deliver it to the Lawyer that does molest or trouble thee: and I
charge thee, give him no time for thy hundredth pounds, but receive it forthwith
upon his sight of the Letter: and if he refuse to obey my Letter, (as I
believe he will not) then deliver him this Writing, sealed with my Signet, and
then I warrant thee, he will forthwith perform all that therein is contained:
for if he do not, I will make that Country too hot for him. Now God reward
you, said the Farmer, I might have gone further, and spedde worse. Then the
King said, seeing thou haste given me the first fees that ever I took, and the
last that ever I will take: now I will give thee the first reward that ever
thou receiuedst of a King, and perhaps the last that ever thou shalt receive
of a King: which, if thou be a good husband, will bear thy charges home: and
therewith the King gave him money. Barlady Master, said the Farmer, I had
good luck to come to you: if I had tarryed at home, the Lawyer would
perhaps have had me in prison ere this: but if he use not me well, I
perchance may have him in prison ere it be long. Then said the King, farewell
good Father, and if the Lawyer resist thee, let me know it with speed:
whereby I will find such means, that he shall never trouble thee more. Now God
be with you, good Master King, said the Farmer. And this I may well say, that
you are the quickest dispatcher of matters, and the least taker of Fees, of all the Judges that ever I knew.


Omen. It is no doubt but that the Farmer went home with a merry heart.


Siuqila. Could you blame him? Would it not make one glad that was every day
in fear of imprisoning or losing his living, to be relieved and released of
his care and sorrow? besides the seeing of his enemy so suddenly to be
vanquished? yes I warrant you. And then the Farmer with his bill on his back,
went merrily home, and he coming home late in the night, he knocked at his
door, and immediately his wife did let him in.


Omen. But did not the Lawyer marvel where he was become all this while?


Siuqila. Yes forsooth did he, and being very merry for his absence, he declared
abroad that he was run away for fear, but that case was suddenly altered, for
the next Sundaie after, the Farmer came to the Lawier being in the Church, and
said, Sir you have gone about long to trouble and vex me, and all to get my
living from me, but now I hope the matter is taken up between you and me: who
has taken up the matter said the Lawyer? if any have done it, that is more
than I know, said he: than said the Farmer, he that has done it, is thought
to be a ^ufficient man to end a greater matter than this. Then said the
Lawyer, who will be so bold, to determine any matter of mine without my consent?
yes said the Farmer, he that did it dare do it well enough: though you take
your self to be a iollie fellow in this country, and think you may bind
Bears here, he is taken for as iollie a fellow where he dwells, yea and may
bind bulls there: then said the Lawier, though he rule there yet he can not rule
here: then said ye Farmer you dare not tell him so: dare I not said the Lawier,
yes and rather tha^ he should take up any matter of mine, I would go to the law
with him: though you are a Lawier, yet you make but a wrong match to go to the
Law with him said the Farmer, and therewith he took the Kings letter out of
his bosom, and said, he that has ordered the matter between us, has sent
you a letter, read it, and then you shall see who has sent it. Then said the
Lawier (when he looked on it) I perceive it comes from the Kings Majesty, I
will read it and that willingly, and when he had read the letter, he said,
neighbor you needed not to have taken this pains to make the King an
arbitrator between us, a worse man might have served well enough, you should
have found me reasonable enough, without such cost or travel to the King, if
you had come and talkte with me your self. Yea marie said the Farmer, if I had
come unto you, I should have found you so reasonable, that you would have taken
nothing for reason but the yielding of my living: you that can be content
without all Law and reason to trouble me wrongfully, and to take my Farm
vnrighteouslie, would scante use me reasonably. You know, said be, I am sure,
what our King has written unto you? yea, said the Lawier very well: then I
trust said the Farmer you will suffer me to occupy my Farm quietly: yea
that I will said the Lawier, for I will not disobey the Kings commandment
in any point: to whom the Farmer said, then I trust you will pay me my
hundredth pound forthwith that the King has appointed by his letter. I will
pay you it neighbor said the Lawyer, but I pray you give me some respite for
the payment thereof, for I have not so much ready money to give you: set
your heart at rest said the Farmer, I will have it by and by, I will give you
no days, therefore tell me whether I shall have it or not. I pray you
neighbor said the Lawier bear with me, for I have it not now ready for
you. Yea but, said the Farmer, if you might have my Farm at the payment of
that money, I know you would pay it quickly and that within an hour. Now
seeing you have an hundredth pound in a readiness to undo me withal, then I
am sure you have a hundredth pound (though not so willingly) to help me, or to
perform the Kings pleasure withal. Therefore make no more a do, for I will
have it presently, and if you think this letter of the Kings own hand, is
not sufficient, here is an other sealed with the Kings privy Signet, which
when the Lawier perceived, though he made a fair show outwardly, it grieved
him not a little inwardly, and then he caused the money to be fetched, and so
paid the Farmer the hundredth pound that was appointed by the King. And when
the Farmer had his money, he said to the Lawier, master Lawyer, as you like
this, trouble your poor neighbors again. And then the Lawyer went forth of
the Church very sorrowfully: And the Farmer and his neighbors went home very
joyfully.


Omen. The Farmer happened on a very good Judge. Your King was maruellously to
be commended therein: he helped the pore Farmer speedily, he rewarded him
liberally, and enriched him with his enemies substance politikely, and made
him enjoy his right according to equity, and feared other from taking their
neighbors livings wrongfully. If he had not gone to the King, he should surely
have been wronged at home. Affability in a Prince is a worthy Virtue, whereby
much goodness does grow: for if your King had been proud and
disdainefull, and had bin given to a stately look, rather than to an affable
countenance, this pore Farmer the^ durst neither have gone to him, neither he
himsfelf would vouchsafe to speak with him: but being clean of a contrary
disposition: ye pore Farmer was imboldned to go to the King, and the King was
most willing to talk with his pore subject: both which were such occasions,
that the oppressed was relieved, helped and succored: and the oppressor was
from his mischeuous pretense restrained.


Siuqila. Indeed Affability in a Prince is a worthy virtue, whereby much
mischief is avoided, and great goodness does grow: as by this last example,
and by diverse other before does manifestly appear. Sir, seeing you have so
severe and affable a Prince, then al his Officers dare do none other, but
justly and truly, according to their charge and duty.


Omen. No I warrant you: if a poor man or any other Suter complain to the
King, as they may very easily, for every day (except certain times) at a
certain hour in the afternoon, as I told you before, the King himself does
sit openly at the gates of his Court, only to hear poor complaints or other
Suits, whereby they shall not need to procure friends, to help them to the
speech of the King, neither shall be driven to stay long, either for redress,
or an answer.


Siuqila. It is a very good order especially for the poor, that have no money
to make friends, nor yet to relieve the^ in staying so long about their suits.
But I beseech you tell me, what if the King should commit a poor man's Bil, into
the hands of some that he appoints therefore, to bring it unto him and to
put him in remembrance thereof, and the same that has the poor man's Byl,
does keep it from the King, and delay the poor man with fair words, through
Friendship, Brybes, or Rewards?


Omen. None dare do so with us for their lives: for then the next day or soon
after, the complaynant may certify the King thereof, and then I warrant you,
he that should so neglect the Kings commandment, and keep the writing from
ye King, should pay full dearly for it.


Siuqila. Yea but it is possible, that he that the King puts in trust with
the said writing (to avoid that danger) may commit the poor man to prison,
that he should not complain to the King: whereby the poor man may be
constrained, for fear of long punishment, to agree with his oppressor for
little or nothing, and so be never the better, but rather the worse for
complaining to the King.


Omen. You doubt more than needs, there can be no such thing with us: marry
there was once such a like fact committed with us, but the offender was so
handled ^or it, that never since any did or durst offend in the like.


Siuqila. I pray you tell me in what sort it was?


Omen. That I will willinglye, therefore mark it aduisedlye. On a time when
the King was sitting at the gates, A tale worth the marking of a wicked
Remembrancer.
to hear suitors, and men's complaints, a poor man came to the King, and gave
him a Bill or Supplication, and desired his Grace to look on it: which the
King very gentlye received of the poor manne. But for that, the King had then
many matters to debate (not having sufficient time, to look on the poor man's
Supplication) he gave the same Supplication to one of his Remembrancers,
commanding him to deliver it unto him that night, or the next day at the
furthest. Which ye Kings Remembrancer did not, either for that he was his
friend, or had given him a reward, on whom the poor man complained in his
Bill: or else because the poor man gave him not some reward, to remember him
to the King. Which poor man came diverse and sundry times to the said
Remembrancer, but he said, that the King was not yet at leisure to look on
his Supplication. To whom the poor man said, sir I have little or no money to
spend, and moreover, I muse that it is so long ere the King look on it, for he
commanded you, to deliver it unto him the same night, or the next day at the
furthest: what, said the Kings Remembrancer, must the King read it when it
pleases you? well, said the poor man, I pray you deliver me my Supplication
again, and I will trouble you therewith no further: for to morrow I will give it
unto the Kings Majesty my self. Then the Kings Remembrauncer (being very
angrye) said, thou shall not have it, I am put in trust, and it is my office
to deliver it, therefore thou shall tarry the longer. Sir said the poor man,
though it be your office to remember the King of poor men's suits and
complaints: yet it is more than your^ office, to keep men's Bills and
Supplications from the King, that he shall not read them. Then the Kings
remembrancer said, do thou tell me my duty? I will teach thee how thou
shall control thy Superiors: and therewyth he sent him to prison, commanding
him to be closely kept, that none but ye keeper of the prison should speak with
him.


Siuqila Indeed that was ye next way, to keep the poor man from his right, and
the King from the truth: but how did the poor man then? for he could have
no body to tell the King of his case.


Omen. He did well enough, for the King being of a good and perfect
remembrance, within two or three days after, said unto his said Remembrancer:
why do you not deliver me the poor man's Bil or Supplication, that I gave you
to keep such a day? forsooth, said he to the King, I have lost it: yea said
the King, you are good to be a poor man's Soliciter: why did you not tell me
thereof before I did ask you? then said he, I was afraid to tell your
Majesty of it, meaning to have the poor man to make another, before your
Grace should have known it. Then said the King, why got you not the poor man
to do so? then he said to the King, I did never see him since. Then said the
King, the absence of the poor man, and your loosing of his Supplication
coming both so iump together, is not very well to be liked. Then said the
Kings Remembrancer, it is like that he is agreede, with the party that he
complained of; or else I should have he arde of him ere this. Then the King
said, Politic words to make the Remembra^cer not to suspect.
it may be so, and it is very like, but if the fellow come to you bring him to
me, yt I may know the cause of his co^plainte. And soon after the King changed
his apparel, making himself like a seruingman, and went out at a privy
Postornegate, and so enquired in the prisons, what prisoners were there, and so
by talking with many of them, did understand of this poor man that was kept
in close prison, and therevppon the King being like a seruingman, desired the
keeper of the prison that he might speak with him: nay, said the Iayler,
you shall pardon me: what apparel has he? said the King: and then the
keeper told him: which apparel the King remembered well, whereby he perceived
it was the same manne he looked for. Then said the King, seeing you will not
let me speak with him, tell me I pray you, at whose suit or commandment
does he lie here, that I may be suter to them for him? marry said the
keeper, as far as I know, one of the Kings Remembrancers sent him hither:
God a mercy, said the King, and now seeing I cannot speak with him, I pray
thee be good unto him, and I will go about to release him: and the King then
departed from the prison. And as soon as the King had conveyed himself
priuilye into the Court, he sent for the said poor manne, that was then
thus kept so in close prison (unknown to the Kings Remembrancer.) And when he
came before the King, he told the King how he was committed to prison, by the
Kings Remembrancer, and told him the occasion thereof: yea, said the King, if
we should commit poor men's causes to such Remembrancers, A thing to be
marked.
and not look to them our selves, the oppressors should be remembered and the
oppressed should be forgotten: and the defrauders should be defended, and the
defrauded utterly impouerished. If we should wink at such wrongs, and
suffer such officers, the poor within a while would rather loose their right
than sue for their own. Then the King bad the poor man keep himself close in
the next Chamber, until he were called for.


Siuqila. If Kings, Princes, and Rulers should search thus narrowly, as your
King does, they should find some yt they put in trust in such cases, most
deceiteful; whom they take to be faithful, and troublers and hinderers of
poor suitors, that are appointed to aid and help them. But did the King
remember his Remembrancer?


Omen. Yea the King remembered him so, that the Remembrancer did never forgette
it as long as he lived. As soon as ye King had conveyed the poor man away, he
sent for his said Remembrancer, and said to him: was the poor manne with you
yet, whose Supplication you should have delivered me? I never saw him since,
said the Remembrancer: do you not know, said the King, him against whom he
complained in his Supplication? no truly, said the Remembrancer. Then said
the King, it seems hereby that you never read the poor man's Supplication:
are not you a fit man to be in this office, and to be a Rememberer for men's
suits, and a Solliciter in their causes? Then said the Remembrancer, if it
like your Grace, I read it, but I have forgot it: it likes me well, said the
King, that you did read it, but it misliketh me that you have forgotte it: you
shall from henceforth be called the Kings forgetter, not the Kings
Remembrancer. Then said the King, I fear least he against whom he came to
complain, has hurt him, killed him or cast him in prison. I think it is
not so, said the Remembrauncer, for none I believe dare be so bold to use
any in such sort, specially that come to sue to your Majesty. Then said the
King, if it should be^knowne, as it would hardely be hid, it would be more
painful than profitable to them. But if any should presume to do so, said
the King, what were they worthy to have? truly, said the Remembrancer, they
are worthy, in my judgment, to be whipped. I pray you, said the King, tell me
one thing that I shall ask you, but lie not. Do you not know where the poor man is, whose Supplication I delivered unto you? No verily, said he, I marvel
why your Grace should ask me the question: Because, said the King, it may
be, and is very like, that he did come to you to know an answer from me
thereof: if he had done so, as he did not, said he again to the King, that
makes not that I know where he is, or what is become of him. Yet if he came
to you, said the King, he might then tell you, that his adversary or
oppressor had satisfied him or agreed with him: which if you should tell me, I
should be then satisfied, and think, that the man is safe and gone home. Then
the Remembrauncer said, if I should now tell you any such thing, then I
should be contrary to my former tale: for I told your Grace, that I never
saw him since, as I have not indeed. Then I perceive, said the King, you
know not where he is: No indeed do I not, said he. Now indeed, Mark the
Kings words.
said the King, I believe you, for he is not in prison, where you think, but
he is out of prison where you know not. Then the King called for the pore
fellow, and bade him come before him. And when he was come before ye King,
then ye King said to his Remembrauncer. Do you know this fellow? at which
time he said nothing. If you be so forgetful, said the King, you are not
meet to be a Remembrancer, especially to a King: this fellow is more meet to
be a Remembrauncer than you, for though you have forgotten him, he (I think)
does remember you. Yea, if it please your Grace, said the fellow, I remember
him indeed, and know him too well. It does please me, said the King, that thou
do remember him: but it does displease me, that thou haste such a cause to
remember him. How say you, said the King to the Remembrancer, can you not call
this fellow yet to your remembrance? well, because you are so obliuious, here
I discharge you, and you shall be my Reme^brauncer no more. Though you remember
not, that this fellow required his Supplication of you, yet I trust you have
not forgotten, that you have sent him to prison, where he should have lien
still, if I had not been a better Remembrancer than you. I muse who gave you
authority to cast pore Suitors in prison, that come unto us to complain of
their wrongs and injuries: though you, for your pleasure commanded him into
prison, I hope you will not be angry, that I, for my pleasure have commanded him
out of prison. Then the Remembrancer fell down upon his knees before the King.
To whom the King said: Worthy words of a King.
Ah varlet, what heart had thou to imprison this poor man, that before had
great wrong, and to seek his utter undoing that was almost undone? How
durst thou presume to shop him up in prison to keep him from me, whose
liberty was necessary to complain unto me? As long as Kings are served with
such, the wicked shall be boldened to oppress the pore, and the poor will
be afraid to sue for their own. If thou haste done thus to a poor man being
a Subject, what would thou do, if thou were a Sovereign? You said to
this poor man, you would teach him to control his Superiors: now I say to
you, that I will teach you to imprison your Inferiors. Haste not thou observed
the words of Christ well, which we with all our endeavor have commanded to
be kept? that is, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even the
same do you to them? Would thou be content to be cast into prison, for
suing for thy right, as thou haste done to this man for complaining for his
due? the doing of that to him, that thou would not have him do to thee,
shows, that thou art no true Christian, but a Sathanist. How subtly
wentest thou about to cause me to credit thee, when thou said, that none
durst be so bold to use him so, when thou knew that thy self had so
used him? But whereas thou said, that none durst be so bold as to do it,
now it appears, that thou haste done that that none durst be so bold to do:
which argues, that thou art the boldest of all other, to imprison pore men
wrongfully. But seeing you have been so bold, as to punish this poor man
without a cause: then I trust I may be so bold, as to punish you with a cause.
And first, for that you said, they were worthy to be whipped that should use
him so: according to your own judgment, my judgment is, that you shall be
whipped naked. And because thou haste lied three several times to me: therefore
thou shalt not speak any word of nine months, that is, for every lie
three months, A wise judgment of the King of Mauqsun.
and shalt all that while wear on thy sleeue an H. and an L. for a Hurtefull
Liar. And for that this poor man has been in close prison seven days at thy
commandment: now thou shall be kept likewise in close prison, seven
years, (that is, for every day a year) at my commandment. And afterward,
during thy life, thou shalt wear on thy back and bosom, these words: This
was the Kings Remembrauncer, that imprisoned a poor man wrongfully, that
complained of his wrong to the King. And further I judge and decree, that this
poor man shall quietly enjoy half of al thy whole living during his life, for
his wrongful imprisonment. And also I charge and command thee, upon pain of
death, that thou shall not come at any time within seven miles of our Court.
And then the King rose up and departed, and al his judgments were executed and
performed. And ever after, ye King had every suitors name written, in a little
note Book that he kept for his own remembrance: that if ye Reme^embrancers
did not bring him men's Bills or Supplications, he might call for them, and
remember them himself.


Siuqila. This worthy and famous fact of the King, made not only al other the
Kings Remembrauncers after take heed, to remember to deliver pore men's Bills
and Supplications to the King, but also feared them to commit any of them to
prison.


Omen. Yea surely, this the Kings severe judgment and handling of the wicked
Remembrancer, wrought such effect, that never since any durst delay pore
men's causes and suits, neither durst trouble them, for justly complaining of
any.


Siuqila. What order have you for such rich men as cruelly arrest and
imprison their pore decayed debtors, and are not able to pay them that they owe
them.


Omen. We need have no law nor order for such, for there are none with us
that use their pore debtors so. Have you any such cruel and uncharitable men
with you?


Siuqila Yea that we have, and that no small number: and if you will not believe
me, if you were in our Country, you could not go at any time into any of our
prisons (that are for indebted persons) but that you should find such pore
decayed prisoners there.


Omen. What uncharitable men are their Creditors, that will suffer them to lie
there, being not able to pay them? by being abroad, they might in time be able
to pay them, either part or al: but by lying in prison, they bring them to
poverty, their wives to penury, and their children to misery. Such cruel
hearted caitiffes belike mean not to have Christ merciful unto them at the
last day, but make an account to be pinned up or imprisoned in the dungeon
of Hell for ever. For surely, they that will not forgive their pore brethren
their small debts, which they may be able to pay: Christ will not forgive
them their great and wonderful debtes, that they are never able to pay.


Siuqila There are some so cruel and so vengeable with us, that they had
rather without any thing let their pore debtors die in prison, than to have
half their due, and to deliver them out of prison. It was my chance to be in a
prison one day, and I heard a pore decayed prisoner (that once was very
wealthy) say with weeping tears, that he offered his creditors all that he
had in the world, wheresoever they could find it or have it, to release him
out of prison: desiring to have no more left him but the very shirt on his
back, Most cruel Creditors.
to cover his body withal when he should be turned out of prison: but they
would not take this offer, but kept him in prison still.


Omen. Those meant not to be the children of God, but were fully determined to
be the darlings of the Devil. If that poor man had bin with us, he should have
bin delivered whether they would or not. It is marvel, that you have no order
for such cruel Cut throats, especially seeing the word of God is so
plentifully preached among you. It is a thing very needful to be looked on.


Siuqila. Yes, our worthy and merciful Prince has appointed Commissioners for
taking order in the like, which if they execute diligently, it will bridle the
cruel, and pleasure the poor. But I desire you to tell me the law or order
that you have in this case.


Omen. I will not let to do that. A notable order for prisoners that are not
able to pay their debts in Mauqsun.
The next Court after that any is arrested for debt, the party that is
arrested shall be brought before the Judge of that Court, who, if he confess
ye debt, and affirm that he is not able to pay it, bringing good proof and
Certificate thereof, and the Judge being credibly and truly certified, that
his creditor is wealthy, and well able to live without it: then the Judge
shall require and entreat the creditor to release his debtor, until he shall be
able well to pay him: which if the creditor refuse to do at ye Judges request,
then our law is, that the Judge shall not only have power to release the
prisoner, but also quite to discharge him of all the said debte, wherefore the
creditor did sue him.


Siuqila. A worthy law: For what Christian and charitable man can, or will
look to have his debtes of any before they are able to pay him? then what
godly rich man can once crave his debtes of them that are decayed and fallen
into poverty, which have not to relieve themselves withal? therefore he that
is wealthy or well able to live, and will not release his pore debtor out of
prison, until he have wherewithal to discharge his debt, is well worthy to be
constrained to release his debtor, and to lose all the same debte. But what if
the party that does arreast his debtor, be also fallen in decay by misfortune?


Omen. That being known to the Judge, then the Judge may require him to
release him out of prison. But if he deny the Judges request, the Judge cannot
release ye prisoner, neither yet acquit him of his debt. Yet if he will not
release his debtor, he shall soon be rid out of prison.


Siuqila. Which way I pray you?


Omen. Our Gentlemen, rich men and Merchant men with us, are so godly and
charitable, that a poor man can not lie long in prison, but they among them
will pay his debtes. There was one with us did owe unto an other five hundred
pounds: and he, to whom he did owe all that money, did lose all his goods by
mischaunce: A rare releasing of a prisoner in Mauqsun
which five hundred pounds was all that the creditor had to live on, besides
he did owe part of the same, whereby he was constrained (though very loath)
to arrest his debtor, thereby to see if his said debtor could make any
friends for the payment thereof. And within one day after that the party was
arrested, it was noysed abroad, that immediately, certain charitable rich
men paid the five hundredth pounds he ought, to him that imprisoned him:
and also they gave him one hundred pounds more to help him withal. And so
within two days after he was arrested, all his debts were paid, he set at
liberty, and had a hundredth pounds home with him besides. Do they use the
pore prisoners thus with you?


Siuqila. Nay soft there, they have other needelesse business that requires
less haste. If any do so with us (especially so hastily and liberally) it is
more than I know, and I think, more than the prisoners feel. It may be
practiced when I am dead and rotten, but I fear it will not be used while I am
alive. Yet I am persuaded, that with us there is more spente wickedly in a
month, than will release all such pore debtors that are arrested in a year.
Therefore, how bewitched are they, that had rather do evil, a month to
bring them to Hell: than to do good a whole year to bring the^ to Heaven? If a
poor prisoner should owe so much with us, he were more like to rot in prison,
than in such sort to be released out of prison. But now sir, I pray you tell
me: is there any with you that make themselves Bankerupt before they need?


Omen. Bankerupt, what mean you by that? we have no such with us.


Siuqila. I mean such, as get money and diverse men's goods into their hands upon
credit, and occupy outwardly so honestly, that none would think they would
deal deceitfully. Who when they have gote^ as they think sufficient into
their hands, and perhaps have four or five hundred pounds more than will
pay their debtes, will keep their houses privily, and shut their doors
closely, and so will make themselves as though they were not able to pay their
debts: whereby they will drive their creditors (perhaps some of them to their
undoing) to agree with them both upon days, and for a great deal less
than they owe them, which when they have done, will flaunt it abroad, and
enriche themselves with other men's losses: and perhaps thereby will make
themselves worth a thousand pounds or two, and make their creditors worth
little or nothing.


Omen. Nay, I am sure there are none such with us, and I think, there are none
such among them that profess Christ.


Siuqila I would there were not, but I fear there are too many such.


Omen. If such a one were with us, A good law in Mauqsun for such as make
themselves Ba^kerupts without need.
his keeping of the house would not serve him, for I told you before, if any
be not able to pay his debts, if he declare and prove the same to the Judge,
the Judge will require his creditors to bear with him until he be able to pay
them: and then, if the Judge can not entreat them so to do, the Judge has
power to acquitte them of their debtes, except in such cases as is before
mentioned: wherefore they need not keep them from their creditors in their
houses, nor otherwise absent themselves: but if one in such case is able to
pay his debts, and feign himself unable, and make himself Bankerupt without
need, and be proved (which our Judges would soon find out) the Judges shall
compel him presently to pay every manne his due, and if he have sufficient
left to live on (as the Judge shall think) besides his debts, then al his
debts shall be equally given among the pore decayed men of the town where he
dwells: and if ever after he stand in need, or would borrowe any money, no
man shall lend him any, for if they do, he shall never pay it to them again;
but it shall be paid to the Kings use at the days of payment.


Siuqila I would they that make themselves Bankerupts with us before they
need, and to hurt their honest creditors, were handled in this sort: then
honest men would be more willing to lend, and the crafty would not be so
desirous to borrowe. You told me at the first of an unthankful son that
would not know his own father, that the King worthily handled according to
his deserts: Now I pray you tell me, how do men's sons commonly use their
decayed Parents with you?


Omen. If Parents be decayed with us, their children are so religious to God,
and so loving to their Parents, that with all their power they will help and
aid them: and their children will strive among themselves who shall help them
first. And for conformation thereof I will tell you one rare example.


Siuqila. I beseech you do so, for I much delighte to hear them, they are so
strange.


Omen. There was an ancient man with us that was very wealthy, An excellent
example of a loving son to his father.
whose whole substance was in his house: for that he had a rich Shop very full
of wares, who had little owing him, and he ought as little himself. This man
had but one Son, whom he brought up very well in learning, whereby he
came to be very wealthy, and might dispend at the least an hundredth pounds a
year. He had an Office besides that was as much worth or more to him, who
was so godly and virtuous that God did maruellously bless him: and he dwelt
from his father above an hundred miles at the least. It chanced thorough
negligence of a servant, that his house was burned, and all that was in it,
which was all the goods he had: so that he had scant a coat left to put on
his back. Which great mischance and loss his neighbors bewailed: but
presently his godly and charitable neighbors did not only comfort him, but
also brought him money, clothes, household stuff, and such other necessaries in
great abundance, which he utterly refused, and in no wise would have them,
saying: I thank you most heartily, good christian and charitable neighbors, I
will not burden you with any thing: for, though God, to try me withal, has
suddenly impouerished me, as he did Job: yet I trust he will prepare for me,
(though not so much) as he did for Job. I have a Son that GOD of his
goodness has blessed with sufficient wealth, whom I have brought up as a
Father should bring up his child, which I hope, will use me as a child should
use his father. And as you have been ready to help me in this great
extremity, so if any of you should need, I to my power will be ready to
relieve your necessity, and then he took his leave of his neighbors, with
simple clothes, sufficient to keep him from the cold, and so he went forward
toward his Son.


Siuqla. I hope he used not his father when he came to him, as he that was of
the Kings counsel, that would not know his Father.


Omen. No, he used him a little better than so, as you shall perceive by the
Sequel. This auntiente man though it were painful unto him, at last came to
his Sons house, where he found the doors shut: because it was something
dark and within ye Evening: and through his knocking one of his Sons
servants came to the door, which when he had opened, he asked the old man
what he would have, and with whom he would speak: who answered again, I
would very gladlye speak with your master, my master, said he, is now at
Supper, therefore he is not at leisure to speak with you. I pray you tell him
(said the old man,) that here is a poor man come to speak with him from his
father, and then I think he will either come or send for me. And then he went
to his master and said, sir there is a poor old man at the door, that would
feign speak with you, he says he is come from your father: bid him come in
said his master, that he may Suppe with me, and after Supper I will talk
with him. Then the old man his father came into the Parlour, where his son
was at Supper, whom as soon as his son saw, he knew him, wherewith he rose
out of his chair, and kneeled down, and asked his Father blessing: whereat his
father could not refrain from weeping: then said he, father I beseech you
weep not but rejoice, with me your only son, the sight of you rejoices me
more than any treasure on the Earth. I thought son, said he, you would not
have known me in this coat: we ought, said his son, to know the garment
by the person, not the person by the garment: therefore though your cote be
changed, your countenance is not changed. Oh son said his father, not
long since I was welthy and able to help my friends: but now I am so poor
that I am not able to help my self, and then he told him what mischaunce he
had. Well father said his son be patient, Few sons will ask such boonds of
their fathers.
and thank God for all: but where you say, yt you are so poor that you are not
able to help your self: that I trust will prove shortly not to be so. With
that his Son fell upon his knees, and desired his father to grant him one
thing that he would require at his hand. Alas son said his father I am not
able to grant you any thing, father said his son, that that I would ask
of you you are easilye able to grant, therefore I will not leave kneeling
unto you, until you have granted me my petition. Then said his father, rise
up son, and kneel no more, for I will grant it you, seeing you say I may
easilye do it. Then said his son, from this time forward I give you
freelye all my goods and Lands, that I have in the World, and that you shall
possess and enjoy them for your own, and that it shall be at your choice to
give and to bestow them where you list. Which when his father heard, he was
astonished. Son said he, that is too much for me, a small portion thereof
shall serve my turn: father said his son, I trust you will not go from your
grant, thus it must be, it shall be none other. Well son, seeing there is no
remedy, I will take it upon me, but if I had thought that this would have
bin your request, I would not have granted to perform it. Then his son made
fresh and fine clothes to be put on him, and a fair Gown upon his back,
and did place him in his chair at the upper end of the Table, saying, oh
father how do I rejoice to see you master of this house, you said eue^ now
that you were so poor, that you were not able to help your self, but now
that is not so, for I am sure that you have enough for your self and your
friend. And his son desired the Gentlemenne that were with him at Supper, to
make much of his father, and so they did.


Siuqila. How did the Gentleman's wife like of this liberal gift, that her
husband gave to his father? did she not frown at it I pray you?


Omen. As she was very glad of her husbands fathers coming (though he were
poor and beggarlye) so she was most joyful, when she saw that her husband
had given his father yt that he did.


Siuqila. Many Gentlewomen with us would have frouned on their husbands half
a year after (perhaps as long as they Mark this.
had lived) if they should have entertained their poor father in this
order, and given their father in law such a liberal gift. I will not say, but
that there be many with us, that use their fathers reuerentlye, and do
relieve them well in their necessity: but I never heard of any, (and I fear I
never shall, but of this one that dwelt in your Country of Mauqsun) that thus
used their father, either in poverty or prosperity. I perceive the children
with you, do maruellouslye obey, love, and help their parents. Do the
servants also reverently behave themselves to their masters, that brought
them up, and succor them if they come to poverty?


Omen. You may be most sure they do. Few servants do so.
If a man should fall in decay with us, that has brought up Prentises or
Servants if any of those servants be then wealthy or able to help them, as
soon as they hear that their said master is decayed, well is he that first
may help and relieve him: yea they are so earnest in helping their decayed
masters, that one has been at great contention with another therefore, and
have gone to the law about it.


Siuqila. I have lived a good while, yet I never heard, that any with us went
to the law about any such matter. Can you show me any example thereof?


Omen. Yea that I can a hundredth, but one shall suf^^^e, which I mean to tell
you. There was a very rich occup^er, or rather a Merchant with us, that had
brought up diverse Prentises, whereof especially two of them, were not only
diligent and obedient, whilst they dwelt with him, but waxed very rich after
they began to trade for themselves. It chanced after, that their said master
(through great losses on the Sea, and through evil creditors) was maruellously
decayed and brought to great poverty, who escaping the Sea very hardly, came
home, and thinking then to give over and to meddle no more with such Worldly
affairs (not showing outwardly the bare case he was in) suddenly sold all
that he had, and paid all his debts therewith, which being paid, there was
nothing remained for him to live on: and he sold his house also to pay his
debts withal, wherein he had not past a months respite to dwell: whose bare case
these two servant that were so rich understood well enough, whereof one of
them went in a morning unto him and said thus: sir, I understand that you are
in more want than you make show of, I have learned that you have like a good
man paid al your debtes, notwithstanding the great losses you have had of
late, whereby you have left your self little or nothing to live on. Besides
that, you have sold your house you dwell in. And seeing it is so, I am ready
to bestow half the goods I have on you, which I hope is so much, as will make
you occupy freshly again. You were my good master and brought me up, in this
rich trade that I now do use, whereas if you had not showed me, learned me,
and otherwise helped me, I could not have gained this I have gotten. Besides
that, you of your goodness gave me an hundredth pou^ds to begin withal,
which in the mean season, to help you in your need, lo I have brought you.
To whom his master said, I thank you for your good will, but I will neither
take half your goods, which most courteously you have offered me, neither the
hundredth pound that you now proffer me. For the truth is so, I am fully bente
and determined, (from which I will not be persuaded) to give my self to
prayer and a quiet living, so that I will not from henceforthe trouble my self
with any Worldly trade. Then, sir said he, because you are thus bent, I will
persuade you no more to the contrary, but seeing you have refused my first
offer, I most hartilye desire you to take my second proffer, which is, as
long as you live to take your bourding, lodging, and finding in my house: and
of this one thing I assure you, you shall fare no worse than my self, nor lie
no worse than my self. Then said the decayed Merchauntman, God will bless and
prosper such as you, that have such care of your masters that brought you up:
I thank you for your gentle offer, it may be that I will take it, but as yet I
will not certainly promise you. Seeing you will not, said his servant, at this time
grant me, I beseech you yet promise me now (that before I speak with you
again) none other herein prevent me. That I will, said the decayed Merchant.
And so they departed.


Siuqila. It will be a good while ere a decayed Master with us have such an
offer at any of his servant hands. It was marvel if his other enriched
servant did not come to him and offer him the like?


Omen. In deed the next day after his other servant came to him as you
judged, and offered to him as much or more, whom he thanked heartilye for his
gentleness, but at that time he would not promise him to take his finding and
lodging of him: sir said he, if it please you to promise me now to take your
board, your lodging, and apparel of me during your life, I will give you
besides every week half a Crown in your purse, to spend or do therewith
what you list, which you shall have also as long as you live. I am much
beholden to you, said the decayed Merchaunte man, for this your great
courtesy: I have not a little cause to rejoice that I have brought up such a
servant, but I pray you to pardon me, for as yet I cannot promise you: seeing
you will not do that, said he, I pray you the^ grant me that none other shall
allure you from me before you tell me of it, whereat the decayed merchant
stayed a little, remembering his promise to the other: you need not stay at this
said the servant, therefore I beseech you let me crave so much at your hands.
I am content says he, I will not promise to be with any before I have told
you thereof. And when he had that aunsweare of him, he took then his leave of
him.


Siuqila. A man would have thought if he had not known the matter, that they
had sued for some great commodity to themselves, they were so importunate: but
I would feign know who got him at the last.


Omen. If you will give ear a little you shall know. Within two or three days
after, he yt was first with him came to him again, and was very earnest in hand
with him to grant him his request. To who^ the decayed Mercha^t man said, I
would fain promise you, but I am bound yt as yet I cannot, how are you bound
said he? I may not promise you said his master, before I have told another
thereof. I beseech you tell me who is ye said his servant? seeing you will needs
know, said his master, it is such a one your neighbor, yt was once my servant
as you were. The^ I perceive said he, yt he would have you with him, yea in
deed would he, said his master. Well sir said he, I trust you will not be with
him, and refuse me, though perhaps he be something more able than I, yet I trust
he shall not find nor use you, better tha^ I. Well said the decayed Merchant
man, I know not what I may do, I mean to take one of your offers, because you
were my faithful servants, but hastily to do it I am much in doubt, for yt
thereby I should displease the one of you, then said his servant for as much as
you can not promise me at this time, I beseech you yet to do thus much for me,
as to promise none other these ten days following. This I am content to grant
you, said his master, whereof assure your self. And then for that time they
both departed. The next day following this same man that had his grant for ten
days, got out a process, and cause it to be served on the other that was his
fellow, and servant to the said decayed Merchant, whereby he was to appear
before ye Judge ye next day following, who marvelled what matter he could have
against him, whereupon he appeared before the Judge, at which time ye
Plaintiff was there also. And the^ ye Plaintiff said: my Lord such a man was
my master, who^ I found very good unto me, and who^ I am bound to love and
obey as long as I live: who though he was once very rich and welthy, is now by
mishap fall^ in decay, which as soon as I understood, I went unto him, and
proffered him of my goods to help him wtal as I thought good: but he refused it,
and in no wise would have it, saying yt he would give over toyling in ye world,
and give himself to quietness and prayer. The^ I offered him meat, drink,
cloth, lodging, and al other necessaries during his life, which he thanked me
for, but he would not the^ promise to take my offer, and since I understand,
that he would have taken my offer, but this man (whom I have caused to appear
before you) has since gone about to prevent me, and would allure him out of my
hands, to be with him. This my Lord is ye very matter yt I have against him.
This is a very strange and a rare suit, said the Judge, how say you said the
Judge to ye other, have you practiced to get this his decayed master from him,
and to be with you at your finding? no my Lord said he, I never went about to
allure him from him, for I protest before your honor, yt I never knew yt this
man was desirous or went about to have him, before he himself now told it.
Therefore therein he burtheneth me wrong: marry I must needs confess, yt I have
offered him both my goods, which he has refused, and his meat, drink,
clothing, and lodging, and al other necessaries belonging to him during his
life, as this man has done: which to do I have as great cause as he has, for I
was his servant, as well as he, and therefore I hope I have not deserved to be
evil spoken off, for relieuing my good master in his necessity, for all yt I
have I have got through his bringing of me up, and by ye trade yt he taught me,
therefore next under God, I am most bound to him. Wherefore my lord, all this
being truth yt I have told, I trust I have neither offended this man nor any
other. I must needs say this, said the Judge, that he was both a very good
master to you, and you show your selves as most true and faithful
Servants to him: no doubt GOD has, does and will, prosper your dealings
for your carefulnes and love, that you have to your master, I ^al him your
master because he was your master. Yea my Lord, said they both, and we
will take him for our master as long as we live, and use him as our father,
whiles the breath is in our bodies: well said the Judge, I perceive you both
would feign have him, yet one of you is like to go without him. But though you
seem to contend to have him, do you think he will be content to be with
one of you? yea my Lord said the Plantiffe, he told me so himself, but he
is loath to promise either of us, because he thinks thereby to displease one
of us. Then said the Judge, it were best that he were here himself, and so he
did send one for him, who by and by came unto the Judge: how say you, said
the Judge, here are two which were once your servants, that are very
desirous to give you your keeping, and other necessaries as long as you live,
whereof I think you are not ignoraunte. No my Lord said the decayed
Merchant, they both I thank them have bin very importunate to have me with the^,
and I would very feign be with one of the^, but they love me both so well, and
I favor them both so much, that I cannot tell which of them I may choose to be
withal: no said the Judge that is marvel, but will you be co^tente said he, A
strange kind of pleading.
that I shall rule the matter? yea my Lord said he, with all my heart. Then
said the Judge I hope to make a quick dispatche of this matter. But my Lord,
said ye Plaintiff, I beseech you hear me first, what I can say for my self:
say on, said the Judge: I must confess, said he, that we were both his
servant, but I was the first that offered him this offer, which my master
can not deny. I must needs confess that said his master, then said the
Judge, how long was it after that you heard of his decay, that you offered him
this? forsooth my Lord, said he, the next day after. Then said the Judge to
the Defendant, how long was it after ere you offered him this gentleness?
within two hours after at the furthest said he. Then said the Judge to the
Plantiffe, though he came after you, yet he made more speed than you: then
said the Defendante, my Lord, I beseech you consider, that I was my Masters
servant before he was: yea my Lord said the Plaintiff, but I was his
servant longer than he was, and also I think my master did more for me, tha^
for him, for he gave me a.C. l. at my first setting up, for my self, therefore I
am more bound to do for him tha^ he: Yea but said ye Defenda^t, my good Master
was bound for me, for 500. l. in wares, which I borrowd at my beginning, and
gave me also. 100. Marks in money, which was my chief making: and therefore he
did more for me than he did for you, wherefore I am more bound to do for
him. Then said the Plaintiff, I have offered to find him as long as he
lives, and to fare, go, nor lie, no worse than my self: so have I done,
said the Defendant, and I will keep him as well as you for your life. Besides
that (my Lord) I have offered to give him weekly half a Crown as long as he
lives, to put in his purse, to spend or use as he lists. Then said the
Plaintiff, I will give him a Crown to put in his purse weekly as long as he
lives, and let him do withal what he list. I will give him a Noble, said the
Defendant, rather than I will lose the company of my Master for money. No more,
said the Judge: do you offer this of spite that you have one to the other? or
for zeal and good will you bear to your Master? Then said the Plaintiff, I
owe this man the Defendant no evil will in all the world: but I offer this to
my good Master, of pure zeal and love to my Master. And I, said the
Defendant, do owe this man that has caused me here to appear, no manner of
malice: but this that I have proffered to my Master, is only of Christian
charity and pure love to my Master. Well, said the Judge, for that this your
loving Master is very willing to be with one of you, and both of you are
willing to have him. I will knitte up the matter in brief. But first tell
me, how far does one of you dwell from another? Forsooth, said they, we
dwell within four or five houses one of an other. Is there never a preatie
house between you, that is emptye or to let? Yes, my Lord, said the
Plainetiffe, a friend of mine has one almost between us both. To whom the
Judge said: will he not let it, think you? Yes I am sure, said he, to whom
I list. Then I do awarde, said the Judge, Mark this Judgment.
that both you shall hire the same for him to dwell in, and shall pay the rent
therefore equally, and you shall furnishe his house with all things necessary
for him, and he shall be at meat and meal with one of you one week, and with
the other another week, and you shall find him clothes necessary for him
equallye between you, and when he lists to dine or sup at home, you shall
send him victualles, as does appertain for him: and moreover, because you
have offered it him, you shall give him weekly, as your turn comes, a
Crown, to use and bestow as he lists: and all this you shall do as long as
he lives: and if either of you die before him, then the other that shall be
alive, shall be at all the charges for the finding of him, as ye one of you
before desired. With which judgment the decayed Merchant was well liked, the
Plaintiff and Defendant both well pleased: and the Judge therefore of every
one praised.


Siuqila. I never knew of any that went to law for such a matter: I have
heard of some that have arrested their Masters that brought them up, and that
taught the^ their trade to live by, yea, and perhaps rather upon a pretended
malice, than upon any good occasion. Sir, I am very desirous to know whether
you have many prisoners with you, or not?


Omen. We have very few or none, for it is a very hard matter to find with us any
traitors, Few prisoners in Mauqsun.
murderers, or fellons, they fear God so much, obey their Prince so
duetifully, and love one an other so well. And if any be imprisoned, it is
decayed debtors, (not wicked doers) that through misfortune are impo^erished,
who cannot long be imprisoned, as before I mentioned.


Siuqila. Indeed, as you say, you have ye charitablest people with you, for
helping of pore prisoners, and for paying of their debts that ever I heard.


Omen. I will tell you of as strange a releasing of a prisoner, as has bin in
your country I believe, if you will be co^te^t to hear it.


Siuqila. Yes that I will with all my heart.


Omen. It is a very common thing with us for men to visit ye prisons, and to
understand ye cause of their imprisonment, whereby according to their ability
they may find means to release them.


Siuqila. It is not so common with you, but is as rare with us.


Omen. And on a certain day, it was two men's chances to meet at one time at
one prison, A strange example of one that went to the law, about the releasing
of a prisoner.
to visit what prisoners were there: and the keeper answered them, that then
there was but only one in prison, which when they heard, they earnestly
desired the keeper, that they might speak with him. You shall with a good
will, said he. And so they both went unto the prisoner, whom they asked, how
long he had bin there: the prisoner said, I have bin here yet scant a whole
day: wherefore do you lie here, said the one of them: Forsooth, said he, for
debt, and that is twenty pounds, which I am not able to pay, yet I was once
within this twelve month, worth an hundred pou^ds, and all my debtes paid: but
through Gods good pruidence, not by mine own negligence, I am now not worth
a groate: wherefore I thank him as much, as though I were as rich as I was
before. What is he, (said one of the charitable men) that keeps you in
prison? a very honest man, said he, who, through necessity is urged to do it,
in hope, thereby to get some of my friends to pay him, thereby to release me.
Have you any friends or kinsfolks that dwell nigh here, said one of them, or
that knows of this your imprisonment? No truly, said ye prisoner, but within
a hundred miles I have such friends, I hope, that would quickly release me,
if they knew of it. Well, said the one of them, if your friends were here,
they should not need to trouble themselves about the delivering of you, for
I will pay your debt, and release you out of prison: therefore tell me his
name, said he, and where he dwells, to whom you owe ye money, for I will not
dine before I have paid him thy debt, yt he may release thee. No, said the
other, you shall not pay his debt, for I will pay it for him: you shall not, said
the other, for I was within the prison door before you. And thus they were at
contention one with an other, which of them should release the poor man out of
prison. And when the prisoner had told the^ where his creditor dwelled: then he
that was first within the prison door, was going to the creditor to agree with
him, and to pay him the prisoners debte: which when the other saw, he would
needs go with him also, saying, that he would release ye prisoner. And for
that he is my friend, said he, I know at my desire he will take my money
before yours. Yea, said the other, I will have a remedy for that, and he seeing
an Officer there at the prison door, said, I pray thee arrest this man at my
suit for such matter as I have against him: and that he may appear this day
in the afternoon before the Judge. And when he had given him his fee, he
departed thence, and then the Officer arreasted him by and by, and told him it
was at the suit of such a one. Well, said he that was arrested, I will put in
sureties for my appearance: and so he did.


Siuqila. I think few Sergeantes with us can say, that ever they arrested
any in such a case: But did he appear before the Judge at afternoon?


Omen. Yea I warrant you. At which time the Plaintif^ met him, who said then
unto the Judge: my Lord, it was my chance this day to go to a prison, where
I found but only one prisoner, who lies there for twenty pounds debt, which
prisoner I would have released, and paid his said debte to his creditor, but
this man whom I have caused to appear before you, would not suffer me, for
when I was going unto him that imprisoned the pore manne, he said he would
go to him, and discharge the prisoner, wherein me thought he offered me great
wrong, to take that charitable work out of my hand that I was determined to do.


Siuqila. But saving your tale: me think, that he had no lawful cause to
arreast him in this case.


Omen. You think so: but it is as lawefull with us to sue a man for preventing
him of a charitable deed, as it is lawful for a man to arrest one with you for
preventing him of any worldly commodity. And when he had told his tale before
the Judge: then the Judge asked the Defendant, whether he came out of his
house, purposely to release a prisoner, or not? and he said, yea. Did you so
too, said the Judge to the Plaintiff? Yea, my Lord, said he, that was the
only cause why I went from, home. Then the Judge said to the Defendant, was
this Plaintiff within the prison gates before you? My Lord, said he, I must
needs confess that: but I followed him immediately. Then the Judge called
them to him one after an other, and examined the^ privily, at what time they
were first minded, to go visit the prison, thereby to release a prisoner: and
he that was first in the prison said, that the night before, he was fully
determined to do so the next morning as soon as he was risen: the other being
defendant said, that when he was ready devising what he were best to do, he
thought he could not go about a better work than to visit the prisoners, and
to help to release such as were there, yt were not able to release themselves.
Then said the Judge, you are both charitable and godly men, you strive to do
well, where as many strive to do evil. But for as much as you are both willing,
to show a great deed of charity of the poor prisoner, and that one of you
will needs pay his said debte of twenty pound: Note this Judgment.
my Judgment is, that you that are the plainetife, partly for that you were
first within the prison door, but chiefly for that you were first determined
to visit the prison, to do such a charitable work, that you shall pay the
said twenty pounds to his creditour, thereby to release him out of prison. And
further, because you that are Defendant, were so desirous to pay the same for
him, and to release him: therefore I decree that you shall give the said poor
man, when he is released out of prison, twenty pounds also, to help to
maintain and succor him withal, for that I understand he has nothing to
live on: for it is as charitable a deed, to relieve poor men (that can not
tell how to live) when they be out of prison, as to help to release them out
of prison. For many are driven to live more hardly out of prison, than in
prison. With which judgment, these two charitable men did greatly rejoice, and
were meruelously well contented, and therewith the Judge arose and departed.


Siuqila. If you had not told me this tale, I would have sid it is Too good to
be true. Truly your customs are so commendable, your laws so profitable, your
Judges so just, and your stories so strange that I can not almost be weary
to hear them. Their are many old men in our Country, but I believe the
oldest of them all did never hear of any such fute before a Judge, and that
more, I think they never shall. But whereas they strive thus with you, who
shall soonest release poor men out of prison, there are many with us that
contend, who shall keep them longest in prison.

At the last day when Christ the general releaser of all prisoners, shall
send the merciful to heaven, and the unmerciful and the hard hearted cut
throtes, to ^uerlasting fire, from which none shall be able to release them:
then they will be sorry that they kept their poor brethren in prison. For if
Christ will send the unrepentant to Hell, that do not visit the poor:
prisoners that are imprisoned by other: it is not like he will send them to
Heaven that throw their poor brethren in prison, and most cruelly keep them
there, suffering them to hunger starve, and dye.


Omen. I trust there is none such in such a Christian country as your is.


Siuqila. As you trust there is none such, so I would to God there were none
such. But whosoever are such, I am sure once they will repent that they have
been such. I pray you sir, are the Gentlewomen with you very charitable to the
poor*


Omen. For charitable alms, and for succoring of the poor, they exceed
generally all the Gentlewomen in the world.


Siuqila. Surely we have many godly and virtuous Gentlewomen with us, but many
are a great deal more given to prampe up themselves, than to show mercy and
pity on the poor.


Omen. I will tell you such a thing of three Gentlewomen of our country, that
I think you never heard the like done since you were borne, by three of yours:
So that you will hear it.


Siuqila* Be bold I will hear it, if it were an hour long.


Omen. It chanced that three Gentlewomen in the cool of the euenyng did walk
abroad in the fields for their recreation, A stranger example of three
Gentlewomen
and within a quarter of an hour after, they espied a young child sitting by
it self, weepyng, but they salve no body with it, and immediately they all
three ran toward it as fast as they were able for their lives, that no
Gentlewoman with you would have run any faster, if it had been to save all
the living they had. But one of them, that was at the first behind, came first
to it and caught hold of it, saying, for as much as this poor child has
neither mother, nor other keeper here, that I can see, I will have it and keep
it, for I have wooune it by the law of running, Then one of the other
Gentlewomen said, you shall not have it, for though you are swifter then I,
whereby you did out run me: yet I was the first that ran toward it,
therefore I ought to have it by right. Then spoke the third Gentlewoman, though
the one of you by swifte running have got it, and the other by running first
would have it, yet I saw it before any of you, and have taken as great pains
in running as either of you, therefore neither of you shall have it, for I will
have it, Well, said the Gentlewoman that had it, plead you your title, and I
will plead my possession: for I assure you, you shall win it by the Law
before you shall have It. Well, said one of the Gentlewomen, I will not take
it from you by force, but I tell you truly, I will have it, or else the L^we
shall fail me. Then said the third, I assure you I will have it, if the Law
will give it me. Then the Gentlewoman that had it said, we may go to the
Law in a good cause and offend not. But as it would grieve me to keep it
and after by Law to loose it: so it would not much please you to spend your
time in the Law about that you shall never obtain, but if you will needs
prosecute the Law against me, I must defend my cause as well as I can: one
thing I comfort my self withal before we begin, the Judge will not be
partial, but Judge uprightly. Then said one of the other Gentlewomen, I trust
you will not be angry with me, for going to the law with you in this case:
neither with me I hope, said the other Gentlewoman: no said she I will owe you
never the more evil will, for if one may be angry and sin not, then we may
go to the law and hate not.


Siuqila. Such a matter by the Law I believe was never tried in our country:
but did the other Gentlewoman sue her for this poor child, I pray you tell me.


Omen. I in deed did they.


Siuqila. It had been reason, that first they should have asked their husbands
leave therein.


Omen. They that have no husbands, need ask no leave of their husbands:
they were all three widows.


Siuqila. Perhaps they had no children of their own* and that made the^ the
more desirous to bring up this poor foundling.


Omen. Perhaps that would have been a mean to make your Gentlewomen to have
done so. But I assure you, five children were the fewest that any of them had.
The next day (because they would not prolong time) the other two severally by
process, summoned this Ge^tlewoman that had the child, to appear before the
Judge the next day after: who appeared accordingly, against whom they had put
in their bills of complaint, wherein each declared for themselves as well as
they could. Whose bills when the Judge had well perused, he said, surely this
our Country of Mauqsun has such suits in the Law, as I think no Country
has besides: I pray you Gentlewomen said he, do you sue this Gentlewoman of
spite and disdain that she keeps the child from you, or of a Christian and
charitable love that you have to do such a godly deed? Truly, said the one
of them, I do it only of Christian charity: and the other said, I do it of
pure love that I owe to the poor member of my master Christ. We do it not for
want of children, for we both have good store of children of our own. And so
have I also, said she that had the child, wherefore my desire is, only to keep
it for the love that I owe to God, and for the zeal I owe unto the poor
friendlesse child. Well, said the Judge, I perceive you claim ^he pore
child by your first coming to it, and by taking it into your possession,
which is a good point for you to plead by, seeing neither of them before had
any title in the child. My Lord, said she, Such cases are not common.
I hope it will rather help than hinder me: for the truth is, I was so
earnestly affectioned to have the child, that I did run with all the endeavor I
coulce, whereby it was my good hap first to take hold of it, and so I took
it, and since I have kept it. It appears, said the Judge, that you were
desirous of it, or else you would not have run with such a good will: Mark
the words of the Judge.
and then the Judge said to one of the other Gentlewomen, you claim to have
title in the child, for that you were the first of the three that began to
run toward the child: it seems that you were desirous to have the
child, or else you would not have preassed to have run first of al toward
it: But for that this Gentlewoman was behind you, and then did out run you,
being much grosser than either of you, whereby she was the more unable to
run, which in every man's judgment, should rather have made her come
behind, though she had been before, than to come before, being behind:
therefore I must needs gather, though you were very desirous to have the
child, yet she was most earnest to have it, for that she took the most pain
therein, in that she did out tun you both, whereas there was great odds
that both you should have out^ run her. And whereas you (said the Judge to
the third Gentlewoman) do claim the child by first seeing of it, that
makes more against you than with you: for you had such advantage by first
seeing of it, that thereby you might have been a good way before either of
them: and for that you are most slender of the three, and therefore more apt
to run, you must needs have been first of all at the child, if your
desire to have it, had been as carnest as your pretense is great, for you
running before they knew, must needs be at the child before they could. And
moreover your coming lagge or behind them both, your seeing it first, and
sle^der making considered, shows manifestly, that you ran rather for
company, than for the child, or to get you good credit by running, which you
might have lost by tarying. These are reasunable conjectures, yet there may be
privy impediments that I know not of. Wherefore Gentlewomen, as I fear I can
not please you all, so I would be loath to displease any of you. I trust none
of you would have me to divide the child among you, as the harlot that was not
the right mother, would have had King Solomon to do: for your desire is, to
have it to preserve alive, but ye wicked harlot for spite would have had it
killed. Yea my Lord said they, we desire to have, it nourished not spoiled, and
fostered not famished. Then said the Judge, could you find no body nigh it, I
muse how it came there: my Lord said she that had the child, this morning
early I sent two of my men to search the fields, and not far from the place
where we ^ound the child, they (...) where a poor woman was dead, but of what
disease I know not, she was not killed, for there was neither wounded nor
stroke to be found on her, which poor woman was the very mother of this child
that I have, for they tried that, not only at the next town, but also that she
had two young children more, which woman was a widow. So that those her two
children have never a father to releue them. Where are the two children said
the Judge? forsooth, said the Gentlewoman, they be in that town, my men know
where they ^e, for they did see them: what became of the dead woman said the
Judge? the men of the same town where she dwelled caused her to be brought
thither, and finding that she dyed of Gods visitation, they buried her. Well
said the Judge, God has so wrought, that where perhaps I should have
displeased some of you, now I hope I shall please you all: therefore this is
my Judgment: you Gentlewoman that took such pains in running, whereby you
first took hold of the Child, shall have the same Child to keep, according
to your desire, which I trust you will bring up, as you will do your own. And
for ye both you so fain would have had the Child, you shall have the other two
Children between you, that is, either of you one: And thus you three rich
widows, shall keep three Children of one poor widow. New lay you, said the
Judge, are you pleased herewith? yea my Lord said they, and we rejoice at your
wise and godly judgment: How say you, Siuqila? Do Gentlewomen use to sue at
the Law in this order with you?


Siuqila. No, nor I think in few places else, if is possible if three
Gentlewomen with us had found a fine little Puppie, or a pretty Spaniel, it may
be that they would have gone to the Law one with another rather for that, than
for a poor motherlesse or Friendlesse Child. I trust ours Court will not be
cumbred with such causes, nor our Judges troubled with any such suits. Tell me I
pray you sir, what gifts with you, procure the greatest friend ship, or get
the greatest reward? What gifts are best accepted in Mauqs^.



Omen. Forsooth Books.


Siuqila. And what next that?


Omen. Books.


Siuqila. And what next that?


Omen. Books.


Siuqila. Here is nothing with you but Books: as though nothing requires
friendship or rewards but Books.


Omen. Yes main gifts beside Books, procure and deserve rewards, and
friendship with us, but Books are the chiefest of all other: for they are
such Scholemaysters as do teach all Sciences and knowledge especially to
ripe and pregnante wits, without any wages or rewards:


Siuqila. What meante you to name Books thrice on a row?


Omen. Marie I will tell you: they that invent and set forth divine books to
persuade men from sin, to allure them to godliness, to train them to truth,
to win them to obedience, and to lead them to the endless life: they I say,
that give such gifts, making their gifts them selves, have of all other with
us, the most friendship and the greatest rewards therefore. And they that
devise and frame books, that teach good government, politic orders, and
common commodities for a common wealth: such with us as give such gifts of
their own making, find great friendship and the next rewards to the other.
And they that invent and make books, that teach honest trades, that explain
learned sciences, and that open at large necessary knowledge, such as present
any such gifts of their own invention, acquire next favor and friendship to
the other, besides sufficient rewards correspondent to the gift.


Siuqila. Those gifts that procure the most friendship, and the greatest
rewards with you, I believe obtain the least friendship, and the least rewards
with us: and those that are most esteemed and gratified with us, are least
regarded and rewarded with you. But how are such books esteemed of you after
they be published?


Omen. Maruelously, they read the^ thoroughly, they peruse them advisedly, and
they practice them diligently: do they not so with you?


Siuqila. Some do so I am sure, but the most do not so I am certain.


Omen. Do not many buy books with you?


Siuqila. Yes truly that they do.


Omen. Then it is no doubt, but that they do read those books they buy.


Siuqila. Nay, nor every one reads not the books that are given them.


Omen. If they do not read them thoroughly, to what end do they buy them?


Siuqila. Many are so fantastical with us, that they buy them for the newness
of the Book, not for the goodness of the work. For some, if they have not a
Book, be it never so good almost, before any other see it, or have it, he
refuses to read it, and makes no account of it: tushe, says he, that
Book is stale, as though no Book is good but while it is new. And also a
great forte with us, seldom or never read Books thoroughly and advisedly,
unless they be in such places, that almost they can have no other exercise, as
such as are in prison, wayters in the Court and other places, and such as
travel on the water, where many hear and read that in good Books, that
otherwise they should never read nor hear.


Omen. Truly, they are not of my mind, if I should buy a Book, I would surely
read ye Book. As one cannot well judge of a Book before he read it, so we
ought to read it thoroughly before we judge it. And as some have a better
opinion in an unread Book, than it does deserve: so some unread Books do
deserve a better opinion, than many have in them. Therefore it is good to read
Books, for if an evil man read a good book, he may be the better: and if a
good man read an evil Book, he will not be the worse. But we are sure of one
thing with us, evil Books cannot infect us, for we have not an evil Book in
all our country.


Siuqila. And if some might have their wills, they would not suffer a godly
Book in all our Country. Well sir, if you were as much tired with talking, as
I am hungry with harkning, you would tarrye no longer to aunsweare me: but
now for that I have no more to ask you, but am satisfied in all things, as my
heart does desire: therefore I will trouble you no more: Assuring you, that for
godly laws, politic orders, righteous Rulers, merciful Magistrates, just
Judges, loving Lawyers, pitiful Physicians, zealous Husbands, obedient Wives,
dutiful Children, trusty Servants, good Landlords, honest Tenauntes, courteous
Gentlemen, virtuous Gentlewomen, charitable Neighbors, and faithful Subieds,
your Country of Mauqsun exceeds all the Countries in the World. You have
led them such a dance, that in all things I am sure they will not follow you
in haste.


Omen. I would you were as sure that they would follow us in goodness, as I am
sure, we will not follow them in euilnesse: though I am in doubt that few will
practice our doings, yet I believe that you will declare to many our deings.


Siuqila. Be sure of that, I may travel where I list, and go where I will, but
sure I am that I shall never come into any Country, where al things are in
such order as they are with you.


Omen. Many a Country may be godly governed, politikely ordered, with good
laws furnished, and with obedient subjects inhabited, and yet far unlike ours
in all points. Well, they may follow us if they will, but they shall not go before
us if they would.


Siuqila. If they meant to follow you, as I fear they do not, they would come
so far behind, that I am out of doubt they should never overtake you. Though
my journey home, will be something grievous unto me, yet the knowledge of the
worthy orders of your country, makes me very joyful: but there is no remedy,
if I intend to come home, I must set forwards and begin to go home. Therefore
now I will take my leave of you, most humbly thanking you, for the pains you
have taken for the unfolding unto me your marvelous orders, and your most
Christian conditions.


Omen. I would your long journey were no more painful to you, than the
discourse, of our Country has been trouble to me. The God of al goodness
guide you in your travel.


Siuqila. I doubt not but he will: for he will defend them from dangers that
trust truly to him. In whom is all my trust, and in Jesus Christ, whose
Kingdom God grant we may all inherit. AMEN.


FINIS.

