THE BEGINNING, CONTINVANCE, AND DECAY OF ESTATES: Wherein are handled many
notable Questions concerning the establishment of Empires and Monarchies.

Written in French by R. de Lusing, L. of Alymes: and translated into English
by I. F.

LONDON, Printed for John Bill. 1606.

TO THE MOST REVEREND Father in God, RICHARD, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
MOst reverend Father, it pleased your Graces right worthy predecessor, to
vouchsafe my unworthy letters sent him in my travails, a gracious acceptance.
The greatest trouble they put him to, was to peruse them; so were the proofs
he gave of his virtue, and the signs of his love toward me, the only end and
use I ever had or made of them. Your Grace has had the happiness, with the
merit, to succeed him in his dignities: his virtues were already yours in
propriety. Of his love I may say, as of your Graces; that I then did, as I now
do, rather desire to deserve it, then deserving it, desire to make bold use of
it. Love that descends on us from men of virtue and eminency, is it self both
hope and reward, hire and payment. That to-boote which we call doing good, or a
benefit, as it is an effect that true love matched with ability, will even
strive to produce, so is it then most welcome when it comes sooner imparted
then expected. With this freedom of mind, and duty of respect, I present to
your Grace this new apparelled discourse: It has already put on the habit of
three several languages, and if my judgment err not, our English fashion
will not ill become it. I met with it in my wanderings, and brought it along
with me, with an intent, for my private exercise of that tongue it first spoke
in, to translate it: that performed, my determination to recommend it to your
Graces patronage, fell to be at this late dangerous time, when the devil
(arch-enemie of truth) and his execrable ministers held their general
counsel how they might make but one fireworke of our whole estate: but the
consideration of your Graces most just employments in so weighty a business,
withheld me with a reverend fear of their disturbance, till I weighed that
even this subjects handling might perhaps do good to some bad that had a head,
if not a hand (for so great a clock could not strike without many wheels) in
so damnable a project: since if they will needs outstrip former ages, or
foreign countries in strange plots of ruining kingdoms and common wealths,
they may by this discourse be drawn to practice them upon the common enemy of
Christendom, and not upon us that acknowledge with them one Jesus, one Bible,
one Baptism. Your Grace sees the reasons and scope of these my well intended
endeavors, which subject their allowance or disallowance to your Graces most
grave censure, so does my unworthy service with my self, to your much desired
employment, as

Your Graces most seruiceably devoted, JOHN FINET.

The Epistle Dedicatorie of the Author to the Duke of Sauoy.
OF all we admire in these times there is nothing comparable to the fortune of
the Ottomans, and the increase of their greatness; if we examine their
beginning and means, for they are by nation Tartarians, sprung from the most
base and remote parts of Asia, in former times as unknown as unworthy: If we
consider their conditions, they bewray no feeling of ciuility or courtesy: If
we regard the parts of their mind, where shall we see ought more rude, and
rough hewn then the spirit of that people? What have been the soldiers they
have had through whose valor they have aduantaged themselves by so many
memorable victories? No better then slaves haled in their infancy from the
breasts and laps of their mothers, children of tribute tythed every year from
amongst the miserable Christians over whom they command and domineere. Yet we
see that with these feeble means they have, in less then three hundred
years, conquered Asia as far as Tigris, and the Gulf of Persia, possessed
themselves of Egypt, Numidia, and all the red sea. More, having achieved
these glorious co^quests they have been seen to march, as they say, with
colors flying through Europe, to ouerrun large countries, seize themselves of
kingdoms and most puissant Estates, finally to become Monarchs of Greece, and
to have carried the Empire of Constantinople; whose neighbors have not been
exempt from the havoc of their forces, so many armies overthrown, so many
Princes ruined, so many rich cities and towns sacked and rased. Their power,
ouerflowing in happiness, is at this day the scourge of the East and the
terror of the West: In sum, they are fearful to the whole world. But the
greater is the astonishment, when we consider, that naked and unarmed, they
have marched victorious over the bellies of the most warlicke nations under the
heavens, the best provided of forces and all munition necessary for the wars,
that such a people as they unskilled in navigations should become masters almost
of all the seas. Many have gone about to search out the cause of this thriuing
greatness, and I amongst others have for my part with no small diligence
perused such authors as have written their history; but when I have narrowly
sifted all they have said of that matter, I find not this my honest appetite
and curiosity as I would contented; rather as one ill satisfied with the
diversity and negligence of their Historiographers, all of them nothing near
approaching the course and knowledge of the first and essential cause of this
their so raised fortunes, I have sought to please my self with setting down as
I have, the many acts and observations I have thereof collected, and which well
deserve to be published: not that I so far forget my self as to think my
self able to fly a higher pitch then others whom I much honor and esteem;
but because I have taken clean an other way; with this hope nevertheless,
that huely representing and distinguishing by order as I do, the establishment
of this Monarchy (answerable to what may be understood thereof) the appearance
and truth of my discourse will somewhat inlighten this subject and afford me an
honest excuse upon the defects which may be discovered in my opinion. The
argument then of this book consists of three points, whereunto the order of
the whole discourse has reference: In the first place I summarily handle the
means they have practiced for their advancement and greatness; secondly with
what cunning and deceit they maintain what they have gotten: and lastly how we
may be able to assail them, and turn the chance of their victories and
powers. This my travail (most mighty Prince) takes his flight straight to
your Highness to range it self under the shelter of your protection, armed
with the allowable opinion, that your Aighnesse as a generous Prince cannot but
take especial pleasure to hear, see, and weigh such speculations. To say the
truth, the ordinary discourses of your Highness table are no other but sundry
questions, which it pleases your Highness usually to propound to all those
noble spirits that attend you; but above all, when any one awaketh matter
concerning either Estate affairs, or the atchieuement of deeds of arms; then
is the time your Highness lends an attentive ear to such as discourse
thereof, and to all men's admiration resolves the most difficult points of the
matter in handling, wherein you discover a judgment so far beyond the vulgar
and surpassing your age, as we cannot but confess that the propositions you
make are so many proofs and resolutions which you deliver, and please to draw
from out the capacity of your servants. Which considering often with my self,
I find forthwith allaied in me the heat of the intention I had to dedicate
this my book to your Highness, but at the same instant finding represented
before mine eyes; the excellency of your judgment, together with your noble and
gentle disposition, which knows how to accommodate your greatness to the
honest designs of your subjects, such especially as reverence you like me,
fear immediately vanishes and my desire gathers strength, with assurance
that you will be so gracious, as, though I be the least of your servants, you
will not spare to entertain and honor this my little labor with your
judgment: practicing upon me what the Sun (common father of generation) does
on the earth, bestowing his beams indifferently as well upon the low plants as
high trees. It may please your highness then to vouchsafe to receive this
treatise with the like countenance as you would ought else especially labored,
in imitation of the divine Majesty (only Idea of all perfection) which as well
excepteth the offering of the poor widow, as the presents of great Princes.
Again, it may please your highness not to think amiss so farforth to protect
the whole discourse, that it may, supported by your authority, pass with that
credit as I wish among men, and remain free from the many censures of such as
take no other delight then in reprehending other men's inventions. This
assurance will make me lift my head higher then otherwise I would, for two
causes: The one for the honor and particular contentment I shall receive
having performed ought pleasing to your Highness, the other for the testimony
I shall hereby have of the participation of your favor beyond my merit and
expectation: for which I offer up my self not to die ungrateful, as

Your Highness most humble Subject and vassal, R. de LVSING.

To the Reader.
THe world had never more Books, Books never less worthy matter: learned,
unlearned, all will be writing, and of these the most affecting the glorious
names of Authors, become the authors of their inglorious names.

Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli.
The Readers skill,
Makes Books thrive well or ill.
But the true life of a work, and sound discretion of the writer, appear not
more in the well handling, then wise choice of a subject. I know diverse courses
may meet with one end, as many ways lead to one city, so may one theme
entertain a world of inventions; but of these (like the same meat served in
in several fashions) some few only shall carry the true pleasing relish and
temper; the rest (as knots in names) stand rather for ornaments or flourishing
differences, then matters regardable or of consequence: well may the will or
appetite for a time transport us, but reason as sovereign must in the end
control and check us. In the compass of my observations, I have seen
discourses and styles, otherwise hollow and unsound, sway even the best
judgments, not alone to allowance, but imitation. Whether this were the
infection of ignorance, that seasing the most might spread to the best; or the
tyranny of fashion, which must, howsoever monstrous, (if our selves will not
seem monstrous) be followed, I know not: one thing I am sure of; time has
discovered their weakness, and truth his concealed daughter is come to light,
when such light owls live (or to say better) die confined to perpetual
obscurity. This work seems to have passed the pikes of such dangers; it has
for a sufficient time undergone the view and censure of the best discerning
nations of Europe: it has been taught to speak both their and the old Roman
language: if England should not now afford it kind entertainment, I should
think it in an error (not to say of judgment) of custom, as being not yet
clear of the imputation it carries of harshnesse toward even worthy
strangers; but since I find (as do themselves that suffer) that this
discourteous fault is laid upon the common sort, and the contrary extolled in
the gentry and persons of more eminent quality, Vilia miretur vulgus: We will
appeal from their ignorance, to the more generous and better bredde
understandings. And to awake these, let me tell them, they shall find it a
discourse not faint or languishing, but such as like a well breathed runner,
gathers more strength toward the end of the race, then was bewraied in the
beginning. Now to others which shall perhaps object, that the scope hereof lying
out of our distance, asks as small heed, as it smally concerns us; I
answer, that then the gout or gangrene is not to be regarded because the great
toe only has it. Time and sin may one day (which God turn from us) make us
more sensible, and this subjects debating more necessary: such as it now is, or
may prove (Reader) I here expose it to thy view and censure. I know some
acquainted with me and my courses, will expect rather matter of mine own, then
others invention. They have reason in this, howsoever I have ability: but I
cannot yet forget an honest learned Physician I once observed, who (it seems)
to spare others, so spent his own spirits in the personal practice of his
medicinal conclusions, as his body yet suffers the injuries of such
selfe-offered violence. I am not so charitable; neither hold I him the
vnwisest, that out of others trial frames his own confirming. It is time
that begets judgment and assurance. And to this purpose I will close with a
saying of that ever most reverenced Master of morality Seneca, Non ignoro
etiam quae in speciem laborant, dignitatem dico and eloquentiae famam, and
quicquid ad alienum suffragium venit, mora conualescere.

I. F.

The Table of the Chapters of the first Book.
THe Turk has applied his thoughts wholly to the wars. Chap. 1. He has
alwaie^ sought to make offensive war. Chap. 2. He has made no account of
fortresses. Chap. 3. He has trained up his soldiers to valor and
hardiness. Chap. 4. He has maintained his soldiers in military discipline.
Chap. 5. He has made no reckning of other forces then his own. Chap. 6. He
has to power joined cunning and deceit. Chap. 7. He has been always served
in his war by good and valiant Captains. Chap. 8. He has made no skip in
his enterprises. Chap. 9. He has not spent time upon enterprises of small
importance. Chap. 10. He has laid hold on occasion. Chap. 11. He has behaved
himself with nimblenesse and celerity upon his occasions. Chap. 12. He has
gone himself in person to the war. Chap. 13. He has evermore gone well
appointed to the wars. Chap. 14. He has never fought out of season. Chap. 15.
He has never divided his forces. Chap. 16. He has not long held war with
one alone. Chap. 17.
The Table of the Chapters of the Second Book.
OF religion. Chap. 1. Of the direct dependency of the Turks subjects upon
their sovereign. Chap. 2. How he has deprived his subjects of strength. Chap.
3. The causes that may move a people to fury. Chap. 4. The common remedy
applied by the Turk against the force and fury of the people. Chap. 5. How the
Turk curbeth the power of the great men of his Estate. Chap. 6. How he
confounds the practices of foreign Princes his neighbors. Chap. 7.
The Table of the Chapters of the Third Book.
THe causes of the fall and ruin of Estates. Chap. 1. From what conjectures
the continuance of Estates may be gathered. Chap. 2. That the Monarchy of the
Turk is comprehended within the number of great Estates. Chap. 3. Whether the
Empire of the Turks draw toward an end. Chap. 4. By what kind of causes the
Empire of the Turk might most easily fail. Chap. 5. That it is not an
impossible thing for the Christians with open force to vanquish the Turk.
Chap. 6. Why the leagues amongst Christian Princes are commonly of small
effect. Chap. 7. The defects which may be observed in the leagues of the years
1537. and 1571. Chap. 8. A league which may be treated without danger of the
former defects. Chap. 9. Wherein consists the greatest forces of the Turk.
Chap. 10. Where the Turk might be most easily assailed to overcome him, either
by sea or by land. Chap. 11. Of the inward causes whereby the Empire of the
Turk may come to ruin. Chap. 12. Of the mixed causes. Chap. 13. How particular
persons may be gained. Chap. 14. How the people of the Turk may be wrought
from his obedience. Chap. 15.
CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE Greatness of the Turkish Empire.
Wherein are handled the manner how it is become so great, the means whereby
it is maintained, and how it would be easy to bring it to ruin.
1 The sum of this discourse. 2 The division thereof into 3. principal
parts. 3 The argument of the first book. 4 Steps to the Turkish greatness.
FIrst: My purpose is to examine in this treatise how the Empire of the Turk
is grown to that height and greatness. 2: And the better to effect it I will
divide the whole discourse into three principal parts. The first, what way he
has taken to attain to the top of such a raised greatness as his now is. The
second, with what means and arre he behaueth and maintains himself therein;
and finally I will declare how the pride of this Tyrant may be abated; his
greatness diminished, and his Empire ruined. 3: The subject then of the first
book shall be to examine what have been his courses in his conquests; and
though they have been without any order, reason or faith: yet will it be no
hard matter to discern, by the success of such counsels as he has put in
practice in his most difficult enterprises, the good from the bad, and also to
separate in the course of his actions all whatsoever has been profitable;
from what has been hurtful and ill undertaken: heerin imitating the Be
which from bitter herbs sucks most sweet honey. These are in my opinion the
steps and dessignes he has followed to attain to his greatness, whereby as by
degrees he has built his strange fortune which makes us at this day so much to
fear him.

1 First he has applied himself wholly to the wars. 2 His war has been
always offensive. 3 He has made slender account of fortresses. 4 He has
fashioned his wisdom to valor and hardness. 5 He has maintained his great
and mighty armies in military discipline and policy. 6 He has made no
reckoning of other forces then of his own. 7 He has to power joined cunning
and deceit. 8 He has been served by excellent Captains. 9 He has not made
any skip in his enterprises. 10 He has not spent time upon matters of small
importance. 11 He has laid hold on occasions. 12 He has speedily put in
execution his dessignes. 13 He has gone in person to the war. 14 Well
appointed. 15 In a fit season. 16 He has not divided his forces. 17 He has
not long continued war with one alone.
CHAP. I.
That he has applied his thoughts wholly to the wars.
1 Books held by the Goths a let to arms. 2 Charles the 8. his expedition to
Naples. 3 Christians held unfit for wars, because so intent to study. 4 The
Turks wholly addicted to the wars. 5 The Romans most martial. 6 Barbarous
nations most warlike and prompt in their attempts. 7 The Turks despisers of
Liberal arts. 8 They invade Italy. 9 Their military virtues. 10 Whether
liberal arts disable their followers for the wars. 11 The use of History and
the Mathematikes. 12 Letters and arms fitly married together. 13 Learning and
valor necessary in a Commander, obedience in a Soldier.
1 AT the time that the Goths made a most fearful sack of Greece, and as a
violent stream ouerflowed her fruitful plains, ransacking her many cities
and rich towns; amongst other spoils there fell into their hands a great
number of books of all sorts of professions; wherewith not knowing what to
do, as unprofitable stuff, they would have burnt them, if one amongst the
rest had not opposed himself: who stepping forth cried out; it was requisite
they should carefully preserve them, and leave (quoth he) this poison amongst
the Grecians, since in time they will bereave them of all martial courage, as
ordinarily they do all such as apply themselves too much to the like learning
and knowledge, making them become tender, effeminate, and altogether unfit for
the use of arms; so as failing of courage they will prove more easily the
pray of our fortunate conquest.

2 When Charles the eight of France with so small an army made his way thorough
Italy, 1494. Guicciard. li. 1.
and that without unsheathing his sword or couching his lance, he became master
of the kingdom of Naples, and of the greater part of Thoseany; the French
Nobility reasoning among themselves whence such a base cowardlinesse, as they
had found amongst the Italians, should proceed, imputed the cause thereof to
the study of learning, as that which softeneth the courage, and is not fit for
ought but to make a man fearful, unapt, and of a weak resolution for the
wars.

3 Heretofore and at this day, the Turks have and do esteem the Christians
of little valor in martial affairs, because of the variety of Arts whereunto
they usually addict themselves; and though a man be so smally durable as he
cannot attain to perfection in diverse sciences, nor so enable himself to the
attention of sundry matters as he may game the mastery for which he strives;
yet all men will busy themselves about knowledge, and intermeddle with all
Arts and practices, not heeding that in stead of forwarding themselves, they
recoile from that perfect knowledge which is requisite for them, and so remain
unfurnished, or but weakly grounded in one only profession.

4 On the contrary, the Turks fashion their whole dessignes to the war, and
bend all their thoughts and studies to the exercise of arms, rejecting all
other courses, and pleasing themselves only in what may stand them in stead
for that profession.

5 There is nothing more true (and we find it in histories) then that the
Romans were most excellent Soldiers, but especially before they opened their
gates to Arts and Sciences presented them by the Greeks, and that they gave
themselves over to the pleasures of the East. Then were they at the best for
true carriage of marshall affairs when their Consuls scorned not to hold the
plough; when Physicians, Surgeons, and men of such like profession were in no
credit amongst them. And to say the truth, we find that if afterward they did
atchieue any worthy enterprise, it was not by means of any valor which was
remaining with them, but by the reputation and strength they had formerly
gotten. For proof hereof we may plainly perceive that as soon as they had
given entertainment to foreign sciences, made tender by study, they received
notable and dishonorable overthrows, as well at the hands of Iugurtha,
Mithridates, the Cimbrians, Numantins, Spartans, the Parthians, as of others.

6 For confirmation whereof we observe in ancient histories, that the most
warlike people, and withal such as have performed the memorablest acts, have
been the most gross, rude and inured to pain and hardness, far from all
ciuility; free from such delicacy and wantonness as is corruptly stepped in
amongst us; such as had no learning or taste of any knowledge or action which
might allay or never so little shake their courageous resolutions and warlike
dessignes. Of this composition were long since and are at this day the
Scythians, who sometimes made their worthy arms resound as far as the most
remote parts of the East, as far as the Danow and the banks of Nilus. It is
not long since that they, Zingis.
conducted by Quingus their King, ouerran all the East, harrowed the plain
country, and replenished all with misery and desolation. The memory of the
famous acts of great Tamberlane is yet fresh, who only hitherto may vaunt that
he has in a ranged battle vanquished the Turkish armies, and led their
Co^mander captive, making him serve as his footstool. 1397.
In our time the Mogores, a gross and ignorant people sprung out of Scythus
(or to say better) out of Tartaria, have achieved great conquests toward
India. Every man also knows that the great Cham, as rude and rough hewn as
these, is nevertheless one of the most mighty potentates of the world, ruling
over a people of the least civility that can be imagined. But not to wander
out of Europe, let us behold the Swizzers, and we shall find that for
knowledge and ciuility they are no better then these, yet have they performed
many worthy exploits as well at Nancy, 1477.
Dijon, Nouare, Marignan, Dreux, as else where: 1513.
In such sort as, not infected with our vanity, 1515.
they give (as a man may say) the law to the mightiest Princes that seek their
assistance.

7 Now the Turks above all nations have ever professed to follow this course of
life so barbarous and rude, and even at this day they contemn all knowledge
and profession of whatsoever art, be it never so noble or industrious; among
the rest they abhor painting and ingrauing, neither make they any account of
architecture: and in very deed we see that they have ever held it an especial
offense toward God, to ingraue or paint him. As for learning they reckon it as
mere foolery: In a word, there are none amongst them so slenderly esteemed as
men learned and seen in any kind of knowledge. In their garments they affect
not stuffes wrought, imbroidered or curiously cut and fashioned, but such as
are whole and lasting; laces, fringes and other ornaments are by them rejected:
beaten and massy gold is only in request amongst them. In the wars they seek
rather to appear fearce and terrible, then gallantly set forth and apparelled:
their whole delight is set upon war and arms; insomuch as it is hard to find
any one of them who will not manifest by his fashion of living that he is
rather borne for the wars then ought else: so as when there is any leuying of
Soldiers, such as are left at home hold themselves highly injured; so
honorably do they esteem of the life of a soldier. Whence it proceeds,
that they are so feared in all their attempts, either for beseeging, battering,
or forcing of places of greatest strength; for skirmishing on foot or on
horseback, in set battles by sea or by land, or for fortifying and defending.

8 Whereof they gave sufficient proof when having gotten Ottranto they
valiantly made it good against the forces of all Italy; 1480.
even till the death of their master Mahomet the 2. 1482.
leaving behind them, trenches, bulwarks, ramparts and all other sorts of
fortifications, so well contrived and disposed, as they have served since for
patterns and models to our Commanders of Christendom.

9 Such is their laborious virtue in the wars, as there is no place so strong,
or enterprise so difficult which will not prove easy at the enforcing of
their powers.

10 Returning now to that I said concerning knowledge: I expect that some one
should say: And what I pray, is learning a let to military virtue, or a means
to hinder a man from becoming a perfect soldier? surely no: I am of a
contrary opinion, and I ground it in part upon the experience of such Captains
as I will here reckon. Alexander the great and Caesar who were of the
principal most aduenturous, and politic Masters of the wars were most
excellently seen in all sorts of knowledge; for my own part I hold it very
difficult for any without the aid of History or the Mathematiques, to deserve
the name of a great Captain and sage conductor of armies:

11 Since History by the variety of examples both of good and bad success
furnishes a man with heedfulnesse and discretion, with resolution and advice
in all occurrents, and makes him more considerate in what he undertakes; like
as the Mathematikes refine his knowledge and judgment, as well in engines of
war as in fortifying.

12 In conclusion, it is not to be denied but that learning is most proper to
mould and perfectly fashion a heart and courage borne and disposed to arms:
for this cause they would in old time, that Pallas armed should signify unto
us the marrying of letters with arms. Now to come again to the Turks
rudeness, we shall find (examining some of their Princes) that somewhat must
be abated. Let us consider what were Mahomet the 2. and Selim and Soliman his
sons (the most valiant Princes of the race of the Ottomans) and we shall see
that they delighted in reading Histories, and in studying the Mathematikes: so
as though nature dispose a man to hardiness and magnanimity, it is sure that
if he be wholly unfurnished of arts and learning, he will be of a disposition
doubtful, unassured, unresolved and without any true stomach or valor; parts
especially required in a Soldier. This has been seen in those of the
Ottomans which wanted the virtues of the three above named; and amongst others
Bajazet the second and Corcas his son can witness it. These indeed had in
some measure the knowledge of good letters, but these performed no valiant act,
because they had not hearts and courages borne to the wars.

13 Whence it follows that the study of learning avails much to the forming
of a wise and discreet Captain, and to help him to attain to the perfection
worthy his name; nature withal disposing him to valor and generositie.

As for the private Soldier I hold that he needs not know more then to obey
it, not being necessary he should be instructed in so excellent an
understanding of matters as the Commander, considering that human Sciences
and the liberal arts in an unsettled mind make it embrace ciuility,
wantonness and ease in stead of travel; make us love quietness; fear death,
fly hunger and thirst, with other pains and periles of the wars: In sum, they
imprint in a man rather a desire to husband his life then to lavish it for the
glory and good of his country, and for his particular honor: which is more
dangerous in a soldier then in a man of any other profession: for this reason
such an one need know no more then to obey, go well armed, and valiantly
defend himself against his enemy.

CHAP. II.
That he has always sought to make offensive war.
1 Of offensive and defensive war. 2 The authors opinion thereof. 3 Others
opinions. 4 Reasons in behalf of the offensive, and inconveniences of the
defensive war. 5 Commodities of the offensive war. 6 Spoils in our enemies or
our own country: their difference. 7 Machiauel confuted. 8 The chief cause
of the Turkish greatness has been the Christians idleness. 9 The war upon
the Turk must be offensive. 10 Examples of good success in that kind.
1 IT is a doubt often disputed, and not yet resolved, whether it be better to
assail the enemy at his own home, or to attend till he assail us: The Lord of
Langei, Machiauell, and others of our times have discoursed hereof to the full.

2 For my part I am of opinion (as also the worthiest captains have been)
that it is always better to assail, then stay till we be assailed: Alexander
the Great, Hannibal, Scipio, Caesar, and many other Romans serve to approve it;
and all these would have laughed at such as should have otherwise counseled
them.

3 Yet some there are in our times which have endeavored to prove the contrary
by demonstrations subtle enough (but unsound) and to this very purpose of the
Turk, to wit, that it were better to attend him then to seek him out upon his
own dunghill: These are counsels more curious then well grounded, whereof
consequently ensue few effects of moment: we may couple such men with those
vaunting Ingenours or Artists, who discoursing upon some work of their
invention promise of it wondrous effects, and set forth some simple module
which serves but for demonstration only; but when it comes (as they say) to
the push, and that they must put their instrument to his true trial and use,
then is it that they are far to seek, and that they confess the difference
between an essential effect and a superficial flourish, such as their first
module afforded. Just in this manner these contemplative state-Philosophers
will attend the Turk at their own home, whom they dare scarce look in the
face neither in nor out of his country.

4 It is most certain that he which assaileth has always more resolution
and courage then he that attends. For he has already formed his
determination and provision when the other goes by heeresaie and likelihoods:
moreover in assailing, the war is undertaken with more advantage, and commodity
then otherwise it would be; and he which minds to force a country or province
may make his use of all such advantages and commodities as he finds may serve
his turn in the country he intends to conquer. As among others, if he have
set on foot some practice, or hatched some treason in the minds of two or
three, such of the subjects of the prince he assaileth as he knows offended
or malecontent. Or if he have plotted some matter of purpose for an universal
rebellion. All which incountring with the dessignes of the supposed conqueror,
he makes them serve his turn with more advantage in going to seek out the
enemy; then he should do in staying for him at his own home. By these means
Charles the eight King of France found the way open to the conquest of Naples;
1494.
and Jews the 12. possessed himself of the estate of Milan: 1499.
by the like occasion also the Empire of the Mamelucks subjected their necks
to the yoke of Selim the first. 1516.


5 But of all this we may collect a more sure proof of my proposition then
when the enemy is at our doors, and that the astonishment surpriseth us,
overthrows and confounds all counsel and courage; at such a time
unexpected disorders hem us in on every side; necessity presses us; all
things become suspected and difficult, so as most commonly we know not to what
Saint to recommend us; nor what course were best to be taken; for since we must
have an eye, misdoubt, make provisions in sundry places, bestow garrisons
where most need requires; we shall find that applying remedies on the one
side our affairs will grow desperate on the other. Moreover by distributing
garrisons in this sort, it must needs follow that we so much the more weaken
the body of our army, and that through this constraint we quit the field to
the more strong; which disadvantage commonly draws with it the ruin of our
whole estate.

If contrariwise we will preserve all our forces in one body, we leave to the
assailer many passages and places where he may set down and fortify himself
there to hold us play and train us on at his pleasure; but if it should so
happen that the assailer were encountered by him which attends with equal
force, with as brave a countenance, and like courage, the retraict and defense
rest at his election, so he be a Captain wise, and advised, such as was
Solomon when he marched into Hungary, and when the Emperor Charles the 5.
went courageously to meet him.

6 And because the Disastrous chance of war may sometimes light upon the
assailer be he never so wary and valiant; it is to be presupposed (that being
granted) that he will sell his skin at so dear a rate, as the forces of the
assailed shall remain thereby so disordred, as he will not be able to offend
the vanquished, or disturb his affairs, notwithstanding that his country be
far distant from the country assailed: this may be seen by the example of
the overthrow the French received, and the taking of their King prisoner before
Pauye insomuch as that loss (besides that of their Prince) did not afford
ought to the victorious whereby he might advantage himself upon the kingdom
of France. 1524.
Also it is much more easy to set a foot again an army discomfited, abroad
then at home; because if fortune have showed her self adverse and our foe at
our home, then is the time that such as are malcontents and mutinous lift up
their heads, and that our people stand amazed and for the most part
intractable. Then must we travail amain to put our men in heart, then must we
make much of those few good men, the remains of a battle to bestow in our
Towns and trust them with the government thereof. On the other side if these
losses betide us far from our home and in another country, the fear and the
stonishment will be the less amongst our subjects, and they more pliable and
forward to succor us, were it but to keep the danger aloof from themselves.

7 Me thinks Machiauel much abuses himself when he so opiniatiuely
mainteineth, Mac. disput. lib. 2. c. 12.
that if the Romans had received out of Italy the blows Hannibal gave them by
the overthrow of * three armies, At the river of Trebia, where Sempronius was
slain, at the lake of Thrasimenus where Flaminius was overcome, and at Cannas
where Terentius Varro and L. Paulus lost the field.
that they had never been able more to have held up their head or
re-established their affairs as they did: Machiauel lays this ground; That
they had never found means again to set a foot so soon as they did the
residue of their forces, had it been out of Italy. Mark I pray how he
erreth; for it is well known that the overthrows they had in their own
country made them lose, besides their soldiers, many good towns, and bred
revolt in their Colonies which followed the fortunes of the victorious, with
diverse other accidents that shook their estate; all, which had not succeeded
with such disaster if the loss had befell them far from Italy: for in this
case both heart and means had served them more abundantly then they did, to
assemble new forces and as great as they had lost. Maharbals saiing to
Hannibal, was, Vincere seu Hannibal, sed victoria vti nescis. Liu. Dec. 3. l. 2.
It is also certain that if Hannibal had known how to make good use of his
victory the Romans had been utterly overthrown. It must needs be, that their
means and power were very great, and that God had an especial hand in their
affairs, seeing that in such disorder they should recover themselves; and that
with such courage, as they refused to serve their turns with those which had by
flight escaped from their ouerthrows, neither made they any account of
redeeming those which were taken prisoners, nay rather in stead of doing this
they deprived some of them of all honor and confined others into Sicily. It
seems to me that these reasons may serve to confute those of Machiauel, and
that it is high time we return to that principal point concerning the fortune
of the Turk.

8 We will say then that the faint-hearted slacknesse of the Christians has
made way to the Turk for the enlarging of his limits, so as they abut almost
of all sides upon Europe, and has been a means that he can now not only
attend the enemy (as Machiauel says) but go to rowse him at his own home.
It is the course he has observed and taken; to ruin his neighbors round
about him, and increase his power, which he has so done as he has clean
bereaved us of all stomach to assail him, yea or once to dare to attempt it.
For though there be Princes enough which hold it necessary for the good of
Christendom to set upon him at his home, yet to this day we see none that will
begin to strike the first stroke, or set first hand to the breaking of this
ice.

9 But if ever God gave us the courage virtuously to attempt this enterprise in
revenge of the oppression and wrongs Christendom has endured at his hands; we
must not think to undertake it by other means then those he has himself put
in practice against us, and that is to seek him out at his own home and nobly
to embrace the dessignes himself has observed; which doing, and having God to
guide, we shall doubtless obtain those victories of him which he has had of
us. Admit he have been for a time our Schoolmasters, and that we have learned
of him to our cost, it is now high time that we show how we have profited by
his instructions, and that we know how to put them in practice and pay the
interests of our damages.

10 Now to make it appear that it is not a matter of that difficulty and
danger that some imagine, let us note these examples which are in a manner
familiar unto us. Had not Andrew Dorea the courage with a small number of ships
to enter into Greece where he got Patras and Coron? 1532.
Don John of Austria, did he not afford a notable proof hereof in the year
1571. when being General of the league, he sought the enemy out in the inmost
parts of the Leuant where he gave him battle with that courage, that though
he were inrferior to him in men and galleies, yet failed he not (assisted by
God) to overthrow the most puissant and great army that the Ottomans ever set
forth by sea against the Christians: There is nothing the Turk so much
fears, as to be set upon by the Christians, both because he knows they have
valor in them, as also for the jealousy he conceiueth of the great number of
them under his obedience: All which would without question rise in arms if
they might but once see the Christians Colors flying, and so accompanied, as
that they might to some purpose make head against the Ottamans.

CHAP. III.
That he has made no account of Fortresses.
1 We must endeavor as well to keep as conquer. 2 The reason and use of
Colonies amongst the ancient. 3 Their discommodities. 4 The causes of
rebellions. 5 An other discommoditie of Colonies. 6 The Portugals manner of
planting Colonies. 7 Their benefit. 8 Fortresses the second means of
preserving an estate. 9 Their use and necessity. 10 Machiauels vain opinion
confuted. 11 Forces ever in readiness, the third means of preserving an
Estate. 12 Whether is better to maintain Fortresses upon the borders, or to
have an army ever ready. 13 How the Turks cuntries live in peace by means of
the latter. 14 In keeping the second means, in getting the third is most
approved. 15 Whence the power of the Turk does grow. 16 Wars abroad beget
peace at home.
1 PRinces generally strive by all means to preserve not only their own
estates, but such provinces also as they have conquered; observing what the
time, the humor of the people, and their means will permit. But because each
one takes a different course, and of this difference happens both good and
evil, I judge it necessary to say somewhat thereof by way of discourse: I will
spare to meddle with the form each one keeps in the politic government of
his dominions or principalities; and will draw my self within compass of
handling, in three several points, all that may be said or alleged upon this
subject. First then we will speak of Colonies, next of Fortresses, and last of
Armies, entertained for the defense of the country.

2 Colonies have been one of the means which the Ancients have most
ordinarily observed; and at this day they are practiced to maintain a subdued
people under the obedience of a new sovereignty. Such then as allowed of this
manner of preserving Estates, by way of Colonies bestowed the lands of those
they had conquered upon their natural subjects, equally distributing them
according to their merits; supposing that in so doing, they should sow the
country conquered with new men, which might behave themselves with a like
devotion and dutiful observance toward them, as vassals perform toward their
Sovereign.

3 The Grecians used them first; and then the Romans: but this manner of
assurance is not so commendable, as many may suppose, insomuch as it draws
after it these two dangerous consequents. The first is, that when a Prince
depriueth such of their goods as are natural owners thereof, to bestow them
upon his own subjects, it wins him and his immortal hatred, accompanied
with an everlasting thirst of revenge, and of regaining their liberty, for
though such as are so despoiled of their goods be but few in number in regard
of the Colony, yet it is to be imagined that they have many kinsfolks and
friends interessed in their miseries, and that there need but three or four
men of resolution to draw all the rest to a mutiny and revolt. If this be held
a difficult matter, yet is it a thing natural to become wise by another
mishaps, and to fear and be provident lest we fall into the like inconvenience
as our neighbors. The apprehension of which calamity makes us ofttimes
conceive worse of the evil then it deserves, especially when the actions of
the conquering prince are grounded rather upon force then reason, as ordinarily
they are.

4 Most commonly the rebellions and insurrections of people and cities, happen
not so much for the outrage done to a whole communaltie, as for the injuries
particularly received by some of those which have revolted: but howsoever, such
wounds always breed the universal destruction of a common weal. ^^^^t. lib.
3. c. 8. Rer. Hisp. Ri^ Neap. l. 2. Reg. Hisp. (...) de Christ ^oem. lib 1.
To this purpose we may allege the example of Roderick King of Spain, who
having ravished Cuba the daughter of Count Julian, the indignity of the fact
entered so far into the hearts of all the Nobles of the country, as every one took
the wrong to be his, and having thereupon taken arms to aid the father in his
revenge, it grew to a worse matter; for hereby they gave the Moors entrance
into the Estate who put to death their King: and were themselves beholders of
the spoil of their country by persecuting vengeance upon so infamous an act
performed by the disordinat lust of him who ought to have reproved and
chastised it in others.

5 The other discommodity which they meet who will settle the establishment of
their fortunes upon the erections of Colonies is, that in succession of time
those men so removed from their own country into another newly subdued,
fashion themselves unto the climat, humors, and complexions, and to the same
mind of preserving their estate, as those amongst whom they are sent to
inhabit. And having thither transported their goods and begotten children, they
thenceforth make more reckoning of the country whither they are come as
Colonies, then of their natural country whence they were displaced: like trees
which planted in an other soil change much both of their nature and taste.
This the more easily happens to Colonies by how much the more remote they are
from their native place of abode. For proof, find we not that even the
neighbor Colonies of Italy during the time of the second Punicke war would not
in any wise contribute to the necessities of Rome their original mother? Lin.
dec. 3. li. 7. 7. Annal. v. c. 545. Olymp. 144.


6 The Portugals observing these inconveniences have to assure the Indies,
practiced a manner of Colonies much more sure, tolerable, and less envied;
which is thus: They plant their Colonies not all at once, but few at a time by
Carauans or companies according as need requires, to inhabit the countries
by them newly discovered; yet not thoroughly to people them, but after as they
shall see they thrive, and so accordingly they by little and little replenish
the Colonie. Goa is the best provided of all they have established, and there
they contract alliances with the ancient inhabitants, and take and give their
daughters in marriages: by this means (which is as I have said the more
plausible) they live free from violence, assured of the good wills of the first
inhabitants who enrich themselves greatly by their traffic and commodities.
In this manner they multiply and are scarcely perceived how, growing to such a
multitude of people as they serve to enlarge and establish the name and
government of the Portugals. From year to year they ad to this increase which
serves them instead of a fortress amongst such as they subdue, and in such
provinces as they will people and accustom to their fashions and rule.

7 Time and experience make it plainly appear, that these forms of Colonies
are more tolerable and sure then any heretofore practiced, for in these the
natural inhabitants are so far from being thrust out of their houses, as on
the contrary, they are therein maintained and more confirmed in the peaceable
inoying o^ their goods. Moreover the union and commixture of blood one with
another softning their natural roughness, retains and redoubleth the
affection as well of the ancient inhabitants, as of those of the Colony. The
Spaniards do the like in the West Indies that which I find most notable
herein, is, that the one and the other rest not satisfied only with
establishing Colonies, but further they convert and instruct the Indians in the
Christian faith, to Gods glory and theirs: It is that which the king of Spain
performs and continues by means of such religious orders as he has planted
among them: for not being able to store so many and so large countries as those
are with natural Spaniards and Portugals, they by this conversion and
Baptism, make those people become Portugals and Spaniards.

8 Having discoursed of the form of Colonies, and how the conquering Prince
may profit himself by them, it is now time that we come to the second thing
which may afford assurance to an estate. The means are many, but the
Christians most usually make choice of fortifications, as seeming to them most
strong bridles to rain in and curb both the ancient and newly subdued
provinces. There they appoint their Magazins for munition and other provision
for the wars; there they bestow garrisons of soldiers for their defense; some
places they fortify upon the frontiers, where they constitute for Governors
and officers, creatures of their own fashioning, the better to contain all
under the obedience of the victorious.

9 Yet is it that which Machiauell reproves and rejects as unprofitable:
Dis. l. 2. c. 24.
but because they are reasons or opininions so weak as that like Spyders
cobwebs, they are easily broken, I will not spend time farther to confute them;
only I will say thus much, that Alfonso king of Naples, a most judicious
prince, whose authority should carry credit, always esteemed this practice
of fortification most necessary and profitable, especially in a country newly
conquered, and not to leave it open and consequently subject to injury and
revolt. The proceedings in this kind, of Francis Sforce duke of Milan, of the
Emperor Charles the 5. and of so many other Princes and Captains which have
woone reputation and renown amongst men, are such as who well considers them
will laugh at the opinion of Machiauel. Without seeking any further, have we
not the French for example? who made no account of erecting cittadels in the
I Will of Sicily: but after they had conquered it, 1281. 13. Ap.
they as soon lost it not without a most lamentable slaughter executed on them
by the inhabitants; but contrariwise deriuing their wisdom from their own
misery, after they once took in hand to make fortresses in sundry places of
Italy, there was no means but by peace to dislodge them. 1516.
The Mamelucks who were in the same error of not trusting to Fortresses, found
themselves in less then two days deprived by Selim of the most part of their
lives, estate, and powers. The Spaniard embracing the indifferency of this
opinion, and desirous to gratify the Flemings whom they thought to appease by
this moderation, returned into their hands the strong holds of their
Provinces: which they had no sooner done, but they were neere-hand expelled the
Low Countries.

10 And though all these examples are but too sufficient to confute the opinion
of Machiauel, yet will I bring him once more upon the stage, and sift him a
little better: See here the substance of what he says: Either thou art able
(says he) to bring sufficient store of men into the field (in which case
fortresses are not any ways necessary) or thou have not means to leauie such
forces as are requisite to defend and warrant thy estate, and then they are
unprofitable. Mark, I pray, the wrong course he takes, walking as he does in
extremes, without keeping the mean, most necessary in these propositions: to
say the truth, he is much mistaken; since this matter as others, should be
distinguished by the portions and qualities thereof, the better and more easily
to understand it. In my opinion then (which I deliver not to exclude others) we
must say thus: Either a Prince has means to levy men out of hand by an
ordinary continuance of arms, or else he must have time to do it, be it
either by leuying a sufficient number of his subjects trained up to arms, and
by the assistance of friends and associats, or of neighbors, which in regard
of their particular interest, will willingly join with him, that he may
protect them from the same injury he may himself receive. In these two first
cases, Fortresses would prove more profitable then necessary: or else a
Prince is of that power as he is able at once to assemble so many men as he
will keep or win the field from the enemy, or will be able, at least,
commodiously to succor the place besieged. In these two respects, Cittadels
are necessary though not much profitable, because they by their constant
defense, stop and intertaine the enemy, afford by such temporising, means
and leisure to order matters; for (as the Venetians say) Chi ha tempo, ha vita,
who has time, has life.

11 The third means for a Prince to preserve his estate, is that which those
allow of, who not trusting to Fortresses, and making no account of Colonies,
do ordinarily intertaine strong companies of horse and foot, and in such
numbers, as they may always contain their subjects in natural obedience,
hinder rebellions, and which most imports, repel, and oppose the enemy, and
as occasion requires, visit him at his own home. In time passed the Mamelucks
practiced this form of government; Aemil. lib. 3. Tuicae.
and the Turks at this day observe it in all points. The Visconti sometime
Lords of Milan, used this form of preserving their estates, and amongst others
Azzo-Visconti ordinarily gave intertainment (yea even in time of peace) to
22000. horse, and they did him no small service.

12 A man may yet put one doubt more of this matter, the resolution whereof
shall fit very well for the course and concluding of the discourse. That is,
which is best either to erect Cittadels or always to maintain a great army.
Experience (our common Mistres) teaches us that for the conservation of great
Princes estate sortresses are the best; because they do not so much incumber
nor dislike the subject as does an army, whose troops dispersed in diverse
parts of the country waste and disorder all: on the other side soldiers shut
up in a fortress are not so insolent and licentious as those commonly are
which keep the field, yea and that oft-times with more havoc then if the
enemy himself had ransaked and ouerrun it. The liberty which armies dispersed
thorowout an estate challenge and assume to themselves, is such as makes them
forget all policy and military discipline: the example of the Milanois herein
will not be beside the purpose. They never complained of the Garrison of the
Castle, 1765.
but when it came to that that Jews the 12. would have lodged his horse within
the town they presently revolted; whereupon ensued the loss of the estate.
What was it that wrought the revolt of the Flemings? was it not the obstinate
mutining of only 1500. Spaniards, who crying after their pay ouerran and made
spoil of all the country? The self same Spanish nation disquieted the Estate
of Milan under the Marquis of Guasto and the I Will of Sicily under Ferdinand
Gonzaga. 1526. Paul. Iou. lib. 7. de Vita vir. ill.
The Sorians and the Egyptians no sooner saw Selims standards displaced but
they rebelled against the Mamelucks, whose armies had maruellously oppressed
them, they having been constrained to maintain them at their own charges.

13 Whereto I know may be replied, that the Turk nevertheless peaceably
holds his estate after the same manner we speak of, his forces being
evermore on foot and in a readiness: it is true, and so is it that to clear
this, two principal reasons may be alleged. The one that he has deprived
such his subjects as are Christians and of a different law, of all use of
arms; and that he has brought them to this pass that they cannot vant to
hold any thing in propriety: which was not practiced toward the above
mentioned; moreover all assemblies upon whatsoever cause are expressly forbidden
them: he keeps them under and makes no more reckning of them then of sheep
pend up in a fould using them like brute beasts, not once vouchsafing to employ
them in the wars. The other reason is that they have no power of themselves to
oppose the Turks so mighty forces; and (which is worst of all) they never have
had any foreign succor to encourage them to such an enterprise.

14 I will forbear to diue any deeper into this subject; me thinks we may see
sufficiently by this how much more supportable are Cittadels, then armies
ordinarily entertained. But if we speak of conquering, I allow that armies are
more to be preferred before fortresses, considering that we thereby enjoy
means to embrace all occasions offered, and at an instant to execute both the
will and design of a Prince so provided.

15. To say the truth it is that which the Ottamans have practiced, to advance
their Empire to such greatness as at this day we see it; it is that which has
heaped on them the honors of so many victories, and which has endowed them
with authority, reputation and means. They have always had (as they yet
have) their armies in a readiness, and have fought with their neighbors in a
manner with as much advantage as a man armed against one that is naked.

16 Some I know will marvel how such a number of people so armed, can contain
themselves from reuolting. I am of opinion, that if they were not ordinarily
employed as they are, in attempts of war, that in the end their multitudes
grown rank with quiet, would easily be drawn to rebellion or mutinies; which
the soldiers of Alexander the Great can witness, for whilst the enemy kept
them in doings, who were then they more hardy and valerous? but after their
victories, who more insolent and insufferable? The Roman armies, how fortunate
were they whilst they had continual war, atchieuing all their interprises
in a manner as they could wish? but after their conquest they became so
turbulent and unquiet, as they assumed to themselves the authority of creating
Emperors, and for the most part so licentiously, as every army made his
particular choice, so as there was no remedy but to try by fight who should
carry it; which occasioned the overthrow of the state. The French, have they
not evermore faithfully served their king against strangers? but so soon as
they had peace with the English, and after with the Spaniard, they filled every
corner of their country with sedition, sackings, cruelties, and slaughters; and
that with such obstinate persisting, as the contagion thereof has not been
able for 25. years space to be removed. But that which is most to be
lamented, is the scandal they have brought upon the church. This self thing
may be appropriated to the Flemings, and the cause may be imputed to idleness,
and the exceeding plenty wherein they lived. The example of Bajazet the second
shall serve to close up this discourse, for he being given over to his ease;
the soldiers, who could not brook such idleness, so awaked the courage of
his two sons, Selim and Acomath, as all the forces of the Empire (which had
established the Turkish scepter) were divided into two, and it lacked not much
of being utterly overthrown, every one for his part seconding the rebellions
of the sons against the father.

CHAP. IIII.
That he has trained up his soldiers to valor and hardiness.
1 Why the armies of these days consist not of so good soldiers as in former
times. 2 Principal causes of victories. 3 What care is to be had in leuying of
good soldiers: and this to be wrought by a fourefould means. 4 By election. 5
Exercise. 6 Honors and profit. 7 The Turks proceeding herein.
1 IT is seldom seen that the armies of these times consist of good
soldiers, for the more we vary from the course our forefathers took to bring
them to perfection, by so much the more are we deprived of that happiness
which were to be desired and seriously sought after by Princes, and those which
as Commanders would reap honor and profit by the wars.

2 Victory (which depends of the divine will) deriueth her success and
principal ground from the multitude of men, but especially from the wisdom of
the Commanders and from the valor and generositie of the Soldier.

3 It is requisite then that we look more narrowly then we do unto their
choice, and that they be such as we may honor and profit our selves by them:
now we must deliver how we may light upon, or make good and hardy soldiers,
which is done in my opinion by a four fold means, by election, exercise,
honor, and profit.

4 By election, because all those which we levy for the wars have not that
natural inclination to valor and courage, nor a constitution of body fit to
endure the travails and dangers incident thereunto. Moreover a gallant fashion
and spirit are not found in every one, much less a resolution to attend,
defy, and assail the enemy; also every man's heart will not serve him to enter
the trenches, throw himself desperately into the dike, scall the walls, offer
himself valiantly, to make good a breach in despite of the Cannon, of stones,
of wilde-fire, and of death it self: Their complexions perhaps will not brook
that they should spend the whole day in continual turmoiles without eating,
and the night without rest, so as where some make account that Antwerpe is able
to make 30000. men, Venice 40000. Gant 60000. Paris 100000. all fit and able to
bear arms, me thinks they should be understood that they are such as have
the age required, but not the disposition proper to such a profession. For
proof hereof have we not of late seen that the Prince of Parma has ranged
under the obedience of the King of Spain even with small forces those of Gant
and Antwerp which had formerly together with those of the low countries
rebelled against their Sovereign? 1584. and 1585.
The Romans held in such esteem this manner of making choice of their
Soldiers as when they would express a leuy of men they termed it Delectum
agere vel habere to make a choice. In our times no man has been more careful
and circumspect in the choice of his soldiers (at the least of the Captains
of Italy) then Cosmo de Medici Duke of Florence; and indeed he was provided of
the best and most approved soldiers of his time.

5 To election we are to add exercise, Veget. lib. 1. c. 15.
without the which there is no forwardness or constitution of body be it never
so strong, able to attain to the perfection requisite to execute and
accomplish, as appertains to a good, brave, and noble soldier.

6 But if the General be so wise as to join to exercise profit and honor, Eo
enim impenditur labor and periculum aplirisque vnde emolumentum and honos
speratur: T. Liu.
then is it that there is no danger or difficulty be it never so great which
his soldiers will not overcome; no encounter which they will not force; no
enterprise which they will not happily compass. As for a Prince there is no
money better bestowed then that wherewith his Captains whet and intertaine the
courage of the Soldier. Plut. lib. 2. c. 5. and 6. li. 1^. c. 4. Gel. lib. 5.
cap. 6.
This was the cause why the Romans beside the ordinary pay of their armies,
ordained crowns for them which had in the wars saved the life of a citizen,
first entered the breach, or boorded a ship: these were termed Coronae Ciuicae,
Murales, and Nauales.

7 The Turks, to our confusion, are not inserior to the Romans, be it either
for the choice they make of their soldiers, or for rewarding them. For they
choose from among the nations under their obedience, the most warlike, and take
of them but the flower and such as are most proper for the wars, sparing not
afterward to recompense them at the full. It is a thing incredible with what
continual exercise they inure their soldiers, in so much that even from the
cradle (if a man may so say) they train them up unto the wars. The
intertainment the Turk gives them is sufficient; but as for the rewards,
honors, and commodities he shareth among them, it is hardly to be expressed:
There is not any Prince at this day living that may in this regard be compared
to him; and which is more, the meanest of his soldiers upon his virtuous
behavior in arms is capable of attaining to the most eminent charges and
dignities of his estate, and of enriching himself with inestimable treasure.
To confirm this, the goods which Meehmet Bassa left behind him, (who of a
Christian Apostate aspired to that greatness) were valued at two Millians of
Crowns. In a word they are sure that reward waits always upon valor.
Moreover the prowess of the private soldiers cannot be smothered amongst
them, it is rather immediately discovered and notice taken thereof. Of all the
Ottoman Princes Mahomet the second was the most bountiful, for he gave beyond
measure, so as sometime he increased the soldiers pay a thousand fould. Selim
the first did the like; and it is worth the noting, that as those two surpassed
the residue in liberality, so did they in honorable and triumphant victory.

CHAP. V.
That he has maintained his Soldiers in military Discipline.
1 A very great army may be easily overthrown by a mean army. 2 The cause
hereof, and benefit of the latter. 3 Care is to be had that an army be not
ouercharged with baggage. 4 A Generall-with more ease may command a mean, then
too great an army. 5 Soldiers are animated by the persuasion and presents of
their chief commander. 6 They are in service to be well acquainted with one an
other. 7 The encumbrance of huge and over great Armies. 8 How it comes to
pass that the Turks so great numbers of men prove victorious. 9 Defects in
Christian armies. 10 Obedience of the Turks. 11 Battles lost through
disobedience of the Soldiers. 12 The military discipline of the Turks
notable.
1 THe happy success of battles by those of ancient times with such wisdom
atchiued, makes it most apparent unto us that most commonly the mean armies
have overcome the great. Alexander the Great, diverse Grecian Captains, amongst
others Miltiades and Themistocles, and among the Romans Lucullus, Scylla,
Pompey and Caesar always assailed and vanquished the barbarous people rather
with unequal then equal numbers, if we respect the multitude; but they went
far beyond them if we consider their military virtue. In these latter times
the Commanders of the Emperor Charles the 5. and of King Philip his son have
likewise gained the victory of many armies greater then this.

2 To such as demand the reason of it, I will answer that it was because the
principal strength and sinew of an army consists, in affection, in military
Discipline, and in a well disposed order in the day of battle: without which
parts an army is as frail as glass. A few may be more easily and orderly
ranged then many. Virtue united is always more powerful then separated and
disiointed. Hence is it that bodies of an indifferent stature are for the most
part more vigorous then such as are over great and huge, which the Poet
(speaking of Fidaeus) expressly signifies in these words. Mayor in exiguo
regnabat corpore virtus. Great virtue in a little body raignd. And Virgil
alluding to the Bees says, Ingentes animi angusto in corpore versantur. In
slender bodies they have mighty minds: questionless a mean army must needs
be more stable and united then a great, because multitude is naturally
accompanied with confusion, commonly waited upon by disorder.

3 Moreover, it is a thing of high consideration to be able to take such order
that a camp be not incombred with baggage: rather that it be free and
manageable, so as it may be every where commodiously co^ducted, ranged and ever
in a readiness to gain and make good dangerous and difficult straites and
passages; that it be not tired and discouraged for the long marches it must
often undertake; that it do not faint for such accidents as diversely chance,
nor for any exploits or executions which present themselves unexpected. All
which a mean camp will be more proper to perform then a great: for it shall
not need so great a quantity of victuals, nor so great an incombrance of
baggage or carriage as the other.

4 Moreover seeing it is more profitable and necessary that an army be
conducted and governed by one only General; and that it depend of no other
then him; It will be more easily effected in a mean then a great army,
especially compounded of diverse nations. And this dependence shall be better
ordered if the General can content himself with small store of luggage and
that well trussed up. The multitude of mean causes slacketh always the course
of the efficient, and keeps back the fruit thereof. A little army has not
need of so much luggage as a great.

5 And it is much better that the Captain himself know his soldiers and
they him; then to rely upon the credit and report of such as are under his
charge; for the soldier that shall hear himself named by his Captain
aduanceth himself so much the more, and becomes more desirous of honor.
Whereas if he see himself forgotten and vntespected of him which commands,
he grows distasted and out of heart, and almost careless how matters have
their procedings. Who doubts that the presence of the Captain or General of
an army does not serve as a motive to the soldier to make him diligently
preserve his reputation, and to shun the reproach of cowardice? which he will
not so carefully perform, if he find himself out of the presence of his
Commander, or that his Commander make as if he did not see him.

6 It is good also that the soldiers frequent brotherly together, for that
assures them more, and makes them trust to one another assistance in time of
the most cross fortunes. All these parts encounter and are entertained more
easily in a mean, then in a great army.

7 Which is often attended upon by more inconuenienences then the other, as by
famine, plagues, contagious mutinies and dissentions. There is yet another
dangerous inconvenience which is most usually the companion of a multitude;
that is, that they form to themselves a confidence of their own forces
greater then they ought: of this confidence follows a contempt of the adverse
power, of this contempt a presumption, author of infinite mischiefs.

8 But how happens it then (will some say) that the Turks have every where
gained the victory by multitude? Would you know how? Because they have betimes
trained up and instructed their great armies, to keep so good an order, as
well in execution, judgment, military discipline, readiness, as disposition
to arms, that they are become as tractable, and easy to manage as ours though
mean and few in number.

9 On the other side we have suffered our armies to slide into such insolency
and liberty, as we can hardly rule and conduct them without so many dangers,
confusions and luggage, as it were enough to trouble Captains of great policy
and experience; and to say the truth, see we not that the Turk more easily
furnishes an hundred thousand men with vittailes, then we fifty thousand? for
besides that his soldiers make not, as ours, any account of the diversity of
vittailes, of delicacie or of toothsome morsels, they drink no Wine nor Beer,
which imports the consideration of almost the one half of our munition and
charge.

10 What need I speak of obedience, nurse of the order observed amongst them?
since it was never seen that the Turks ever lost battle through disorder,
much less left off pursuing any attempt for their soldiers mutinies.

11 Whereas almost all the battles we have bid them, had not been lost, but
by the mere disorder and disobedience of our men. Whereto may we impute the
miserable loss of Nicapolie, 1396.
but to the disordinate rashness of the French, who served at that time in the
army? Sigismond king of Bohemia (afterward Emperor) seeing that contrary to
his will and commandment they advanced themselves as courageously as
unadvisedly. What shall we speak of the overthrow of the same Sigismond which
happened some few years after? 1409.
came it not to pass by means of the disordering of his infantery? which
being not yet fully set in battle array were covered with a cloud of arrows,
let fly by the enemy so to the purpose as they were all hewn in pieces even
under the noses of his horse; which seeing themselves destitute of foot were
struck with such a fear as they betook themselves to flight not without the
loss of many good soldiers and worthy Captains, all to the shame and
confusion of the Christians. Ladislaus King of Polonia, 1444.
was he not overcome at Varna through the disorders of the Bishops of Strigonia
and Varadin? who to the end to chase inconsideratly the enemy, shaken and
flying in one part of his army, forsook their ranks to pursue them, so making
way for them: who laying hold on the occasion came with the rest of their army
to charge them there where they lay most open, in such sort as they wan the
victory most miserably slaughtering the Christians. 1541.
At Buda, 1538.
at Exechium, 1560.
at Gerba, and in sundry other places where we have been overcome, it proceeded
rather of our disorders then of the Turkish forces.

12 So as we must acknowledge that the Turk excels us both in number of
good Soldiers and in all other military discipline: He is followed with such
numbers of men as it seems he relieth wholly on their multitude, but it is in
so good a manner as if he respected naught but order and military discipline,
parts (to our dishonor) far from us.

CHAP. VI.
That he has made no reckning of other forces then his own.
1 The wars are to be maintained by our own strength, neither must we rely
upon foreign powers. 2 The good and ill that resulteth of both these. 3
Conditions of confederate forces. 4 Other inconveniences which arise from
assistance of foreign powers. 5 Examples of Leagues against the Turks. 6
Their defects, hindrances of their success. 7 The Turks not accustomed to
make Leagues with any, but using their own forces, have overthrown many
armies confederates. 8 With whom they might well have joined in league to their
advantage.
1 ALl high enterprises either for preservation of an estate, or for denouncing
of war, have been ill plotted and as ill carried when they have relied upon
the assistance and favor of a third power, and not of our own; seeing that
from hopes and proiects so ill grounded we never come to enjoy the fruits which
such a succor, the desseigne of him that enterpriseth, and his extraordinary
preparation promised us; rather they are infallibly attended on by some
lamentable accident which utterly overthrows them.

2 Since oftentimes it falls out that the expectation of such succor
promised, serves rather to slack the course of our endeauours, and lessen the
preparation of the enterprise, then otherwise to forward or better them; were
it not for the confidence of such succor he that attempteth would prepare his
forces proportionable to his project, and not trust to outward helps either of
friend or confederat. Who doubts, when we so repose our selves upon an others
forces, and that he is at charge for our loves sake, that he does not make us
more backward to provide and disburse of our own store? But this is not all:
the worst is, that while we thus expect, time wastes unprofitably, and
occasion (which once escaped cannot be laid hold on) is let slip and lost
without recovery: for whilst we so attend our assistants our practices are
discovered.

3 And who will believe that a friend or associat will embrace the desseign of
him he assisteth, or wish his good fortune with such hearty affection, as he will
not be ready upon the least occasion he shall desire to find, to leave him in
the lurch? And without question this occasion will offer it self at any time
whenever he has a purpose to dissolve the league and covenants agreed upon
between them; especially if he be the stronger and more mighty, and find not
himself interessed in the success of the enterprise, for which he took arms
and became confederate.

4 We may also add another defect and imperfection; and that is, if the
succor we attend be to be assembled from diverse places, or, that the winds
(if it be by sea) or some unlooked for accident (if by land) hinder by so many
means the preparations for the war and intended voyage, as that the season fit
for execution escapes him that enterpriseth; so as before he begin to march or
set forward to the Rendeuous his opportunities of attempting or atchieuing any
memorable act, utterly fail him in a matter which he had before discreetely
enough plotted and disposed: moreover he cannot bear swaie as master of the
confederate forces, insomuch as he which sends succors may underhand deliver
to his Commanders memorials and instructions more strict and limited, then the
necessity of the undertaken affair would permit. Also the least distaste
either of the Prince which assisteth, or of the Captain which conducteth such
succors, serves oft-times to dismiss the promised forces, deceive the others
expectation, and bring all he undertakes to nothing: So as he remains not
only more weak by this disappointment, but his own forces also become
unprofitable, and consequently himself exposed to all wrong and ruin: for as
if one only wheel of a clock be out of temper, it suffices to disorder the
whole motion; so where the undertaker fails but of one part of his promised
troops, the effects, which in part depend thereon, likewise fail, and the
course of his warlike designs remain crossed and perverted. I will not forget
also to say that a camp consisting of such borrowed pieces, has necessarily
need of many heads to command it, and an army compounded of so many heads
(because of the diversity of opinions and affections) will most commonly have
the worse when it comes to handie blows.

5 We may illustrate these discommodities with examples that touch us near,
and are familiar unto us, and were not long since practiced; for this cause I
will more willingly, then otherwise I would, here produce them. In our time we
have seen two most memorable leagues between the Pope, the king of Spain, and
the Venetians, consenting and united to undertake one war against the Turk:
the one was under Pope Paul the third, 1537.
and the other in the life time of Pius Quintus. The first was carried with an
excessive charge, yet without any effect worthy so great an assembly: The
cause in my opinion proceeded of the difficulty that was found to ioyn in one
body the confederat forces, and draw them together at the Rendeuous in due
season: for they met not till the end of September. Although an other
inconvenience may be alleged to this purpose, which overthrew, the good
success of such a holy and Christian attempt; yet it may appear that to
avoid the shame and dishonor that followed thereof, it had been easy to
have performed somewhat of more memorable consequence, then was the taking of
Castle-nouo, if we had known how to husband the times and occasions fit for
the employment of so combined a power. Concerning the second, which was (as I
said) in the time of Pius Quintus, 1570.
the army of the Venetians, very gallant and strong, spent all the summer in
attending the Galleis of Spain which were to conuoy succors into the I Will of
Cypres then attempted by the Turk; so as this slacknesse of assembling the
Galleyes was a cause that the army became almost quite unfurnished of good
soldiers drawn together to their great costs by reason of the plague which
had made a most pitiful havoc among them. Notwithstanding all this they
forbear not to make toward Cypres so late, as by the way they received the
news of the lamentable taking of Nicosia: Which made them imagine that the
Turks had, upon that commodity, most strongly manned their Galleys (as it was
likely enough) with land Soldiers, and that therefore there was more
appearance of danger the^ of good success in assailing them: upon which
consideration they held it best to turn their course homeward and refer that
business to an other time; having then thus dishonorably behaved themselves:
returning they incountred so many misfortunes, as well weather beaten by reason
of the Winter then approaching, they at length arrived at their home sorely
bruised and spoiled. The year following the army of the consederats met,
notwithstanding all this very late, yet undertook they to encounter the enemy,
of whom they got that so renowned victory in the year 1571. if God had
permitted us to reap thereby those worthy fruits that we had reason to expect.
Now for all this Cypres was not recovered but remained to the infidel as the
reward and wages of his valor. The third year of the league the king of
Spain, in stead of pursuing his enterprise against the Turk as he had
determined, caused Don John of Austria Admiral of his fleet to stay at
Messina, because he then doubted that the French would assail Flanders, with
such forces as they had that year rather suffered to take breath then wholly
cased and dismissed: So as the whole season was spent unprofitably without
attempting ought worthy such preparation, as the confederates had in due time
set forth. This was an occasion of excessive charge, and that the armies did
not once stir till it was too late, attending what their neighbors would do,
who, as I have said, seemed to threaten the King of Spain with some attempt
upon his country of Flanders. In the mean time the Venetians, tired with the
charge and trouble they were at to no purpose, treated a peace with the Turk.

6 Who will make any question now (those things well weighed and considered)
that if the leagues (both the first and second) had been well carried without
these crossings, iealousies and suspicions which accompanied them, (though
vainly and upon no ground) but that they would have brought forth some
worthy and honorable fruit, to the glory and honor of God, the peace of his
church, the increase and establishment of the Christian commonwealth? This may
be enough to prove that forces compounded of diverse nations, depending of many
and different heads, are in marching more slow, and at a time of need less
effectual then others. It may appear to some that I hereby infer, that
leagues between Princes are unprofitable, and therefore not to be made: so
far is it from me to maintain that opinion, as I rather willingly embrace
the contrary: but I reserve a time to handle how and in what manner it would
be good to make such a league, (especially against the Turk) when I shall
arrive at the place appointed for this purpose, to the end I may discourse of
it at full. Vid. l. 3. c. 7. 8. 9.
Now let us return to the argument of discourse in handling.

7 The Ottomans never made league, either offensive or defensive with any: and
never had help of strangers: on the contrary, they have always had to do
with armies compounded of different nations confederate, and conducted by
sundry Commanders, all which (as ill united, not understanding one another)
they have evermore vanquished. Moreover we have ordinarily seen them more
forward and deliver about their enterprises being alone, then accompanied; and
consequently more united in their force, more nimble in execution, and (it must
needs follow) more renowned and fortunately victorious.

8 Yet they had no lack of whom where with to practice their associations (if
they had approved them as good and necessary) as among other with the Sultan
of Caito, with the kings of Carmania and of Persia, and with many other great
princes al of their own sect and religion, who would not (as it is to be
supposed) have set light by their league and amity; especially then when they
saw them so increase in power and greatness. But they have ever made very
slender account of such practizes and confederacies, esteeming them
unprofitable for him, who of himself has a high courage, and forces
answerable wherewithal to go thorough with a conquest, which they judge will
admit no sharing or division, since the ambition of rule strives to be alone
and brooks no fellowship, no not between brothers; as little between father
and son. It is true, the Turks have sometime taken to their service some few
troops of Allarbs paid as mercenaries, in like manner as now a days the
French entertain the Switzers and other foreign nations; but they never
termed them, as they now use, Confederates or Associates, titles invented
purposely to give color and applause to such leuies.

CHAP. VII.
That he has to power joined cunning and deceit.
1 Machiauels perverse opinion of not observing faith, rejected. 2 The ground
of a Princes authority and estimation laid by the observation of his faith. 3
Confutation of Machiauels opinion. 4 Breach of faith a heinous crime. 5 Other
mischiefs that spring out of Machiauels position. 6 To observe faith is godly,
honest, and profitable. 7 What we are to conceive of the Turks falsehood and
perjury:
MAchiauel amongst other virtues wherewith he would adorn his imagined
Prince, Princ. c. 18.
woonderfully commends disloyalty in a great person, affirming that he ought
not to make reckoning to observe his treaties of peace or ought else he
undertakes, at the least when his game is fair: and that he may at such a
time without scruple of conscience, or other honest respect, violate his faith,
break the laws of nations, and his oath. A thing questionless unbefitting a
magnanimous spirit, and which ought never to have place among the actions of a
Christian Prince, to the end he may not by so foul and dishonest a stain
disgrace the residue of his virtuous operations. This makes me esteem this
axiom so lewd and detestable, that we should blush, so much as to imagine it,
much less to propound it as a precept for Princes; who are not to profess
other then Justice and generositie. It is good for none but those whose case is
desperate, and who respect not that their posterity condemn them for men of
foul and cauterized souls.

2 To say the truth, no man can with reason gainsay, renown and a good
reputation, as well at home as abroad, to be the most firm foundation of all
principality. And what reputation can a Prince have either among his own
people or strangers, if he be noted for a disloyal, unfaithful, and periurde
person, one that stands neither to his word nor agreement?

3 Machiauel to conceal the fault he not ignorantly commits, says, that
this is sometimes most requisite for the good of Princes affairs, since
occasion once passed is irrecouerable. What more mere folly could he discover
to his confusion, then in thus concluding, that a Prince is not to regard the
bond of his faith, if the good of his estate present an occasion to violate it?
Truly none at all: neither were it necessary according to Gods laws, or the
carriage of humane affairs, that Christian Princes were of that mind; for it
would prove the direct course never to see but fire and sword amongst us.

4 Such as are good detest these opinions, 1539
as did heretofore Frances the first; who professing faith and honor, rejected
such counsel when the Emperor Charles the 5. about the establishment of the
affairs of Flanders, passed through France, and upon the Kings word, crossing
his country came to Paris. That word this Noble Prince preferred before the
greatest good that could betide his estate, if he would have retained the
Emperor, and constrained him to forgo the places and estates he held in
Lombardy and Italy, whereto the King pretended a right, which he often
unprofitably disputed, as did also Henry the second.

5 By the same reason a man may also say that sometimes it is well done to
ransacke Churches, rob Altars, oppress innocents, and succor the wicked:
for there is not any vice so detestable, or crime so heinous that sometime
carries not with it a show and color of good, and proves not profitable to
him which in due season performs it; were it for naught else but because he
attaineth the effects of his corrupt will. If that were not, should we have so
many murderers, falsifiers, sacrilegious persons and men given over to all
reproachful vices? if thereby they did not reap some temporal commodity?

6 I will yet add further, and maintain it to the end, that for a man to
keep his promised faith, and be so accounted of by the world, is a work of
God and without comparison much better then to violate it and embrace such a
damnable opinion as that of Machiauel, yea though the profit were immediate and
such as might afford wherewithal to balance his breach of faith and promise:
Not to keep touch with one is enough to incur the suspicion and ill conceit
of all; neither is there any which will not think he does God good service in
performing the like toward all such Princes as shall take such courses; which
will yet farther administer matter for an other repentance, to see that when
they shall tell or mean truth no man will believe or trust them. I could
illustrate this proposition with infinite examples but I will content my self
with that one of Duke Valentine son of Pope Alexander the 6. cited by
Machiauel, as a perfect Captain; who without respect of truth, his oath,
reverence of religion, or honor, which is so charily to be preserved amongst
men ordinarily, abandoned himself to all disloialty, breach of faith, and
whatsoever other wicked and traitorous courses; so they carried with them some
show of present commodity. This man during the life of his father went through
with certain his designs, borne out rather by the Popes authority then any
fortunate success of his mischievous attempts. After the death of his father
it was quickly seen how smally durable are all such estates as are founded
upon deceit. Iou. lib 8. hist.
For he found himself immediately forsaken of his friends and pursued by his
enemies; so as more lively to express what he came to, after he had most
maliciously hatched and atchiued so high enterprises, he served (as they say)
but for a cipher, and was as one that had no being, leaving naught behind him
but only the footsteps and a cursed memory of his wickedness, which made his
life and name infamous to all posterity.

7 Some one will tell me that the Turks have done the like, and have used all
sorts of cunning, deceit and treachery, toward their neighbors, and that
nevertheless they have thriued by it. It is true, but the causes are
different, and yet we see that the most disloiall amongst them were not the
most assured in the forces of their trecheries. Amurath the second, Mahymeth
the second, Baiazeth the second, Selim the second, were held the most subtle
Princes of their race; but we must grant that if those their wicked procedings
thriued for a time, it was more through the coldness and dissentions of the
Christians when they should have revenged and repelled their injuries, then
that we should therefore believe that it is well done to prove perjured and
disloiall. Amurath the second made proof of it to his cost, and having
received an overthrow at the hands of Ladislaus King of Polonia, At the
Mountain Hemus.
he speedily made peace with him and turned his forces against Caramania, where
whilst he was busied, Ladislaus judging (so persuaded and backed by Pope
Eugenius) that he should not do amiss to falsify his faith with a Barbarous
Turk of so insolent a nature, and so capital an enemy of Christendom as all
breach of peace might seem as a true performance thereof; resolved to make war
upon him on the sudden, which proved so dangerous as Amurath was near
tumbling from the top of an high and glorious fortune to the lowest degree of
misery; so as his estate was never more shaken and endangered; if the Christian
army (which followed their victory) had not, as I have said, disordered
themselves: Whereupon the glory and triumph fell to the Infidels to the great
misery and confusion of the Christians. At Varna.
Selim the second, 1444.
having unlooked for, attempted upon the Venetians to the prejudice of his
vowed faith pulled upon his neck the forces of the league, 1570.
and had too late repented himself if God in regard of our sins had not in
such sort sealed up the eyes of the Christians as they could not see nor make
their benefit of the gate his divine Majesty had set open to a more high
enterprise then the loss they received at Lepanto. Soliman that was held the
most wise Prince of all the Ottomans (if wisdom be able to shine where there
is no light of true faith and Christian belief) having understood at such time
as he caused his army by Sea to fall down toward Ottranto the year 1537.
that Mercurin de Gatinaro and the Citizens of Castro were made prisoners after
they had surrendered the place contrary to promise, he forthwith commanded
that they should be released, saying that disloialtie to violate their faith
and word once passed, was not the means to win the hearts and likings of
strange nations.

CHAP. VIII.
That he has been always served in his wars by good and valiant Captains.
1 Whether an experienced Commander and raw Soldiers: or experienced
Soldiers and an unskillful Commander be the better. 2 The first best allowed
and the reasons. 3 Examples hereof.
1 IT is ordinarily disputed amongst Soldiers and martial men, which is the
better, a good Captain employed about the conducting of an army consisting of
raw Soldiers, or an army of old Soldiers committed to the command of a raw
and unexperienced Captain.

2 As for me (if my opinion may carry credit amongst so many, sufficient to
decide this question) I hold it better that a worthy and valiant Captain
should have the charge of an army of untrained men without experience, then
that an army of old Soldiers trained and beaten to the wars, should be
recommended to a Captain, yet a nouice and vnskild in the profession of arms.
The reasons proper for the maintaining of this proposition are so plain to
such as without being obstinate or passionate, in behalf of either party, will
entertain them, as they are not to be gainsaid: for is it not much more fit
and easy that a good Captain make and fashion a camp of raw Soldiers, then
that good and experienced Soldiers prepare and fashion their Captain to the
conduct of an army? who can without shame deny that an army does not rather
obey the voice and command of their Captain, then the Captain of his army?
Male imperatur cum vu^gus regit duces. Senec. trag.
otherwise it were as they say, to set the cart before the horse.

3 Now we must come to such examples as may instruct and make clear the truth
of my proposition. If we will as we ought, examine how many times the
Christians have been overthrown by the Turks, we shall undoubtedly find,
that it has evermore happened rather through want of experience, 1396.
courage, sufferance, concord, and authority in the Commanders; then for any
other default. So at the battles of Nicepolis, for that such like Captains
did set light by the Turks forces, and took not a sufficient survey of them,
they received a most shameful overthrow, a worthy reward of their weak
experience, in not knowing how to fight with those barbarous nations, 1526.
whom they might well think wanted neither skill nor valor. Did not Jews
king of Hungary by means of the Bishop of Tomerea (who brought him almost to
the slaughter) endure the like disgrace, at the battle of Mogoria, for want
of experience in matter of war, and of judgment sufficiently to discover the
enemies forces, and the passages of the country where he was to buckle with
him? In like sort was not the unskillfulness of the Italians cause of that
victory the Turks gained at Grado, who had then for their leader Homarbay,
General of the Turkish army? Also the year 1537. at Exechium ( Mahomet
Iahiaoglis being Governor under Soliman of Belgrad and the frontiers of
Hungary in the time of king John) the great Caziauer losing his courage, did
he not abandone to spoil, death, and ruin a fair and strong army, which he
commanded for the Princes of Germany and Italy, some one troop excepted, which
dishonorably together with him saved themselves by flight? Also before this
heavy loss, did not Anthony Grimani General of the Venetian army fail of
courage when with great advantage he might have charged the Turks, Sabel En.
10. l. 9.
and put them to the worse? 1471.
The very like want of experience and valor was seen in an other Venetian
General, who shamefully left the I Will of Negropont to the spoil of the enemy.
To conclude, have not the Christians been so many times put to the worse
near about Buda, for want of valiant and experienced Captains, as it cannot
without grief be related? On the contrary, the Ottomans have never suffered
misfortune of war; at the least for lack of authority, command, or wisdom
in managing their armies: for they themselves have in person conducted them,
and been present at all their high exploits and important enterprises by them
achieved. They have likewise evermore committed the charge of their difficult
actions and affairs of war to the most valiant and experienced Captains
amongst them, whom they had formerly well known, trained up, and exercised to
such charges by infinite proofs of their courage and wisdom in most dangerous
and difficult occasions. In sum, experience is that which perfecteth valor.
The Turkish Emperors have always given to their Captains ample power and
commission freely to dispose of their most important affairs, wherein they have
been thus happy that we cannot find that ever such Captains lost battle for
lack of command or obedience; or that they ever for want of courage or
experience in the art military, made stay or question of their proceedings. Of
all the Bashas that ever had the managing of matters of importance, and had
greatest hand in the affairs of their Masters, Acomet was the chief (who
served Mahomet the 2. and added much to his greatness by obteining many glorious
victories) insomuch as he was no less feared then his Soueraign. To him Sinam
may be joined who lived under Selim the first, and being slain at the battle
of Matarea (wherein he wan the victory for his Master) Selim said of him that
the death of so worthy a man as he, was cause of such great grief unto him as
it equalled the joy he conceived for so happy a victory: such also was
Barbarossa that famous pirat, who for his many warlike acts wan the renown of
a valiant Captain, and was most highly reputed of his Master Soliman, for whom
he performed many memorable enterprises as well by sea as by land. Hence we may
gather that undoubtedly a great Prince cannot do worse then commit the charges
of his wars, the dignities and conducts of his armies, to them which enjoy his
favor but unworthily: he should consider the deserts of others, and especially
of such as with more sufficiency would render an honorable account of so
worthy an imploiment. We see it fall out oftentimes that for default of well
measured elections a Prince plungeth himself and his estate in a thousand
dangers and confusions through the insufficiency of his unskillful ministers:
the examples of such unfortunate events would fill this volume if I would stand
to relate all such as my memory presents unto me. But omitting all I will
only put you in mind of the Emperor Charles the fifth well known for most
judicious in all his elections, meruellous in his actions, mighty for the great
number of his excellent Captains bredde and trained up under him; all which
can witness the care he had in his choice, and in very deed they did him such
service as by their means he enlarged his dominions with many rich Provinces,
adorned his scepter with most memorable victories, and his house with triumphs
to his immortal glory.

CHAP. IX.
That he has made no skippe in his enterprises.
1 United virtue strongest. 2 The strength of kingdoms by their situation. 3
What it is to skippe in an enterprise. 4 Kingdoms preserved by the conjunction
of their subject provinces. 5 Confirmation of the Roman Empire. 6 The means of
establishing an Empire by confederacies. 7 The French as quick in losing as in
conquering countries. 8 We are not to indeauor so much to conquer as to keep.
9 The Portugals and Spaniards distracted government. 10 Industry of the
Ottomans in conquering. 11 An admonition to Christians. 12 Horror of the
Turks.
1 NOthing would be so strong as a poinct, if it were to be found in nature;
at the least if the rules of the Mathematiques be true as they be held, because
being most simple, it cannot be corrupted either by inward beginnings, or
outward causes; so is a body more enduring and powerful, the nearer it
approaches to the resemblance of a poinct, that is to say, the more it is
united and compact in it self. And in very deed as nature unable to bring to
pass that all the world should be one only body, made it continued and ioining
one part upon another; and as to preserve this continuation, she in all she may
opposes Vacuum, which is only able to corrupt and destroy her:

2 So estates become more durable, and of greater ability to maintain
themselves when they are (as I may say) sowed, linked, and bound together, the
one helping to entertain and preserve the other. Hence we may gather that such
provinces as have their situation trussed up together in a round form, are
more strong and mighty then such as extend themselves in length: as for
example, one may say of France in comparison of Italy, because this latter
resembling a leg stretched out is less fit to defend it self then France,
which is round, as her provinces lie and are situate: whereby she is
consequently not only more united in her forces then Italy, but also more
nimble and able to maintain herself then the other.

3 Now let us come to our discourse and make it appear what it is we
understand by this discontinuation, and that which we term to skip in our
enterprises. It is properly when we regard not the contiguity (if I may so say)
or near adjoining of our estates; and that happens as often as we leave an
enemy behind us, at one side of us, or otherwise, in such sort, as he may
cross, cut off, beseege, or enclose us when we so inconsideratly skip or
stride; we may likewise say that he truly skips who crosses from one country
to another so far distant, as by that time he has finished his voyage, his
strength fails him and his troops prove so out of heart and tired, as they
become utterly unprofitable. We may allege for example that which befell the
Emperors of Germany, the king of France and of England in their voiages of the
holy land, for the length of the iourny, the far distance of the country, the
diversity of the Climate, the change of the air, and many other such like
inconveniences, so tired and discouraged them by reason of the travails and
miseries they had suffered upon the way, as they could not attempt any matter
of importance, or go through with their enterprise according to their project:
not unlike a ball which stirs not from the place where it is once settled,
through want of that moving power which should toss and raise it. So if these
Princes at the first arrival did afford any proof of their courage, valor,
and likelihood of good fortune; the languishing of the principal motive
suddenly made them lose their advantages, and reduced the whole to terms
unworthy the merit of their holy intentions and travels.

4 We must then allow that it is requisite for the preservation of estates,
either that their provinces touch and intertaine the one the other, or that
their forces be of ability to maintain themselves of themselves: for this
continuation has of it self such force and efficacy for the lasting and
preservation of estates, as we see that commonweals and mean kingdoms have
thereby longer maintained themselves then great and rich monarchies. We may
allege for example the commonweals of Sparta and of Venice; of the kingdoms
of Persia and France, whose rule has much longer endured then that of the
Sarazins, of the Mamelucks, or of other more mighty Empires. The cause
proceeds, as I have said, of the union of that entertainment and conjunction
of provinces, abutting the one upon the other, which is of such virtue and
efficacy to give strength and continuance to a monarchy, as it almost
exceeds conceit and imagination.

5 The Romans which saw well enough that the enlarging of their Empires limits,
trained after it a consequence of a necessary dispersing of their forces,
endeavored by all means possible to reunite this body, augmented and made huge by
their aduantageous conquests; reducing to their obedience and rule, all they
got both by maintaining sufficient forces upon the frontiers of their Empire or
garrisons in places of importance, as also by establishing Colonies, and
infranchising many strong towns, with bestowing on them the like liberties as
the people of Rome enjoyed, by them termed Municipia. In other places also
they instituted certain fraternities and assemblies of people, with
prerogatives of the Romans privileges, which they named Conuentus: Moreover,
they committed estates and entire kingdoms to the government of certain
Princes held and esteemed as friends of the people of Rome. By these means
joining them to their love as well by gratifying them with their liberty and
bounty, as with other privileges, honors and dignities, whereof they did
partake in their town as in right of Citizens: They termed these towns and
people their confederates, and the Kings their friends. As for example in
Afric they had Massinissa, and Iuba; in Asia, Eumenes, Prusias and the King
of Egypt. In Europe those of Marseilles, Autum, Auerg^^^, Rennes and others;
making account more to avail themselves by such confederacies and amities then
by means more strickt and severe: so then power is established and continued
either by our own forces, or by annexing of the forces of our friends which
serve us as a continued rampart and conducteth us out of danger even into the
country which we intend to invade, and that with so much the greater advantage,
when upon some part it confineth with the country of our confederates.

6 But because we are never able with good assurance (especially Princes
amongst whom this is a tickle point) to maintain so good intelligence, it is
requisite if we will make this use of an other, to make him confident either
through the hope of participation in our conquests, or else by intimating unto
him (if he be our inferior) an evident assurance in our proceedings, and such
a plainness and integrity in all our other actions, as even that may rid him
of the distrust he might conceive of being one day prayed upon and brought
under by that insolency which accompanies the prosperity of fortune, and may
serve to stretch the conscience of a conquering Prince. After we have in this
manner framed an impression of our integrity in the heart of our neighbor, we
may march in his country as securely as in our own, and rest assured that we
shall by him be furthered and assisted.

7 The French could never keep any country by them conquered abroad, unless
it were Piemont and Sauoy: for it one day they had gained a foot of land, they
were enforced to forgo it the next, no sooner winning it, but they lost it.

8 We commonly say, that there is no less virtue in him that keeps them in
him that gets. Non min^r est virtus quam quaerere, part^ tueri.
I affirm that there is need of more dexterity in keeping then in getting,
for an amazement of the people we invade, a rebellion in our behalf, or any
other such like stir makes us easily masters of that whereto we aspire; but
to preserve what we get, we must maintain a continual counsel which must
have all the parts thereto appertaining, as gravity of judgment, ripe
deliberation, nimblenesse to dissemble, industry joined with a daily
heedefulnesse and patience to attend occasions. The French (which are reputed
the most warlike nation under the sun,) are but too sudden, open, impatient
and of too stirring a nature; for proof you shall observe that what they
atchieue not when they first attempt, they almost never compass it: all their
boilling heat is soon exhaled and spent by the sudden feruencie of their
courage, which most commonly transports them beyond all moderation and advice
most requisite in what we undertake, without heeding the end for which they
began. This negligence together with their impatience has made way to all the
misfortunes which out of their country they have induced: The voyage of the
Terseras and certain other attempts upon the Portugales have not long since
confirmed this opinion, and made the wound of their unhappiness bleed a fresh.
Lews the eleventh, a prince of an approved wisdom and clear sighted in
matters of estate, would never lend any ear to the persuasions of sending an
army into Italy or other remote parts; rejecting all such practices, as well
for the reason formerly alleged, as because of the infidelity which he
thought to be in the Italians, and particularly in them of Genoa. If Charles
the 8. his son, Jews the 12. Francis the first, and Henry his son had
inherited this their predecessors opinion, they had not with such excessive
charge, mishap, and misery attempted Italy.

9 Here some one will object that nevertheless the dominion of the Portugals
is of 90. years continuance or thereabout in the Indies, so far distant from
the first spring and original. The like appears in the government of Philip
King of Spain spread and divided in so many places as well in Europe as in
India. Surely it is not possible to imagine a greater distance then from Lisbon
to Ormus, Goa, Malaca, and Ternate, so as from Portugale to their farthest
Conquests, there are no less then twenty thousand miles; and although they
endeavor to join these estates so severed, by the neerenesse of sundry
fortresses here and there bestowed in the midway (as Zofala, Mohambique,
Melinde, which belongs to a certain King their Ally, besides other like
means) yet all these are but weak sinews long to sustain the union of so
far separated members. But it is Gods pleasure that by how much the foundations
of this rule are more feeble and subject to be shaken, by so much the more we
should admire the omnipotency of his divine Majesty, whereby they are
maintained, fortified, and protected. The dominion likewise of the King of
Spain is spread into so many parts of Asia (especially by means of annexing
the crown of Portugale) of Afrike, of Europe, and of the new found world, as
there appears in this preservation a greater miracle then counsel or humane
providence, for in very deed to rule so many and so severed nations differing
in religion, manners and tongues without stirring from home, is it not a work
of heaven rather then of humane policy or discourse? God therefore which has
of his goodness made him owner of so many and so goodly countries, has not
denied him wisdom and counsel to know how to order and maintain them, as
he does, under his obedience.

10 The Ottomans have ordinarily behaved themselves more iudiciously in this
one part of conquering (without inconsiderat skipping) then in any other of
their actions. For neither covetousness of enriching or enlarging their
estate, nor the easiness of attempting, nor the inticements of peoples
insurrections, nor the thirst of revenge (which commonly makes Princes mighty
in men and money, forget themselves when the maintenance of their authority and
credit is called in question, especially perceiving the law in their hands to
execute more readily then can particular persons) nor any such like motives
have been able, as I said, to induce the Turks indiscreetly to skip or to
engage themselves in any enterprise far from home. Rather on the contrary they
have marched fair and soft from country to country, and devoured (as they
continue still to do) all such as confine and are neighbors unto them. Hence
has grown the consequence of so many happy victories, the benefit of so
great and rich conquests; the course of so easily preserving what they have
gotten.

11 I have said that for the most part they have not inconsideratly skipped or
strid in their enterprises, as the Christians do and have done: and as we see,
when any of them have taken such ways to greatness, the fruits and effects
have not proved answerable to their project and promised fortunes. This
unhappiness, common with the error founded upon the reasons formerly alleged,
ought henceforth to serve as an instruction to make us become more wise and
regardfull then we yet are, to the end that after we have by an holy and
universal amendment appeased the wrath of God, we may war against them with
the same policies and advantages as they have practiced in raising themselves
to our cost and confusion. These examples also should admonish us of what is to
be feared, to wit, least failing to chastise and humble our selves, his divine
Majesty inflict upon us a more severe punishment, then that we have hitherto
endured, and for this cause open a more large gate to those infidels utterly to
ruin and destroy us.

12 Now lest any one should think I have against reason held that the Turks
have not, as we, forgotten thus inconsideratly to skip, I will recite certain
examples to that purpose. The first then that did it, was Mahomet the second,
which unfortunately attempted Italy, Soliman performed the like against the same
country, after the interprise of Diu in the Indies, which was undertaken the
year 1537. then that of the year 1542. that of Ormus 1552. and finally upon
good grounds the attempting of Malta which was so valiantly defended by the
Knights of the order, as (next the honor due unto the divine Majesty) all
those brave Gentlemen, who with their grand Master Parisot, made it good
against the Infidels, deserve to be consecrated to all praise, and to a most
glorious and eternal memory.

CHAP. X.
That he has not spent time upon enterprises of small importance.
1 Get the greater, the less will follow. 2 The besieging of some small hold,
may be the hinderance of the whole expedition, this exemplified. 3 The Turks
discretion in their expeditions and sieges. 4 The best course is, to become
masters of the field. 5 Error in the siege of Malta.
1NAture as wise and provident, does not busy her-selfe about the birth of
every particular thing, but rather sets her hand to the generation of the
substance, which without any further pain, is afterward attended on by the
accidents every where inseparably accompanying her. In like sort a good and
discreet Captain in the carriage of his enterprises, should not aim at ought
else but to conquer the places of importance; for of their consequence other
inferior parts of the estate come tumbling in (as it were) of themselves, which
as inseperable accidents or qualities, undoubtedly follow the first examples of
greater moment, whereon depends and subsisteth the others being.

2 We have often seen, that a paltrie Sconce (either because of the natural
strength of the situation, thickness of the wall, goodness of the matter,
courageous obstinacy of the defenders, or some other accident not foreseen or
dreampt of, has stopped the proceeding of a royal army, and has proved it
self as able to withstand the force thereof, as a city greater, richer, and
more peopled. And though we become after masters of such blocke-houses and
small fortes, yet that is no furtherance to a more important conquest; or help
to the enterprise begun. We find written that the Emperor Maximilian, because
he to no purpose spent so much time about Asola (which he striued to subdue by
the way, for the reputation and credit of the army, he conducted to Milan)
inconsiderately lost the occasion offered him to become Lord of that Dukedom;
and performed not any thing after to the good of his affairs. The French also,
after they had passed the Alps in the time of Jews the 12. thriued not in
their attempts of the kingdom of Naples; having upon an ill ground undertaken
Rocca-Secea, where they engaged both their honors and lives; for having
besieged it certain days, and given the assault in vain, they lent leisure
and courage to the Spaniards, to bethink themselves: made their powers less
valued for so badde a beginning, and discouraged the people for ever attempting
any thing in their behalf, as no doubt they had done if they might have seen
a fortunate and better digested proceeding then theirs was, the name of the
Spaniard being then odious amongst them. This fault made the Spaniards so bold
as to say, that the rest of the kingdom was reserved for them, and not for the
other, who had so ill husbanded their opportunities. In the year 1556. holding
on the said design for the conquest of Naples, did they not vainly spend
time, money, their forces, and pains at Ciuitella, to the ruin of that goodly
army which Henry the 2. of France sent thither under the command of the Duke
of Guyse: who was nevertheless a valiant and discreet Captain, and who had
perhaps done better if his particular interest, or the overmuch trust he
reposed in the Popes Nephews, had not blinded him: Other reasons may be
alleged for the small good this army did the king, who had conceived of it
great and honorable hopes; but I will refer them to such as write that
History. The Spaniards also have thrice attempted the I Will of Gerbes, 1560.
and every time lost a goodly and flourishing army, able to have performed a
far greater matter then they could hope for by getting the henroust (if I may
so term it.) The year after the battle of Lepanto the army of the
confederates, 1572.
which was then in the Leuant, having their forces augmented by the arrival of
Don John, made Ochiallo General of the Turkish army, retire to Modon, as
fearing those of whom he had made trial the year before. If they had put him
to it as they should have done, no doubt but they had found him dismaide, and
hardly bestead how to defend as well the fortresses as his army by sea: for he
had not left above 60. galleys, to guard the haven, and had bestowed the rest
of his forces one year. But when he saw they went to besiege Nauaria near
Modon, and that they had no saying to him at his landing, as he feared they
would, he took heart at grass, and after made a jest of the designs of the
Christians army, which he in such sort held play and entertained, as it
performed nothing worthy such a power assembled immediately upon the good
success of a former victory.

3 The Turks in what concerns the ordering, commodity, and assurance, in
their enterprises, surpass (to say the very truth) all other nations for well
managing of warlike affairs: for they never attempted place that the design
thereof was not far more worth then the pain they employed about it; or
that the enterprise did not deserve the like or more expense: carrying
themselves thus, they are by the effect of their enterprises grown mighty,
for force and means, and have opened the way to the increase of their
greatness and success of their affairs: which in such sort assuring (wherein
they have aimed principally at profit) they have more and more weakened our
forces, not without an evident consequence of extreme danger: when they took
in hand the conquest of Cypres, they were wise enough not to bestow time in
taking Cerynes a fortres almost impregnable. They foresaw that it was of small
moment, at the least not to import much in that they intended to compass, but
they rather directed their course and endeavors against Nicosia, as against the
principal place of all the Island, whereabouts they so well employed their
pains as they carried it. By which conquest it was found that Cerynes soon
followed, (as of a necessary consequence) the disaster of their capital town.

4 In all the executions of their hardy dessignes they have always at the very
first been Masters of the field, which has so furthered them as thereby the
strongest holds of the country, which they could not otherwise have gotten but
by force of arms, have been surrendered up unto them. Such fortresses being
unable long to hold out when all hope of succor is cast off by the opposition
of so strong and mighty armies as theirs are.

5 At the war of Malta it seems God did dull them, 1560.
overthrowing the policies and practices which are ordinary with them. For the
Bassa (who would needs begin with S. Hermes because it seemed commodious to
stop up the haven and after to get the suburbs where the knights made their
aboade) consumed much time about it, and lost the better part of his best
soldiers. In the mean space the season of the year spent so fast, and the
resolutions and valor of them in the town proved such, as in the end he grew
confounded, perceiving too late how flenderly he had prevailed, and that he
must necessarily begin a new with the principal place, which he should have
at the first attempted, if God (as I said) for the good of Christendom, had
not blinded him in his enterprise. Dorgut Raiz Viceroy of Argiers, who was to
second this Basha in all his war, and to whom he was commanded to communicate
his designs as soon as he should arrive, (which he did some few weeks after
his first setting down and beginning to batter) soon discovered his error,
and could vpbraid him with it, telling him he should have gone right on to the
fountain, without stooping to the shallow streams. So as after the taking of
S. Hermes, they did not perform or attempt any matter of importance, but as
men tired and discouraged, they trust up bag and baggage to be gone as soon
as the succor appeared before Malta; these leaving behind them the memory
and testimony of their shame, and ill grounded advise, and the knights of
their honor and valor.

CHAP. XI.
That he has laid hold on occasions.
1 Occasion pourtraied. 2 It is to be observed. 3 Examples of the Ottomans
diligence in laying hold on occasions offered by the Christians. 4 The
difficulties of a defensive and offensive league. 5 The false guess of the
selfe-ruine of the Turkish Empire. 6 The weaker Princes are easily subdued by
the mightier. 7 Other occasions offered by the Christians to forward the
Turkish greatness.
1 THe ancient Romans signified unto us by the picture of occasion (whom they
adored as a goddess, putting wings to her feet, supported with a bowl,
behind bald, and before hairie) that we must be diligent to apprehend her
when she presents her-selfe, and not in any case to let her slip:
considering that if she once escape us, she leaves us naught but a vain and
vexing repentance.

2 And to say the truth, in all a man's actions. There is nothing more
commendable then to be able to make the best use of occasion and especially in
matter of war. In as much as he that knows his advantage, how to take it and
to carry the time before him is furnished with the principal adorning virtue
of a Captain, occasion being no other thing, then an opportunity that the time
more by accident then providence offers unto us, for the well performing of
what we have in hand, and for the abstaining and well coming off from a
dessine vnsesonably attempted, as the event of the above mentioned interprise
may sufficiently witness. This is that these Infidels have studied at such
times as God has made them his instruments to afflict and chastise us, and
this is that we ought to do against them, for the glorifying of Gods divine
Majesty, not yet for ought I see pleased with us. In a word all such as have
enlarged their estates have either inioyed or hammered out some notable
occasion which they wisely laid hold on, and have consequently reaped the
fruits of an unusual advancement. The Grecian and Roman histories can teach
us this, but I omit them as too far from us, to betake my self to such as are
more familiar and near unto us. Pepin and Charlemaine were by the Romish
church called into Italy: 735.
the like was Charles of Aniou into the kingdom of Naples. 800.
Those of Aragon were invited to Sicily by the people and to the conquest of
the kingdom of Naples by Queen Ione the second: 1263.
The house of Austria is at this day enriched with many goodly kingdoms
brought them by their alliance and marriages: one whereof subjected unto them
the Low countries, 1476.
the other gave them Spain with her apurtenances, the third for a perfect
raising of this howses gretnesse, annexed unto it the crown of Portugale and
the east Indies, 1579.
so as if we nearly consider human casualties, we shall find that force
without occasion is fruitless or smally available.

3 The Ottomans have not attained to the height of so mighty an Empire but by
such occasions as we have too carelessly, The Christians ministered occasion to
the Ottamans of their own overthrow
unworthily, and as of our free bounty, presented unto them. The first sprang
from the negligence and cowardice of the Emperors of Greece, who through their
extreme lasciviousness and sloth ( Sardanapalus and Heliogabalus like)
became deformed monsters of all loosenes and riot: 1 The first occasion: the
sloth of the Emperors of Greece.
So as abandoning themselves to all voluptuousness and excess, that martial
vigor which had till then honored and preserved them, began by little and
little to decline amongst them, and next amongst their people, (these framing
their manners after their governors) which prepared means and occasions for
the Turk to set foot one while into some inferior province, and ere long
into a mighty kingdom. 2. Occasion: envy of the Emperors of Greece.
The second occasion which showed it self favorable and proper for the Turks,
was, when the Grecians upon a malicious envy began to disfavor and oppose the
dessignes of the Christian Princes which had by league united themselves for
the conquest of the holy land, and so ill advised they were as insteade of
seconding them they crossed them in all they might, to the end to stop the
fortunat proceeding of their worthy armies, not heeding poor souls that they
thereby befriended the Turk; who did but watch his opportunities. For they
well observing this fault, and temporising the occasion which after appeared,
failed not to spy when they might surprise them (as they did) all beaten,
tired, and disunited in force and means, whereupon it finally insued that the
Christians were utterly expelled Jury, About anno 1290.
by the Turks, who after turned their armies against the Greeks themselves
and bereaved them of their Empire. These were mischiefs and wounds by them
well deserved, neither are they to be pitied, but so far forth, as they have
bread the calamities and ruins which have and do still continue to afflict
Christendom. 3. Occasion: the civil wars of the Emperors of Greece.


The iarres and divisions of the Princes of Greece ministered the third time an
occasion to the Turkish thriuing greatness: John Paleologus.
This happened at such time as the Emperor of Constantinople was so ill advised,
as to crave the aid of Amurath the first to defend him. This Prince which lay
still in wait, willingly sent his troops, not to succor, but to discover the
country for the better advancement of his designs; and in very deed the
soldiers returning from that voyage, delivered so aduantageous reports of the
riches, pleasantness, and fruitfulness of that country, painting it out unto
him so abounding in all commodities necessary for the life of man, as he
forthwith resolved to attempt it, 1363.
so as not long after without bidding, he in person passed the Straight, and so
well husbanded the occasion to settle himself in Europe, as since his
successors have there made the principal seat of their Empire. The divorce
and separation of the Greek church from the Roman, 4. Occasion: the
separation of the Greek Church from the Roman.
prepared a large way for the fourth occasion, embraced by the Turks, more
aduantageously to ouertop us: since this division was a mean to distaste and
allay the courage of the Princes of either party, neither has it ever since
been possible to reconcile or unite them by any good or firm intelligence, so
as remaining in this sort divided, they have never been able to enterprise
ought worthy Christian piety, or the greatness of their powers and
monarchies; thereby to cut off and overthrow (as they might and ought) the
proceeding of the common enemy of Christendom; who getting by his negligence,
scope and liberty, is grown greater to our universal hurt, which those
princes have evermore fostered; a disease now by their obstinate division
grown remediless. 5. Occasion: the Turks aid called into Italy.
This evil has proved the more lamentable because of the discord amongst
other Christian Princes which refuse to make their benefit of others
calamities, or to acknowledge them as corrections coming from the hand of God.

This mischief grew greater at such time as some Potentates of Italy
inconsiderately called the Turk to their succor, showing him the way into our
seas farther then was convenient. In this regard our ports stood open unto
them, they entered and conuersed with us as with friends and associats, a thing
most abominable before God and man, and of most dangerous consequence. And to
the end I be not held an outlasher, I will reckon some of those that have so
ouershot themselves. Alfonso the second king of Naples, 1498.
and Lodouick Sforsa duke of Milan, were those that brought in Bajazet the
second: that against the French, this against the Venetians. Isabell Queen of
Hungary craved aid likewise of Soliman, 1540.
against Ferdinand king of the Romans. 1543.
Francis the first of France, and Henry the second that succeeded him, d^d not
only let in the Turkish power into our seas, but suffered them also to land at
Nice and in Corsica, leading captive at their return, an infinite multitude of
poor Christians, (without respect of amity, age, or sex, which they snatched
up in those places and along the Adriatic coasts.

The sixth occasion observed and embraced by the Turks, 6. occas. the plurality
of the Christian Princes.
may be said in my opinion to proceed from the consideration they have had of
the plurality of Christian Princes, supposing (as it is true) that it could
not be without that jealousy and suspicion which each man particularly
conceiueth of his own estate, rank, and dignity, and and so the whole being
divided into diverse governments, it must follow the parts should be more feeble
and scanted of means to undertake against him: since (as we have said) virtue
united in one entire body, is always more strong then separated into many
parcels. That which is worse, is, that in this division of Monarchies, the
ambitious thirst of greatness, has taken dangerous footing amongst Princes,
and has bred (as by a necessary consequence) discord, separation of wills,
diversity of designs, and variety of pretenses, of all which partialities,
has sprung suspicion, the common plague amongst princes. This suspicion like a
canker has contaminated the union and rid the means how to knit and establish
a holy league and confidence amongst them for a defensive or offensive war.

4 Now to make a defensive league against the Turk is in these days a hard
matter in so much as the princes of Christendom are so far from one another,
and some especially from the enemy, as like men out of danger they weigh it not
esteeming themselves most assured: And to undertake to establish an offensive
league is no less difficult seeing the profit of their conquest cannot be
drawn to a proportionable equality, it may be also every man fears the
greatness of his companion (although never so much his partner for aid and
common association) but above all he that has the most commodious havens or
his Provinces most proper for the mannaging of the war. Or else he who can
better maintain his conquests would prove the most suspected and maligned.
These considerations hinder them from uniting and assembling themselves as they
ought for the common good.

5 Moreover every one flattereth himself that time and the worlds ordinary
change will breed ruin and alteration in the estate of the Ottomans, and
settle their affairs without being constrained to expose themselves to danger,
travel, and charge.

6 Another reason and inconvenience may yet be alleged that each of these
princes being weak in respect of the other they cannot so courageously resolve
to undertake what were profitable and necessary for them; whence it grows
that the feebleness of their strength is yet made more feeble by this
irresolution; so as a mighty power charging them they shall remain subject to
the discretion of the indiscreet enemy: by these means the lords of the several
parts of Lombardy became the pray of the Venetians who subdued them with as
much facility as resolution; But had the repulse when they attempted the state
of Milan, utmost limit of their power, dominion, and conquests. After the same
sort also the French in time past brought under all the Provinces of Gaull, but
when they would enter the confines of Spain, the opposition of that
neighbour-greatnesse stopped their course and was a rampart to defend them from
further proceedings. In the very like manner the Turks having devoured all the
Princes of Greece, Macedonia, 1408.
Bulgaria, and Seruia attempting the invasion of Hungaria, 1412.
they had their hands full, since the valor of these Kings and people (so
fashioned, 1438.
hardened and enured, of a long time to the wars, as they were the better able
to make head against them) discovered it self to be greater then the
consideration of their indifferent estate could well bear, as witness the
exploits of Ladislaus and Mathias Coruin, who found the Turks play to their
cost. But so soon as those Kings and people did forgo this first valor and
suffered the exercise of arms to degenerat, 1521.
Soliman overcame them both at Belgrade and at Mogacia. 1526.
After the Turks had gone thus far, they met with that bar of the house of
Austria seconded by the German forces, and supported by the power of the king
of Spain; who showed himself always fearelesse of the Turkish forces: As for
the Venetians they have evermore (backed with the Popes and the Spaniards power)
behaved themselves most honorably: one happiness there is that those places of
Christendom which border nearest upon the Turk were never in more mighty
hands, nor had ever so few Princes to rule them, as at this day: whence grows
an infallible consequent that they are more easily defended and maintained,
especially having that particular conjunction of the power of Spain, which is
such as the Turk cannot stur without incurring an apparent danger; It being
manifest that besides that the king of Spain is of ability without fear to
resist him, he can also with his own forces curb him and bring him to reason.
So as the Turk awed by so mighty a king, will not, as he was wont, so so one
bend his forces against the Christians his neighbors. The Muscouit on the one
side, and the kings of Polonia and Persia on the other, are of such power and
courage, as they will always make the fame of their particular forces, to be
both respected and feared.

7 The diversity of opinions in matter of religion, have made way to the
seventh occasion, 7 Occasion: the diversity of opinions in Religion.
have disunited the courages, spent the forces of the Christians, and have made
them rise up in arms one against an other. In the mean time the Turk gets
footing, grows great in sight of all men, and is become a terror to Christian
Princes.

Disloyal and traitorous Renegades or Apostates, 8 Occasion: treason and
disloialtie.
are those which have discovered to the Turks the Christians secrets, have
acquainted them with the advantages of landing and inuading, have been guides
to their armies into the very hearts of our richest countries, and have opened
the door of the eight occasion.

But for the ninth, 9 Occasion: the Turks peace with some Christians, to war
with others.
let us consider what subtilties they have practiced, and whereon that has
been principally grounded. I am of opinion, that the better to order their
affairs, and seize upon the Christians with more security, their leagues,
treaties of peace, and suspensions of arms, passed between them and our
Princes, have been their greatest furtherances: for the Turks never warred
with any Christian Prince or Infidel either to defend their own estate, or
with hostility to assail an others, but they first of all made their country
sure against the power of their neighbors, but above all, such as (seeing them
elsewhere busied) had means to disquiet their affairs, invade their
territories, and assail them at unawares. The peace they have so long
maintained, with the Polonians can testify as much: Again the quiet they have
suffered the Venetians to enjoy for these many years sufficiently bewraieth
with what care they handle this business. The continued peace they keep with
the French teaches us likewise with what providence and wisdom their matters
are carried; to the end not to receive any incombrance or interruption by means
of strange enmities, at such time as they proceed in their enterprises; They
take truce with the Emperor always to their advantage; and lately intending
to war upon Persia they dealt for a suspension of arms with the King of
Spain, so as making all sure on one side they in a trice assail the other,
hereby so well playing their parts, as having the law in their hands they
remain as arbitrators of peace and war, pursuing always the course of their
dessines with an advantage too great unworthy and preiudicious to the Princes
of Christendom; whose greater part is so awed by their forces, as they have
often chosen to enter into conditions of a dishonest peace or truce though
never so unassured, rather then to expose themselves to the danger of their
mighty armies: not heeding that thereby they have lost many fair occasions of
doing good upon them: whereof we need not seek farther for examples then now
that the King of Persia keeps them in continual war (at least if such news
as comes thence be true) and that he has lately given them an overthrow near
Taurijs of above four score thousand men. Which if it be so, what better
occasion can you desire (o ye Princes of Christendom) to set upon them and
revenge the dishonor of our passed injuries? Can it be otherwise but that in
their former incounters and in this last they must have lost the flower of
their captains and choice soldiers, and is it possible that the swelling
pride of their command and greatness should not shortly undergo some change
and decrease if you will intertain the occasion which God offers you? o but
you sleep and are altogether unprovided to assail them. They are our sins
that hinder us and have bred the disorders of civil wars which disquiet France
and the Low countries, with such obstinacy and cruelty as these Princes have
work enough to order their own affairs: their neighbors in the mean time
having their ears filled with the noice thereof, looking what will become of
such sturs and fearing lest the fire which so cruelly burns their neighbors
house, should fasten upon theirs, which makes them stand upon their guard to
keep out such broiles and disorders. In the mean time the Turk wants no
time to recover his losses; and to laugh at our inconsiderate follies; follies
indeed for us, but wisdom for him. It is a marvelous matter to consider with
what succes and advice he has quieted his neighbors, in such sort as he has
been never known to have had two quarrels in hand at one time. Imitating
herein the wisdom of the Romans who had an especial care not to have two
enemies to deal with at once, but if they assailed one, they took order by
device and friendly means that the other were lookers on, or associats in
their travails. Selim the first, which warred with the Persians, so ordered
the rest of his estate, as during all the time he was employed that way, 1514.
the Souldan of Egvpt never disturbed him: his son Amurath continuing the
same enterprise, never received let of any Christian potentate.

The dessignes of the Princes of Europe, 1536.
and the wars they have so long and so wilfully maintained one against the
other, have affoorded the Turks a large passage for the tenth occasion to
benefit themselves by their obstinacies and divisions; 10 Occasi^n: Christian
Princes warring one upon an other.
neither have they omitted nimbly to lay hold on it to some purpose for the
good of their affairs. What enmities were evermore cruelly exercised with fire
and sword then those our ancestors and we our selves have seen between France
and Spain? What malice was ever more deeply rooted then that of the two
Kings? What nations are there in the world more mighty or more valiant then
these are; and hence let us consider what profit, what comfort would have
redounded to Christendom, and what fearful ruin to the Turk, if by some
holy league they had been united; such undoubtedly as there should have been
no memory of them, whereas they are now most mighty, and most dreadful. If we
will descend to particulars, was there ever Prince that had better means to
conquer the Turk then Charles the fifth? For besides his valor, invincible
courage, and other notable parts which shined in him, he had sufficient force
to execute his enterprises: he was followed by Captains of incomparable
virtue, his soldiers were most resolute, his people and Provinces were all
most desirous of so holy a war, he had havens and roades fit wherein to harbor
his ships, and in a word he had whatsoever was necessary, but how? He was
always constrained to have an eye behind him, to stand upon his guard, because
of his neighbors who spared not to molest him as soon as he did but once aim
at so holy an interprise. King Philip his son has met with the like
incombrances: so as we may well say our sins have ministered occasions enowe
to the Turks to assail us with such advantage, as it has been an increase
and establishing to his estate, we always shrinking at the cruel shocke of
his mighty forces. Amongst all the Ottomans Amurath the first was the most
diligent to hunt after, and embrace occasions, who (as we have already
delivered) sent his supplies to the Emperor of constantinople, 1360.
passed the straights in person and got into his hands the two Castles. Bajazet
the first, his son showed himself nolesse politic and prompt to discover
his advantages, 1363.
patient to attend his occasions, and diligent to gather the fruits wherewith
his hopes presented him.

CHAP. XII.
That he has behaved himself with nimblenesse and celeritie upon his
occasions.
1 The fortune of war consists not in discerning but in the use of
occasion. 2 Celeritie in wars most expedient. 3 The Turks readiness and
wisdom in that kind. 4 Furtherance of this celeritie. 5 Impediments of the
Christians in their expeditions. 6 Treasure requisite. 7 Exact obedience in
Captains and Soldiers and an observation of military discipline. 8 Strength
and ability of men and horse. 9 Examples of the Turks celerity. 10 In their
sea-actions and their order: 11 Defects of the Christians shipping.
1 BEcause this Chapter, in regard of the continuance of the matter in
handling, is but as one dependencie and conjunction with the former, we will
still make use of this word Occasion, heretofore discoursed upon, as of a
table wherein is represented all whatsoever our forefathers have conceited of
it; and what we ought to admit thereof: following this path we are to remember
that who in time lays not hold on occasion, shall never more enjoy a like
time to recover it with the like commodity of well doing as he once had, if he
had known how to entertain it as he ought. To discover then the opportunity
of affairs, is not all that is required: Veg. lib. 3. c. 26.
That which most imports, is to serve our turns with it at an instant, when
it presents it self, to guide our intentions to that perfection we aim at.

2 Celeritie is an especial matter in all affairs of importance, but above
all in the wars, wherein it is more necessary then in any our actions.
Because (as said Selim the first) the least delay we therein use, turns to a
gross error, especially since it bereaues us of the commodity and advantage
offered to put in execution, what we had wisely and with study determined:
Hannibal a worthy and renowned captain, was noted of slownesse, not in
resolving but in embracing his occasions of victory which might have assuredly
established his affairs. That great Pompey was likewise subject to the same
imperfection, which did utterly undo him. In a word, no motion wanting
speediness, can be of much force, or produce worthy effects: Violent
agitations loose alike their force with their swiftness, but such as are
natural attain it, and fortify themselves in it.

3 This is that the Turks know well enough how to practice, fashioning
themselves to quickness, nimblenesse, ability, and to a certain store of
whatsoever may seem necessary to that purpose, so as their promptness and
forecast has never omitted the occasions presented unto them without reaping
the fruits and glory thereof.

4 But some one will say, that it is requisite for the suddenness of occasion
that many things rely in the power of him that will follow this course. I
grant it, for they indeed who will fitly make use of such advantage, must be
always in arms, and herein also the Turk surpasses us, for he continually
entertaineth so many soldiers, as it were hard to take him unprovided, or to
find him (when need requires) without a mighty army, which serves to
hearten him, and to awake his courage: but above all, he has so great a number
of horse ordinarily in a readiness, as that is but too sufficient to make him
proudly humor his own will; so as thought and execution are in a manner one
with him. This is yet farther accompanied with a powerful commodity which
adds facillititie to his promptness; and this is, that his horse and foot
are lightly armed, and without incombrance of luggage, so as by this means he
more easily assembleth his troops, ordreth them, and conducteth them
wheresoever he pleases, without distinction of time. Again, sobriety and
sparing (familiar among his soldiers) make much to the advancement of his
enterprises, contenting themselves, as they do to drink water and eat rice and
salted flesh, which they reduce into powder, so as every one carries with him
his provision almost for a month, and when that fails, they live by the
blood of their horses, which they salt themselves, like as do the Muscouites
and Tartars.

5 On the other side, when our soldiers march, they must have such store of
munition follow them, to their so strange confusion and hinderance, as they are
never able to go through speedily with any notable attempt. This brings a
twofold let to their enterprises. The first in their provision, which in the
unmeasurableness thereof is never made in due time. The second, in the conuoy
thereof, never so well ordered as it ought, whereof the event of the enterprise
of Exechium, is but too true a testimony, the soldiers then suffering more in
regard of the famine and difficulty of conueying victuals unto them, 1538.
then of-the enemies forces. Qui frumentum necessariumque commeatum non
praeparat vincitur sine ferro. Liu. l. 3. c. 26.
Whose attempt had been unprofitable if the camp had not been disordered by
this inconvenience, whereby the soldiers became half dead for hunger, and
grew so feeble, as the courage to defend themselves utterly failed them. Which
the General of the Turkish army foreseeing, waited till such time, as the
famine had brought them low, and made them strengthlesse, that he might upon
their enforced retrait assail them behind, and so weary them with continual
skirmishing as they should at length chase and overthrow themselves, as indeed
it came to pass. I remember I have heard one worthy to be credited, 1557.
say to this purpose; that when Emanuel Philibert Duke of Sauoy, deceassed, was
General of the army in Flanders, he found no difficulty in the wars more
important then the discommoditie of proportioning and carriage of necessary
provision as he had oftentimes approved. On the contrary, it may be said to
the Christians shame and confusion, that never any of the Turkish armies were
known, through such default, to suffer extreamitie or to be disordered.

6 Let us now come to the point of sudden execution, and to the instruments
thereof, and let us dwell somewhat thereupon. I find the most necessary and
profitable is to have always store of money in our coffers: and that is a hard
matter, especially for such as are not provident, and that in all things so
pamper themselves as the Christians do; but not for the Turk, for he has
(when and what he will) in store to serve his need for the wars, and for
whatsoever belongs thereto. This is the sinew of war, and the only means
to hasten forward occasion, and attain (as he does) to a happy end of his
enterprises, but at his return home, he observes a barbarous and insolent
course of remboursing his charge: After he has performed what he undertook,
he repaieth himself by new impositions, whereto he enforces his subjects to
contribute: This to him is easy: but to us the most difficult material point
is the procuring of money: for the greater part of Christian Princes are so bad
husbands and of so small forecaste, that they have scarce one cross in store:
and are always at the borrowing hand, or enforced to pawn their lands and
demaines. And though the Christians be not so covetous as the Turks, yet they
are of so good a hold fast, as no small time will serve to draw money from
them, so as while that is doing, occasion has already turned her back and
left us naught, but the shame and sorrow of our enterprises ill success and
effect. And if it chance that we hold on our courses, it is with such headlong
rashness and ill advice in all we do, but particularly in providing of arms,
horse, munition, and other necessaries, as all being performed out of season,
there is neither the forwardness, the array, the election, the abundance, the
resolution, nor the well disposing of matters which would otherwise have been,
and which we see to be in our adversaries.

7 There is another thing which adds much assurance to the Turks designs,
and makes them more easily to execute: and this is the incredible obedience of
the Captains toward their General, and of the soldiers toward their
Captains and such is the love amongst them as there is no danger or difficulty
(be it never so great) which they will not easily overcome, so willingly they
perform what is enjoined them. It was never heard that any revolt or mutiny
stopped or slacked the course of their conquest.

8 They have yet another most considerable advantage and that is the strong
constitution of their men, spirit and speed of their horse. Where on the
contrary our forces dare scarce bouge unless they be backed and strengthened by
foreign succors either Almines or Switzers, people faint and of little courage
upon a sudden and unexpected action, as being framed of a dull and slow
metal serving for naught but to make good the entire body of a battle, and
be unto it as a solid and immovable rampart. 1542.
The incounters they have had with the Turk at Buda and elsewhere have taught
us how unprofitable they are and of how slender effect for the speedy and happy
advancement of the affairs of Christendom in those parts: Moreover the Turks
horse are of more speed and strength then ours: the spanish Genet is indeed
nimble and full of Spirit, but wants strength and breath: Contrariwise the
horse of Germany is able and strong but tender withal and not ready upon the
hand, so as he is more proper to make a stand and defend then to assail,
skirmish, or give the chase. The Napolitane is good and strong but of such a
nimblenesse as is not held for perfect speed, on the other side the enemy has
the Hungarian good for service, the Barbary horse of incredible swiftness, the
Valachian, the Turkish, and the Moore almost hard for enduring of travail and
well breathed, so as we may conclude that he inioyeth whatsoever is necessary
for the war, better, more ready, and in greater abundance then we, and that
this is it which makes him speedily and with advantage, to serve his turn with
all occasions which present themselves.

9 There are so many examples of this aduantageous celerity in their actions as
they are almost innumerable; but I will only note two or three which may seem
in a manner prodigious so admirable has been their success. Amurath the
second having intelligence of the great forces leauied by Ladislaus King of
Hungary (with whom he had formerly concluded a peace) with an intent to
ouerrunne him, 1444.
being then busy in the wars of Caramania; he suddenly quitted that
interprise, and with such marvelous speed crossed all the Helespont as in seven
days he arrived at Varna with four score thousand men, In like manner Scheder
Bassa employed by Bajazet the second to divert the attempt of the Venetians
upon Milan, 1498.
came with such extraordinary speed as he appeered in the territory of Treuiso
before they could have news so much as of his departure, less of his arrival
in those parts. 1516.
Selim the first marched so speedily from Cesaria to Aleppo, crossing the
mountain Aman with his army and artillery, as he came upon the Souldan before
he dreampt of him supposing him to be as then rather upon his way to encounter
the Persian then to attempt him.

10 This particular diligence of the Ottomans is not to be limited all only
with their land wars: they have performed as much by sea, so vigilant and wary
have they showed themselves in exalting the honor of their names, and of their
great estate, by them maintained even unto this day: And since they are so
incredibly nimble and advised in maritine exploits, I hold it not from the
purpose to touch briefly the order they observe in assembling their forces.
They reject the vessels and ships of great burden as ouerheauy and vnwealdy if
the wind fail them, rather hindering then furthering him that conducteth them.
Their Galleys and Galliots are speedy, well manned and well appointed.

11 We on the contrary drag with us a great number of ships and Gallions as
our best strength and choice provision, but they are in proof the cause of
such incombrance to the service in hand, as we for the most part waste the
season unprofitably and spend our opertunities in rigging and attending them;
being also often times enforced to disorder our Galleys, to the end these great
carts may keep with us. Hence grows yet another discommodity, and that is,
that having placed a kind of hope in our ships, we in forgoing them, find our
selves too weak and failing of courage to assail the enemy; who is not to be
forced to fight but when he please, Anciently called Nicoplu a city of Epirus.
having too open a field to fly and espy his occasion, as it happened at Preueza
the year 1537. and at the battle of Lepanto which was the year 1571. for
then the ships of the league remained behind with a good number of soldiers
unprofitable for that action, in regard they could not ariue there time enough.
The year after they encountered the like discommodity: since for the very same
cause the army of the league, goodly and mighty fought not at all, neither
performed ought worthy so great a preparation. And when the Galleys of the Pope
and Venetians met, and that they attended Don John (who aboade still at
Missina, because of the then beginning troubles of Flanders) the army of the
Turk being then commanded by Oechially, 1572.
he once presented battle, but because of the advantage of the wind which
without other helps drove our ships, and fearing the encounter of our round
vessels, he made his escape by means of a certain stratagem, which for the
strangeness thereof put the counsels and judgments of our army to a plunge.
In very deed it is worthy the noting: for seeing the whole strength of our
ships united with such confederat Galleys as were then there, make toward him,
he gave commandment that in every one of his Galleys they should put fire to a
barrel of powder and row backewards (not making for all this any show of
flight, the prowes of their galleys still appeering toward them) and as soon
as the smoke had covered his fleet he halled on a maine, and in an instant
hoissing up al his sails shaped his course to Napolis in Romania, our ships
not daring to follow him.

In regard he had gotten the advantage of them they bearing but their mizen
sails, and knowing how dangerous it was for them being ignorant of his
designs, to break company: eight days after we coming near together there
followed some light skirmishes, but so soon as they perceived us to faint, as
being deprived of our ships, they charged us with the whole army, in like sort
as when we had them for succor they retired. So as it was then found by
experience that the great ships served but to keep us from buckling with the
enemy.

I have made mention of this incountre in my commentaries of the notable
occurrants of these times written in Latin, and somewhat more at large then I
here deliver, for I was present in the army during all that voyage, under the
command of the Duke de Main.

CHAP. XIII.
That he has gone himself in person to the war.
1 A question concerning the Princes presence in the wars: 2 The first
commodity is, if the Prince be there in person, it ads courage to the
soldier. 3 The second is, it causes plenty of all things in his army. 4 The
third, it increases the army. 5 The fourth, it works facility and speed in
advice and execution. 6 Of the power of Lieutenant Generals in the wars. 7 The
fifth commodity, is the Princes authority and dignity. 8 The first discommodity
growing from the princes presence, is, that thereby the enemy proceeds more
prouidently. 9 The second, that his Commanders use less diligence in discharge
of their places. 10 The third, is emulation of the leaders, whence grows
contention. 11 The fourth, the emulation of the Lieutenant general toward the
Prince. 12 Examples to this purpose pro and contra. 13 The preposition defined
by distinction. 14 The Ottomans wars in their persons have succeeded well. 15
Exhortation to Christian princes to undertake wars against the Turk.
1 WHether the prince should in person go to the war, or else send his
Lieutenant, is a question often disputed with such reasons and earnestness by
sundry grave personages, as whatsoever may be now delivered to that purpose
would prove but an unprofitable repetition of what has been formerly digested
by so many rare spirits. This then excusing me, I will refer the deciding
thereof to men of more experience then my self; yet will I not forbear by way
of discourse to deliver my opinion; and cite such examples as may help for the
clearing of these doubts. First then we are to reckon the commodities the Kings
presence affoordeth in his army, and so in order of the other consequences.

2 Whereof one of the principal is, that it puts spirit and courage into
the soldiers, it so nearly presses them as they must of force, as it were,
make their valor appear, especially when they join battle where the
Majesty and life of the Prince, yea and their own too is in hazard. Then is
it that the honest desire of preserving their masters life grows fervent in
them, and so much the more by how much it is far more precious then the life
of a captain or general, either mercenary or subject which the Prince might
have sent to command them. This occasion more then any other moves them more
freely to hazard their lives and means for their Princes service, which they
would not so courageously perform under any other that should command in his
stead. They likewise expect greater and more assured rewards from him then from
others.

3 Again, the king is always better followed; he is attended on with the
consequence of far greater provisions either of victuals, munition, money, or
whatsoever may be necessary for the enterprise, than his lieutenant, who has
his power limited, his allowance stinted, and cannot dispose but in part of the
credit and authority of his master, to whom he remains as countable.
Moreover, the subject fixes his eyes and affection upon his Prince, and
lauisheth his life and means according as the business is, 1525.
and he is addicted. Francis the first, King of France, being before Pauy
powered money forth (as a man may say) by bushels, yet Odet de Lautrey his
lieutenant general, lost the Duchy of Millan for lack of three hundred
thousand crowns that were assigned him for his charges, but were never
delivered him. Whereupon the Switzers failing of their entertainment (whom he
had till then fed with hopes of pay) he was constrained to fight with such
disadvantage as he miscarried, 1522. Guic. lib. 14.
and his whole army was put to flight; which had not happened if the King had
been there in person, for either money had not failed, or else the credit and
authority that accompanies the Princes presence had wrought them to patience
and contained them in entire devotion.

4 Moreover the great train of Nobility and men of quality that the Prince
brings with him is a strengthening to his army, and adds to it life and
beauty, every man striving to appear more gallant then other; which they would
not vouchsafe to do nor to subject themselves, commanded but by an ordinary
General; for there are always about the King, by election or necessity, many
great personages equal in power and dignity, and some differing too in rank
and charge, either as being Princes of the blood, or for honor and authority
won by desert, al which would perhaps do little for the General, but would
most willingly obey and expose all for their King and master to whom they owe a
duty both of nature and benefit. These great men's followers serve also to
increase the army.

5 Beside these considerations the King brings evermore with him a resolution
of his enterprises, wherein a General most commonly proceeds with a
restraint and advise, as fearing in his too forward attempting, to exceed his
commission. In the mean while, time passes, and occasion escapes, most often
to the Princes hinderance and blot to his reputation.

6 In this regard if the wisdom and loyalty of the Captain be approved,
Princes ought not too strictly to limit their charges: but if they doubt of
them, it is indiscretion to put them into their hands, as we may see by these
examples. Don Emanuel King of Portugal having sent the Duke of Braganza General
into Afric, he fortunately wan and made sure for his Prince the town of Aza
Azamor: but that performed he would not take Marocco (as at that time he might
have easily done) though he were counseled thereto by the wisest and greatest
of his army, because that (said he) it went beyond his Commission: Lopez Zoares
General for the same King lost in like manner the opportunity to take the city
of Aden, of especial importance for the affairs of his master (for it
stands just in the mouth of the Red sea) though the inhabitants would have
delivered him the keys. Insomuch as he should have taken upon him (as he
said) more then his commission allowed him. The thing was of that consequence
as he might well have forborne the observation of his fast, to swallow such a
morsel. Neither had the service been one of the least, he could have
performed for his master.

7 In conclusion we are to grant that the presence of the king brings with it
a certain greatness, and more aweth the enemy then his Lieutenant; as it was
seen at the enterprise of Tunise; for Barbarossa sharply took up and reproved
those who said that the Emperor Charles the fifth was himself in person in the
Christian army, inferring hereby that he should then have his hands fuller
then he made account, and that nothing could be lacking in the enemies camp,
when their Prince was there present. This is that may be said of the good
redoundeth from the presence of the king in his army. Let us now see what may
be alleged on the contrary.

8 First it may be said that the King which goes to the wars in person
ministers greater occasion then he would to his enemy to provide himself of
forces, means and friends: and affords him matter also of pretending a more
glorious victory, with the hopes whereof and of rich spoils, he puts
courage in his men, disposing them to attempt valiantly all things be they
never so hazardous, so hartning them to fight.

9 It may be said likewise that the presence of the King makes his Captains
less heedefull and diligent at all occurrants and advantages, because they in
part rely upon the vigilant eye of the Prince, who is to carry away the whole
honor of the enterprise, their valor remaining as dimmed and eclipsed. This
happened at the battle of Pauie. 1523.
For the Commanders relying upon the kings presence and discreet carriage of
matters, had no regard but of their pleasures in stead of diligently bethinking
themselves of the duty of their several charges, which in the end turned to
the ruin and dishonor both of their masters and themselves.

10 Again an army where the King is in person, is always replenished with
Princes and great personages, all which promising themselves great matters,
seek not but to excel one another in place and command, whence grow among them
iealosies, enuies, and sundry differences breeding infinite disorders, to the
overthrow or hinderance of their Masters affairs. Who is not without his part
of fear to discontent some in contenting others? This plague of ambition, is
such as it will sometimes so wrest the consciences and honors of these great
men, as they will not stick to hinder the service of their Masters only to
oppose the fortune and worth of such a one, as they see out-strippeth them in
preferment; yea often times their ambition grows so extreme, as for
despitethey will utterly forsake their Princes service: Their virtue and valor
being perhaps in the mean time not of the meanest, and such as if it were well
employed would gain honor and victory to the army.

11 There is yet another discommodity, and that is, that the king carrying with
him the party, who^ in his absence he intends to constitute his Lieutenant,
he in the mean time repineth at his Masters worthy exploites, considering how
the honor should have been his, if alone he had the managing of the army;
again, knowing that all such misfortunes or discomfitures, as may befall, it
shall be attributed to the insufficiency of the Prince, and not to him, he the
less regards it. In a word, the glory we pretend, and the jealousy we have
of our particular honors, are two especial powers, to shake and curb generous
spirits. The Emperor Charles the fifth, had sufficient trial of it: for some
of his Captains and Lieutenants could often times with small store of money, and
few men, gain triumphant victories, as well at Milan and Naples as else where,
which perhaps in presence of the Emperor, would not have been so fortunately
achieved.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, the question is not yet fully
determined, rather it remains diversely ballancing to and fro, as appears by
these and the following examples.

12 Charles of France, About 1364.
surnamed the Sage, never set foot out of his study to command his armies, yet
knew he so well how to make the best use of his Captains valor, and manage
his affairs suitable to the time, that he finally recovered his whole kingdom,
and expelled thence the English, who possessed the greater part thereof. On the
contrary, the Emperor Ferdinand, who warred by his Captains, himself not
stirring out of Vienna, received great and dangerous overthrows. Charles the
fifth, on the other side, wan more honor and victories by the valor of his
Captains, then ever he did in those wars and enterprises himself undertook
in person. 1524.
If the attempt upon Marseilles had taken effect, it might have been truly
said that his Captains had been in all places victorious: witness Pauie, the
Bicock, Landrino, Naples, Coron, Genoua, Rome, and Africa; but where he went in
person, as in Saxony, at Tunis, Dura, and Vienna, his fortune proved
indifferent between good and bad. But at Argiers, in Piemont, and at Metz, he
encountered on all sides such misfortune, as it deemed (as a man may say) the
luster of his renown and victories formerly gained.

13 Mark the effects of success and fortune so different, as it were a hard
matter to pass a sound and determined judgment upon this proposition: so as
the more I imagine by the contrariety of these examples to inlighten it, the
more obscure me thinks I make it; the final deciding thereof, may be framed
thus. The King which undertakes the conduct of an army, is either a discreet
and advised Captain, or else he is altogether unskilled in the mystery of
war. In this last case I should think that it were most for his good, to
rely upon an others relation and execution, especially if privy to his own
imperfections, he want a dexterity to make the best use of another man's
valor, wisdom and counsel. But if so be he be capable of the government,
and conduct of an army, and that he have courage to execute, in mine opinion
he cannot do better then to undertake the war and attempt himself in
person: for if in all military virtues he equal the most valiant of his
army, he will surpass them in fortune, credit, and authority, and in all the
other good parts above mentioned. Kings compounded of these excellent parts,
always crown their eminency with honorable triumphs. Theodosius the
Emperor, Charles the Great, and sundry others can witness this sufficiently;
Jews the 12. of France, having been always conqueror, and never conquered
in whatsoever he undertook himself in person, was put besides the kingdom of
Naples, by means of a battle which his captains lost near the river of
Garillion, 1503. Guicc. lib. 6.
for lack of resolution and advice; which mischance was by that good prince so
lamented, as he made a vow, thence forward to command personally in his wars;
And to say the truth, if the Captain be not discreet, valiant, and of long
approved experience, it is strange if he ever perform worthy act: in such
cases the presence of one only Turnus is more available then of a thousand
such Captains.

14 The Turkish Emperors who go themselves to the wars, have tasted the
sweetness thereof by so many and so notable victories, as we are at this day
their admirers. Selim the first was wont to say that battles gained in the
Princes absence were not to be termed accomplished victories, and we see that
they have scarce ever enterprised ought which has not taken effect in the
end. Yea it has been observed that when their Captains have been
overthrown, if they themselves went afterward in person, they always returned
victorious. Amurath the second went himself after Carambeius general of his
army (who was overthrown by Ladislaus King of Polonia) to war upon that
Prince, 1444.
whom he overcame and cut his whole army in pieces: 1481. 1522.
Mezat Bassa was employed by Mahomet the second in the enterprise of Rhodes,
which he shamefully abandoned; but Soliman going himself in person, carried it
by plain force, and chased thence the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, who
disquieted his estate by their ordinary excursions in the Leuant. 1469. and
1407. 1474. 1583.
Amurath Captain of the said Mahomet received a notable overthrow at the hands
of Vsumcassan King of Persia: but Mahomet going after himself in person
vanquished the enemy already victorious, and put him to a desperate plunge. The
Mamelucks overthrew Querseolus and Calubeius, Bajazet the second Commanders:
Selim the first after personally undertaking them, overcame them, and wholly
rooted out both them and their Empire. Amurath the third now reigning has been
so many times beaten by Cudabenda King of Persia in person, and through the
unskillfulness of his Commanders, that a man may well say that never any of the
race of the Ottomans received so notable overthrows as this has: Whereto may
be added, 1585.
that he met with last of all before Taures; where he lost about 80000. men
together with the Bassa General of his army; a great blot to the glory of his
ancestors, yet the loss being so far off from his estate, he received not so
great a shake as if it had been near him or in his country.

15 But who will take hold of such advantages to do good upon him, seeing the
greatest Princes of Christendom are turmoiled in civil wars and troubles of
their own estates? surely none: Nay rather he is like to gather strength more
then ever, which he would not so easily do, if he were to encounter the
Christians well appointed, resolute and in a readiness jointly, and with one
consent to make their benifit of so goodly an occasion.

CHAP. XIIII.
That he has evermore gone well appointed to the wars.
1 That our deliberations may take good effect, we must prove all courses, but
undertake nothing rashly. 2 Rather superfluous then but necessary provision is
to be made of what belongs to the wars. 3 Advantages of errors committed in
military provision. 4 The wisdom of the Romans and Turks in their
provision.
1 NOthing can be imagined more contenting the spirit then the happy success
of that every one undertakes answerable to his condition: much more a great
Prince when he has resolved upon any thing, espeically the war, is not to
forget any one thing of what soever may perfect his design, which he ought to
conceal and keep to himself all he may. We have one notable example hereof
yet fresh in memory, and that is of the Prince of Parma Alexander Farnese, who
for a time had the managing of the troubles and wars in Flanders, where he
almost never attempted any thing which according to his intent, he did not
perform: In very truth his acts were such as he deserves to be reckoned as
one of the most judicious, wise, and advised Princes of our age, particularly
in this point of making provision of things necessary in due season. And to say
the truth, who soever disposes his affairs, is evermore attended on rather by
shame, reproach, and repentance, then honor, glory, and contentment: That
Prince which once loses his reputation by this default, hardly recouereth it,
but remains infamous; he is less feared of his neighbors, and which is more,
he himself enters into a certain ill conceit, and distrust of himself,
which in such sort accompanies him, as in whatsoever he afterward a new
undertakes, he rests unassured, doubtful, confounded in all his
determinations, and is incapable of constant and resolved counsel, carrying
always the repentance of his former fault with a sorrow which tormenteth his
very soul, so much the more strangely, by how much such a Prince is the
greater, or is well conceited of himself.

2 This is an aduertisment which should open the eyes of all such not to
undertake any thing but what is well digested, and with such order and
forecast, as there be rather abundance then necessity: for when the provision
is small and that it never so little miscary, it depriueth the Prince, not of
courage but of confidence and advice, of whose lack insueth the want of
wherwithall to warrant and shelter his reputation, unless it be that he will
say, I had not thought, words most dangerous in the wars where he can err but
once, and unworthy ever to proceed out of the mouth of one wise and advised,
unless he mean that the miss of these two virtuous parts be to be borne
withal.

3 Prospero Colonna a great Captain proved this to his cost at such time as he
undertook to assail Parma without cannon or other munition of war requisite
wherewith to take such to task as were the French soldiers then in the
town. Iou. lib. 20.
For they sent him away well laden with blows, shame and displeasure, unable
to perform ought of what he too unadvisedly attempted. Frederick of Bossola
met with the like at the same place for want of counsel, money, and other
means which are not borne as Pompers soldiers in striking the ground with
our foot: Guicciardin was then within the town and had a command within that
garrison.

And though the Captain be wise, yet if the army once discover that their
provisions fail them, that they be far from succors, far from places of
retrait: then is it, lo that they become astonished, that fear and
disobedience seiseth them, and that all these meet in one, make a foul ado;
which the enemy perceiving (as it is impossible but he should) will if he be
wise, make his benefit of our necessity; which will serve him as a rampart
and bridge at his pleasure to assail and harm us, but to preserve himself
safe and untouched: It is that the Turks taught our men at Exechium.

4 The Romans more wary, never fought but in gross and answerable to the
proportion of the enterprise, their armies were either Pretorian or Consulary:
the Turk has always sent to the field mighty forces, and aduantagioussy
furnished; neither has he ever quitted enterprise for lack of men, munition,
or money. What was his provision of artillery at the siege of Malta, but in a
manner infinite. For not to reckon his other charge, he there discharged
threescore thousand cannon shot. At the siege of Nice, where the French were,
Barbarossa General of the Turkish army, brought such store of artillery, as
the French that were at their own doors had lack of powder to continue their
portion of battery which they had undertaken; and were constrained to borrow
of the Turks, to whom they should rather have lent; since the enterprise was
theirs, and they brought the other thither.

CHAP. XV.
He has never fought out of season.
1 Especial wisdom to be used in giving battle. 2 Errors of Charles the 5.
and other Christian Princes in their Sea Fights. 3 The Turks wisdom in that
kind. 4 Sea actions unseasonably undertaken. 5 Advantages that the Turk has
in such cases above the Christians.
1 EVery man is able to resolve that he will fight with whatsoever force shall
present it self, Capienda saepius seius in malis praeceps via est.
and with hopes of victory, Sencca. Agamem.
or else to sell his life at a dear rate; but to perform it against heaven and
time, was never heard of; for in such cases courage, wisdom, and power become
danted, so as consequently there follows a despair rather then any honorable
fruit of a labor and endeavor well employed. In a word, who so precipitates his
enterprise without attending fit time and season, seeks naught else but to
lose his time, his pain, charge, and reputation (which is the maine point) to
his ruin and confusion.

2 The Emperor Charles the fifth might make us wise, since having obstinatly
undertaken the seege of Metz our of due season, and without mature advice; he
was constrained to rise from before it with such a disorder, shame, and loss,
as he afterward hardly thriued; Not long before that, for lack of applying
himself to the time when he enterprised upon Algiers, how many ships and men
lost he? so many as it was a long time ere he could recover himself, learning
this lesson to his cost, That earth cannot force heaven. And though the valor
and policy of the Turk can challenge no part in that action, yet can he make
use of the Christian losses to his advantage. Now if tempests and inconstancy
of weather opposed this prince both at Algiers and Metz, they did not less at
such time as he attempted the voyage of Tripoli in Barbary: for the contrariety
of winds made him waste much time at Saragossa, and after by the like
constraint and violence, as much at Malta, during which time the most part of
his soldiers died, and in the end utterly despairing to reach Tripoli in due
season, the army a boade at Gerbes, where it was after overthrown as well by
tempest as by the Turks, who knew well enough how to advantage themselves by
this disorder. The first year of the war of Cypres, the armies of the Pope and
of the Venetians incountred notable losses by tempest of sea, even in the
mouths of their own havens, and all for too late assembling themselves.

3 The Turk never fought, especially by sea, but when the season and
opportunity would permit him.

4 Some one that may perhaps long to overthrow this position will allege that
the Princes of Christendom have nevertheless in the winter attempted voiages
by sea. It may be, but I should think it was either in regard of the hope they
had, not to encounter the Turk as they might, in the summer, then for any
assurance they had or might have in the well-speeding of a voyage
inconsiderately attemted.

5 In brief, if we must adventure beyond reason, it were better we did it
fighting against the Turks, then against the winds, with the Moors then with
storms and shipwrackes. To say the very truth, our Princes of Christendom
have their forces and estates so far separated one from the other, that before
we can reduce them to one consent and body; time and opportunities are fled.
But the Turk has his powers so limited and ranged, not depending but of one
only head, as he is always in a readiness to repel all assaults almost before
the threatening of them can be with him. In conclusion, if all these reasons
suffice not to clear the proposition, yet should they teach us at the least to
prove wise, resolute and advised hence forward not to enterprise ought so out
of season, as that we should be driven to fight with time rather then men; they
should teach us to gain rather then to lose occasions; to abound rather then
want; to seek to be honored and to thrive rather then to receive dishonor
and loss: but the maine point in all is to have God on our side as our chief
strength and most assured conductor.

CHAP. XVI.
That he has never divided his forces.
1 Wisdom of the Turks in undertaking one, not many wars at once. 2 Division
of forces dangerous. 3 Those few good Commanders that are found in a confused
multitude are not to be far separated. 4 The overthrow of one army may breed
terror in the rest. 5 Provision cannot be made at once for many expeditions.
1 SVch has been the wisdom and foresight of the Ottomans, as they have
never almost had to do with two enemies at once. Contrariwise they have so well
ordered their enterprises as the finishing of one has drawn on the beginning
of an other; but when they forsook this beaten and sure way, 1481.
then lo misery ouertooke them, as it happened to Mahomet the second, who would
needs war with three armies at one time, sending one for Italy, at such time
as he took Ottranto: the other to Rhodes, where his General and army were
well beaten: the third he himself went to conduct against the Mammoelucks, if
by death he had not been prevented. He had in these three armies above three
hundred thousand men, besides his army at sea, consisting of above five
hundred sail. The voyages and designs ill digested, all these three armies
were discomfited; for that of Italy, though it took Ottranto, got nothing by
it; seeing that as soon as the soldiers understood of their masters death,
1482.
they quitted the place upon composition.

2 But me thinks this proposition, whereby I maintain that it is not good at
once to set a foot diverse enterprises, may be thus impugned. That the success
of the Turks death, and the commotion it wrought amongst his people, was cause
that those armies miscarried, and not the separation of them and their
enterprises. I confess as I ought, that whatsoever betideth us, necessarily
happens by way of a first or exciting cause. But to come to the ground of our
principal matter; without farther subti^^tsing this discourse, it is easily
seen how hard it is for a prince to provide sufficiently at one time for
sundry enterprises, at the least upon a sound foundation thereby to reap
honorable fruits: since all division of forces brings with it a debility,
and becomes rather a subject of injury then to be able to iniure others, to
be beaten then to beat, to be others pray rather then to pray upon others: for
as a body divided by parcells is not of that weight taking it severally, as
when it is reduced to the first unity: In like sort the forces of a prince,
when they are divided and disunited have not that virtue and subsistence as
they would have in their unity and well-ordered consunction: for proof, who
considers that Mahomet had three hundred thousand men, will say that the
unity of such force was invincible; but divided it proved not so (though
indeed each of these powers by it self (at the least in regard of the
Christians) was a most mighty army, had it had proportion squared to what it
would attempt) and if this mass of 300000. soldiers had marched in one
entire body it had been easy for them to have attained their purpose, one
seconding another as he might have done with that of Rhodes, Patros, and
Ottranto, which he had in this case undoubtedly conquered.

3 An other reason may be yet alleged, and that is, that it is hard to find
such Captains as are fit for the conduct of armies; that in these great
assemblies of forces there are few resolute soldiers; and that they which are
such being once by their division (as a man may say) diminished, it is a kind
of gelding the army of those which may serve by their example to assure and
encourage the other confused multitude.

4 Moreover when we undertake three enterprises at once (as Mahomet, who
serves to this purpose did) if it happen but one of them to fail, the news
of their misaduenture, makes the rest (undoubtedly depending the one upon the
other) to fail of resolution.

5 Again, as we have before delivered, it is necessary that the war be
undertaken in gross, and that assay be made of our forces as soon as may be,
that we may not be driven long to entertain a great army (which for delay of
execution does often times disband, break up and overthrow it self with it
self, but especially with answerable provisions the better to enjoy great
happiness with small charge; which will never befall him that divides his
forces and at once attempteth in diverse places. We will then conclude that the
Ottomans for the most part have not had but one enterprise in hand at once, and
that to atchieue it they have so well provided for it, as the victory has
remained on their side.

CHAP. XVII.
That he has not long held war with one alone.
1 Why the Turks have not continued war with one alone. 2 A long war adds
courage and experience to the enemy. 3 It moves neighbors out of the fear of
their own like misery to aid the oppressed. 4 The Turks manuer of shifting
his wars, and making peace at his pleasure.
1 WHat more assured testimony can we have of a continued wisdom, or to say
better of a well carried subtilty amongst the Ottomans, then in that they have
always come off well in concluding their wars, This was Licurgus rule to the
Lacedaemonians.
and have not maintained them long against one and the self same enemy? The
practice of this policy has been most aduantageous unto them; P^ut. vitu. Lic.
such people as they have not been able at the first to subdue, they have left
in peace, yet have not forborne in the mean time to turn their arms
elsewhere. I have fashioned to my self two especial causes of this discreet
course.

2 The first is the fear they have ever had lest they might make good
soldiers of those against whom they should wilfully maintain a lingering
war. A thing ill practiced by the Spaniards in Flanders and the low countries;
for continuing war many years together against them, they have acquainted that
people (before soft and effeminate) with the fearful clashe of their arms,
they have so encouraged and imboldened them, as at this day there are few
nations more industrious about their fortifications, or more resolute in the
field.

3 The other occasion which has withheld the Turk from making war long time
together upon one people, is, in mine opinion the fear he has to incite their
neighbor Princes to take arms against him. For if the compassion and fire
which burns our neighbors house doc not move us, the fear of the like to
light on us will make us bestirre our selves.

4 The Turk then following these steps one while assaileth the Venetians,
despoiling them now of a Province, then of a good town or place of strength.
And having there made up his mouth he prays next upon the Hungarians,
doubting lest he might pull upon his neck a general league of the other of
Italy. He evermore pretends in show that he will attempt no further: rather
that he means to plant the utmost of his limits at the place by him last
conquered: In the mean time he forgets not to be watchful where he may
sease himself of some other place of more importance, more easily to incroch
upon us. After he has gotten from the Hungarians some piece of their country,
he retireth himself before their neighbors be assembled, or that they have
means courageously to revenge themselves of their injuries. In conclusion he
so well behaueth himself as he has never suffered us to fasten upon him
whatsoever wars he has made upon us, and he has always so timely made his
retraite, as he has not enforced the neighbors of the country assailed to
join and be in league together; he in the mean time resting upon his
advantages of having a great number of soldiers well trained and entertained
in continual wars whereby they become more experienced in all occurrents, then
ours; by these means attaining to the triumphs of so many crowns and estates.

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of Religion.
1 Religion the principal bridle of the subjects. 2 Excellency of the
Christian religion. 3 The vainness and abomination of the Mohammedan religion.
4 Disputation of religion forbidden amongst the Turks. 5 The great Turks
example is a confirmation of his religion. 6 So are the calamities of the
Christians, and of others different from them in opinions.
IN like sort as by the disposing of what has been before handled we have
made it apparent by what ways and means the Turk is become great; so are we
now to deliver the manner how he holds, and maintains what he has already
gotten.

1 All such as have gone about to lay the foundation of souerantie have begun
with religion, as that whereof princes must necessarily make use, to contain
their people in obedience and worship of one God true or false; if this were
not, it were impossible they should acknowledge one Sovereign in earth* were
they without the fear and knowledge of one Supreme in heaven: We might
allege ancient histories whereby it would appear that all such as have gone
about the establishment of a monarchy, have had an especial care to ground it
on the pretense of religion, by whose mystery and ceremonies they held in
those whom they sought to range to their laws, by this scruple making them
more tractable and pliant to receive instruction; Numa Pompilius, Vid Pluit in
their lives.
Lycurgus, Sertorius, and others are sufficient proofs, whose credit grew from
the communication they gave out they had with some Divinity; others that could
not hit of the way to frame a new religion fortified themselves nevertheless
with a pretense of it, in reforming the old, as did not long since Ismael King
of Persia and his Coosine Harduellas, who performed great matters in the parts
of Asia by introducing a new superstition of religion. About 1499.


2 But to the purpose, we must auow that as there is no religion more true, so
is there none more favorable to Princes then the Christian, for the quiet and
preservation of their estate and mind. In so much as this by way of conscience
subiecteth to the king and all other superiors (howsoever perverse and
vicious) the heart, the person, and goods of the subject; what greater reason
or instrument of state can we meet with then that which brings the people
under a full and perfect obedience? If our Savior Christ submitted himself to
the law of the Emperor and paid tax and custom for himself and Saint Peter,
who will doubt that his disciples are not to do the like as true obseruers of
his precepts? I remember a discourse written by the Jesuits of a certain
Prince of a country newly dscouered in India, who as one very politic and
wise perceiming the simplicity and purity of the Christian doctrine, though
himself were an Idolater, permitted that his subjects should be baptized,
cathechized and instructed in our faith; and was present at their baptism;
furthering to his power all the actions of the Jesuits; because (said he) I am
assured if these men observe their law as they are bound, they will fail
neither of loialty nor obedience, and will pay me my tributes and revenues
without fraud or contradiction.

3 Let us now enter into the principal matter of the subject which we have
undertaken to handle. The law of Mahomet is full fraught with fables and gross
absurdities, and so far from reason to maintain them, as it would be an easy
matter by way of some holy manifestation of their errors to alter the estate
and government of the Turkish Empire. What more strange impertinency can there
be then that of their Alcaron? It is impossible to devise more absurdities,
dreams and cousenings, then those their law giver Mahomet has introduced: but
he perceiving well enough that the foundation of his falfe doctrine was such as
it would be easy to overthrow it; knew cunningly how many ways to remedy it.
First he framed all the precepts of his law according to natural sense, and
made them suitable to the course of things base and earthly, thereby to make
their observation so much the more pleasing and easy to be admitted and
maintained, as being founded upon the pleasures of the flesh and the world; he
could never better charm the reason and lull asleep the spirit of that dull
and wholly illiterate nation, then to tie them to the performance of a law
altogether sensual.

4 The other means he held to make his law lasting, was the express
forbidding to enter into disputation about any one point of it, unless it were
with the edge of the sword: In regard whereof he termed it, the law of the
sword. Thus the Prince of the Turk who has in his hand the sword and force,
is also consequently the Arbitrator and Judge of the doubts and controversies
which arise in his law, and determines them as he sees good, so as he is wise
enough to suffer any new opinion to take footing. For as soon as that happens
he turns his sword against the authors thereof, and that with such rigor
and cruelty as he utterly rooteth them out not leaving so much as a seed or any
parcel of them. The troubles and dissentions which heresies have brought in
amongst the Christians serve him for examples, he sees such histories daily
verified; he is very well informed of them, and turns them to the best use
beyond the experience his predecessors have had of such fruits as spring from
a new interpretation of their law. Harduclles in a very small space wan such
credit amongst that barbarous people, that by means of a certain new
interpretation of the points of their sect, he busied all Asia, where he sowed
so many troubles, as he well near endangered the whole estate of Bajazet the
second.

5 But that which makes the law of this cursed race more durable is, that the
Emperor himself observes it with that devotion, honoreth it with that
reverence, embraces it with that religion, and preserves it in that credit
and authority; as it is hard to imagine a man more devout and affected toward
it.

6 Again, the misery and vexations that the Turks (deprived of all other light
but that their mother sense affords them) behold other nations dispersed
through their dominions and of a contrary belief to endure, wholly weddeth their
dull souls to this false doctrine: neither is there that misery which that
vile Mahometane race make not all those to suffer who embrace not their
religion, but above all the Christians.

CHAP. II.
Of the direct dependency of the Turks subjects upon their Sovereign.
1 Subjects must have their eyes chiefly upon their Sovereign. 2 Tyrants
strength and guard of strangers. 3 The absolute authority of the Ottomans. 4
The Princes seuour, the subjects safety. 5 His subjects exact obedience and
the cause thereof. 6 Rebllions whence procceding.
1 THe best cement that can be made to give long continuance to an estate, is
to work so, as that the subjects, of whatsoever quality or condition they be,
may have always need of him that is their Commander, to the end they may
immediately depend upon him and reverence him: but because it is hard to bring
all the world to this pass, especially in a great monarchy: those at the least
are to be drawn to it, as farfoorth as is possible, who should be the sinews
and supporters of the Princes power.

2 This moved such Tyrants as durst not assure themselves of such people as
they had subdued, to have about them Captains, Soldiers, and servants which
were strangers and had neither kinsfolks, nor friends in that country, but
relied absolutely upon them. This heretofore was the manner of the Soldans of
Egypt; and though they be courses so violent, barbarous and unworthy of
Christian Princes, as they should never be set before them, yet may they
somewaies advantage them in the consideration of their ends and aim of their
intentions, applying them and appropriating them so far forth as Christian
policy and the interest of faith may permit.

3 Now then we will deliver what use the Turk in these times makes of them. He
to establish his Empire and amplify his greatness and authority, intitleth
himself not only Prince and Monarch of his estates, but Lord also and
peaceable Master of the persons, habilities, goods, houses, and possessions of
his vastals; neither is there inheritance or succession so assured, be it never
so lawful, but it depends of the disposition and free will of the Turk, so
as if any ask of his subjects whose house it is wherein he dwells, and to
whom belongs the land he tilleth, he makes no other answer, but that they
are the great Turks his Master; moreover they all term themselves slaves of
their Prince: whence follows that they can not any way maintain the quiet
possession of their goods, nor account of any thing as of their own but by his
especial favor. Much more if they aim at raising themselves to any eminent
place of honor they are to beg it of the magnificence and pleasure of their
Prince; means which serve to curb those barbarous people, yet to be rejected
of Christians and abhorred of lawful Princes, who receive and hold their
monarchies of the hand of God. There are more honest precepts to be given,
whereby they may purchase and preserve the love and obedience of their people,
without using such cruelties and tyrannies. But because the argument propounded
requires that I relate the means this barbarons race has observed to become
great, and that I am fallen into that matter, I will continue it: yet not as
approving any such course, or as indeuoring to set them down, by them to form
a receiuable example, or to induce Christian Princes to make them their pattern
of governing their estates.

4 By this former discourse then we have delivered how the Turks subjects have
need of him, some to preserve what they have gotten, others to attain to
dignities and places of honor. And in a word, their being and life depending
indifferently upon the Prince, their principal care is to win his favor.

5 Thi^ dependency fortifieth it self and increases by the obedience and
government of great personages, employed by the Turk in his service, and
fashioned by himself to this end, who are from their infancy brought up at the
Princes charge, and instructed every one according as he is naturally inclined
either in the excercises of arms or any other laborious trade, so as such not
knowing other father or benefactor then their sovereign (from whom they
receive both goods and honors): never think of kindred or friends, neither
have they any touch of blood or natural alliance, dedicating their body, mind
and whole devotion to the only goood of their masters affairs, whose creatures
they acknowledge themselves to be, to whatsoever degree of honor they be
preferred: neither is it in their power to amasse other wealth then that which
is rawght them by the hands of the great Turk. To make it more plain to the
Reader who these are; they are the Spachi, Spachioglani and Ianizzars; in these
consists the strength and guard of the Turkish Empire. I hold it not amiss
to discover in a word (as by the way) what is the form and condition of these
bands and companies: so to deliver a more clear understanding of their manner
and power. The Spachi and Spachioglani are horse men, whereof there are a
thousand in number, which march at the right hand of their Lord. The Selactari
or Soluptari, are other thousand horse, which accompany the great Turk on the
left hand, when he marches, as the Spaihioglani on the right; of these two
companies are chosen the Governors of Provinces, and upon these according to
their merit, the Turk bestows his daughters in marriage. The Vlufezgi are
other thousand which march after the above named, who in part are called out of
the bands of Ianizzars, as men noted for their especial valor: or they are
such as have been slaves, and for their notable service performed toward their
masters, or for having saved the life of some Bassa or Beglerbee in the wars,
attain to this degree of being one of the Turks guard. The Charipies are of
like number as the Vlufezgi, and march after them. The Ianizzars follow after,
who are foot, and appointed for the guard of the Turk: These at their first
institution were few in number, but now they amount to 4000: In these two sorts
of foot and horse, consists the strength of the Turk, being as the
seminary of the Sangiaks, Bassas, and Lisirs. This great number we speak of,
give no arms or any other mark of hereditary gentry, being in such sort
ordained as they cannot attribute to themselves any thing in particular, nor
attain to any pre-eminence, but such as by their virtue they may inuit their
Prince to bestow upon them. It is the only means whereby the Turk gains
all the obedience and loialtie he can wish; obedience in regard they are (as I
have said) trained up unto it from their infancy, which in them turns to a
natural habit, placing the fruit of their labors in the assurance of such a
servitude: Loyalty, in as much as they expect from him their whole
advancement, and acknowledge to receive more benefits of him then of any other
Prince; neither has it been known that they ever committed treason of
importance, unless it were the revolt of Gazeles at Damasco, 1520.
and of Acomat Bassa at Cairo, Iou. l. 13.
in the time of Soliman. Which was but (as a man may say) a fire of stubble
extinguished at the very first appearance and pursuit of their Master. Now the
Ianizars, and the other mentioned, who are the sinews and principal
foundation of the Ottomans greatness, and who receive so many commodities by
this dependencie, and do daily expect more; have no more dear care, then to
uphold their Masters safety, and preserve the greatness of his estate,
whereunto their own fortune is linked.

6 To show by what means the Turk maintains this dependencie, let me say
that all dependency of the subject upon his Master and Sovereign, may receive
an alteration either by force fury of the people:
authority, of some great man of the country. by the support of a for^en
Prince.
Matters thus disposed (not to enquire nicely after al sorts of inconveniences)
it rests that we see how he remedieth these kind of accidents, and
preuenteth the causes of such like infirmities as these, which in time might
weaken and ruin his Empire: let us begin then with the strength of the people.

CHAP. III.
How he has deprived his Subjects of strength.
1 Wherein consists the strength of an estate. 2 The Turkish Empire
maintained by the use of arms, as that of the Romans. 3 Tithing of Christian
children by the Turks. 4 The manner of their education: and the commodity
accreweth thereby to the Turks. 5 Great assemblies amongst them forbidden.
1 THe strength of an Estate consists in the valor of the Nobility, love
and faithfulness of the Subject, reputation of arms, multitude of Soldiers,
and commodities of horse, which may be therein bred or nourished.

2 The Turk then which would attain to this poinct, only by arms, horse,
and Soldiers, observes evermore this rule: He takes away all use of arms
from such Provinces as he has newly reduced to his obedience, he forbids
them the commodity of horses fit for the war, and endeavors all he may to
choke in them the springing up of men proper for the exercises of arms; and
has an ere that in all his dominions, not any man have in his house weapons
for the war, no not so much as a knife, unless without a point; Moreover, he
allows not any Jew or Christian to have or keep any horse, imitating
herein the manner of the Romans, who observed both the one and the other,
especially at the surprises and surrenders of towns; The principal conditions
were always, that they should forgo their weapons, their horses, and deliver
hostages: hence is it that we read so often in Caesar, Arma proferri, iumenta
produci, obsides dari iubet. Hereby depriving the subdued people of all means
to undertake or maintain a rebellion. Again, Hostages gave them a future
assurance of the fidelity and obedience of their subjects: for amongst such as
they admitted, the chief of the Counsel and such as were valiant men at
arms, were the first mentioned: but above all, those of whom they might
conceive any doubt or suspicion. We read that Caesar having taken Auxerra
(which was not one of the greatest not best peopled towns of France) drew
thence six hundred Hostages: So as it is to be thought, that the rest after
such an abatement, could not be of any great courage or strength to revolt.

3 The Turk without troubling himself with the care how to train after him
an unprofitable multitude of Hostages, in an instant riddeth his subjects hands
of their best forces, and strangely armeth and fortifieth himself with
themselves, against themselves; and herein he thus proceeds. He maintains
in pay about two hundred Commissaries, who as Superintendents travel up and
down all the countries of his obedience, to see and ouersee all that is said
and done by the Christians. These men go throughout Grecia, Wallachia and
Bosnia, and extort by way of tenthes, the children from the bosoms of their
fathers and mothers, according as they esteem them fit and likely to be
fashioned to the wars.

4 These children thus culled and assembled from al cuntries of his obedience
are after sent to Constantinople and distributed amongst the Merchants, and
Citizens by name, and inroulement; to the end they may be there instructed in
the law of Mahomet, and taught the Turkish tongue: After (when they come to
the age to bear arms) to be of the number of Ianizzars. For during their
youth they are trained up to all such military exercises as may put valor in
them, and make them soldiers; and this by particular Masters appointed to
teach them to shoot, wrestle, leap, vault, and so to harden their bodies as
the tranailes of the wars may be after held but as pleasures and natural
actions. Thus the Turk by this tithing of Children assures himself of his
people in a two-folde manner; in despoiling as he does the Provinces of the
flower of their martial men; and applying them to his own strengthening both
at home and abroad.

5 Hereunto he adds the express forbidding his subjects all assemblies, or
building of any strong houses, which may stead them in time of sedition or
tumult, neither are they allowed the use of bells, by whose sound they might
call themselves together to the execution of some plotted revolt, or mutiny. In
a word, they are naked of all means, to fortify, to arm, to assemble
themselves or to become any ways; fit for the wars; no other subject is left
them to work upon but the tillage of the land, whereto, as to al other
mechanical arts, they apply themselves; so becoming base, abject, and unapt
for the wars.

CHAP. IIII.
The causes that may move a people to fury.
1 Despair armeth the weak. 2 How to avoid tumults and civil commotions. 3
Fear amongst subjects is vpheld by Justice, and plenty of things necessary.
4 Praise of peace and Justice. 5 Execution of Justice amongst the Turks
pleasing and tolerable, though unjust. 6 An exhortation to Christian Princes
to administer Justice.
IT has often happened, and in our times we have had trial of it, that the
people, though unarmed, have in their despair and fury disquieted a whole
estate, and brought the commonweal into an exceeding distress and
perplexity. Furor arma ministrat (says Virgil) Iamque faces and sax a volant.
We have the testimony of the Romans time, in those civil wars which happened in
Italy and in Sicily, and of the mischiefs which followed those rebellions; as
much has been seen to happen in these times in the I Will of S. Domingo about
the change of government introduced upon those conquered people, forced to
subject themselves to a new kind of servitude. In very deed that people is
not weakly armed which has a heart, a good spirit, and a nimble hand.

2 This is the cause why the Turk to prevent these popular commotions, has
deprived the people of all sorts of arms, to the end they may forget both the
use and courage to handle them, and that they may not by them take occasion to
mutiny. Now to provide that so barbarous a yoke drive them not to despair, he
maintains a general peace and tranquillity throughout his estate: he has a
care that justice be equally distributed: that they have plenty of victuals,
and all other usual commodities, the better to lull asleep their fury.

3 By these means every one makes the best of his fortune and lives quietly
at home, embracing that natural desire of holding his own, which to perform
every man emploieth whatsoever may proceed out of himself: moreover this quiet
and ease of mind does so soften men, as they rest free from the thought of
plotting or undertaking sturs and rebellions: Justice, quiet, and plenty, are
three things which have for their opposites, the violence of soldiers in time
of war, the corruption of Judges in time of peace, and scartsiy and famine in
both. The injustice, the abuse, and avarice of officers and magistrates, are
those which procure the subversion and unavoidable ruin of a country. I could
add to this discourse many examples and domestical proofs, but not to enter
into too deep a sea I will spare them, and will content my self to say only
that all those of ancient times, and such as have had any touch of a good mind
(either Christians or infidels) have evermore confessed that the sincere
execution of justice is the strongest pillar of all well ordered estates, as on
the contrary injustice is the overthrow, not alone of men and countries, but of
beasts also.

To return to our matter, it is sure that when the common subject has
wherewith to nourish, cloth, and handsomely accommodate himself and family;
when in the midst of arms he is safe in his own home; when he stands not
in fear of forged crimes, or bribery of Judges; then is it that he falls
asleep in security, and cares not but to entertain that tranquillity,
rejecting all thought of rebellions. This is it which the Turk (who warreth
continually with his neighbors) puts in practice to maintain peace
throughout his dominions, and to be beloved and faithfully served of his
subjects, whom he tieth to him with those strong bands, which are to say the
truth (besides Justice and tranquillity) most proper for preservation. A great
help heereunto is his continual employing his Captains and Soldiers in the
wars, especially out of his own country, and to the spoil of his enemies.

5 Peace is the horn and true mother of abundance: Then is it that every man
tilleth his land without disturbance, and quietly inioyeth and increases his
own store, since as the Poet says, Pax arua colit: Justice Queen of virtues,
is that which serves as the base and most sure foundation to peace, which
could not otherwise subsist, nor the laws likewise; then is it that they gain
strength and vigor.

5 And though the form of the Turkish Justice be not without much vanity and
oppression, and though all matters be determined amongst them by way of
witnesses, who are alike bought and sold; and that judgments pass as gold and
silver is stirring: yet the quick dispatch they receive, makes them forget
this inconvenience; and though the sentence of such Judges be often pronounced
against all order of Justice; yet is there thus much good gotten by it; that
men consume not themselves body and goods in pleading and trotting after
Lawyers and Atturnies, which have their consciences as large as the other, who
are bought more dearly: besides the delay, vexation and uncertainty of the
judgment. And though the sentence of such men be much displeasing, yet the
people have this to comfort them, that they many times see them endure most
notable and exemplary punishment: for the Turk sometimes upon the least
complaint brought against them, puts them to death, be they never so great
personages, as well to enrich himself with their spoils, as to manifest
himself to be a Prince most respective of justice and equity, and to give also
a manner of satisfaction to his subjects so oppressed as Selim, left that
example of Bostand Bassa.

6 Hence Christian Princes are to fetch an aduertisment how to be more careful
then they are in making their ministers observe a more upright and speedy
distribution of justice amongst their subjects: not upon the grounds and
intents of this barbarous Turk; but rather because they are one day to render
an account before God, who to this end established them in place above others.

Questionless the long delaying of suites is the most damnable plague to be
found at this day in all estates: The abuses committed otherwise by the
ministers of Princes are more to lerable then these; where the whole is in
question. For this cause Princes ought to look more nearly to this then to
any other thing.

CHAP. V.
The common remedy applied by the Turk against the force and fury of the
people.
1 Another way of preventing popular seditions, by having always bands of
foot and horse in a readiness. 2 The Turks strength in his court. 3 His
other strengthes. 4 Inconveniences that grew by the Roman Legions: 5 Prevented
by the Turk.
1 THough the means formerly delivered be sufficient to keep the Turks
subjects from rebelling, yet there are stronger by him practiced, wholly to
prevent and extinguish even the least spark of sedition, and to provide
against other like inconveniences. He maintains a great number of horse and
foot always armed, always in pay, and distributed in garrisons through out his
Empire, especially in places most proper to resist or assail. These curb the
people, and upon the least show of rebellion lay hands on them, repress their
insolency, and suffer not the least appearance of sedition to take root,
removing the causes even at the first without respect to any. This is the
reason that there has never been known any popular rebellion in his estate.

2 The port of the great Turk, as they term it (as who would say his court
and guard) consists chiesely and ordinarily of four thousand horse,
distributed into four companies, to wit the Spahioglani, who are in all a
thousand besides their servants, which march not in their rank but apart, and
of these every one has seven or eight. These range themselves on the right
hand of their Lord wheresoever he become; and the Solastri (equal in place and
authority) on the left. These two sorts are accounted as children of the great
Turk, and are nourished and brought up in the Sarraglio at his charge (as has
been said) and there trained up in all exercises of arms. After these, march
the companies of the Vlifezgi and Charipici, inferior to the other in rank
and authority. Those on the right hand, these on the left, either consisting of
a thousand horse. And wheresoever the great Turk go, they never forsake him.
These four thousand horse together with twelve thousand Ianizzars are the
strength and guard of the person and port of the Turk, with these forces he is
always able to hold in awe and subjection a city more populous then
Constantinople, and not stand in fear of any attempt against his person.

3 In other places of his Empire he bestows other great numbers of the
Ianizzars to be assistant to the Governors and Bassas, besides the succors
they are to have of such horse and foot as those are bound to furnish on whom
the Turk has at other times bestowed such arable lands as have been
conquered by arms, whence he draws one man or more as the necessity of his
affairs requires, and according as is the value of what they possess. These
are called Mozzellini. Such as are tied to this contribution may be compared to
the Feudataries of our Prince, toward whose service they are to find a light
horse or musket, and some of them two, more or less according to the imperial
institutions of such fees and tenures as so bind them. After all those we have
named, march the Alcanzi, or Aconizij, as a man would say Adventurers, which
have no wages, and are appointed to march a days iourny before the camp,
pilling, harrowing, and hauocking all before them, whereof they are to answer
the fifth part clcere to the great Turk: of these there are thirty thousand,
besides them there are the Azapi (of mean quality) but such as serve his turn
for Gally-slaues, mariners and pioners to entrench, fill up ditches, raise
engines, and perform other such like seruill offices, their number is 40000.
Over and above these under two Beglerbees or Lientenants general, the one in
Europe the other in Asia; he has near an hundred thousand horse in ordinary
intertainment. The Beglerby of Grecia or Europ (which is as much to say as
Prince of all Princes) has his place of residency at Sophia a town of Seruia.
That of Asia abides at Culhea a town of Galatia. Each of these has under his
obedience many Sangiacks (as much as to say sherifes or bailifs) the very
children of the great Turk which govern in the Provinces where they command
are bound to obey them. This great multitude of horsemen are so well mounted
and armed, as none can choose or wish a more fit or direct means then their
ordinary strength to hinder all popular reuolts or rebellions, be they never so
great. That which happened to Gazeles after the death of Selim does sufficiently
approve it; about 1529.
he thought to stir against Soliman, and to move Syria to rebel; but he was
prevented by that mighty power which Soliman found even then in a readiness,
wherewith he overthrew him. These ordinary provisions of war are the more
terrible and effectual, in regard that all the people of his obedience are
entirely disarmed of whatsoever offensive weapons.

4 The Romans observed this custom, to distribute diverse of their legions
about the frontiers of Germany along the Rhene and Danowb, to the same end
and purpose as the Turk entertaineth his horse. But it seems that he
proceeds therein more discreetly then did the Romans, for they kept all their
forces together in one place, and under one General, of whom depended the
absolute command of the armies: whence it fell out that to accommodate
themselves, they overthrew the houses of particular men, ruined, and famished
the country, as well by the havoc they made (which always attends so
great a multitude) as by their large provisions most necessary for an army:
The other provinces far distant were exempt from this oppression, yet not
from contribution, but those which sustained the army, were so ouerburdened,
as their misery incited them to rebel, and shake off their obedience. But
contrariwise, the Turk which disperseth his horse and foot into diverse
Provinces, under the command of sixty and six Sangiacks, draws not after him
such disorder or ill satisfaction as did the Romans. Their great assembly in
one place was cause of seditions, debates, mutinies and other mischiefs, most
difficult to be prevented. They did not perceive how this manner of proceeding
was a means that the Soldiers grew too much to affect their Captains, and
that the Captains found themselves by them enabled to attempt (as they often
did) many things to the prejudice of the Empire. And in very deed it oftentimes
happened that their armies made choice of their General for Emperor, in despite
of the Senators authority; either in regard of the valor they knew to be in
them, or of some pecuniarie corrupting their affections, which the Senate could
not remedy: And in truth it was a very easy matter for the General, so far
from home, and holding his forces united in one body, to practice the Colonels,
and the Colonels to bargain and buie the hearts and affections of the
Soldiers, by them to possess the Empire, so as sometime the army of Spain
chose their General Emperor, and at the same time that of Germany theirs:
whereof we have many examples, as also of the calamities and miseries which did
thence accrue to the Estate and subjects.

5 It is an inconvenience whereto the Turk cannot be subject; for keeping his
troops and armies so spread abroad and dispersed, they have not the means to
mutiny (especially being in no place over strong) nor yet grow to affect their
Beglerbyes or Governors, whom they seldom see or repair to: much less can
the Beglerbee in his own behalf easily win or entice the hearts of the
Sangiacks, or affections of the Soldiers, as he might well do if the troops
were alwais together in time of peace, and abroad in one and the same province.

CHAP. VI.
How the Turk represseth the power of the great men of his estate.
1 The authority of a Prince (if his virtue be not eminent above all the great
men of his kingdom) is by their virtue obscured, whence grows the diminution
of the subjects observance. 2 From whence the authority of the Nobility does
proceed. 3 The detestable cruelty of the Turkish Emperor against the next of
his blood. 4 Usage of great men taken by the Turks. 5 The uncertain fortune
and estate of the Turks officers.
1 TO the end the dependencie and authority whereof we have hitherto
entreated be without alteration maintained, it is requisite that the Prince
have a care, that there be none in his country who for their greatness may
encourage the people, and embolden them to attempt ought, backed by their
authority, countenance and conduct.

2 This greatness may grow from three principal causes: either in regard they
are Princes of the blood, or for that they are noted to be nobly descended and
rich, or else for the reputation they have gotten, and a long while preserved,
either by cunning, or by their own valor, and merit: things that win credit
and name amongst the common people. Concerning the first cause, the children,
brethren, and kinsmen of the Turk, are great by consanguinitie. The Barons of
the country obtain the second rank, whereto the nobleness of their family
calls them: for the third, such ministers and officers as bear a stroke and
swaie in matters of the highest consequence, are accounted great.

3 The Ottaman Princes, of nature barbarous and cruel, ordinarily shelter
themselves from these inconveniences, with courses far from all humanity, in as
much as without all respect of Law, religion, or other civil consideration,
they upon the least scruple that may be, rid their hands by execrable
murders, of their nearest kinsfolks and friends, yea even of their fathers
and brethren, alone to enjoy and by their death to assure to themselves the
quiet possession of their kingdom. Selim the first murdered two of his
brethren, procured the death of all his nephews, yea and of his father also.
He would often say that there was nothing more sweet then to reign out of the
suspicion and shadow of his kindred; and that he deserved pardon for what he
had committed, since it was the same play and usage he should have received, if
any other but himself had attained to the crown. Amurath the third which now
reigns, made his entry by the death of his brother, and searched the
establishing of his Empire, even in the belly of his mother, then great with
child, making for this end, one end of her and what she went withal: these
cruelties are monstrous in the sight of God and man, and full of horror and
infamy: yet has it not been known for all this, that ever any city, any
people, or army, did revolt or mutine. This inhumanitie is amongst them grown
to that lawful and ordinary consequence, as they usually put it in practice,
without fear of blame or reproach. The examples thereof are as infinite as
their memories, stinking and abominable. In a word, this butchering is amongst
them an hereditary succession, descending from one to another, which God would
revenge with our hands if we would amend our lives.

4 As for the Barons and Lords of the country, Mahomet the first, destroyed
their seed, expelling them out of his estate, as he did all the originarie
Turkish Princes his allies; and if by chance there remain any of the Ottoman
race, he is so kept down, as he traileth (as they say) his belly upon the
ground, living most poorly without all charge, and manage of affairs: so as
neither valor nor riches can make him appear or shine in the worlds eye;
rather he remains eclipsed amongst the vulgar sort, without honor, credit,
or estimation.

As for the Princes and mighty men of the country by them subdued, they know
well enough how to rid their hands of them, in sort as we have before
declared: so as never Empire was raised, or maintained with more execrable
murders, then this has been in these days; they neither sparing Princes of
their blood, nor the chief Potentates of their provinces; for they blind
them, if not kill them.

5 Now concerning the ministers and officers, who by long managing of weighty
affairs, have attained to Honorable places, authority and reputation; there is
not one, be he never so great, which at the least wink, wrath, and pleasure
of his Lord, loses not his life immediately. Bajazet caused Acomat Bassa to be
put to death, an excellent man of arms and a worthy Captain, saying the too
much reputation of the servant was a cause of the too great jealousy of the
master. Selim likewise put many to death, and amongst others Mustafa Bassa,
whom he caused to be strangled at Prusa, and after to be cast out to the dogs.
This was his recompense for favoring him in the usurpation of the Empire
against Bajazet his father then living, and for making riddance of his two
brethren Acomat and Corcut. He suspected it was he that had revealed his secret
(as indeed he had) to Aladin and Amarath children of his brother Acomat,
because contrary to his expectation he sought their death. It is in a manner an
ordinary course with Princes that one light offense obscureth and makes them
forget a thousand good services performed for the good of their affairs. For
my part I am of opinion that this rage, and inhumane cruelty familiar with the
house of the Ottomans, is but a true and just judgment of God, who will by
their parricid hands chastise the Apostasies and wickedness of one by
another, considering the greater part of them are Christians who have denied
their faith, and by that miserable act climed up to the height of those eminent
charges and dignities they possess. As not long since his divine Majesty
permitted a poor simple soldier to kill Mahomet Bassa, a man most mighty in
credit and authority; but more rich of power and means; yet such a one as had
been a Christian and had taken upon him the orders of Priesthood.

CHAP. VII.
How he confounds the practices of foreign Princes his neighbors
1 The divorce of the Greek church from the Romish confirms the Turkish
Empire. 2 What were requisite to stir up the Turkish subjects to rebellion. 3
The Greeks utterly destitute of means for such proceedings. 4 His own
subjects thoroughly curbed.
1 ONe of the most assured means practiced by the Turk, as an infallible
course of settling his estate against the intelligence which his people might
hold with Christian princes, is the divorce and separation he maintains
between the Greek and the Romish church, supposing while this schism shall
continue amongst them, that they will never establish between them a sound
amity. This made the conquest of Constantinople easy unto them; this has
forwarded the proceeding of his victories, and as it were, put into his hands
all those rich and goodly Provinces, whereof he is at this day the peaceable,
but Tyrannical owner: moreover he so narrowly observes our unhappy discord,
as he by a perpetual counsel endeavors all he can possibly, that the
Patriarchs render no obedience to the Pope: neither is it long since Zacharias,
Patriarcke of Constantinople, was like to be staked for having admitted the new
Callender and the reformation of the course of the year, made in the time of
Gregory the 13.

2 Now to return to the principal point, it is to be presupposed that the
proiects and carriage of popular rebellions, cannot be undertaken without the
support and direction of the mightiest for wealth, means, and authority, in
the country which we would surprise; and that Princes will not bouge to set a
foot these plots and enterprises, but by offered occasion of some fortress
which imports the assurance and consequence of the estate, and may serve for
a refuge to recover their decayed strength: or else that their destigne relieth
upon some promised succor, or finally upon the consideration that those who
inuit them to this conquest are so strong within themselves, as they may hope
for an honorable issue of their enterprise.

3 These are all necessary particularities, but not any of them rests now in
the hands of the Greeks abased by extreme servitude, and so far from having
any fortress at their devotion, as they cannot once stir without being
discovered; and though they were disposed to undertake, they have at their
back so great a number of men at arms, as at the least breath of a rebellion,
they would cut them off before they should have means once to peep forth of
their shells.

4 The Turk again makes them sure to him so many ways, though all barbarous
and uncivil, as he scarcely allows his subjects leave to draw their breath,
nor suffers his mighty men once to hold up their heads; or foreign Princes
to be able in due time to attempt ought against him.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The causes of the fall and ruin of estates.
1 Estates are subject to change. 2 Some of longer, some of less continuance.
3 Great, small, and mean estates, and their causes of ruin; external,
internal, and mixed. 4 Less estates come to their ends soonest by external
causes. 5 The great by internal. 6 The mean more durable, yet subject to
alteration.
1 THe order that nature observes in all things created does plainly enough
teach us that whatsoever is borne passes and hastneth toward death; and that
all things which have a beginning necessarily and interchangably roll toward
their end. This proceeds either of an ordinary and natural course, or of
the violence and alteration of compound bodies. Hence we draw this
construction, that estates change, monarchies fail, and the ruin of one
serves as the raising to the other.

2 Again, as of human bodies some are more strong, vigorous, and of a better
composition then others, and so are of longer continuance; so we see the same
difference in kingdoms and estates: in as much as some preserve themselves
longer, either because by their nature they are more surely founded (as for
example the Signory of Nobles is more lasting then the popular estate, and a
Monarchal estate more then a commonweal, because a Monarchy keeps the
causes of corruption more aloof from her; or is policed with better laws) or
because of the situation which is naturally more strong then the other, as we
see at this day in the Signorie of Venice.

3 But because this assertion is subject to diverse obiectio^s, we will divide
it only into two propositions. First then of principalities, some are small,
some great, some indifferent, either in regard of their subsistence or first
essence, or of the comparison which may be made between them and their
neighbors: Secondly, the efficient causes of the utter ruin of estates are
either inward, or outward, or mixed: The inward are to be fetched and conceived
in respect of the negligence, ignorance, and riot of Princes which give
themselves over to all voluptuousness; whereto may be added the factions,
secret practices, ambitions, and desperate humors of subjects, with sundry
other occasions, all fit to bring estates to their utter ruin. The outwad
causes are the stratagemes, arms, and force of the enemy. The mixed are such
as participate of both, as are the rebellions of the people, treasons of
particular men, put in execution by foreign aid and force. Since then it is so
that all principalities are subject to ruin by one of these three causes; we
are now to unfold what maladies may infect, as well great and indifferent, as
small estates; and draw all within the compass of inward, outward, and mixed
causes.

Now like as in natural things natural corruption is more tolerable then
violent, so must we consider whether the alteration and impairing of estates
and commonweals chance by reason of age, or by the violence of some not
forseene cause.

4 Returning then to our former division and well examining it, we shall find
that small Estates come to their ends rather by means of outward causes
(brought in by force and violence) then otherwise: In as much as their power
being insufficient to withstand their mighty neighbors ambitious attempts,
they are at the first encounter ouerset with the storm of his conquests; in
this manner the several Signories of Lombardy fell in subjection either of the
Duke of Milan, or of the Venetia^s; the free cities of Thoscany became a pray
to the Duke of Florence: The Princes of Afric to the King of Fez-Marocco, and
Algiers.

5 On the contrary, great Empires are usually subverted by means of inward
causes; either by ease and plenty, which customarily makes Princes to swell
with insupportable pride; by voluptuous riot (whereto people amidst their
abundance are most prone) or else by insolency and presumption seazing the
great ones of the country when they see themselves much followed and
reverenced, all fit inticements to dispose a heart (but indifferently generous)
to plot for his own raising.

Nec quenquam iam far potest Caesarue priorem,
Pompeiusue parem.
Then is it (as one says) that Caesar cannot brook a superior, and that
Pompey stomaketh an equal.

6 Mean estates undergo danger as well as the two former, yet far less,
since they hold the mean as the other the extremes, for they are not so
unfurnished of strength, as that it would be easy for every one to invade and
oppress them, neither are they of that greatness and wealth, as to afforde
matter to particular men to grow mighty, or else abandon themselves immoderatly
to delights and pleasures, or to transport themselves beyond the limits of
reason. This is it that so long preserved the commonweals of Sparta and of
Venice, which evermore respectively entertained a mean and equality.

The mixed causes of the ruin of Estates are inward treacheries and outward
force. Treason hatched within an Estate much more indammageth a great then a
small or mean Empire. For a monarke is not able to turn his eye upon every
corner of his Kingdom; and sturring spirits are fortified in their attempts
either with the hope of impunity (the nourse of vices in all Estates and
governments) or with the opinion they have conceived of not being discovered
till such time as their proiects meet with some good success. These things
happen sooner, when the Prince is far off then at hand. Spain can witness it,
which was so unhappily betrayed by Count Julian, Anno 714.
as it thereby fell into the hands of the Moors. So was the Empire of the
Mamelucks by the treason of Caierbeius possessed by Selim Emperor of the Turks.
1516.
Who would search more narowly into Christendom shall find that the civil
wars of France minister more examples for proof of this then is necessary.
Thus we see that small estates are most to stand in fear of foreign force,
since they have not wherewitheither of or in themselves to be able to resist or
to take breath: That the mean estates are always less offended by outward
force then the smallest, and more free from inward treason then the greatest.

CHAP. II.
From what conjectures the continuance of estates may be gathered.
1 Causes of the change of Estates. 2 The ruin of Estates is most answearable
to their beginnings. 3 The roots of common wealths how maintained. 4 Security
especially to be avoided.
1 I Will no farther extend the discourse of the former chapter, nor diue into
the other efficient causes of the ruin of estates: for should I handle what
might be farther said of this matter, I should wander too far from the
propounded subject, and perhaps rack the argument beyond his due pitch. I will
then tie my self only to the conjectures of the continuance or fall of
estates, omitting other causes, as also all that may be referred to the
judgment of the heavens, the influence of the stars, and to their virtue;
sithence this knowledge is fraught with so many obscurities and contrarieties
in what is written thereof, as I will spare to search too far into it: Though
otherwise we are to imagine that nothing is made in vain, and that those
celestial bodies move not by chance, but rather by divine order and
disposition. Again, the errors of their Ephimerides and the different
supputation of the first masters of their profession, make the knowledge to be
uncertain and their so surely grounded maxims to afford contrary
resolutions. Let us not meddle then with the aspects of the stars, or the
natiuities of estates, but regard and consider the effects of what is at our
own home without taking so high a flight. We say then that estates suffer
either by the unremovable ordinance of God, or by the natural course of time,
wherewith in time they grow feeble, and change: or else by the wills of men, so
unstable and light, as they ordinarily breed an universal alteration through
out a whole estate and commonweal. We will only draw our conjectures from
natural causes (not to meddle with the judgment of the divine Majesty or man's
inconstancy) nakedly and simply to speak of them as near and familiar, to the
end we may not enter into the chaos of causes heavenly and most remote.

2 So then we are to think that the continuance of estates is proportioned to
their beginning. It is with them as with sensible creatures, which the more
they hasten to arrive at the perfection of their being, the sooner also they
fail and die: the contrary is seen in those which with a slow and measured
pase attain to a more fair maturity and perfection: as for example, among
beasts the horse, amongst trees the willow are of no long indurance: but those
that (as the Heart and Olive) make by degrees and slowly toward their ripenes,
are likewise more lasting. We may say the like of Empires and Estates: for as
we see them slow or swift in their increase, so are they more swift or slow in
their ruin. Have not the French more then once conquered the duchy of Milan
and the kingdom of Naples, and that as a man may say almost in a moment? so
have they many times lost it and all in a moment: such conquests resemble
Torrents tumbling down the mountains, which in less then an hour, by reason
of the great shoutes of waters they bring with them, become fearful and
dangerous; when soon after in an instant, we see them fallen and shallow, so
as a child may wade through them without trouble or danger. Now not to leave
this conquest of Milan and Naples, we must to this purpose by examples contrary
to the former make good the ground of our proposition: which to perform, I
will set before you the manner how the Spaniards conquered and held these
provinces.

I find it has been by a long course of time, and infinite travail
accompanied with all the pains and troubles, which those who set up their rest
upon a conquest and resolve to abide out the wars, ordinarily endure. Hence
their labor has taken such root, as nothing since has been able to escape
their hands, howsoever they have been often times galled and put to their
plunges. It is requisite then that Empires have their roots to sustain them,
which must be deep and sound, otherwise it is impossible they should long
continue. Now that they may be such, there is an especial wisdom and many
years required.

3 The true roots of an estate are the love of the people toward their
Prince, the sincere and holy distribution of Justice amongst the subjects;
military discipline well policed and observed by the soldiers; honors,
rewards, and benefits bestowed according to virtue and merit: that great men be
not slightly set by, abased or contemned: that the common sort of people be
entertained with all honest satisfaction: necessary provisions for the
maintenance of places of strength; well husbanding of the treasure; friendly
intelligence with neighbor Princes; vncorrupt election of officers; modesty in
their proceedings: these are the very true roots able to fortify and make
monarchies to flourish and raise them to eternity: which roots can never prove
settled spring, or send forth worthy fruit, unless they be planted in the
soil of wisdom, advice and industry, and husbanded by the continuance of
time.

4 It is often seen that great Conquests and victories attained without loss
or labor, so blind the Conqueror, as they make him become like one of those
long reeds or canes which carry outwardly a good appearance, but are inwardly
hollow and of frail substance. They cause him to contemn his companions, and
those who assisted him in obtaining his victories, but more the subdued people,
whence ordinarily follows, that the higher is his fortune, the nearer is his
fall. We have straied sufficiently. It is now high time to return to our
principal discourse: and as we have heretofore made it appear that there are
three sorts of estates; so we are now to unfold in what rank of the three the
Turk is to be bestowed.

CHAP. III.
That the monarchy of the Turk is comprehended within the number of great
estates.
1 The substance of the ensuing Chapters. 2 Greatness of the Turkish Empire. 3
Compared with the Romans. 4 The marvelous success thereof inwarre.
1 From the division of estates delivered by us in the former chapter, this is
to take his foundation, and by these causes we are to make choice of that of
the three which is the surest; by what accidents or infirmities both the one
and the other may undergo a change, either outwardly or inwardly, and in which
rank of the three we are to lodge the Turk. Some one perhaps will judge this
question superfluous and unprofitable, seeing his renown, his conquests, and
his long rule do but too much teach us what he is: notwithstanding all this I
should not think it besides the purpose a little to particularize the causes
of his greatness.

2 The estate of the Turk is held without question to be one of the greatest
and mightiest, as well in regard of the large circuit it contains, as of his
power: he is great because of so many Provinces reduced to his obedience; and
though he have not so great a share in Europe as the Romans sometimes had, he
has to counteruaile this, more aduantaged himself in Asia and Afric: for
when the fortune of the Romans was at the greatest, and that they had their
arms most at liberty, yet went they not beyond Euphrates: It is very true,
that Traian went farther, but all the Provinces he subdued were soon abandoned
by Adrian his successor.

The Turk has not done so, for he has extended his dominion as far as
Tigris; he possesses all Mesopotamia, or as they term it Diarbecke. From
thence he reaches as far as Balsera or the Gulf of Persia, which the Romans
never saw, and the Gulf of Arabia. And to say better, all is his from the red
sea to the City Aden, which is in the maine continent beyond the mouth of
this sea, more then an hundred and fifty miles: he has also enlarged his
dominions toward the South far beyond Egypt. In Africa all is his, except
three places of strength which the king of Spain holds, Pegnon de Veles,
Oran, and Melila: Mauritania also is his, only three fortresses excepted, which
are Tanger, Arsilla, and Mazagan, conquered by the Portugal: when I name
Africa, I intend that country commonly termed Barbary, and not Ethiopia.

3 Having now seen the largenes of his dominions, we are next to discourse of
his means and power. I find that he has better established the one and the
other, then the Romans ever did when they were at their intirest greatness,
because in such a most large compass of his country, there is no king or
common weal bears sway to distinguish his dominions: which was otherwise
with the Romans, who had many such wedged in, within the continent of their
Empire.

There is not any one of his subjects that dares to say that the house wherein
he dwells, or the land he tilleth, is his own. They acknowledge to hold all
they have of him: he ordinarily intertaineth diverse great and mighty armies
both by sea and by land. So as it must needs be granted that he is greater in
his estates, means and power, then ever were the Romans, for he so peaceably
maintains what he has conquered, as he can no ways undergo the troubles
and wars which the Romans endured at the hands of Mithridate, the Parthians,
Farnaces and others. Moreover, next Europe the Gauls are not his enemies. The
Cymbrians are his associats; so as he fostereth such a tranquillity and
obedience on all sides, as he amasseth inestimable treasure.

4 And more, (a thing worth the noting) in three hundred years space since he
began first to reign, he has received but four notable overthrows (that
excepted which he received the year past near Tauris) But the Romans in
less time received more and greater at the only hands of the Carthaginians. In
sum, there is not that nation in the world which can vaunt of so many victories
in so short a space, or to have triumphed of the captivity or death of so many
kings and great Princes, as the great Turk; or that have with such happy
success and discipline so soon raised so mighty an Empire as his is at this
day. Is it not a fearful matter to hear it related that Mahomet the second
(an infidel) has had such favor of the heavens, as to have been able in the
space of 32. years reign, to subdue two Empires, usurp twelve kingdoms, and
take by force two hundred cities? That which affords the greatest cause of
wonder, is, that all this has succeeded in the very time when the art of
military engines and fortifications were in their perfection, and wherewith we
might have armed our selves to withstand him. In conclusion, what shall we say
of Selim the first, who in less then four years space vanquished the
Mamelucks, subdued all Syria, Palestina, the red sea, a great part of Arabia
and all Egypt? These are questionless goodly and notable Tropheys of the
Turks greatness, but most dishonorable and dangerous for all Christendom.

CHAP. IIII.
Whether the Empire of the Turk draw toward an end.
1 The Ottaman Empire leans toward ruin. 2 The reasons are the bordering
princes upon the Turks estate, and their providing for their safety. 3 Made
wise by others harms they stand upon their defensive war. 4 They are bridled
by strong fortresses. 5 Contrary arguments.
1 WE have discoursed as briefly as might be of the fall and ruin of estates,
of their efficient causes, and upon what conjectures a man might gather them.
It is now time that we see and examine in like sort whether the empire of the
Turk be nere his end, and abatement of his greatness, according as a man may
draw from conjectures it leans toward his declining; and though the
foundation hereof be built upon reasons so clear and evident as they are not
to be contraried, yet will I allege one that carries more appearance then all
the other; and that is, that the greatness of his empire is at the highest
that it may be by the ruin of Princes by him expelled, vanquished and made
away one after an other, whilst he has in the mean time triumphed of their
estates and rich spoils; but now that he has none to oppose him with hopes of
so favorable issue as had the other: his ambition, heart, and courage will
grow idle and languish; whence in time will spring the ruin of his Empire; Is
he not already come to that pass? The Princes that confine upon him, though
more weak then he to bid him battle, assail, or defend, have nevertheless
so ordered their affairs and means, as they are able at this day to sheeld
themselves sufficiently from his attempts.

2 Amongst others the King of Persia, does he not so balance his power as he
has given him many great overthrows, and one lately (as I have said) near
Tauris? The Tartarians also hold him play and more provoke him then he them;
and of late they got from him Caffa a strong and wealthy town; moreover
whilst he was busied about the wars of Persia the Georgians took and sacked
Xistis; but they were not able to hold it; so as the Turk has repossessed
himself of it. The Muscouit does not only defend himself from the incursions
of the Turks, but he often times also skirmisheth with them, commanding as he
does above an hundred and fifty thousand horse. The King of Polonia likewise
more mighty then the Muscouit, is so strong as he will not take wrong; but is
able rather at all times to repel the violence of his enemy. The house of
Austria together with the aid of the Princes of Germany, has wherewithal to
make their party good and to oppose him: the Venetians, united with Italy and
Spain (which in such a case will not abandon them) are likewise able enough to
defend themselves and hold their own. As for the king of Spain, he is so
mighty by sea and by land, both of men and money, as he dares undertake
himself to encounter the Turk in battle, much more to defend himself if
assaulted. The King of Fez is not any way awed by him, and is more strong then
he, at the least in Afric; which he approved to the common hurt of
Christendom by that overthrow and death of the King Don Sebastian of
Portugal, where so many Christians miserably ended their days. The last of
those which abut upon the Turk is Prester John, who has hitherto behaved
himself so honorably against him, as he has never showed any token of fearing
his forces. So as being now unable by reason of the concord and stout
opposition of his neighbors, to gain farther ground; he must of necessity
(unless God in regard of our sins be otherwise pleased) begin to recoile;
and that greatness which he has built upon others ruins must decay and
lessen; since the matter which gave the increase is on his part wanting.

3 There is yet an other point which fortifieth this opinion, and that is: that
all such Princes as confine upon the Turk, are by others example made more
wise, advised and considerat, then they were before the ruin of such as served
for a pray to the Ottomans; whereby they will discreetly look to themselves
how they courageously hazard their persons or estates at one battle: they
will rather be content to stand upon their defense, attending while time beget
some apparent occasion, roundly and to the purpose to set upon him.

4 Again, there are at this day so many fortresses, so strong and so well
appointed, as they are in a manner impregnable, so as the Turk is not like to
find the way so open as heereto fore he did to carry them: but if he should
put himself upon that hazardous enterprise of forcing them one by one, it were
as much as to become the author of his own ruin.

5 Neither ought any man in opposing this, 1570.
allege the loss of Cypres, since it happened not so much through the Turks
power, as because of the distance of Venice, which was to supply them with men
and munition. A man may by a contrary argument say as much of the saving of
Malta (speaking according to human causes) for it was not protected either by
the forces within it self, 1565.
or by the succor sent thither from other parts: but only because the Island was
so far distant from Constantinople as the army could not in due time and season
receive their provisions and be refreshed as was requisite, nor well imploie
such as were sent thither. If it would please God that the Turk might often
make such voiages, he would prepare us fair occasions to attempt the revenge
of the outrages Christendom has by him sundry ways received.

CHAP. V.
By what kind of causes the Empire of the Turks might most easily fail.
1 The power of the Turk not to be easily overthrown by outward causes. 2 The
power of Princes and estates bordering upon the Turk, as the Persians,
Tartarians, Moscouits, Polonians, Germans, Venetians, Spaniards, etc.
1 AS we have at large entreated in the chapters going before by what causes
all estates may be brought to their last end and ruin; so are we now to come
to that of the Ottomans, as one of the greatest; and examine by what
inconveniences it may undergo a change. I am of opinion that this their so
raised greatness can hardly decay by virtue of outward causes; seeing the
Princes bordering upon their estate, Quae non prosunt singula, multa ^uuant.
are every one in particular weak to assail them, as they might well do if
they were peaceably united.

2 This weakness presupposed, it follows that it will prove a hard matter
to ruin him by foreign force, whose strength and means it is requisite we
examine to inlighten this opinion.

First, those that confine upon the Turk next Afric, are the King of Fez, of
Marocco, and Prester John: next Asia, the Sophi and the Tartarians: in Europe
the Duke of Muscouy, the King of Polonia, the Emperor, the Venetians, and the
King of Spain.

As for the King of Fez he has men enough, but small store of money, so as he
has not the means or ability to maintain a lasting war: Again, though I
should suppose he were able to be at the charge, yet I find him naked of other
things necessary to advantage himself upon the Turk, such as are places of
strength to forward his proceedings, and assure his retrait: so as he is like
enough to come short of his aim: and if he should perform some worthy exploit
in Africa, doubtless the King of Spain his neighbor would soon be jealous of
his good fortune. And in very deed this is not the point, for it is all one
with Christendom whether the King of Fez be too strong for the Turk, or the
Turk for the King of Fez, since both are the Christians enemies. As for
Prester John, all the world knows he has enough to do to defend himself
against the Turks forces; neither is it long since he wan from him all the
havens he had upon the red sea, and amongst others that of Archiech and Mazzua:
now for the Sophi, if we search their histories we shall find that the kings
of Persia have always had the worse of the Turks, and among all other Mahomet
the second overcame Vsumcassan; 1474.
after him Selim the first did as much to Ismael whom he forced into the
remotest parts of his country. Tarmas also met with the like measure at
Solimans hands: and on the contrary we see that Cudabenda has had such a hand
of Amurath the third now reigning, as he has often vanquished his armies, and
now of late at Tauris: and though he have achieved most worthy victories, yet
has he nothing aduantaged himself. In the Turks country, he has not wan one
fortress of importance, or ought else that might counteruaile the charge of
his wars: This has succeeded in regard the Soph^is strong of horse, but
unprovided of foot, which should be the principal force of such as besiege or
defend. Moreover, to force places of strength there is required great store of
cannon and other munition, all wanting to the Sophi, who may well meet the
enemy in the feeld and bid him battle, but not pursue and assail him if he
retire into his fortres; because of the above said defects of foot and
artillery; and though he were provided of them, yet wants he the skill how to
use the^ like others. The example of Tauris approves this sufficiently, for
after he had this last year vanquished the army of the Turks, and slain an
hundred thousand men, he could never take the Cittadell wherein the Turks had
drawn all their munition of war, and left above eight thousand men; neither is
there any news hitherto that he has taken it and expelled them thence. The
Tartarians are as ill stored with foot and artillery as the Persians, and
except that they last got of the Turk, it may be truly said that they never
did him harm. As for the Moscouit which abutteth upon him (as do also the
Polonians) they have in regard of the Turk small store of men, horse and
money; so as the most they can do is to hold their own. Now concerning the
Germans, they have lost much of their ancient reputation by the overthrow they
received of the Turk at Exechium, Buda, and sundry other places; so as they
are glad to keep home without daring to assail him. The Venetians have been
so unfortunate, as they have never moved war against the Turk but it has
succeeded contrary to their hopes: and which is the worst of all, they never
consented to any treaty of peace, but they did forgo some important member
of their estate. And to say the truth Mahomet the second got Negropont,
Scutari, and Groya; Bajazet took from them Lepanto and Modon, and after in a
treaty of peace they made with him they parted with S. Moore; in an other
treaty they left to Soliman Napoles of Maluasia: Selim the second wan by force
the I Will of Cypres, Duleme, and Antiuari: And though these be heavy losses, yet
in regard they were far distant from their estates they are more supportable
then if they had been near hand, so ought they now more then ever advise how
to strengthen themselves against the Turk by their brave resolution and
provision, which they may better do now then ever, in regard their forces are
more lively, and the members of their commonweal more united and compact then
heretofore. Now we are to come to the king of Spain. Let us say that he has
store of money and all provision necessary to be employed in the wars; that he
is not without sufficient numbers of foot and horse alwaie in pay; that he
has the commodity extraordinarily to leuy so many men as may make the Turk
stand in fear of him; that his forces by sea are good and strong, and that he
can increase them at his pleasure; that he has store of victuals, commodity of
havens, for convenient landing in his countries; and in a word that he is so
mighty, as that neither he stands in awe of the Turk, neither dares the
Turk assail him: yet this power and hability could never hitherto be employed
to the purpose against the common enemy of Christendom. Not for want of will
or inclination thereto, but because he is hindered by the revolt of Flanders.
The suspicion also and fear of his neighbors arms, would never permit him to
display an united and firm power against the Turk: he has rather been
enforced to wast his time and means upon the particular preservation of his
estates somewhat distant one from an other, in stead of courageously exploiting
them against the Turks to the good and consolation of Christendom. But our
sins are they especially which have deprived us of the glorious fruits and
advantages we might have gained by so worthy a power. In conclusion, we must
grant that since the Empire of the Turk cannot receive any damage or
alteration by outward causes (which are wont to ruin estates) it is necessary
that inward causes either separate or mixed effect it; yet before we discourse
of these two means I hold it not amiss a little to examine, whether his
estate may be by maine and open force overthrown.

CHAP. VI.
That it is not an impossible thing for the Christians with open force to
vanquish the Turk.
1 The Turk is not invincible. 2 Examples of their sundry overthrows. 3 A
comparison of their good and ill success in battles. All proofs that they
may be conquered.
1 THe conclusion of the argument of the former chapter, is, that the Turk
cannot by way of open force receive harm or ruin of importance; because of
the mighty power and means he has of his own. But hereby is not inferred
that therefore Christian Princes should fail of courage or hope, to go through
with their affairs to his prejudice; rather otherwise placing their confidence
in the Almighty, they are to hope better then ever, for the reasons I shall
hereafter allege; by the handling whereof I hope to prove that so far is he
from being invincible, as on the contrary he may be easily vanquished as many
experiences may resolve us.

2 We have elsewhere said that Bajazet the first was overcome and taken alive
at the battle he fought at Mount-Stella against the great Tamberlain, 1397.
under whose hands he died a captive. 1439.
Carambeius Bassa of Amurath the second, was discomfited by Ladislaus King of
Polonia in the valley of mount Hermus: 1440.
he came with an intention to revenge himself of the loss and dishonor that
the Bassa of Notalia had received at the hands of John Huniades, which at one
time recovered from him a part of Seruia and all Moldauia: but instead of
performing this he became himself prisoner of that King, and had almost al his
army put to the sword. Bajazet the second sent Calibeius and Querscogles his
son in law into Asia against Caitheus Sultan of Egypt with a great army to
revenge the intertainment the Sultan had given Zizimus his brother, 1482.
whom he had succored with men and money against him: his army was overthrown
near Adena a town of Cilicia, where the Turk received the most notable
overthrow that was ever given him. For of an hundred thousand which presented
themselves in the battle, the third part remained not alive; yet those that
performed this noble execution, were scarce one against six; but the advice of
two Italians and of the Mameluckes so furthered the affairs of Caytheus, as he
spied a time to charge the Turks when they least expected it. Soliman left the
siege of Vienna with loss of 60000. 1529.
men which were there slain, having given twenty general assaults to the
town. The year following he assembled an other army of 200000. men, with
intention cruelly to revenge the harms he had received; but the Emperor
Charles the fifth went to meet him, with such forces, as the other fled so
hastily as he had scarce leisure to save his baggage. Don John of Austria
natural sone of Charles the fifth in the year 1571. got at Lepanto that so
renowned victory of the army of Selim the second; this has since made them
walk (as they say) with the bridle in their hands, and confess they had
passed too rash a judgment upon the power of the Christians either by sea or by
land: I omit to speak of the prowess and noble acts of Scanderbeg against the
Turks, and how many times he overthrew the Commanders of Amurath the second:
and valiantly recovered Albania the place of his birth whereof he and his
predecessors had been deprived by that Tyrant, neither will I again cite the
examples of John Huniades or Matthew Coruin, who in a manner with a handful of
men opposed and discomfited the Turkish forces, nor of the Portugals, though
they have at sundry times assailed the Turk near the red sea, barred him of
passage, and rid him of the means of farther issuing out of the mouth of that
sea. What should I speak of the Tartarians, who but lately took from him
Taurica Chersones (called at this day Perocopsky) if the reports which come
from those parts be credible?

3 Such as have been curious in the search of the Turkish history have
observed, that in the space of two hundred and fourscore years they have
fought with their neighbors thirty and six battles, whereof they have only
gained eighteen and lost the rest. These are all signs and successes whereby
a man may conclude that they are not invincible, and that their fortune has
been balanced between gain and loss, so as we may believe, if God for our
offenses did not busy the forces of Christian Princes elsewhere then against
the Turk, where he has had the overthrow once, he had had it thrice: by all
these foregoing examples we may collect that this proud enemy has not his head
so hard as it may not be broken, or else sorely brufed. And though Christian
Princes are not of power sufficient apart and of themselves to take him to
task, yet may they do it by ranging themselves to that union and concord, as
that there be amongst them but one common fortune. This being granted (as I
presume it shall) we are to unfold how they may purchase his ruin.

CHAP. VII.
Why the leagues among Christian Princes are commonly of small effect.
1 Leagues are concluded for the respect of honor and profit. 2 The inequality
of gain brings a difficulty to the conclusion of leagues. 3 Christian
Princes the farther they are from the Turk, the less have they fear of
dangers wherewith other more near him are possessed. 4 No man vainly exposes
himself to an apparent danger but where an evident commodity inuites him. 5
While each strives to protect his own frontiers from the Turk, others are
neglected. 6 The inequality of aid begets a contention who shall command
most in the wars. 7 Remedies against such difficulties and calamities.
1 THere are many respects and causes, which customarily make the leagues of
Christian Princes altogether ineffectual, which may appear to some a matter
of hard disgestion, and for this cause I hold it requisite particularly to
clear it. It is a received maxim that all the actions of Princes are
undertaken for two principal causes, honor and profit: that the consideration
of honor often masqueth under the pretense or good of their affairs: we will
then only meddle with profit which we may term interest.

2 Now this interest (a common mask for all faces) cannot be a like equal
between Christian Princes with one consent undertaking the war against the
Turk: for they diversely confine upon the common enemy, and this diversity
breeds a difference also between their resolutions and interests; and though
this be an inconvenience not in the case in handling to be contemned, yet the
principal difficulty depends not herein: It rather consists wholly in the
concord of the treaty of the league, and this concord is hard to be wrought
for these following reasons.

3 All these Princes are not neighbors of the Turk in the same equallity:
some are more strong then other: this difference of strength affords to some
a commodity to defend themselves or offend him with their own forces: others
are weak, and consequently exposed to the incursions and spoils of the Turk.
It is an infallible maxim, that the farther Princes are from the danger, the
less forward are they to stir, prepare for the war, or contribute to the
charge or means requisite for the undertaking thereof with the like feruency
and affection as they would if they saw themselves so near to the mischief,
and that there were apparent danger.

4 Again, that Prince which sees no great profit or interest in such an
enterprise does less regard it then he who^ necessity inforceth to stand upon
his guard, and fear that tyrants invasion. Moreover, if the Princes united to
this league and combination shall once know that they shall get little or
smally advantage their estate, it is not to be expected (when they enter into
it) that they will bring with them that courage, resolution, affection, and
forwardness as the business would require. See then how the disposition of
the interest makes the beginning difficult, the proceeding and issue
uncertain, by reason of the diverse alterations and varieties which accompany
every associated Prince, suitable to his passion or affection; Whereupon would
undoubtedly follow an impossibility of establishing this league, and union
upon so sure foundations, as that the beginning may be good, the middle and end
better: since the effect without union amongst many agents remains evermore
as nothing or nothing worth.

5 We fall then far short of our reckoning, unless we can minister some
remedy to the diversities of this interest and profit. This inconvenience is
attended on, and counterpeized by an other of as great or greater
consideration: And this is the interest and particular consequence of the
neighborhood that every one indifferently has with the Turk; by the which
indifferency, each one according as his fear is, will desire the war may be
undertaken to his advantage. As for example, Spain fears the neighborhood
of Algiers; Venice of Albania: hence will grow that the league taking effect,
the Venetians will strive that the forces of the league may be employed in the
Leuant, the Spaniards toward the South: so as it will not be possible to manage
the enterprise to both their satisfactions.

6 There is yet another inconvenience that our Princes will not be able by an
equal portion to enter into the league, inasmuch as one wants means to
contribute thereto in money more then a sixth part, another a fifth part; others
that have no money, will contribute men or ships; others more mighty in both,
will undertake half or a second. These are all the portions by whose assembly
a league may be formed. Of their indifferency grows yet another difficulty
or inconvenience (as we list to term it) and that is, that whosoever
contributeth the half, would likewise have in his hands (as the greatest and
mightiest) all the power and swaie. In which it will follow, that the other
shall not undertake or perform ought but by his advice, direction, and
assistance: If he will make a stand, they are not to go forward; if he list to
march elsewhere, then their desires carry them, they must follow him: If his
affairs press him to alter his resolution and mind, and that he will retire
to his home, they are constrained to do the like, so as all their charge,
pains, and holy intentions, are utterly overthrown, and they oftentimes rest
exposed to the injury and revenge of their dangerous neighbor, against whom
they jointly rose in arms.

7 These are, to say the truth, considerations and inconveniences of that
value and consequence (measuring them by their parts, and not by the whole) as
we must conclude that none but God is able to tune this league to an agreeing
harmony, which we are most humbly to crave at his Almighty hands with a strong
faith, a true amendment of life, and a more perfect charity then this age
affoordeth.

CHAP. VIII.
The defects which may be observed in the leagues of the year 1537: and 1571.
1 The conditions, success and errors of the league in anno 1537. 2 Of that of
1570. 3 How a league may be established to avoid the formerly committed
errors.
1 COntinuing the matter of the former chapter, it will not be beside the
purpose, by the way to touch the defects which were found in two the most
memorable leagues that have been made in our time between the Princes of
Christendom. The first resolved upon in the time of Pope Paul the third, 1537.
between him, the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the Venetians. It was then,
beside the conditions, agreed upon that the Emperor and the Knights of Malta
should set forth 82. Galleys, the Venetians a like number, the Pope 36. only.
Andrew Doria was chosen General of the Emperors army, Vincentio Capelli of
the Venetians, and Marco Grimani Patriarch of Aquileia of the Popes, having for
his Lieutenant Paul Justinian; and for the maine land service Ferdinand Gonzaga
was chosen General. Moreover it was concluded between the princes, that
whatsoever they should get from the Turks with the forces of the league either
in Greece or Dalmatia should be left to the Venetians as in recompense of their
so great expense and loss that they should suffer by warring upon the Turk.
Soliman seeing the forces of the league assembled, made have to lanch his
Galleys forth into the maine. Such was his diligence as they were within a few
days in a readiness and went for Candy, where they made some havoc, but of
no great moment. After these roades Barbarossa made a stay of all the army in
the gulf of Larta, there to attend the Christians which came onward, but so
slowly as the season passed without performing ought, or without that they once
met together, and that which was yet worse, our men enforced by tempest,
retired themselves to Corfu whence they set forth. Barbarossa followed them as
far as Antipaxo within an hundred miles of Corfu, but perceiving them to
prepare themselves to fight he speedily retired to the gulf of Larta, so as
our army was resolved for Dirachium, otherwise called Drazo or la Velona, but
that being a dangerous harbor for the galleys, they turned their force upon
Castle Nouo which they carried by assault: an exploit (to say the truth) of
that small importance (respecting their charge and provision) as it wan them as
much dishonor as profit, the town being won the Spaniards seized themselves of
it. The Venetians disputed it as a thing appertaining to them according to the
articles of the league; but it was to small purpose, wherefore quieting
themselves since it was not to be remedied they took an occasion thereupon to
shift themselves of the league. The year following Soliman recovered Castle
Nouo with the loss of those Spaniards which kept it, who were all put to the
sword, those which escaped enduring a most miserable servitude: and though the
peace treated by the Venetian was somewhat disaduantageous, yet they endured
that more willingly, then to be otherwise dealt with then was agreed upon:
other causes might be alleged, as the ceasing of traffic and many other
discommodities, besides the impouerishing of their Estate, all which
necessarily attend the intertainement of armies.

2 The last league of the year 1571. 1570.
yielded not much better fruits, for after a great charge, and the gaining of
so famous a victory, no other good redounded thence to the Christians, but
that the Turk made an assay of their valor; and by little and little the
confederate forces divided themselves: the Venetians departing upon occasion of
almost the same iealousies, as in the former league.

3 It will be now time to deliver how all these inconveniences may be stopped,
and the league become firm and durable, without consideration of any
particular interest, to the end that every one may voluntarily in devotion
consent thereto to the glory of God with a free heart, and an undaunted
magnanimity: In which case, the conditions being rather free then forced on
either side, we may reap thereby fruits worthy and honorable: These two
leagues heretofore mentioned, happened in a time so dangerous for the Venetians,
as it was more then necessary that the Christian Princes (though not
interessed) should unite their forces to assist and protect the other. So the
one standing in the water up to the throat, and encompassed with danger, and
the other on the contrary, free from fear of peril, they entered into the
covenants and conditions of the league, not such as they ought to have been to
make them lasting; but such as were presented to men standing in need of them,
who enforced by necessity, might not refuse them, to the end to clear
themselves of a near threatening mischief. Leagues will then be durable when
they shall be stablished at a time when men are free and exempt from all
constraint; and not to attend as they do, till the Turk affright one of the
confederates, and that he be already come into the field so strong both by sea
and land, as the Venetians or some other of the confederates are already by him
assailed. At such a time to seek a remedy by their hasty assembling, is the
way to imprint a certain fear in their people; and make them flock together
in the fold as sheep in presence of the woolfe. It is requisite then that the
league be contracted at leisure, in a time of peace, and in a season when the
associates may be invited, not by any urgent danger, but voluntarily, and with
such an alacrity of heart, as they may unite their persons, their means,
their powers, and their courages all together to offend the common enemy.

CHAP. IX.
A league which may be treated without danger of the former defects.
1 The qualities of perfect leagues. 2 The conditions of leagues, and what each
of the confederates is to attempt upon the enemy. 3 The commodity of them so
concluded. 4 Advise for a general contribution against private gain. 5 That
the danger we stand in of the Turk, is greater then many suppose, and that
therefore those that are most remote, ought willingly to contribute. 6 What
should move us to join in league against the Turk.
1 NOw then to reap the worthy and honorable fruits of a holy league and
association, we are to remove the defects and inconveniences which have made
the former leagues prove abortiue: And the better to effect it, it is
necessary that their treaties be voluntary: that Princes voluntarily join
their powers and means to one end, though by different courses: so as growing
to capitulations, the one do not advantage himself upon the straightning of
the others affairs. This is it which equalling the conditions, will cause
every one to partake in the enterprise, without all suspect or particular
jealousy: It is not enough that the defects of these leagues be discovered, if
they make us not more wise in the framing of other to come: to the end we may
with all devotion and sincerity build them on a strong and immovable
foundation; and thus in my opinion may be the manner of our proceeding.

2 It is not required that to establish this league and make it fructify, the
confederate forces should assemble in one place, but at one time: my meaning
is, that our Princes must be ready to assail the enemy at once in diverse
places, and that every one bend his forces toward parts which are nearest to
him, so to begin the war to some purpose: As for example, the Spaniards
should invade the parts of Algiers: the Venetians and the Pope, of Albania: the
galleys of Sauoy, Malta, and Florence, should continue their ordinary courses
against the Turk; unless they would join with the Venetians or the king of
Spain: the Polonians should set upon Walachia: the Emperor and Princes of
Germany upon Hungary.

3 Questionless if each of these did in this manner assail him, their courage
and force would be the greater, as would likewise be their desire to persist in
their enterprise, without any respect of pains or expense, hoping all would
redound to their honor, profit, and particular security: which they cannot
expect from the other leagues, and this is that which has in part made them
defective. The enemy that should be so many ways set upon, would be
constrained to divide his forces, which consequently would become less able to
protect him, on all sides whersoeuer he should be assailed. First, the galleys
of Malta assisted with some other, and scouring (as they might) the Leuant
seas, would keep in such awe those that guarde Alexandria and Rhodes, as they
would not dare to peep out: Again, if Spain would invade Barbary, the
galleys of Algiers would be sure to keep home: so as the strength of Venice
joined with that of the Church, would do what they list, and would meet with
no encounter by sea which they should not easily ouermatch: especially if at
the same time the Emperor and the King of Polonia, would war likewise upon
the Turk. We have an example of the times which verifieth our position. When
Soliman undertook the war of Hungary, 1532.
against Charles the 5. Andrew Doria General of his galleies, with a very
small army troubled all the Leuant, took by maine force Coron and Patras, and
harrowed all those seas without control or encounter of the enemies: whence
follows, that if the Christians would as I have said, at one instant set
upon the Turk, they would force him no doubt into a narrow straight.

4 There is one point that would make the enterprise easy, more forcible and
lasting, but it would hardly be disgested, and that is to draw all Christian
Princes which confine not with the Turk, to contribute unto it. All these
suppose themselves free from danger and make no reckning of others sufferings,
in whose behalf they think they should not co^tribute, as those that were
like to have but the charge and the other the profit. In a word, all catholic
Princes are so wedded to this particular interest, which is ever more differing
and unequal among them (as has been before alleged) as the league would
never be thoroughly concluded or of long continuance, this must of necessity be
forgotten, and the only desire of the exaltation of the Church of God must be
that which must range them to the necessary point, whereof they need not
travel to seek examples out of their own houses, which if they would but
imitate all would succeed well, to inuit them to it I will allege one.

The principal aim of the league set on foot by Godfrye of Buillion, Alcut
1088.
and of so many Princes and Nobles some greater then himself which accompanied
him, was not placed but upon the particular honor of the Majesty of God,
whereabout every man employed himself with such zeal and devotion, as without
attending the succors or furtherance of any great King or Emperor, they drew
together an army of an hundred thousand horse and three hundred thousand foot,
wherewith they subdued almost all the east.

5 Leaving apart all these considerations let us come to the opinion that some
have of their being far from danger, and we shall find peradventure that they
are nearer thereto then they are aware.

When Amurath came first out of Asia into Europe was not Hungary (which is now
subject to the Turk) farther off from the confines of the Ottomans Empire then
are now the countries of Saxony or of Bauiers, 1363.
then they of Franconia, the Swichzers and the French? yet we see it now most
in his possession.

6 Shall we then say because we have a mountain before us, or a river between
us, or some estate that seems to shelter us, that therefore we should hold
our selves happy and in security, and not be touched with others danger and
misery? No surely. For if we be Christians we ought not only to have compassion
of others calamities, but afforde them also our good and charitable assistance:
moreover he that measures future things but by the consequence of things
present, finds himself often times beguiled; we are to have such provident
care of what is present, and to come, that we may leave to ours the same
assurance we wish to our selves, to the end to preserve them by this providence
from such danger as they might incur after us. And though we should not carry
that regard of our children and posterity, and that the consequence of our
estate did not spur us on to such an enterprise, shall there remain in us so
little courage and charity, love and devotion to the glory of God, from whom we
have our being and of whom we hold our powers, as that we should all forget to
husband his vineyard, and expel thence such as intrude themselves into it and
pollute it? wherefore serve all those heaps of treasure which the Princes of
Lombardy amasse, one in envy of an other? whereupon will those so mighty
Princes of Germany and the Imperial towns spend their revenues and
incomparable riches? what occasion can all of them find more goodly then this
to attain to an immortal glory? It is then for the enlarging the kingdom of
Christ that we must employ all we have, and for the deliverance of those sacred
places over which those barbarous infidels tyrannize, to redeem so many
thousand of poor Christian slaves which suffer and groan under the yoke of
that enraged dog, to give life to an infinite number of Christians, to
revenge their wrongs, to punish the iniurires and blasphemies which that tyrant
and his helhounds have breathed out against the glory of God, his holy name and
church. And if human appetite must needs be an actor in this theater, it
would be an easy matter for great Princes that send their forces, to urge this
consideration in the capitulations, that they should have in favor of their
contributions part of the spoils and conquests that they might happily
obtain. Again, if the love of the service of God had a working in them, they
might undertake in person the General conduct of the army, or command part of
the confederat troops. Godfrey a poor Prince, in comparison of those that now
sway Christendom, alienated the Duchy of Bouillion for so godly a voyage.
Stephen Count of Chartres did the like with his estate, as did also many great
men, who had no other motive thereunto then the enterprise of the holy land.
Charles the seventh King of France, did he not succor the Emperor of
Constantinople with a great number of horse which he sent him under the conduct
of the greatest personages of his kingdom? And must we sit idle with crossed
arms whilst the cruel flames of this infidels tyranny burn and consume the
houses of our neighbors?

CHAP. X.
Wherein consist the greatest forces of the Turk.
1 Whether the Ianizzars be the chief strength of the Turk. 2 That horse are
more necessary in the war then foot. 3 The progress of the Turk before and
after the institution of the Ianissars. 4 Victories gotten by the horse. 5
Overthrows given by the enemies horse to the Christians. 6 Conclusion that
horse in service excel foot.
IT seems that the greatest part of such as discourse of the forces of the
Turk attribute his chief strength to the band of Ianizzars, as the only sinew
of his power: and amongst other reasons wherewith they strive to fortify their
oppinion, this is one. It has happened many times that the army of the Ottomans
has been so hardly laid to, as the battle has been in a manner lost, yet
have they gathered strength and kept themselves on foot, yea they have gotten
the victory, and all through the virtue and valor of these Legionaries.

2 Machiauel discourses upon this point, Machiauels opinion for foot.
and as one much passionate holds himself to this argument, that foot are
more necessary then horse in all exploites of war, and he lays his principal
foundation upon the example of certain Roman Captains, which (says he) to
break into, and force the enemy on foot have caused their men at arms to
alight from their horses and fight on foot against them: It is a poor
argument and of small importance, since that for once that they made their
horsemen alight, an hundred occasions were offered to make them mount on horse
back if they had the commodity of horse; he which is on horseback may when he
please alight, but a footeman cannot get up on horseback when he will. This
money shall serve to pay Machiauel whom I leave to proceed forward. I affirm,
that in a ranged battle, and in the plain field the forces of the Turk
consist and principally rely on the horse. The proofs are clear and at hand,
as the process of this discourse shall discover.

3 First no man is ignorant of the great victories the Turk got long time
before the institution of the Ianizzars. Amurath the second the year 1420. was
he that first ordained them: yet Ottoman had before that taken Sebasta (a city
of importance in Asia) where he slew above an hundred thousand of his enemies.
1305.
Orcan his son had dispoiled the Emperor of Constantinople and of Bithinia
at several worthy incounters. 1363.
Amurath the first had passed Asia into Europe, with his forces took
Gallipoli, Filipoli, and Andrinople; and we may think that he did not obtain
those victories without dangerous and bloody incounters: he conquered also
diverse other cities and wan many other victories of the Princes of Seruia and
Bulgaria, whom he compelled to stoop under the yoke of his obedience. 1396.
Bajazet the first overcame Sigismonde King of Bohemia, and put all those
French to the sword which Charles the 6. of France sent to his succor. Calepin
his son understanding that Sigismond had raised an army, upon the news of
the overthrow given by Tamburlaine to Bajazet, to salve his losses went to
meet him at Salumbezza, and so valiantly incountred him, as his whole army was
cut in pieces, so as it cannot be said that the victories the Turk has
obtained since the institution of Ianizzars have been either greater or more
memorable then the former, rather they were the steps to these other happy
atchieuements. The beginning of things contain in them the efficient virtue of
the whole. This disputation might prove great and might balance on either
side, if I did not ad weight to one of the opinions.

I will then say, that before the institution and seminary of Ianizzars, 1397.
the Turks received but one memorable overthrow at mount Stella at the hands of
Tamburlan the most strong enemy that ever they assaied, and that after their
institution they received more and greater, as were those of Vsumcassan, of
John Huniades, of Matthew Coruin, of the Mamelucks, of the great Scanderbag, of
Don John of Austria, of the Kings of Persia and others.

4 The second proof which I will produce to fortify the truth of my
proposition, is, that all such as have had the better hand of the Turks, ever
had it by the means of their horse, wherein they did exceed the enemy in
number and strength, as we have so often said of the Persians and of the
Mamelucks. The great Sophi ^^mael, had he not vanquished Selim the second with
the strength of his horse, if when he did set upon the rier-ward, where the
Turk was in person, the thunder of his Cannon had not so affrighted the horse,
as they ran away with their masters, to the disordering of the whole army? The
only thing that overthrew the fortune which the Persian had almost already in
his possession. Cudabeuda King of Persia, has many times overcome the Turkish
forces, by the only strength of his horse, whereof he has more and is better
armed then the other. The Hungarians in like sort have many times put the
Turks to the worse by their fight on horseback.

5 The third and strongest proof of my assertion, is, that all the harms we
have received of the Turk, have come by his horse, as at Nicapolis, at
Salembezza, at Varna, at the river of Moraua, at Exechium, at Buda and
elsewhere.

6 And if it ever happened that the Ianizzars recovered the battle halle lost,
it is to be imputed to this, that they were reserved for the rierward; so as it
was easy for fresh men to repel those which were already weakened and tired.
But I think no man but will grant, that if instead of the Ianizzars they had
been as many horse, they had performed as much. As on the contrary, if the
other had kept in store some fresh troops of horse, as the Turks, they had
dealt otherwise with them, and kept them well enough from bereauing them of the
victory. In conclusion, the horse are they that defeat the enemy, and become
masters of the field, that prepare the way for the foot to the beseeging of
towns, and give them time and leisure to force and take them.

CHAP. XI.
Where the Turk might be most easily assailed to overcome him either by sea or
by land.
1 Examples of sea victories. 2 The goodness of our havens. 3 The number of
our skillful mariners. 4 The Christians far beyond the Turks in maritime
matters. 5 The Turks horse fearful to the Christians, unprofitable at sea. 6
That the Turks are easily to be overthrown at sea.
1 THere were much matter for doubt and disputation upon this question, if
reason and experience did not clear it: for experience we have it fresh in
many accidents; which instruct us that an attempt by sea, would be less
difficult to us, and more hurtful to the Turk, for the reasons and examples
which I will deliver. As often as our forces have to some purpose put
themselves into the Leuant seas, they have been evermore victorious, as at
Metelin, at Cafalonia, at Preuesa, at Scorsolari. If any one opposing me object
the overthrow of our army at Gerbes, 1580.
which happened about the same time, let him read the discourse of the History,
(as is requisite) and he shall find that that chanced not through the force
and valor of the enemy, but rather through our own fault; insomuch as our
army could not take their opportunity to dislodge in due time; but suffered
themselves to be besieged by the hardness of the season, and by tempests;
which so disordred them as it was easy for the enemy to force them. Grimani
General of the Venetians, let slip the occasion of a worthy victory, when
he knew not how to take his time to charge the enemy, as he might well have
done at Sapienza. But on the contrary, Vid. 181.
as often as the Emperor Charles the fifth set forth an army to some purpose,
the Turk durst never look abroad; as when he undertook the voyage of Tunis
and of Algiers, where nevertheless he encountered many disasters, he brought
before Tunis seven hundred sail, and before Algiers five hundred only. Thus
much for experience.

2 Now we must see what reasons we have in store to prove that we may more
easily assail the Turk by sea then by land. Among others this may pass, that
our seas are more frequented, and our ports more rich and safe then those of
the Leuant. For first (set aside Constantinople) there is not thoroughout their
obedience, any one Port that may be equalled to those of Venice, Lisbone,
Civil, Antwerp, London, Amsterdam, Lubec, or Danske, etc. and very few also
that may be compared with those of Naples, Genoua, Villa-Franca, Nessina,
Palermo, Ragusa, Marsseilles, Tolon, Bourdeaux, New-Hauen, Rochelle, and
Rouane, etc.

3 It is clear then that we surmount the Turk not only in numbers of Ports
and good harbers for the retraict and shelter of our armies, but also in
Mariners and men accustomed and experienced in both the seas. Moreover, there
is not perhaps in the world a coast that affoordeth greater plenty of men then
that of Genoua, Dalmatia, Sclauonia, Venice, Candye. Again, there is not a
nation to be found of more resolution or better proof for sea affairs, then
are those of Marseilles. I omit to speak of the Catalonian, the Portugal, the
Biskayan, the English, the Norman, the Hollander, and Zelander, all people
marvelous skillful in Navigations.

4 I would willingly demand, what it avails the Turk to possess a large
and spacious sea bordering country, if it remain uninhabited; neither were it
enough if it were: for the exploits of maritime war, it is requisite they be
valiant, resolute, and such as can endure travel and pain. Along all the
coast of Afric, the Turk has not one Haven of account besides Algies. In
all Egypt he has only Alexandria, and Dalmatia, at the least which are held
in any consideration. In Soria, take away Saffo and Pamphilia, those near
Tirus, Ephesus, Cicize, and the rest so celebrated in ancient times, remain at
this day namelesse, and buried in their own ruins. They have Gallipoli which
is of no great traffike: they have that of Constantinople, whereof they stead
and vaunt themselves most of all: Moreover, all these Ports are not so good or
so convenient as ours, either if we consider the form, or the commodity of
situation, nor so well stored with artillery as ours are.

5 Again, fighting by sea, we shall not need to fear their horse, whose
encounter in regard of their multitude cannot be but a terror unto us; relying
as they do upon them, as the principal nerve of their forces; but as for
foot, we excel them in number and valor:

6 For conclusion, it is most certain, if we could once deprive the Turk of
the use of the sea, he would be soon overthrown by land with a sufficient
number of galleys, which might be maintained in the Archipelago: we should cut
him off from all traffic with Egypt and Soria, as also keeping certain
galleys in the Straight and channel, we should hinder the commerce of Asia and
Constantinople, which he could not be long without, so that by continuing this
manner of warring upon him without intermission, we should by little and little
heave him out of the whole Empire of Greece, where there would be enough to
satiate the greedy ambition of the Christians.

CHAP. XII.
Of the inward causes whereby the Empire of the Turks may come to ruin.
1 Of inward causes by which an Estate may be overthrown. 2 The occasions of
the change of the Turkish Empire, are, a defect that may happen of the Ottoman
race: 3 The hatred, contempt, and disobedience of the Turks officers and
servants: 4 The discord that may arise between his children about the
succession. 5 That it is hard now to stir up and maintain dissension amongst
them. 6 Another occasion may be the Iannizzers liberty and insolency toward
their master: 7 Another the rebellion and revolt of his countries and their
Governors.
1 AS we have before delivered by what outward causes the Empire of the Turks
may soonest receive an alteration, so we are now to handle the means whereby
he may be inwardly weakened, and whether by the infirmities which are begotten
in other estates, that of the Ottomans may be likewise distempered and
corrupted; of the inward causes of this corruption, some concern the Heads and
Ministers, others are derived from among the people. I will then produce some
few examples noting the errors of such as sway a Sovereign authority, and so
orderly come to the other, to collect thence what may serve to procure the
Turks ruin.

2 That which would fall most to our purpose would be if the great Turk should
die without heirs of the true line and race of Ottoman. For in such a case it
is likely the Beglerbyes, Vizirs, Bassas, Sangiacks, and the greatest
personages of the Turkish nation, would each one for himself endeavor to
possess himself of whatsoever he could most easily compass.

3 The second cause would be, if in regard of his cruelty, or negligence, the
Prince should give his subjects occasion to hate and contemn him: but the
mischief would prove yet greater if it did arise from the cowardlinesse or
sloth of the Prince. For his strength consisting wholly in the great numbers
of his soldiers ordinarily entertained, how could he possibly contain such
mighty armies in devotion and quietness; if he did not daily busy them in the
exercise of war? And less how could so many nations be held within compass of
fear and obedience without the fear of ordinary arms? It is not to be
doubted then if they had a Prince who were given over to idleness and a loose
life, or that they discried him to be a coward and slothful, but they would be
forward to draw their swords against him, and thence work their own
destruction. Bajazet the second had proof of this, for abandoning himself to
all pleasures and resolving upon a private and retired course of life, 1511.
to spend his time in reading good authors; his son sought his destruction,
and in the end favored by the Ianizzars deprived him of his life and kingdom.
For though Bajazet repressed the first violence of his sons ambition, yet he
was at the last forced by the Ianizzars not only to pardon his rebellion, but
also to send him with an army against his other son Accomat, who supposing
his father meant to prefer Selim before himself, who was the elder, caused the
noses and ears of his fathers messengers most shamefully to be cut off; the
enormity of this fact ill digested, and worse interpreted was that which
cancelled the greater faults of Selim, to take vengeance of this last and less
outrage; whence it came to pass in the end that these same Ianizzars possessed
Selim of the empire, who soon after put to death his unhappy father. Amurath
the third now reigning having withdrawn himself from the actions of war to
live in ease and quiet has lost much of his soldiers and servants ancient
obedience, zeal, and observance, such as they were wont to carry toward their
Sovereigns greatness. The Bassa of Cairo who had the government of Egypt,
named Ragusei, being summoned (according to their Emperious custom) to make
his appearance at the port, flatly refused to come thither and made his escape
with a world of treasure which he had amassed by extorsions and pilling of the
people, during the time of his administration. The Ianizzars which were at
those times appointed for the wars of Persia, would not once move a foot to
march thitherward: but as half in a mutiny said plainly they would not any
more go upon any enterprise unless the great Turk their Lord would vnchamber
himself from among his concubines, and undertake the voyage himself in
person, so as he was constrained by virtue of gifts and increase of pay to win
them to the war. Moreover of late after the overthrow of Tauris, the Turk
having appointed a new general for the succoring of his vanquished army, and
reenforcing of such as remained within the cittadell; all the commandments he
could lay upon him, could not prevail so much with him as to get him to march
forward, rather he grew to capitulate with him, and that finished, he made the
most ado in the world to muster up twenty thousand men, who refused likewise
to go to that war, otherwise then upon all the advantages they could devise to
demand: not like subjects and slaves, but as if they had been neighbors,
allies, and confederates. These breaches already made in the obedience they
were wont to render their lord and Master, may persuade us that they will easily
rebel, upon the first occasion that shall present it self without respect of
their Princes greatness, or observation of their ancient military policy.

4 The third occasion might befall, if there were many brethren to debate the
Empire after the death of their father, as it happened between Zizimus, and
Bajazet, sons of Mahomet, and between Acomat and Selim, sons of Bajazet.
This Bajazet was favored of the Ianizzars against his brother. Zizimus was
vpheld only by the aid of the Sultan of Cairo, 1482.
and King of Persia. Selim likewise was borne by the Ianizzars and Bassas, and
Acom^nt by foreign Princes: they incountred and fought cruel battles, whose
victories brought the whole Estate in danger: Bajazet and Selim remained
conquerours, each one his party by means of the great numbers of men that
accompanied them, 1513.
and of the valor of the soldiers of the old bands which served under them.
Notwithstanding all these opportunities which God so to the purpose prepared,
not one Christian Prince once stirred, or so much as made offer to arm in
favor of the weaker of those which contended: which would no doubt have
entangled both of them in a long and dangerous strife, enough finally to have
ruined or much decayed the house of the Ottomans, when they should have called
such an one to their succor as would have rather blown then quenched their
fires. Amongst all the Princes of Christendom there was none but the great
master of Rhodes, which sent some supplies of artillery to Zizimus, and which
after received and defended him from the hands of Bajazet, when he was driven
to retire himself to his protection.

5 These domestique quarrels cannot now become so strong (especially such as
might happen between brethren) as then they might, considering that the
Mamelucks, who as neighbors might have fomented and given intertainment to
such differences, are now extinct and their name no more mentioned. They were
in their time the only emulators of the Turks glory: Rhodes has made an
exchange of her fortune, and is now in the power of this tyrant. Cypres bears
the like yoke. These two Islands affoorded an especial commodity to sow
dissentions among the Turks, to favor and succor one of the parties.

6 The fourth cause would easily arise from the presumption and headstrong
rashness of the Ianizzars, likely enough to attempt and execute as much as
sometime did the Pretorian bands of the Romans, who made slender account to
fill the Empire with slaughters and massacres, wherein many Emperors ended
their days: they electing others at their pleasures against the authority of
the Senate, and the love and reverence they ought to have borne toward their
country. The like may we hope or expect from the Ianizzars, that they will one
day assume to themselves the same power and learn to perform the like,
whereof they gave an assaie at such time as they compelled Bajazet the second
to resign the Empire to Selim his son. They did almost the like when Soliman
caused his son Mustapha to be murdered; for they besieged him and environed
his tent for certain days space, crying out they would know the cause of that
young Princes death. In the end by the devise of the Bassa and with stoore of
coin, he wan to him four thousand of them, who disengaged him of the fear
and danger wherein he was plunged.

7 The fifth cause may be fetched from the ambition or discontent of the great
ones of the country, or of ministers swaying the supreme authority and credit
in places of government. Gazeles governor of Soria made way for a revolt of
the like quality, as did also Acomat General of Egypt: Gazeles, assisted by
the Mamelucks, Arabians and those of Rhodes, endeavored to set himself up
against the great Turk: but he was discovered by Cayembeius whom he had
acquainted with the conspiracy. This man either for fear (as looking into the
danger of the enterprise) or for envy of his companions greatness, revealed
all to his Master Soliman, who presently dispatched against him Faratha Bassa,
by whom he was vanquished in battle. Acomat had not the leisure to proceed
far in his attempt, for as he did inconsideratly precipitate himself into the
trial thereof, so was he as speedily discovered, and in an instant suppressed
and slain, without having thriued ought in his dessignes.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the mixed causes.
1 What are the mixed causes. 2 How Estates are overthrown by mixed causes.
1 IN this third book we have at large discoursed how by inward and outward
causes, Estates may be endangered: now we must speak of causes compounded, of
the one and the other, which, to discourse more intelligibly, we term mixed,
which likewise are of power of themselves to alter an Empire and to bring it,
either by an universal or a particular change, to a lamentable ruin. These
mixed causes then are those whereby both the enemy abroad, and the subject at
home may by a common consent conspire against an Estate and subvert it.

2 One of the causes or means may be a popular insurrection nourished by the
enemy, or else the conspiracy of some particular men set on by foreign
practices; or to term it better, the treasons which subjects may hatch in
favor, and by the means and authority of their neighbors. This happens in a
twofold manner, when the subject begins and sets on foot the practice,
or when a stranger lays the way open unto them under some coulered pretense,
or else when some one particular person or all a whole communalty frame the
occasion thereof in regard of some displeasure or oppression. Finally, this
falls out also when the enemy abroad tempereth with one, two, or three, of
the principal men to revolt against their prince and take arms in hand to
ouerturne and ruin the Estate.

CHAP. XIIII.
How particular persons may be gained.
1 How his people are to be provoked to rebellion. 2 How his great men and
chief officers are to be gained. 3 These courses at the first not succeeding,
are to be oftener attempted. 4 Wary proceeding is requisite, lest those that
manage the business incur danger. 5 To whom such businesses are to be
committed.
1 IT rests now that we make it appear how such practices may be set on
foot and cherished: we will then begin with the enterprise to be plotted by
some particular person, by whose assistance it may take effect. We must
presuppose that this person is either private or public, the private persons are
those which suffer themselves most often to be corrupted by money, and with
these there need not so many ceremonies or bro^kings, but if they be public
persons of rank and authority, either in regard of the greatness of their
family, or managing of state affairs; there is far greater difficulty in
corrupting them then the other: yet if we may but discover in them the stinges
of ambition and desire of greatness, and that we propose to them the assurance
of speedy succors, for the execution of the des^^gne; then is it that we bring
them to dare any thing, especially if they have never so little disposition to
be revenged of some received indignity. It is indeed a hard matter to work
particular and private persons without great vncertaineties and dangers.

2 But if we must have to do with the great persons of the Estate, we must
warily make choice of our time, sound them whether they be male content or ill
affected toward their Prince, either in respect that some one is advanced to
their prejudice, or for some other cause which may awake in them a longing to
shake off their yoke and seize themselves of the Estate. These are the means
and occasions, which should be chosen and diligently husbanded by our Christian
Princes, smoothly and with dexterity to procure the ruin of the common enemy;
putting on (as they say) the foxes skin when the lions is wanting. The
displeasure and jealousy which Faratha Bassa conceived against Hebraim Bassa
because he saw him raised by Soliman to greater honor and estimation then
himself, so deprived him of all reason, as suffering the desire of revenge by
little and little to transport him, he began to plot a rebellion, but
discovered he was forthwith put to death: the self same occasion was the
overthrow of Pirrus and Mustapha raised by Soliman. In our time in the court of
Amurath the third now reigning, these ielousies and hart-burnings have been
great between Mahomet and Mustapha, and since that between the same Mustapha
and Cicala (who has outstript him) and all for favor of their Master. If
these humors and ill dispositions had been well looked into and wisely
employed to their best use by some great Prince of Christendom, they had been
fit matter to have bred a dissension and revolt amongst those barbarous people.

3 Now though such practices should not perhaps at the first be of sufficient
power to work that universal change which we wish in that tyrants Empire; yet
are we not therefore to desist as men dismayed; remembering that most commonly
the beginnings of innouations and commotions so extraordinary, are feeble, and
that that wisdom shows it self like it self which can so diligently suckle
and nourish them as they may attain to a happy growth. I am of opinion, that
when we encounter with instruments that are not without ambition, courage, and
a thirst of revenge; after we have felt and sounded them once, twice, or
thrice, we shall in the end make a breach in their loyalty and obedience;
especially if we set before them (be it under a true or false title) the
certainty of some mighty succor, whereof they may see the preparatiues; for
so they will the more courageously attempt against the life and estate of their
Prince.

4 Moreover it is not to be forgotten, that when such practices shall be
discovered by the Turk, and that he shall see the Christians more diligent then
hitherto they have been, to sound the affections of his servants and subjects:
he will thereupon enter into such a distrust of them, as even that will make
him offer them some hard measure. This distrust will be enough to beget a
thousand suspicions and hard conceits in his servants, and subjects, either for
the managing of affairs, or for the danger that the opinion of loyalty
incurreth, when it has to deal with such a distrustful and suspicious
Prince, as this would prove: so as by little and little it would work us out
some occasion fitting our purpose, especially, if whilst this practice were
hatching, and on foot, the children of the Turk should take arms one against
the other, or that during their fathers life, they should dispute the
possession of the Empire: for the ice being already broken, there would be a
more easy passage and better success, then if it had not been taken in hand
at all.

5 But because an especial judgment, patience, and much wisdom are
requisite in such businesses, we must make choice of men furnished with all
these parts, to the end they may wisely know when to take their opportunities
and times, to sow these dissentions, and that there be not want of money to
distribute amongst this people, which are farther in love therewith, then any
other nation the world affoordeth.

CHAP. XV.
How the people of the Turk may be wrought from his obedience.
1 How the Turks Christian Subjects are to be wrought to rebellion. 2 A place
must be chosen for refuge of such as rebel. 3 The vain fooleries of their
Alkoran are to be discovered. 4 How books written to that purpose may come to
his subjects hands. 5 How such books are to be composed. 6 What fruits are to
be hoped from their reading. 7 Exhortation to the Ianizzars. 8 The conclusion
of this work.
1 THe Turk has two sorts of people subject to his Empire; one follows the
sect of Mahomet; the other the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The
Mahometanes are quiet, as those which being of one and the same law, have no
cause to make any tumult. The Christians cannot stir, as being over topped
and awed by a greater power then their own, which curbeth them so, as there is
no better way to move them to rebel, then to make them handle (as it were) and
see the assurance of an approaching succor, to provide them of arms and all
other furniture for the wars: for otherwise it is impossible they should dare
to make the least show once to move, whilst they have the enemy over them
always in a readiness and armed, who would in a moment confound them,
especially being as they are naked and unprovided of arms, offensive or
defensive. Selim the second doubting the woorst, by the counsel of Occhially,
caused all the Christians inhabiting the sea coasts, to retire themselves far
up into the maine land, to the end the presence of the Christian forces should
not encourage them against him, as it happened at such time as Andrew Dorea
achieved the enterprise of Patras and Coron.

2 If the Christians should ever undertake the like dissigne they ought to take
especial heed how they vnship their succors in those parts of the continent
where the horse are at hand, since they were likely enough by their strength to
choke at the first the revolt of the Christians, for so mighty are they in
horse, and of such speed and dexterity, as they would in an instant bear down
before them whatsoever should oppose them. Wherefore it would be better to
enter by Albania and by places mountanous and of difficult access, where the
horse are not able to serve, as in the plain. This is as much as we meant to
say of such Christians as are under the Turks dominions, all which I will
imagine want not will to rebel, if the Princes of Christendom would furnish
them of means.

3 Now let us see what way were best to be taken to provoke the Mahometans to
revolt, and to fill their countries with troubles, and civil dissentions. If
we will but consider how their religion is fraught with untruths, their
Alcoran abounding in follies, we shall find it easy to pick matter enough
out of it to set them together by the ears, especially if we do but disperse
among them certain books fit to convert them, or make them doubt of the
foolish superstitions they observe, composing them for Europe in the Sclauonian
tongue, and for Asia in the Arabian.

4 But because it would be hard to convey these books into the countries of
the Turks obedience but that they would soon perceive the device and speedily
remedy it: It were best beginning far off, in the Indies and in the parts of
Asia and Afric held by the Portugales: for because of the traffic which is
great in those parts many Turkish Merchants and others ariue there from all
quarters. They come to Mozambique in Afric, to Zophala and Quiloe in Asia.
They descend also as low as the Moluccas, Cochien, Goa, Dia, Ormus, and sundry
other parts appertaining to the crown of Portugale. These books also might be
dispersed abroad in the country of the Gentiles, which are friends and
confederates of the Christians, as in Calicut, Zailan, Cambeia, and others; and
the like at Oran, Arzilla, and in other parts of Arabia subject to the crown
of Spain and Portugal, and in all other parts of Europe which border upon the
Turks.

5 There must be a care had that the title of the book be so colored, as it
do not at the first discover the intent of the author, but rather that it
entice them to peruse it with a certain curiosity and show of pleasantness
and delight. It is requisite also that the discourse be not fraught with any
disputations or subtle point against the Articles of their belief, but that
contrariwise it be full of tales and matter fit to move laughter; yet with some
well conveyed passage which may by the way discover or make them doubt of the
fables of their Alcoran.

6 The Turkish Merchants or others, into whose hands this book should light,
would co^fidently read it in those parts where the Turk is not obeyed. And
though perhaps they durst not adventure to carry it with them, yet the
impression and substance of what they had read would remain fixed in their
minds, so as they would after relate it as news to their friends and
families, in such sort as it would grow by little and little to be diuulged
thereabout, whence would spring a longing in others which should come and go
into those countries to buy and read them: In this manner the Alcoran in
process of time would grow out of credit amongst them, and those things which
with scruple and observation they collect thence, would turn to a jest and
subject of laughter, whence there could not but ensue some schism and division
amongst them, for the most religious men of their sect and the most interested
would oppose themselves wilfully to maintain it. Neither would it make for the
purpose to make mention in any sort of our Savior Christ, much less to let it
be known that the author thereof were a Christian: for the immortal hatred
they bear to that name would make it odious, and would bring it at the very
first to be rejected. It should rather be so contrived as if it came from some
other of an other sect, wherein a man might borrow the hand of the inhabitants
of Cambaia, of India, of Arabia, or of Persia. In this manner it would be
better welcome and would carry with it more estimation and authority.

7 It were well also if there were framed and published a remonstrance to the
Ianizzars in the Sclauoman tongue, whereby might be signified unto them their
original, and how in their infancy they were cruelly halled from the bosoms
of their Christian fathers and mothers, conveyed into Turkey, and there nusled
up in the sect of Mahomet, not having judgment as then to distinguish of good
and evil; that they are the pillars to uphold this Tyrant which has set his
foot upon the throat of their fathers liberty, and which keeps them as
slaves under the yoke of a dishonorable and barbarous servitude. This would
avail much, especially if there were thereto annexed an exhortation to take
better knowledge of themselves, and hence, forward like good children to
embrace and free their miserable parents, which daily lament them; and above
all to persuade them to return to the dear bosom of the church wherein they
were first, regeuerate and which attends with spread arms to receive them,
entertain them, and save them.

8 These things well carried would in the end make the Turk so suspicious, and
intractable, as he would offer occasions enough to his people henceforth to
rouse up themselves, and better advise how to shake off that cruel and
unsupportable yoke which so mightily oppresses them, and to fashion
themselves to a more happy and secure life for the quiet of their consciences
and salvation of their souls. This is that whereof the Christians ought
diligently to bethink themselves; and not to work one an others ruin and
destruction, as they spare not to do against the express commandment of God,
which so often recommendeth unto us love and charity toward our neighbors.

FINIS.

