A book made by a certain great clerk, against the new Idol, and old
Devil / which of late time, in Misnia should have been canonysed for a saint.





woodcut of a clerk writing on his lap in the country outside a city

First of all I do make protestacyon, that in this book mine intent is not
that Benno the bysshope, which is deed many years ago / should either be judged
or else condemned. For he has his judge, like as al other have / which have
departed from this life: of whom it is not laufull for any man to pronounce or
give sentence, oneles it be so, yt god has peraue^ture reveled it unto him.
First by words, and afterward by signs / for we do only here touch and
rebuke yt living Satan, Satan.
which now in this time (in which yt gospel is again risen up by the grace
of god, and shines all abroad) knows none other way how to avenge him self
/ than unto the scornynge of god, and to the rebuke and sclaunder of his word,
to take unto himself such manner disguysed apparayle / that under the name of
Benno, (which forsothe would more gladlye have rested in his grave) he might
suffer him self with great ordinance of gold and silver and with solemn
and royal pomp to be consecrated and worshypped for a saint. But the Ire and
wrath of god works this, and brings it to pass, that those obstynate and
blind tyrauntes and pursuers (such as is the Pope with his adhere^tes) which
do not receive, The Pope.
no nor yet can suffer the gospel unto their own salvation: are compelled to
believe leasynges and great errors, and the disceytes of the devil, 2 Thessa.
secundo.
As Paul says unto their greater condempnacyon. And I do this so much the
more gladly, and with more ready mind, for that I do know of a surety, yt it
is nothing pleasant nor acceptable to Benno (if it so be that he is a saint in
very deed) to be canonised. Like wise as it was never pleasant to any of all
ye saints that they have been consecrated of ye Pope / How be it this same
thing (I mean to be canonysed) has chaunsed to very few of them. For these
mere Papistical saints have been for yt most part of them no true chrystyans,
specially for this cause, that (as we do se commenly to come to pass) of this
canonisacyon and consecracyon of saints, men do turn them selfs from the
grace of god and from the faith and trust in Christ: and do lean unto ye
merytes and suffrages of saints. And so much goods and riches is bestowed
upon their temples, yt the work of charity toward our neighbor is well nere
extincte / and that the saints are accounted and taken in the stead of god /
and stones and stocks in the stead of our neighbor / and of the said goods,
Images.
only slow belyes, and ydell swyne are fat fed in the temples, churches,
and monasteryes. Now to the laufull and very saints, there can be nothing
more pleasant and acceptable: than that pure and incorrupt faith and lively
and strong charity do endure and continue among men. And for this cause god
would yt Moses should be in such wise buried, The Butyaff of Moses.
that no man should know his grave: lest else he might happily in yt place be
worshyhped, called upon, and prayed unto. Yea moreover he did not suffer so
much as any honor or worship to be given unto god in any certain place
appointed, or by any spirytuall name, oneles he had commanded it before his
own self. For which cause also Ezechias did break the brazen serpent into
pieces, Esechias
albeit that god had commanded it to be made: because he did perceive that ye
Jews would there set up honor unto god: though the false prophets also did
often times cry, that it was done to the honor and glory of very god, even
likewise as the Pope with his adherentes does now of this Benno. How much
less tha^ is it to be suffered now these days, that in the new testament, in
the clear light of the gospel any manner honourynge or worshyppynge of god
should be set up of any man's own wits and devotion, beside that only
honor and worship which he has commanded in faith and charytie, The
true honourrynge of god.
with ye oblacyon and offering up of every man's own self, so as Paul does
teache in the.xii. Chapitre to the Romans. First to begin at the highest, the
matter went gaylye forward, yt that Satan was in Misnia aduau^syd and set up
by Adryan, Adryan the.vi.
(whiles he lived) his own peculyer and special mynister and servant / For
albeit that he was accounted and taken to be of a certain good and commendable
life, (as the fame goes of him). Yet (as all such manner Hypocrytes are wont
to be) he was the sorest enemy of all men unto god and his word / because I
will not speak here, that at Bruxelles he suffered yt double murder to be
done, and two martyrs to be made unto Christ and to be taken for very saints,
all though he was ygnoraunte thereof, Johan and Henry vetye marters.
and it was sore against his will. For murder was committed and done, as if
they had been than heretykes, which in very deed they were not). For true
christen men, and those in especyall which have any admynistracyon in
spirytual things? do neither torment nor slay any man: but they do only (as
Christ and Paul teaches) eschew the company of wicked men, and beware of
the^. And though neither I ought nor yet can judge, what manner end he had at
his death: yet this doubtless I may judge, that except he did amend before that
he did depart from this life, and did revoke or repent him of such murder.
And did with his heart unfeignedly favor our gospel: it is undoubted, ye he is
not free from dampnacyon. This matter no doubt of it is handeled in all points
after ye papistycall manner. John^ hus and Hierome of prage.
For likewise as in the counsel of Constance, John^ Hus, and Hierome of Prage,
those very saints and martyrs of god, were condemned and burnt. Thomas de
aquino the fountain of all heresy.
And on the other side Thomas de Aquino the origynall fountain and spring of
all Heresye, the pestylence and (as his books do witness) ye ouerthrower and
destroyer of the gospel, was canonysed and made a saint. Even so now (if god
be pleasyd) our master Adrian does at Bruxelles / he has Adryan the.vi.
burnt those very saints, John^ and Henry: and now on the other side makes I
wotte not what of Benno a saint, nay rather the very devil. For this is the
peculyare and propre work of ye popes / they must needs labor about these
things, that is to wit, to rydde the very saints out of the world, and to
auau^ce and lift up on high counterfayte saints / to condemn the word of
god, and to establysshe their own doctrine / and than say afterward, that
this thing does turn to the honor and glory of god and of his saints,
likewise as Christ does say in the.xvi. chapitre of John^ when he says.

THe time shall come ye who soever does kill you, shall wene that he does
honor and service unto god. Forsothe this their noise should have more worthy
of silence / and pope Adryan with those which do so buselye promote and set
forward the canonysacyon of Benno, Pope Adryan.
ought, (and not without great cause) to be heartily asshamed, if there were but
even one little spark of wisdom left in them, for that they have not ben
affrayed to put in writing all those holy manners and examples of Benno, and to
rehearse them in the bulle, and openly to publysshe them unto the hole world,
ye is to wit, how he did join him self to Gregory the. Gregory the.vii.
Henry the vii. Emperor.
vii. and took part with him against Henry the.vii. Emperor / and did
excommunicate the Marchion of Misnia and the Emperor also with him / and than
afterward did run like a false traitor unto the Pope / I would have said
went in pilgrimage to fulfill his vow. O how worthy and semely a deed was
this for a knight? For he ought of right to be called not only by ye name of
an holy bishop: but also of an holy knight, and he were worthy to be dygged
up with golden mattockes and spades, that he might be all together of read
gold. I will not here rehearse nor bring forth the hystoryes, which do
effectually show or declare, how holelye ye Gregorye the.vii. did demean him
self toward Henry ye.viii. Henry the viii.
doutles full like a traitor and a false disceyuoure, if a man do mark well
ye fasshyon of him. For he does provoke the sone against the father, and
deposes him from the Emperpall dignyte, and suffered him at ye last to dye
excommunicate: and all only for cause of worldly riches, honor and tyranny /
unto such manner Pope did Benno convey him self (as the bulle does report and
make bost of him) and such a pope as this, he co^fyrmed and mayntayned in his
peruersytie and wickedness. Neither was there so much wit in that holy man
as to perceive ye the pope did wyekedlye and wrongfully, which did stir up
the son against ye father, to whom god had commanded obedyence and honor
to be given. But he is so desperately blind, that he does join him self unto
the pope, and does maintain and defend his part, and together with him does
excommunicate the Emperor and ye Marchion: where as he ought even with the
ieopardye of his own life to have cried against the pope, and to resyste and
with stand him / I will not (I say) make rehearsal of those things.
The Emperor Henry.
And let us grant, that Henry had an unjust cause, and the Pope a rightuous
cause, (which thing for all that the hystoryes do deny:) yet doubtless this
thing can not be denied, ye Ceasar embrasyd the faith, which is according
to the word of god. But (as I have said) all this business was only for cause
of money and riches besides this for honor and tyrannyes sake / for which
things hethen men are wont to strive among them selfs / here in this thing
(I say) the pope did not Eua^gelycally. For else he ought not to have resysted
that evil, but to have let that thing go which would not contynewe as Christ
does openly teach in ye.v. chapitre of Mathewe. yea more over all though
the emperor had done any thing also against the word of god / yet for all that
the Pope ought to have suffered / and as being the faithful vycare of
Christ his lord, he ought rather to have suffered death in the cause. But here
the Pope not only did resyst evil, and did revenge him self: but also he did
much evil and much iniurye and vexacyons to his adversary. For he did shede
so much blood, and he brought in so much discord and de bate: that a man
would even abhor to read of it. And yet did he not cease nor take up so, The
Popesdede.
until he did spoil the Emperor of his auctoryte / did spoil him and
depryue him of his Empire, and of all his friends, and also of all his honor /
finally of his body and life, yea and (asmoche as in him was to do) also of his
soul. And with such a Pope does that holy man Benno conspire, which god
wotte has declared the gospel even with doing of miracles also. These are
those excellent and noble virtues, for which he was judged worthy to be dygged
up out of the ground we golden spades, peradventure to thentent that we also
should learn by his examples to keep the gospel after the same fasshyon. And
verily I do suppose that this was the miracle and virtue of Be^no, which did
most move and stir the sea of Rome, and which was princypally accepted of
it. For had not this ben adventure he should have lain yet still a great while
in ye ground. For who soever can work such a miracle that he can prove, and
promote or set forward the riches, the pomp, the auctorytie, and the
honors of the sea of Rome, that man alone does more than if he did raise
up.x. dead men, yea and that though all the world in the mean season should
perrysshe together with body, and soul, substance and honor. But thou Benno
a pleasant hypocryte unto ye Pope, how gayly well have thou deserved to be
canonysed: which could find in thine heart to be partener with the Pope of
so many horrible and abhomynable sins against ye gospel / and all common
reason: and to charge and burthayne thy self with them. But verily (as I do
suppose) these virtues of Benno are but feigned and forged of the Misnianes to
flatter the Pope with all, and to move and stir him to consecrate and
canonyse him a saint: because they know well, that the Pope has not a little
delectacion and pleasure in such manner tyckelynge / and is not a little glad,
The amhicyon and vain gforyousnesse of ye pope.
when he hereth such manner so^ges to be songen unto him. And for this cause
therefore they did forthwith even at ye beginning lay these virtues forth
before, all miracles: that by that means the Pope might be taken and made
fond / and that all those other virtues and miracles being else vnparfyte,
feeble and of none efficacite or strength in compary son of those miracles of ye
Misnia^s (alas for very shame) should be ye more acceptable unto him. Now if it
be so yt they do work with lies and false disceytes: who can from hensforth
doubt, that the canonisacyon of this Benno is a mere disceyte of the devil?
so that now not Benno, but the devil him self under the name of Benno does
suffer him self to be extolled and magnifyed as a saint. And if these things
be true and unfeigned: this one thing I may boldly say and affirm, that Benno,
if he dyed having knowledge hereof, and did not repent him and be sorye for
this sinful deed, was undoubtedly cast down hedlonge into hell. For the
gospel must needs be truly, exactly, and perfectly, kept and fulfilled. The
gospel is to be observed and kept.
For Christ says, who soever shall break one of these least commandments:
he shall be called least in ye kingdom of heuyns. Math. v.


WHat manner thing than do those Misnianes consecrate to us for a saint?
doubtless a strong and an erraunte thief, and a blood sheder / the cause of
all the calamyties and myseryes of all Germany / the enemy of the gospel, the
fellow of Antichryst / to whom he did conueye him self, and was made part
taker of his impiety and wyckednes. And this thing may euydently be gathered
of the high and exceeding great boste, which is made in the bulle of our
master Adryan, of that excellent virtue, The bull of master Adryan.
and holiness, which did shine in Benno / what other thing I beseech you is
meaned by these words / we do consecrate him for a saint, which lived contrary
to the rule of yt gospel, what other thing (I say) is this, than to say: We
Misuianes are peuisshe, and utterly mad, which being distracte and beside
our selfs do not considre nor mark what is the very gospel self, or what is
repugnaunt to the gospel / and which do make that thing holy which we do
praise / and which do boste him for this cause, that he did live and demean
him self contrary to the gospel? But thus shall our wood prelates stumble
and fall: which do persecute the word of god. A like thing and of the same
forte is that noble and dely cate miracle, which also is bosted in that
excellent and goodly bulle, not without the great wickedness and shame of
Benno / and not of Be^no alone, but also of all them, which do make him a
saint. For the bulle does boste, how boldly and manfully Benno, for worldly
riches sake, The Marchion of Misnia.
did rydde the Marchion of Misnia out of ye world, which had given him a
buffet / and that same day tweluemonth after yt he was slain, likewise as he
had also before manased and thretened him, that he would do. Here (god wotte)
Be^no did well interpret that place of the gospel, and also express it in
his living, where Christ does say: Mathe. v.
do good unto them that are noyous unto you, and pray for them which do defame
and pursue you.

BUt co^trarywyse i^ this bulle thou see, that Christ does with miracles
confyrme and fortifye clean contrary things to this doctrine, and with words
does teach to suffer, and afterward with miracles does compel the contrary,
to be done. O worshypfull bulle, O goodly canonysers / when will you ones be
asshamed? but the bulle not contented so, The impiety and Bsasphemye of the
Busse.
nor thinking it enough that it does extolle such a blasphemye for a miracle,
proceeds further forth also / and makes of Benno a god, when it says:
hereof it may easily be perceived, that divine power was co^munycated to that
godly man. Almyghtye god ponysshe you, and forfende this, you most ungracious
and wretched blasphemours / For here by these words they will that the saints
do work miracles for them selfs, and not Christ alone, so as it is read in
the.lxxi. psalm, where it is said, which only does work great wonders.

BUt go to now, let us grant here again, that this gross and excedyng great
lie was forged and ymagyned of good Be^no, to thentent to bow and supple the
mind of ye Pope, and to tender his heart. For ye holy see of Rome is more
moved and styrred, and takes more delectacyon and pleasure of princes be in
any place evil entreated and sharply handeled, when they have been bold to
lay hand upon spirptuall goods: than of the hole world were made holy. And
therefore they have also heaped together, and repeted in so many lege^des and
examples and books those things, which did appertain unto this matter: to
thentente doubtless, that they might purchase and get unto them self plenty
of goods and pleasures in this world / and that they should not be constrained
to observe and keep or fulfill the gospel. And if this thing be true: than (I
say) this again that Benno is none other wise a saint, than are Annas and
Cayphas: Annas. Cayphas.
oneles peradventure he took repentance before his death for his life before
led / And they do not a little dishonor and shame to Benno: which do boste
and openly reaporte such deeds of him. For if those things be true, which they
do carye about and boste in the bulle: than is Benno one of the deuylles
saints. And if they be but feigned things: than are they with their
consecracyon and canonisacyon all together moved and styrred and ruled by the
devil. For where it may be proved, that any man has not lived according to
the rule and doctrine of the scripture: without doubt that man can not be holy,
neither ought he of right to be consecrated and canonysed for a saint / no
though he did raise up all deed men, and did work all manner miracles. The
gospel.
The gospel is more mighty and of more strength to condemn a man, than any
manner signs and miracles are to make him a saint. For ye gospel can neither
err ne lie: but miracles do often times deceive, Suspecte miracles.
as Paul has showed unto us, wytnessynge that Antichryst should work with
false cou^trefayte miracles, that he might also begyle even the very elect
persons / and as Moses also does write in the.xiii. chapitre of
Deuteronomium, yt no credence should be given to miracles, wha^ the thing
seems to be against the word of god. For miracles ought to serve the word,
and to follow it: and not to go before it, and to do preiudyce unto it /
wherefore it is necessary and must needs be that either the doctrine of Be^no be
approved, or else that his miracles, be of no wayght nor value, Miracles to be
proved.
as it is written in the last chapter of Mathewe. Confyrmyng the word ye
they preached with signs and miracles following / he says not with miracles
going before, or else miracles apperyng weout any word. And much like unto
these things, is that also, where it is said, that Be^no many years ago even
after his death, did for temporal goods sake ponisshe Wyllyam Marchion / yt
is to wit being moved at the peticyon and prayer of a certain master or
provost, Wyllyam the Marchion of Misnia.
did stryke out the Marchions iye (as for the most part holy are wont to be
governors of churches collegyate). For these noble prelates do all that ever
may be done for moneys sake, and for cause of ambicyon. This their ambicyon
they will to be confyrmed and establysshed even of the saints, that be
departed out of this world. But this example came from the devil, as sure as
god lives in heaven. For so that unclean spirit is wont to work, and to do
his business by vysyons of deed folk, Wysyons of dead men.
that he might make men mad, and to make them affrayed. This is undoubted,
and of a very suretye, that patryarches and kings in the old testament did
sometime fight and handle weapons: but that was only for the word of god, and
for his peoples cause, by the testymony of scripture. But it pleases our
lords of Misnia and the blind see of Rome, to call all that miracles, what
soever does fortifye and maintain temporal honors and riches / yea moreover
I do think this thing also in a manner to be but a forged and feigned thing,
(likewise as all the miracles are well nere, which are rehearsed in all yt bulle)
that the Pope with the Misnianes by such manner leasynges and error would put
good Benno to martyrdom, that not only they might have a confessor of
Benno, Benno a martyr.
but also a martyr. For if he was a good and virtuous man, it is undoubted that
they do put him unto greatter punissheme^t, than ever was any martyr put unto.
For with what contumely and rebuke could he be more foul blotted and stained,
than this that he is said to have lived otherwise than the gospel does
teach / and that those vysyons are ascrybed unto him, which even the devil
him self is wont to handle? How much more wisdom than should it have been
for you, O you worshypfull Misnianes, to have kept you still at home with your
Benno and such manner miracles? And I would counsel you, and aduertyse you to
be more ware and more wise hereafter, and not to contynewe and hold on with
over many such folysshe and peuysshe things to dyshonoure and blaspheme god.
For here you do se, yt your bostynge, either is but forged and untrue: or else
doubtless yt Benno is dampened. And if it be so, that you do hold on with
obstynate minds to run hedlonge, and to maintain and defend your lies, or
so open and many feste vices of Benno: than am I innocent from your blood, and
from the blood of all those, which do take part with you. It might seem yt
you have hitherto mocked enough and more tha^ enough / and that it is time ones
to take up with such things. And the other miracles are so vain, and so
nothing worth and very tryfles: that the thing is worthy to be petyed
because I will not speak here, that blind men are soon and easily begyled,
and they which are ready to tell and here lies. For who I pray you would not
laugh at this, that the belles which were hallowed of Benno, do drive away
tempests of wether? as who should say yt other belles could not do the same,
or as though the devil, which coniured into a glass does suffer him self
to be sent away again, could not bring in, and chase away a tempest, that
so by the permissyon and sufferaunce of god he may deceive wretched men. For if
every thing yt is rare, ought the same forthwith to be a miracle comen from
heaven: than should there never any false miracle be done any where. Of which
sort is this also, that Be^no went beyond Albi, and was seen in this place
and that place, both at one time. Who knows, I pray you whether this were
Be^no, or else some devil? For how many times has the devil played such
prankes? For how hard a thing, or how great a maystrye shall it be, think
you, to the devil, The prince of this world.
which is prince of this world, to make feeble, or to bewytch any man yt is
his own all redye through unbelief in Christ, and afterward to bydde and
command him to be led unto some saint, where he may be delivered and rydde
from his disease or evil? And than this thing straight ways shall be
ascrybed god wotte, unto yt saint. But O good lord, how vncircumspectelye and
unwisely do we al things? How rasshely and unadvisedly do we run on forth
as it were certain blind men? How pyteouslye did the devil deceive saint
Gregorye in his dyaloges? Saint Gregory.
For there is in every place so much plentye of such manner iuggelyng castes
and deceytes, which he has exercysed, and yet does exercise, that I could of
them make ten other such saints, as Be^no is / who again can sufficye^tly
prove, that the holy fountain was brought forth by Benno: saving only that
the common opinion goes so about of it? For a man may find many like things
/ the nature and origynall cause whereof is strange and unknown / of which
sort there are many things at Rome. Brieffely, who soever will descrybe and
ymagine yt good life of an holy bishop: He ought of necessyte to bring forth
the words and doctrine, Signs of true holiness.
wherein he was excellent. And also faith, charity and the cross of
persecucyon which was laid upon his back for his doctrynes sake. These
things only are the true tokens of an holy man / But now this bulle says
in deed, that Benno did preach: but what he did preach, or what he did
utterly believe, it makes no mencyon at all / neither is there so much as any
mencyon at al made of charity, and of the cross / only it speaks of his
ceremonies, and how that in great anger he ran away and afflycted and vexed
certain men for the goods of the church. Besides this there is carried about
tales of certain spirits and phantasyes or ymagynacions of uncertain and
feigned miracles, which should need much more probacion, whether they did
chance accordynglye and verily or not, than this, whether Benno be a saint or
not. But this thing might easily be persuaded unto me, that Benno in deed was
a good man, but yet was in many things seduced and deceived of the Pope: Benno
sedused and begyled.
and yet nevertheless at the last through the unmeasurable mercy of god was
saved in like manner as it has chaunsed to Bernarde, and to very many other
elect and chosen persons. But that he did such miracles, or wrought such
folysshe wonders as the bulle does assygne and ascrybe unto him: I suppose no
man shall prove / or at the least wise if he can prove it: tha^ they do make
Benno the child of dampnacyon, and heir of hell / for asmoche as his life is
clean repugnaunt and contrary to the gospel. Wherefore, as for my part, I
would give counsel, yt no man should be any whytte moved or styrred with this
consecracyon or canonysacyon: but rather that good Benno should be left quyete
and in rest to the judgment of god, which above does know what is done with
Benno, and what condycyon and state he is in / For these miracles do prove
nothing at all. More over even his very doctrine also seems to have been
clean repugnaunt and contrary to faith, charytie, and the cross / what neded
than this so great canonisacyon of him: sith it forces little, whether he be
made a saint or not. For every man may be a christen man, and saved, all
though neither Be^no, neither yet any other man were made a saint: (to pass
over and speak no word here that it can not be, but yt lucre is sought here
in this thing. I aste of all, if it be so, that for all these things which
we have hitherto recyted, yet thou art not persuaded good loving reader: at
the least wise the very bulle it self, (if I be not begyled) will persuade
the, in which the Pope him self does confess and grant, that he him self
with his adherentes did make their prayers unto god, yt he would not suffer
them to err in this business. Here I beseech, se and consydre thine own
self, how the pope does lie unto us: The false lie of the Pope.
and how through ouermoche desire and study to begyle other me^ he does
begyle his own self. For if he do pray, that god will not suffer him to err
in declarynge and publysshing of Be^no to be a saint: How can he, I beseech
you, be assured and out of doubt? How can he prove, that his prayer was herd,
and his peticyon granted? What angel did appear to him, and show him this
thing, that he might be assured of it? But some such thing it must needs
have been, seeing that he does here prescrybe a new article of the faith:
which thing to do, is as laufull to him, and as much auctoryte he has to do
it, as I have to command heaven and ye son. On the other side again, when
he reports and recyteth so often, that by the miracles he was certyfyed and
assured of his holiness: wherefore I pray you does he ask counsel of god,
concerning that thing, whereof he was all redye assured? doste thou not
think, that this is to tempte god, and to scorn him: when thou doste ask and
desire to know a thing, which thou haste perfyte knowledge of all ready? But
after this fasshyon and manner the devil is wont to shame him self / for lies
can not agree nor stand together, but they must needs always impugn them
selfs. Likewise as this our pope, The inco^stancye of the Pope.
which wha^ he goes about to work most holylye and wyttely, calls upon
god, and desires to be certifyed: and in so doing shows him self to be in
doubt and unassured, where as yet before he has concluded it to be certain
and undoubted, and also wylleth it to be taken for undoubted / nothing
pceyuyng nor markyng, that whiles he prays and desires to be certyfyed, he
does acknowledge and confess him self to be unassured and in doubt. It is
therefore certain and undoubted that he does lie, either wha^ he does pray,
or else at the least when he does make his saint. And he lies loud and with
full mouth, as the comen saying is / For he does but only make a
countenance and semblaunce of prayer: and in very deed does mock and scorn
god. How be it in that he does pray as uncertain, he prays truth. But
again on the other side he lies when he says that he is certyfyed and
assured by miracles. For asmoche than as this matter is handeled and done by
mere deceytes and lies / by blyndyng of men's iyes, and subtylte: it
remains, that thou, who soever thou art, do beware of this new Idol, which
usurps and takes upon him the name of Benno / whom if thou will not
confess and acknowledge for a saint, at the least wise let it grieve the, yt
we do comenlye so folysshe and so chyldysshely abuse deed men, We abuse deed
men.
that by them we do cast down hedlonge the wretched kind of men into
myschiefe / what shall Be^no do, if we do use his bones and his relyques to
Idolatrye, for cause to wrast out money from men, to ye destruccyon of so many
souls? wherefore as concerning these things, let this suffyce that has been
spoken hereto of us.

Now let us speak of the very right and true canonysacyon, and which is the
sure, undoubted, and wholesome consecracyon and making of a saint. First of all
it is to be considered and marked, that the scripture does make but small
mencyon, or else none at all any where of saints yt are in heaven: Saints in ye
scripture.
but only of those saints and holy men that are conuersaunt and abiding here
in earth, as saint Paul does write to the Romans in ye.xii. chapter. Give
pte of your goods to releue the necessytie and need of saints. And in the.v.
chapter. of ye first epistle to Timothe. if she shall have washed the fete of
saints.

ANd to make an end i^ few words, Paul in all his epystles calls them
saints, unto whom he writes / showing yt every christen man in his life is
a saint. But the Papists do know no saint saving only those which are in
heaven: and whom they do daily set in heaven: and for this cause doubtless they
do not understand the scryptures, and do depyse and have in contempt all the
very saints of god. if than we will make our life to agree with the rule of
the scripture: we ought to bring away our selfs from ye saints which are in
heaven, and to turn our selfs unto them that are in earth / we ought to
extolle these saints, and these we ought to honor. This thing, no doubt of
it, is pleasant and acceptable unto god, which has also commanded the
same. For as concerning them that are departed out of this world, he has
given us no commandment at all: wherefore it is not acceptable nor pleasant
unto him, what soever it be, Idolatry
that we do bestow upon them / For this manner Idolatrye has been invented of
men, because this thing does bring in some lucre / as other men before me
have sufficyently declared, and have largely treated of all this matter. For
hitherto I have written no special thing as yet of the veneracyon of saints,
(which thing also certain of my books do witness) all though it be imputed
to me, and laid to my charge, as though I had been ye author and first
begynner. And who soever has been the author by the pleasure and will of god,
of a suretye he does not mystyke nor displease me, neither does it grieve me
to bear perte of another man's dishonor and rebuke / to pass over in the
mean season, that I do not coueyte to challenge another man's wrytynges for
mine, but I do acknowledge (as right is) yt god does also work some thing
by other men, because I will not seem to do ye busynes of ye gospel, all my
self alone. It is euydente therefore, how many things, and how great cost
and labor is necessarely required to the making of saints as touching their
bodies: The honor and worshyppynge of saints, me^cyoned in the scripture.
and again on the other side how easy and how ready a thing that true
worshippyng of saints is / which is spirytuall, yt is to wit such as Paul
does write to the Romans in the.xv. Chapter. when he says.

Give part of your goods to the necessyte of saints / and again preuente
each one of you another with honor / again let every man esteem another
man at more than he does esteem his own self.

THis only is to worship saints duly to ye glory and honor of god. For
in asmoche as we are ye temples of god, every man ought to submytte him self
to his neighbor, and to worship god in that temple / to give place unto him
/ to love him / to deal kyndly and louyngly with him / and if he may at any
time, to provoke him unto better thin ges. Now these things are not done (I
suppose) with shouelles or spades covered with silver, nor yet with gylte rakes.
And would god those men which do consecrate and canonyse Benno with the other
saints, would here give ear unto me, and would suffer them selfs to be
monisshed with these words: Tell me who knows, whether these things be true
or not? Doubtless this thing can not be denied, that all that costly ordenau^ce,
and all that expense, and all that labor with the honor and veneracyon, and
brefely what soever such manner thing shall be bestowed in Misnia, is neither
so well bestowed nor is so acceptable unto god: as it should be if any man did
give unto a poor christen man a dinner or a garment. Ye yt thing is rather un
pleasant unto almighty god and is honourynge of the devil: and this thing
is spirytuallye acceptable to god, and hateful to the devil. For god has
commanded this thing, and the other thing he does not know at all. How
many thousands of ducates, do thou suppose or think, that Benno has
cosre, besides that he shall cost in time to come: with which (being cast
away every one of them before god, not without his great indy gnacyon and
anger) so many very saints might have been helped and fed / doste thou not
suppose, that god with his angels will turn them selfs unto that place,
where some good man the same day had pytie and compassyon of some christen man
being in necessytie or afflyccyo^: and will leave Misnia behind their back,
where Be^no is tour mented and afflycted: I would have said is made a saint?
wha^ shall we ones begin to be wise? How often times shall we need to repete
one thing? why doste thou not even by comen reason learn, whether it is better
to do alms upon poor saints that are a live: or else upon this, that some man
that deed is might be made a saint, which has no need at all of such
humanytie and kyndnes? And if it be better and more profitable: to bestow it
upon poor living creatures: why are we such nygardes and so scase in layeng
forth of our money here in this thing: A folysshe and dysordred liberalytie.
and so prodygal and lauysshe in the other thing? But certaynely the
judgments of god are vpryght and ryghtuous / that is to wit, that where it
does grieve us to bestow ten florence frelye and for naught upon the very
saints, which thing should be most acceptable and pleasant to god: that
there the devil should make us so mad with the spirit of Gedynes, and should
so handell us that we do not doubt wastefullye to bestow golden spades and
rakes, yea and otherwhyles a thousand flore^nes upon deed men's bones, and
besides this to seche and purchase unto our selfs al kind and manner of
calamytie and indygnacyon. But wretches have neither delight to here these
things, neither to be leave the^. But be it so / yet doubtless it can not be
avoided, but ye we must needs ones here and have experyence of it: though we
do never so much put of from morrow to morrow / We do seche shame, and
therefore we shall also find shame and rebuke, which verylye is even now at
hand. Besides this (to add this also) though those things also were true,
which are reported of the signs and miracles of Benno, and that the said
miracles were of effect and wrought of god him self by Be^no, though these
miracles (I say) were wroughte even for the gospel sake, so as Christ does
promise in the last chapitre of Mark: (which thing in very deed can never be
proved) yet for all that, we ought not so folysshely, so rasshely, nor with so
mad a beginning to leap forth so hastelye to consecrate and canonyse
saints. For such manner signs and miracles though they do never so much
declare the holiness of a man's life / before the workynge of them: yet can
they not assure us and put us out of doubt, whether ye same man did co^tynewe
steadfast and holy also in his death or else not. The judgments of god.
For asmoche as the judgments of god are hid and utterly meruaylous and
dredefull / For he him self says in the.vii. chapter of Mathewe.

Many men shall say to me, lord have we not in thy name cast forth deuylles
and wrought many myraclas? And than I shall answer unto them. Go from me you
workers of iniquity.

THese forsooth are far greater and more sure and undoubted miracles, than are
those, which Benno has wrought / and Christ also does acknowledge them: yet
for all that he does co^dempne the persons by whom they were wrought. To the
same effect and purpose. Moses also does write in the.xiii. chapypytre of
Deuteronomium, that god does permytte and suffer miracles to be wrought by
false prophets, to thentent to tempte and prove his people. False prophets.
Wherefore it makes nothing to the purpose, though any saint do work miracles
after his death at his grave / For who knows whether god does prove us and
try our faith by those miracles, ye holy man i^ the mean season being
condemned at the time of his death. Likewise as were the^ false prophets in
their life time. But in especyall this is a suspecte thing, when those
miracles are wroughte to the end, that through them holy life in deed may be
commended: but not that the faith and word of god may be confyrmed. And
such for the most part are all the miracles of this Benno, of which there is
nothing that does appertain to the confyrmacy on of the word of god, but
only to his ceremonies, his prayours / to ye gloryes and bostes of the
church of ye Misnianes / and finally to the pompes and auctoryte and power of
the church of Rome / Do you not think it to be an excellent miracle, that
Balaam (as it is written in the. Balaam.
xxiiii. chapter of Numeri) whether he would or not was compelled to preach
the word of god, and to bliss the children of Israel? Was it not also a
marvel that Saul did prophecye among the prophets? 1. Regu^. and Saul.
does it follow therefore, that they must needs be saints: if the holy
ghost did speak or did work such manner things by them? Wherefore before
thextreme judgment no man ought of christen men to be judged and called a
saint, as saint Paul does teach in the.iiii. chapitre of the first epistell
to the Corinthianes when he says.

Do not judge any thing before the time until ye lord shall come, which
shall bring to light the things that are hid in darkness.

SPirytually sith we do know that Christ and Paul have prophesied before, that
in these last days so goodly and so gaye painted miracles should be done, that
even the very elect and chosen persons, if it were possible, should be
begyled. We ought to have good opinion of saints.
Nothing does let, but that we may of a simple and a plain mind account
them for saints, and judge of the^ as one christen man ought to think and
judge of another christen man: But it is in no wise to be received or suffered,
that we will be as sure of it as of an article of the faith and hang upon it,
so as the pope tyrannously with his Benno does require: saving only
peradventure of those whom god in scripture has declared and pronounsed to
be saints / of which sort are the patryarkes, the prophets, the apostelles,
and the dyscyples. I do with a good will believe, that Elysabeth which was
buried at Magbrughe is a saint. I believe the very same also of Augustyne, of
Hierome, of Ambrobrose, of Bernarde, and of Frauncyske: but yet so that I will
not lean and ground upon this belefe, and defend it to the death. For the
certentie and the groundewarke of our faith ought to be fetched at the
scripture, The certentye of our faith.
and to be taken out of it. And except it be expressyd i^ the scripture:
neither ye Pope, no nor yet any Aungelles have any power to make so much as
only one article of the faith. But hitherto we have spoken suffycyentlye
against the deuylysshe work: Now it remains to speak somewhat besides,
against the deuylysshe words / to thentente that the said work may be set
forth to the comen people as it were in a table, and so at the last be
dyspraysed. For I am not ygnoraunt, what manner sermones shall be made every
where through out Misnia, and with what craft they shall mock and begyle the
people, to make them set much by their Idol, and to open their purses wide
unto blyssed Benno / that is to wit to the profit and be hofe of their own
belie / wherefore here I do faithfully and with a christen mind (as I am
bounden to do) exhort and monysshe all men, as many as shall be present at
such sermones: that they do not consydre only the outward apparaunce and
the dysguysed face of the thing, but rather the thing it self / and the very
foundacyon and ground / I can guess well enough what manner roten fou^dacyon
of scripture they will lay under their deceytefull and false buyldyng, and
such one does the bishop of Misnia begin to bost even now in his
writing, theffecte whereof is this. Laudate dn^m in sa^ctis suis. That is to
say, praise you god in his saints. These lauds and praysynges doubtless they
do stretch out very far both in length and bredthe, affyrmynge also that
this is lauding and praysynge of god in his saints, if they be canonysed and
called upon by the prayours of men. But thou who soever thou art which doste
here these sermones, I pray ye think, yea and know thou for a very
certentie, that thou herest a lie, and the prince and father of al lies, whose
propretie is to paruerte ye scryptures and the word of god. For this place
makes against the in asmoche as it is taken of the old testament, wha^ not
only no saint was yet in heaven and prayed unto, but also it was commanded,
that god only should be called upon and only prayed unto, as him self does
witness in the. xlix. psalm saying.

Call upon me in the day of trybulacyon, and I shall deliver the / and thou
shalt honor me.

ANd therefore he wylleth also it to be preached of him, that he is the savior
of men, as it is written in the.iiii. chapter of the first epistle to Timothe
/ and he does also witness in the xxxv. psalm him self to be preserved both
of men and also of beasts. Wherefore health and salvation ought to be asked and
de syred of none other, saving only of him. Moreover this place of ye
serypture does not speak of holy men or of holy women, but rather of holy
places / for thus it is read after the verytie of the Hebrew text. Laudate
dominum in sancto vel in sanctuario suo, that is to say / praise you the lord
in his sanctuarye or in his holy and devout place: Likewise as it is written
in ye.xix. The place of the psalm. Laudate dominum in sanctis eius, is
declared and expounesded.
psalm. Emittat tibi auxiliu^ de sancto / ye is to say, help might he send
the from his holy place, and again in the.xxi. psalm. Tu autem in sa^cto
habitas, that is to say, thou dwell in a holy place.

ANd likewise in many other places which are easy to be found here and there
in the scripture. And in these words he wylleth us to express and fulfill the
manner of honoring of god, which was exercysed and used in the old testament
by the Levites and singing men with songs and belles, as it is written in the
first book of Paralipomenon the.xv. chapitre. Sith than it is so, ye now in
the new testamente there is no place appointed unto us of god, but we our
selfs are the temple of god, as Paul witnesses in the.iii. chapter of the
first epistle to ye Corinthians / and Christ him self also in the. iiii.
chapter of John^ does take away all prescripte and determynate places, when
he says. The time shall come when you shall worship the father neither here
in Jerusalem, but in spirit and truth.

THese words therefore must be understand now in these days of a spirytuall
sanctuary, so that Laudate dominu^ in sancto suo, is asmoche to say, as among
us, and in the congregacyon and company of Christen me^ / wherefore it can not
be wrested nor applied to the canonysacyon of saints, or to the calling upon
them by prayour. And if because of this place it might be proved and
concluded, ye saints are to be canonised or prayed unto: than by the same
reason belles, symballes, taberettes, and harpes, should be made saints and
prayed unto. For it follows in the same psalm.

Praise the lord in shrylle sou^dynge symballes, praise him in harpes and
organes.

GO to than now, if thou do praise god in these musycall instruments: pray
also unto them, and make them saints / as that Misnicall and Episcopal writ
does teach us by this place of the scripture. Laudate du^m in sanctis suis.
For I list not here to rehearse, lest I might seem to tedyous, how those men
for the most part are not wont to praise god in his saints, which do honor
saints and do pray unto them: but contrary wise do far dyshonoure and
blaspheme god / For they do put their hope and their trust in ye saints /
which thing what is it else, than to forsake the faith / to deny god / and to
set up the saints for an Idol? of which matter we have suffycyentlye treated
in another place They allege also that place in ye xv. chapitre of Job. Voca et
ad aliquem sanctorum conuertere / that that is to say. Call, The place of Job,
is evpouned and declared.
and turn the to some of the saints.

FOr those papists are so blyn de and so folysshe hardy that if it happen them
to find this word, sancti, in any place: thereof they will forthwith confyrme
and establysshe the veneracyons and merytes of saints, even as ryghtfully as
they go about to prove purgatory, if in any place they do find this word
fire or this word purgatory / or else to prove holy water, if they may find
this word water in ye scripture. But as for this place of Job, understand it
thus, that Elyphas does reprove the good man Job of sin even for this cause,
that god had punysshed him / for he says.

Call, I beseech the, even one and look about unto some of the saints.

AS who should say / God never punysshed any holy man / neither cannest thou
show that ever any of the saints has been afflycted, which way soever thou
do turn the. But seeing that god does punysshe the so sore: it is undoubted
that thou art no holy man, but a wicked and a sinful man. Here I beseech the
consydre how gayly they have wrested these words to the veneracyon of
saints. They have no co^syderacyon nor no regard in the world unto any manner
thing, but what soever they have thought and put posed i^ their own mind:
there is no remedy but that ye thing must needs strayte ways for their
pleasure be contained in the scripture. The third place is the.xx. chapter of
the proverbs. It is ruin and destruction to a man for to devour a saint, and
afterward to seche vows / the words in laten are these. Ruina est homini
deuorare sanctum, et postea querere vota.

HEre in ye stead of this word deuorare they do read deuotare, to thentent
that so (if god be pleased) ye auctoryte of saints should be establysshed. But
the true text, and as the Author left it, is this Laqueus est homini
exprobrare rem sacra^ et post ea vota q^rere. That is to say it is a
stumbelynge stock and sure and undoubted destruccy on to a man to corrupt and
pollute holy things and holy words, and than afterward to desire to be
accounted holy because of his ceremonies, sacryfyces, and works. As for
example, ye Papists, which when they do psecute ye word of god, and what
soever thing else is holy i^ very deed: yet nevertheless they do in ye mean
season say masses, and do many good deeds, thynkyng nothing at all to change
their wicked state of living, and ones to make an end to destroy and devour
holy things. But now when they are brought to that point that they can not
by the auctoryte of scripture i^ any wise prove ye saints are to be prayed
unto, or to be accounted for medyatours, but clean contrary the scripture
does prove and fortyfye that there is none other medyatour or intercessoure,
than that only medyatour and intercessoure Christ Jesus, Christ.
as Paul does teach i^ many other places, but spirytually in ye.iii. and.v.
chapi. to the Romans, and in the.ii. chap. of the first epistle to Timothe,
they yet (as becomes valyau^te men) do not give over their hold, but do sech
some way, by which they may escape out, and put by ye scriptures from the^
selfs. For this word mediator (say they) is taken two manner ways / one way
it is taken for a satysfactory mediator / or a satisfactor. Another way it is
taken for an intercessorye medyatour or an intercessor. Now to speak of a
satysfactory mediator or mean, there is but only one / that is to wit
Christ, which has satisfied for us / but the saints (after their minds)
shall be accounted intercessorye mediators. Now if any man do ask of them,
where these things are had in ye scryptures, than forthwith they lay against
us the auctoryte of holy church, The church.
that is to wit of their own selfs, whom ye holy ghost does not suffer to
err any thing at all. These men (say they) are of this opinion and do think
thus, ergo it is thus: (how be it if they should play the fools thus in
their scoles, it should be called petitio principii) wha^ they ought to prove
that saints are mediators, which the scripture does in no place teach. But
yet nevertheless they proceed forth on / and even as though the matter were
now proved and known for undoubted, they do of their own brain ymagyne two
kinds or sorts of medyatours. Therefore when thou hear any such manner
thing: thou may well know the wolf by his voice. The holy ghost.
For ye holy ghost teaches nothing, which is not prescrybed in ye scripture /
as Christ says.

He shall teach you al things and he shall bring into your remembrance all
things, what soever I have said unto you.

ANd so at length it shall be made open and manifest, yt this tragedy which
is played concerning Benno in Misnia is played only by mere lies and
deceytes, of the devil both in words and also in deeds / wherefore look thou
that thou do take heed to thy self, and think thus in thy mind / though we
do grant also these things to be true and undoubted, yet that not
withstandyng sith it is a thing not greatly profitable, and which thou may
be without full well, se that thou do keep thy money to the releuyng and
helpyng of thy children and of poor folks, which have pryncypallye need
thereof / and upon whom it shall be best bestowed. But now much more thou
ought to do this, sithe it is euydent and undoubted, that this thing is not
only unprofitable, but also falsely feigned, deceyteful and plainly deuelysshe
/ yea co^sydre and look well upon the fasshyon of them thine own self (if
thou will) which if they did any thing at all unfeignedly and hartelye entende
and seche the hououre and glory of god and of saints: without doubt they
should find mo than two thousand occasyons by which they might succoure and
releue their neighbor / of which every one should be six hundred times more
commendable, tha^ all that pomp and royalte wherewith Benno was translated and
made a saint. But now seeing that they dyspysynge their neighbor and nothing
regarding his necessyte, are all together set upon this thing: every man may
easily perceive yt they are blind and mad, and by the canonisacyon of Benno
do seche their own profit and glory, and thy money. How be it I do hope,
that they are come after yt time, Proverbs.
(as it is commonly said in the proverb) and that they have all in vain
spredde a net before the birds iyes, as Salamon says in the first chapter
of the proverbs. But if thou will worship saints duelye, and praise them
worthelye: thou shall do thing as far forth as the ensamples of scryptures
shall teach and prescrybe unto the, The form and manner of worshyppyng of
saints.
of which scriptures thou may se after what manner the grace and the
benefytes, which have been given of god unto the saints, are propowned and
laid forth before god, whether it be in peticyon, or in thanks gyuynge, or
else in complaynte / as for example. Moses prays in the.xxxiii. chapitre of
Exodi, wha^ he says.

Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom thou haste sworn. etc. And
Solomon in the.xxxi. psalm / lord remember David, and all his calamytie. And
Christ upon the cross said that verse of the.xxi. psalm.

Our fathers have hoped in the and have been delivered. But I am a worm. etc.
And in the.xlv. psalm. O god we have hard with our ears, and our fathers
have told us the work, yt thou haste wrought upon them.

ANd in many other places of the scripture / here thou seyste that no saint is
prayed unto / but that god is praised in them, which did promise unto them
such manner benefytes, and has fulfilled his promise: to thentent that he
would monisshe and teach us, that such manner grace ought with all confydence
to be asked and hoped of him alone / unto thobtaynyng whereof that faithful and
only mediator is suffycyent, yea and more than suffycyent / that is to wit,
Jesus Christ of all saints most holy. To whom only, with the father, and
the holy ghost, be praise and glory for evermore. Amen.

Thus ends the work made against the false canonysacyon of Benno the
bishop.

Translated and prynted in English, in the year of our lord god, a thousand
CCCCC.xxxiiii.

Imprynted by me Robert Wyer dwelling in saint Martyns parysshe, besides
charynge Cross.

Cum priuilegio.

printer's device of Robert Wyer


