A COMMENTARY OF M. DOCTOR MARTIN LVTHER UPON THE EPIstle of S. Paul to the
Galathians, first collected and gathered word by word out of his preaching,
and now out of Latin faithfully translated into English for the unlearned.

WHEREIN IS SET FORTH MOST EXCELLENTLY THE GLORIOUS RICHES OF Gods grace and
power of the gospel, with the difference between the law and the gospel, and
strength of faith declared: to the joyful comfort and confirmation of all true
Christian believers, especially such as inwardly being afflicted and grieved in
conscience; do hungre and thirst for justification in Christ Jesus. For whose
cause most chiefly this book is translated and printed, and dedicated to the
same.

Whilst ye have light, walk in the light.

John 12. printer's or publisher's device of Thomas Vautroullier (?) ANCHORA
SPEI

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling vvihtin the Black frears
by Ludgate. CVM PRIVILEGIO. 1575.

To the Reader.
THIS book being brought unto me to peruse and to consider of, I thought it my
part, not only to allow of it to the print, but also to commend it to the
Reader, as a treatise most comfortable to all afflicted consciences exercised
in the Schole of Christ. The Author felt what he spoke, and had experience of
what he vvrote, and therefore able more lively to express both the assaults
and the saluing, the order of the battle, and the mean of the victory. Satan
is the enemy, the victory is by only faith in Christ, as John records. If
Christ justify, who can condemn, says S. Paul. This most necessary
doctrine the author has most substantially cleared in this his comment. Which
being written in the Latin tongue, certain godly learned men have most
sincerely translated into our language, to the great benefit of all such as
with humbled hearts vvil diligently read the same. Some began it according
to such skill as they had. Others godly affected, not suffering so good a
matter in handling to be marred, put to their helping hands for the better
framing and furthering of so worthy a work. They refuse to be named, seeking
neither their own gain nor glory, but thinking it their happiness, if by any
means they may releue afflicted minds, and do good to the church of Christ,
yealding all glory unto God, to whom all glory is due.

Aprilis. 28. 1575. Edvvinus London.

TO ALL AFFLICTED CONSCIENCES WHICH GROAN FOR SALVATION AND VVRASTLE UNDER THE
cross for the kingdom of Christ, grace peace and victory in the Lord Jesus
our Savior.
IN few words to declare what is to be said for the commendation of this
work, although in few words all can not be expressed that may be said, yet
briefly to signify that may suffice, this much we thought good to certify
thee, godly reader: that amongst many other godly english books in these our
days printed and translated, thou shall find but few, wherein either thy
time shall seem better bestowed, or thy labor better recompensed to the
profit of thy soul, or wherein thou may see the spirit and vein of S.
Paul more lively represented to thee, then in the diligent reading of this
present commentary upon the epistle of S. Paul to the Galathians. In which, as
in a myrrour or glass, or rather as S. Stephen in the heavens being opened,
thou may see and behold the admirable glory of the Lord and all the riches of
heaven, thy salvation freely and only by faith in Christ, his love and grace
toward thee so opened, thy victory and conquest in him so proved, the wrath of
God so pacified, his law satisfied, the full kingdom of life set open, death,
hell and hell gates, be they never so strong, with all the power of sin,
flesh and the world vanquished, thy conscience discharged, all fears and
terrors removed, thy spiritual man so refreshed and set at liberty, that
either thy heart must be heuier then lead, or the reading hereof will lift thee
up above thy self, and give thee to know that of Christ Jesus, that thy
self shall say thou never knew before, though before thou knew him right
well.

Such spiritual comfort, such heavenly doctrine, such experience and practice
of conscience herein is contained, such triumphing over Satan and al his power
infernal, such contempt of the law compared with the Gospel, such an holy
pride and exaltation of the beleuinge man (whom here he makes a person divine,
the Son of God, the heir of the whole earth, conqueror of the world, of
sin of death and the devil) with such phrases and speeches of high
co^templation, of Christ, of grace, of justification and of faith (which faith,
says he, transfigureth a man into Christ, and coupleth him more nere unto
Christ then the husband is coupled to his wife, and makes a man more then a
man), with such other mighty voices, full of spiritual glory and majesty, as
the like has not been used lightly of any writer since the Apostles time,
neither durst he ever have used the same him self, had not great experience
and exercise of conscience by inward conflictes and profound agonies framed him
thereunto, and ministered to him both this knowledge of spirit and boldenes of
speech.

And this commonly is the working and proceeding of Gods vocation, ever to
work things by the contrary: of infidelity to make faith, of poverty to
make riches, in misery to show mercy, to turn sorrow to solace, mourning to
mirth, from afflictions to advance to glory, from hell to bring to heaven from
death to life, from darkness to light, from thraldom to liberty, Samuul. 1.
Esaias. 41. 1. Cor. 1.
in wilderness to give waters, the barren to make fruitful, of things that be
not to make things to be, briefly to make all things of naught. Thus began
God first to work, thus he proceeded, thus he continues, and so will to the
worlds end. The first seed of promise next to Eve, was given to Sara: yet
in what case was Eve before she had the promise? And in what barrennes and
despair was Sara before she enjoyed her well-beloved Isaac? The like is to be
said of the two mothers of two most excellent children Samuel and John
Baptiste, and yet what griefs and sorrows past over their hearts, being both
past all hope in nature, before the goodness of God did work? How long did
Jacob the Patriarch serve in miserable thraldom for his Rachel? In what
excellent glory was Joseph exalted? yet what suffered he before of his
brethren, and how long imprisonment? In what and how long servitude were the
sons of Israel before Moses was sent unto them? and afterward in what
distress were they compassed on every side when the sea was forced to give
them place? After that again, what an excellent land was promised and given
unto them, floweing with milk and honey? but how were they scourged before in
the desert, and yet neither had they the land, but their children? To
ouerpasse many things here by the way, what an excellent work was it of God
to set up David in his kingedome? Also what excellent promises were given to
his throne? Yet how hardly escaped he with life? how did the Lord mortify and
frame him to his hand before he placed him in quiet? Infinite it were to recite
all. Briefly, in all the works of God this is usual to be seen, that he
works evermore most excellent things by instruments most humble, and which
seem most furdest of. Which of all the Apostles did ever think, when Christ
was so humbled and crucified upon the tree, that they should ever see him
again? although he foretold them of his rising before: in so much that Thomas
did scarsely believe when he with his eyes saw him. What man would ever have
thought that Paul in the raging heat of his persecuting spirit would have
turned from a persecuter to such a professor? from such infidelity to such a
faith? in so much that Ananias would scarsely believe the Lord when he told
him. Such is the omnipotency of the Lord our God, ever working lightly by the
contrary, especially when he has any excellent thing to work to his own
glory.

After like sort may we esteem also of Martine Luther, who being first a
frear, in what blindness, superstition and darkness, in what dreams and dregs
of munkishe idolatrye he was drowned, his history declares, witness records,
and this book also partly does specify. Whose religion was all in popish
ceremonies, his zeal without knowledge, understanding no other justification
but in works of the law and merits of his own making, only believing the
history (as many do) of Christ's death and resurrection, but not knowing the
power and strength thereof. After he had thus continued a long space, more
pharisaicall and zealous in these monkish ways then the common sort of that
order, at length it so pleased almighty God to begin with this man: first to
touch his conscience with some remorse and feelinge of sin, his mind with
fears and misdoutes, whereby he was driven to seek further: So that by
searching, seekinge, conferring, and by reading of S. Paul, some sparckles of
better knowledge began by little and little to appear, which after in time
grew up to greater increase. But here it happened to him as commonly it does
to all good Christians: The more that the true knowledge of Christ in him
increased, the more Satan the enemy stirred with his fiery darts, with
doubts and objections, with false terrors and subtle assaults, seeking by
all means possible how to oppress the inward soul which would feign take
his rest in Christ. In these spiritual conflictes and inward wrastlings, how
grievously he was encumbred, fighting against incredulity, error and
desperation, marvelous it is to consider: In so much, that three days and
three nights together he lay upon his bed without meat, drink or any
fleepe, like a dead man (as some of him do write) labouringe in soul and
spirit upon a certain place of S. Paul in the third chapter to the Romans
which was: Ad ostendendam iustitiam sua^: that is, to show his justice,
thinking Christ to be sent to no other end but to show forth Gods justice as
an executor of the law, till at length, being answered and satisfied by the
Lord touching the right meaning of those words, signifying the justice of God
to be executed upon his Son to save us from the stroke thereof, he immediately
upon the same started up from his bed, so confirmed in faith, as nothing
afterward could appall him: Besides other manifold and grievous tentations
(which I speak not of) of all sorts and kinds, except only of avarice, with
the which vice only he was never once tempted nor touched, as of him is written
by them that were conversant with him.

In this mean while, during these conflictes and exercises of M. Luther, which
notwithstanding did him no hurt, but rather turned to his more furtherance in
spiritual knowledge, Pope Leo the.x. sent a Iubiley with his pardons abroad
through all Christian realms and dominions, whereby he gathered together
innumerable riches and treasure. The collectors whereof promised to every one
that would put ten shillinges in the box, license to eat whitemeat and flesh
in lent, and power to deliver what soul he would out of purgatory, and
moreover full pardon from all his sins, were they never so heinous. But if it
were but one jot less then.x. shillings, they preached that it would profit
him nothing. The abomination whereof was so horrible, that when no other man
durst speak, yet Luther could not of conscience hold his peace, but drawing
out certain articles, desired gently to dispute the matter, writing withal a
most humble admonition to the Pope, submitting him self in most lowely wise to
his censure and judgment. But the Pope thinkinge great scorn to be controlled
of such a frear, took the matter so hoate, that he with all his Cardinals,
with all the rabble of Monks and Frears, Bishops and Archbishops, Colleges and
universities, Kings and Princes, with the Emperor also himself, were all
upon him. If the omnipotent providence of the Lord from above had not
sustained him, what was it for one poor frear to have endured all these sharp
assaults of Satan, all the violence of the whole world, having no less then
the soon, the moon and seven stars (as they say) against him? being hated
of men, impugned of deuilles, rejected of nations, by solemn authority
condemned, distressed with infirmities, and with all manner of tentations tried
and proved. And yet for all these tentations such was his life, that (as
Erasmus writing to Cardinal Wolsey affirms) none of all his enemies could
ever charge him with any note of just reprehension. Again, such were his
allegations out of the scripture, that Roffensis writing to Erasmus, confesses
himself to be astonished at them.

And thus much by way of preface touching the conflictes and exercises of this
man. Which we thought good to insinuate to the Christian reader for sundry
purposes: First to note the merciful clemency of Christ our Savior in
calling so superstitious and idolatrous a frear so graciously to such a light
of his gospel, his grace in justifying him, his might in preserving him, his
help in co^forting him, his glory in prospering him, one against so many, and
so prospering him, that the whole kingedom of the Pope had no power either to
withstand him, or to maintain it self: Secondly for this respect also and
purpose, that the reader considering the marvelous working of the Lord in this
man, may the better credit the doctrine which he teaches. And though his
doctrine as touching a little circumstance of the sacrament can not be thoroughly
defended, yet neither is that any great marvel in him, who being occupied in
weightier points of religion, had no leisure to travel in the searching out
of this matter, neither ought it to be any prejudice to all the rest which he
taught so soundly of the weightier principles and grounds of Christ's Gospel
and our justification only by faith in Christ. And yet in the same matter of
the sacrament, not withstanding that he alters somewhat from Zuinglius,
sticking to nere to the letter: yet he joins not so with the Papist, Hereof
read more in the Apology of the church of England, and in the book of
monuments fol. 992. Col. 2.
that he leaves there any transubstantiation or idolatry. Wherefore the
matter being no greater then so, nor directly against any article of our creed,
let not us be so nice, for one little wart to cast away the whole body. It were
doutlesse to be wished, that in good teachers and preachers of Christ, there
were no defect or imperfection. But he that can abide nothing with his blemish,
let him, if he can, name any Doctor or writer (the scripture only except)
greek or latin, old or new, either beyond the Alps or on this side the Alps,
or him self also, what so ever he be, which has not erred in some sentence or
in some exposition of holy scripture. But if he can not so do, then let him
learn by him self to bear with other, to take the best and leave the worst
(although there is no such matter in this book to be feared, forasmuch as we
having a respect to the simple have purposely spu^ged out and omitted such
stumbling places, being but few, which might offend) and to give God thanks
for any thing that is good, and namely for this which he has given to us by
Luther, in opening to us his grace, mercy and good will in his Son so
excellently through the preaching of this man: who if he had not taught the
difference between the law and the gospel, and set out to us our
justification, victory and liberty by faith only in Christ so plainly, so
plentifully and so assuredly as he has done, who ever durst have been so bold
to open his mouth in such words, or so confidently to stand in this doctrine
of faith and grace? For if there have been since the time of Luther, and be yet
some, which openly defend that works be necessary to salvation, where he
before so mightily has taught the contrary: what then would these have done if
Luther had not been? who also did forewarne us of the same, prophesying that
after his time this doctrine of justification would be almost extinguished in
the church, as in certain places experience begins partly to prove.

Wherefore, so much as the Lord shall give us grace, let us hold constantly the
comfortable doctrine of faith and justification, and not lose that the Lord so
freely has given, calling upon the Lord with all obedience and diligence, to
give us grace with S. Paul, not to refuse the grace which he bestows upon
us, nor to be offended with this joyful doctrine, as many be. And therefore as
our duty was for our part to set it abroad, so our counsel is no less to
every studious reader thereof, to pray for grace, rightly to understand that he
reads. For else, unless the special grace of Christ do help, hard it is to
flesh and blood to comprehend this mystical doctrine of faith only. So
strange it is to carnal reason, so dark to the world, so many enemies it
has, that except the spirit of God from above do reveal it, learning can
not reach it, wisdom is offended, nature is astonished, deuilles do not know
it, men do persecute it. Briefly, as there is no way to life so easy, so is
there none so hard: Easy to whom it is given from above: hard to the carnal
sense not yet enspired. The ignorance whereof is the root of all errors,
sects and divisions, not only in all christendom, but also in the whole
world. The Jew thinks to be saved by his Moses law, the Turk by his
Alcoran, the philosopher by his moral virtues. Besides these, comes an other
sort of people, not so ill as the Jew, nor so hethen as the philosopher, but
having some part of both, which refuse not utterly the name of Christ, but with
Christ do join partly the law of Moses, partly the moral and natural
discipline of philosophy, and partly their own ceremonies and traditions, to
make a perfect way to heaven. And these here in this commentary are called
papists, of the Pope their author, being divided within themselves more then
into an hundredth diverse sects, orders and professions of Cardinales, Frears,
Monks, Nuns, Priests, Heremites, and other votaries. All which seem to
spring up of no other cause but only upon ignorance of this doctrine. And no
meruell: For take away this doctrine of justification by faith only in Christ,
and leave a man to his own inventions, what end will there be of new
devises? Such a perilous thing is it to err in the first fundation: whereupon
the higher ye build, the greater is the fall. And yet such builders are not
without their proppes to hold up their workmanship of works against this
doctrine of justifying faith, pretending for their defense the testimony of S.
James, where he seems to attribute justification to works and not to faith
only.

Touching which matter of justification, for as much as in the sequel of this
treatise the author has discoursed upon the same at large, it shall not be
much needful to use many words at this present. This briefly may suffice by
way of preface, in a word or two to advertise the christian reader, who so
takes in hand with profit and judgment to read this book, that in him two
things are specially to be required: First to read it wholly together, and not
by pieces and parts here and there, but to take it in order as it lies,
conferring one place with an other, whereby to understand the better the right
meaning of the writer, how and in what sense he excludes good works, and
how not: how he neglects the law, and how he magnifieth the law. For, as
in case of justifying before God, the free promise of the gospel admits no
condition, but faith only in Christ Jesus: so in case of dutiful obedience,
Luther here excludes no good works, but rather exhorts thereunto, and that
in many places. Thus times and cases discretly must be distincted.

The second thing to be required is, that in reading hereof, he that seeks to
take fruit hereby, do bring such a mind with him to the reading, as the author
him self did to the preaching thereof: that is, he had need to have his senses
exercised somewhat in such spiritual conflictes, and to be well humbled before
with the fear of God and inward repentance, or else he shall hardly conceive the
excellent swetenes either of this writer or any other. For albeit most true it
is, that no greater comfort to the soul of man can be found in any book next
to the holy scripture, then in this commentary of M. Luther: so this comfort
has little place, but only where the conscience being in heaviness has need
of the phisicions hand. The other, who feel themselves whole and are not
touched in soul with any sorrow, as they little care for these books, so have
they little understanding of this doctrine when they read it. And this is the
cause in my mind, why the Pope and his papists have so little feeling and
liking of Luthers doctrine, and all because they commonly are never greatly
vexed in spirit with any deep affliction, but rather deride them that be
beaten down with such conflictes and te^tations of Satan, as they did by
Luther, whom because God suffered to to be tried and exercised with the buffets
of the enemy, they say therefore that he learned his divinity of the Devil.
But how he learned his divinity, let us hear what he him self in this book,
fol. 197. and 198. confesses in these words, saying: Unless we had be^
exercised with violence and crafty assaults by tirannes and heretics; and in
our heart with terrors and fiery darts of the devil, Paul had been to us no
less obscure, then he was in times past to the whole world and yet is to this
day to our adversaries the papists, the Anabaptists and other our
adversaries: And therefore the gift of knowledge of the scripture and our
studies through such inward and outward conflictes, open unto us the mind of
Paul and of all the Scriptures etc.

But let these ignorant papists who so ever they be, taste a little the same or
like as Luther did, and then see what they will say. Experience gives
demonstration. For how many of them do we see, for all their auricular
confession, which puffs them up in false security, but at length, when they
lie at the point of death, where death on the one side and Gods justice on the
other side is before their eyes, for the most part either they despair, or
else leaving all other helps, they only stick to faith and the blood of
Christ Jesus, and in very deed many of them are glad to die Lutherans how so
ever they hated Luther before. And what shall we say then of this doctrine of
Luther? If the papists them selves be glad to die in it, why are they
unwilling to live in it? And if it be true at one time, how can alteration of
time make that false which is once true?

And therefore where these men so stoutely wihstand this doctrine of
justification by faith only, they are much deceived. And where they allege S.
James for them, that is soon answered if we rightly discern the meaning of
S. James and of S. Paul: Of whom the one speaks of man's righteousness or
justification only before men, which is a demonstration of a true faith or a
true beleuer before man, rather then the working of true justification before
god. And so is it true which S. James says, how that faith without works does
not justify: whose purpose is, not to show us what makes a just man before
God, but only to declare the necessary conjunction of good works in him that
by faith is justified. The other speaks of righteousness or justification, not
before men, but only before God: meaning not to exclude good works from true
faith, that they should not be done: but to teach us wherein the true stay and
hope of our salvation ought to be fixed, that is, in faith only. And so is it
true likewise that S. Paul says, that faith only without works does
justify.

The which proposition of S. Paul the better to understand and to join it
with S. James, here is to be noted for the satisfying of the cauilling
adversary, that the proposition is to be taken full and whole, as S. Paul does
mean it, so that with the right subject we join the right predicatum, as the
Scholemen term it: that is, so that faith of Christ in justifying, ever have
relation to the true penitent and lamenting sinner. And so is the article most
true, that faith only without works does justify. But whom does it justify?
the worldli^g? the licentious ruffen? the voluptuous Epicure? the carnal
gospeller? Paul means no such thing, but only the mourning and laboring
soul, the grieved conscience, the repenting heart, the mending sinner: And in
him the proposition is true, according to the doctrine of S. Paul: Romans 4.
Credenti in eu^ qui iustificat impium, fides eius imputatur ad iustitiam: that
is, to him that believes in him which justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. Contrariwise, let faith have relation to the
obstinate and wilful rebel, who contrary to conscience continues and
deliteth in sin, and in him it is true likewise that S. James says: and non
ex fide tantum, Iac. 2.
that is, and not by faith only, meaning thereby that faith avails not to
justification, but only in such persons as have a good will and purpose to
amend their lives: Not that repentance and turning from iniquity does save
them: but that faith in Christ works justification in none but only in such
as heartely repent and are willing to amend. So that: Mar. 1.
Credit Euangelio, believe the gospel, has ever: agite poenitentiam, Mat. 3.
repent and amend going withal. Not that repentance saves any malefactor from
the law, but only shows the person whom faith in Christ only does save and
justify.

But of this enough, and more then greatly needed, especially seeing the book
it self here following will satisfy the reader at large in all such doutes to
this matter appertaining. And thus ceasing to trouble thee, gentle reader, with
any longer preface, as we commend this good work to thy godly studies, so we
commend both thee and thy studies to the grace of Christ Jesus the Son of God,
heartily wishing and craving of his majesty, that thou may take no less
profit and consolation by reading hereof, then our purpose was to do thee
good in setting the same forth to thy comfort and edification, which the Lord
grant, Amen, Amen.

Faults escaped in the printing, and to be amended before the reading of this
book.
Leaf. Page. Line. 11. 2. 1. put out this whole line. 21. 2. 28. put out,
our. 23. 1. 29. for, to err in the faith, read, to fall in faith. 25. 2. 20.
for, gone, read God. 37. 1. 9. for, the God, read God. 39. 1. 22. read, still
goes about 68. 2. 22. for, any other, read an other. 88. 2. 30. for, slime,
read, slymy body. 91. 1. 1. for, were, read, never. 128. 1. 23. for, the
civil, read, then the civil. 151. 1. 13. read, would have hated. 201. 1. 37
for, he is, read, he was. 216. 2. 26. read, but we only suffer. 226. 1. 38.
read, likeness of Christ. 226 2. 12. read, I have overcome. 232. 2. 15. for,
syirite, read, spirit. 235. 1. 17. for amply, read, amplify. 237. 2. 9.
for, I trust to you, read, I have a trust of you. 244. 2. 28. for, understand
well, read, know well. 267. 2. 17. for, lost, read, decayed.

The Preface of Martine Luther upon the Epistle to the Galathians.
I My self can scarcely believe that I was so plentiful in words when I did
publicly expound this Epistle of S. Paul to the Galathians, as this book
shows me to have been. Notwithstanding, I perceive all the cogitations which
I find in this treatise by so great diligence of the brethren gathered
together, to be mine: so yt I must needs confess either all, or perhaps more,
to have been uttered by me in this public treatise. For in my heart this one
article reigns, even the faith of Christ. From whom, by whom, and unto whom
all my divine studies day and night have recourse to and froe continually. And
yet I perceive that I could not reach any thing near unto the heighte,
breadth, and depth of such high and inestimable wisdom: only certain bare
and poor beginnings, and as it were fragments do appear. Wherefore I am
ashamed that my so barren and simple Comme^taries should be set forth upon so
worthy an Apostle, and elect vessel of God. But when I consider again the
infinite and horrible abuses and abominations which always have raged in the
Church of God, and yet at this day cease not to rage against this only and
grounded rock, which we hold to be ye article of our justification, (that is
to say, how, not by our selves, neither by our works, which are less then
our selves, but by an other help, even the son of God Jesus Christ, we are
redeemed from sin, death, ye deuell, and made partakers of eternal life) I am
compelled to cast of all shame, and to be bold above measure.

This rock did Satan shake in paradise, Genesis 3, verse. 2.
when he persuaded our first parents, that by their own wisdom and power
they should be like unto God: forsaking true Faith in God, who had given them
life, and promised the continuance thereof. By and by after, this lier and
murderer, which will be always like unto him self, stirred up the brother to
the murdering of his brother, and for none other cause, Genes. 4.
but for that his godly brother by Faith had offered up a more excellent
sacrifice, and he offering up his own works without faith, had not pleased
God. After this, against the same Faith followed a most intolerable
persecution of Satan by the sons of Caine, until God was even constrained at
once by the flood to purge the whole world, and to defend Noe the preacher of
righteousness. Genes 6. 2. Peter. 2.5. Genes. 10.6. etc.
This notwithstanding Satan continued his seed in Cham, the third son of
Noe. But who is able to reckon up all examples? After these things the whole
world waxed mad against this Faith, 1 Acts 14.
finding out an infinite nombre of idolles and strange religions, whereby every
one (as S. Paul says) walked his own way, trusting by their works, some to
pacifye or please a God, some a Goddess, some Gods, some Goddesses: that is to
say, without the help of Christ, by their own works to redeem them selves from
evils and from their sins, as all the examples and monuments of all nations
do sufficiently witness.

But these are nothing in comparison of that people and congregation of God,
Israel: which not only had the sure promise of ye fathers, and afterward the
law of God, given unto them from God him self by his angels, Acts. 7.5^.
above all other: but always and in all things were also certified by the
present sayings, miracles, and examples of yt prophets. Notwithstanding even
among them also Satan did so prevail (that is to say, the mad and
outrageous opinion of their own righteousness) that afterward they killed all
the prophets, yea even Christ him self the son of God, their promised
Messiah, for that they had taught, that men are accepted into the favor of God
by grace only and not by their own righteousness. And this is the sum of the
doctrine of the devil and of the world from the beginning: We will not seem
to do, evil, but yet whatsoever we do that must God allow of, and all his
prophets must consent to it, which if they shall refuse to do, they shall dye
the death. Abell shall dye, but Cain shall florishe. Let this be our law (say
they) and even so it comes to pass.

The church of the Gentiles.
But in the Church of the Gentiles, the matter is, and has been so vehemently
handled, yt the fury of the Jewish Sinagoge may well seem to be but a sport. 1.
Cor. 2.1.
For they (as S. Paul says) did not know Christ their anointed, 1. Cor. 1.30.
and therefore they crucified the lord of glory. But the church of the gentiles
has received and confessed Christ to be the son of god, being made our
righteousness, and this does she publicly record, read, and teach. And yet
notwithstanding this confession, they that would be accounted the church, do
kill and persecute, and continually rage against those which believe and teach
and in their deeds declare nothing else, but that Christ is the self same
thing that they them selves (though with feigned words and hipocriticall deeds)
are constrained mawgre their heads, to allow and confess. For under the name
of Christ at this day they reign. And if they could without the name of
Christ hold that seat and kingdom, no doubt but they would express him to be
such a one openly as in their hearts they esteem him secretly. But they
esteem him a great deal less then the Jews do, which at the least think
him to be Thola, that is to say, a thief worthily hanged on the cross. But
these men account him as a fable, and take him as a feigned God amongst the
gentiles, as it may plainly appear at Rome in the Popes court, and almost
throughout all Italy.

Because therefore Christ is made as it were a mock amongst his Christians
(for Christians they will be called): and for that Cain does kill Abell
continually, The argument of justification, very necessary and diligently to be
handled.
and the abomination of Satan does now chefely reign, it is very necessary
that we should diligently handle this Article, and set it against Satan,
whether we be rude or eloquent, learned or unlearned. For this rock must be
published abroad, yea though every man should hold his peace, yet even of the
very rocks and stones them selves. Wherefore I do most willingly herein
accomplish my duty, and am contented to suffer this long Commentary and full
of words, to be set forth for the stirring up of all the brethren in Christ,
against the sleights and malice of Satan, which in these days is turned into
such extreme madness against this healthful knowledge of Christ now
revealed and raised up again: that as hitherto men have seemed to be possessed
with deuels and stark mad, even so now the devils them selves do seem to
be possessed of far worse deuels, and to rage even above the fury of devils,
The rage of Satan, a sure argument that the day of judgment is at hand.
which is in deed a great argument that that enemy of truth and life, does
perceive the day of judgment to be at hand, which is the horrible day of his
destruction, but the most comfortable day of our redemption, and shall be the
end of all his tyranny and cruelty. For not without cause is he disquieted,
when his members and powers are so assailed: even as a thief or an adulterer,
when the morning appears and discloseth his wickedness, is taken tardie and
apprehended for the same. For who ever heard (to pass over the abominations
of the Pope) so many monsters to burst out at once into the world, as we see at
this day in the Anabaptists alone? The outrages of the Anabaptists.
In whom Satan breathing out as it were the last blast of his kingdom, through
horrible vproures sets them every where in such a rage, as though he would
by them suddenly, not only destroy the whole world with seditions, but also by
innumerable sects swallow up and devour Christ wholly with his Church.

Against the lives and opinions of others he does not so rage: to wit, against
whoremo^gers, thieves, murderers, perjured persons, rebels against God,
unbelievers. No, to these rather he gives peace and quietness: these he
maintains in his court with all manner of pleasures and delites, and gives to
them all things at will: Even like as sometime in the beginning of the church,
he did not only suffer all the idolatries and false religions of the whole
world to be quiet and untouched, but also mightily maintained, The Devil
troubles not those that are buried and dead in sin, but especially those
that are godly and hate sin.
defended, and nourished the same. But the church and religion of Christ alone
he vexed on every side. After this, permitting peace and quietness to many
heretics, he troubled only the catholic doctrine. Even so likewise at this
day he has no other business in hand but this only (as his own and always
proper unto him self) to persecute and vex our Savior Christ: which is our
perfect righteousness without our works, as it is written of him: Thou shall
tread upon his heel. Genes. 3, ver. 15.


But I do not set forth these my meditations so much against these men, as for
my brethren, which will either show them selves thankful in the Lord for this
my travel, or else will pardon my weakness and temeritie. But of the wicked I
would not in any wise they should be liked or allowed: but rather that thereby
both they and their God might be the more vexed, seeing with my great travel
they are set forth only for such as S. Paul writes this Epistle unto:
that is to say, the troubled, For whose cause specially Luther sets forth
this work and who they be that only understand this doctrine.
afflicted, vexed, tempted, (for they only understand these things) and
miserable Galathians in the Faith. Who so are not such, let them hear the
papists, monks, anabaptists and such other masters of profound wisdom and
of their own religion, and let them stoutly contemn our doctrine and our
doings. For at this day the papists and anabaptists conspire together
against the church in this one point (though they dissemble in words) that the
work of God depends upon the worthiness of the person. For thus do the
Anabaptists teach: The dignity of Gods word and the sacraments depend not
upon the worthiness or vnvvorthines of the minister.
that baptism is nothing except the person do believe. Out of this principle
must needs follow, that all the works of God be nothing if the man be
nothing. But baptism is the work of God, and yet notwtstanding an evil man
makes it, not to be the work of God. Moreover, hereof it must follow that
matrimony, authority, liberty and bondage, are the works of God: but
because men are evil, therefore they are not the works of God. Wicked men have
the sun, the moon, the earth, the water, the air, and all such other
creatures subject unto them: but because they be wicked and not godly, therefore
the sun is not the sun, the moon, the earth, ye water, are not that which
they are. The Anabaptists them selves had bodies and souls before they were
rebaptised: but because they were not godly, therefore they had not true bodies
and true souls. Also their parents were not lawfully married (as they grant
them selves) because they were not rebaptised: therefore the Anabaptists them
selves are all bastards, and their parents were all adulterers and
whoremongers, and yet they do inherit their parents lands and goods,
although they grant the^ selves to be bastardes and unlawful heirs. Who
sees not here in the Anabaptists, men not possessed with Devils, but even
Devils them selves possessed with worse Devils?

The Papists in like manner until this day do stand upon works and the
worthiness of man, contrary to grace, and so (in words at the least) do
strongly assist their brethren the Anabaptists. For these Foxes are tied
together by the tails, Judges. ^5, 4.
although by their heads they seem to be contrary. For outwardly they
pretend to be their great enemies, when as inwardly notwithstanding they
think, teach and defend in deed all one thing against our Savior Christ,
who only is our righteousness. Let him therefore that can, hold fast this one
article, and let us suffer the rest which have made shipwreck thereof, 1.
Timot. 1, 1^.
to be carried whether the sea and winds shall drive them, until either they
return to the ship or swim to the shore.

The conclusion and end of this complaint is, to hope for no quietness or end
of complaint, so long as Christ and Belial do not agree. Eccles. 11, 4. Psalm.
121.4.
One generation passes and an other comes. If one heresy die, by and by an
other springs up: for the Devil does neither slumber nor sleep. I my self,
The Church shall never be quiet in this world.
which (though I be nothing) have been now in the ministry of Chrst about.xx.
years: can truly witness yt I have been assailed with more then.xx. sects: of
the which some are already destroyed, other some, as the parts and members of
worms or bees that are cut asunder, do yet pant for life. But Satan the God
of all dissension, stirs up daily new sects, and last of all (which of all
other, Understand this of pestilent Libertines which would utterly take
away the law, al fear of god and the ministry of his word. Osea. 4, 4.
Mich. ^, 6.
I should never have foreseen or once suspected) he has raised up a sect of
such as teach that the ten commandments ought to be taken out of the church,
and that men should not be terrefied with the law, but gentely exhorted by the
preaching of the grace of Christ, that the saying of the Prophet Micheas might
he fulfilled: Let none rebuke or reprove an other: They shall not prophecy
unto them. As though we were ignorant or had never taught that afflicted and
broken spirits must be comforted by Christ: but the hard hearted Pharisees unto
whom the grace of God is preached in vain, must be terrified by the law. And
they them selves also are forced to devise and imagine certain revelations of
Gods wrath against the wicked and unbelievers. As though the law were or could
be any thing else, but a reueiling of Gods wrath against impiety. Such is the
blindness and pride of these men: which even by their own judgment do
condemn them selves. Wherefore it behooves the ministers of Gods word to be
surely persuaded (if they will be accounted faithful and wise in the day of
Christ) that the word of S. Paul is not spoken in vain, An exhortation to
ministers.
or prophesied of a matter of no importance: 1. Cor. 11, 19.
to wit, that there must be heresies, that they which are proved may be
known. Yea I say, let the minister of Christ know, that so long as he
teaches Christ purely, there shall not be wanting perverse spirits, yea even
of our own and among our selves, which shall seek by all means possible, to
trouble the church of Christ. And herewithal let him comfort him self, that
there is no peace between Christ and Beliall, 2. Cor. 6, 15. Genes. 3, 5.
or between the seed of the serpent, and the seed of the woman. Yea let him
rejoice in the troubles which he suffers by these sects and seditious
spirits, continually springing up one after an other. For this is our
reioicing, even the testimony of our conscience, 2. Cor. 1.12.
that we be found standing and fighting in the behalf of the seed of the
woman, against the seed of the serpent. Let him bite us by the heel and spare
not. We again will not cease to crush his head, by the grace and help of
Christ the principal bruser thereof, who is blessed for ever.

THE ARGUMENT OF the Epistle of S. Paul to the Galathians.
FIRST of all it behooves that we speak of the Argument of this Epistle: that
is to say, what matter S. Paul here cheefely treats of. The Argument is this.

S. Paul goes about to establishe the Doctrine of Faith, grace, forgiveness
of sins, or Christian righteousness, to the end that we may have a perfect
knowledge and difference between Christian righteousness, and all other
kinds of righteousness. For there be diverse sorts of righteousness. How
many kinds of righteousness there are.
There is a political or civil righteousness, which Emperors, Princes of
the world, Philosophers and Lawyers deal withal. There is also a Ceremonial
righteousness, which the traditions of men do teach. This righteousness
parents and schoolemaisters may teach without danger, because they do not
attribute unto it any virtue to satisfy for sin, to please God, or to
deserve grace: but they teach such Ceremonies as are only necessary for the
correction of manners, and certain observations concerning this life. Besides
these, there is an other righteousness, which is called the righteousness of
the law, or of the ten commandments, which Moises teaches. This do we also
teach after the doctrine of Faith.

There is yet an other righteousness, which is above all these: Christian
righteousness.
to wit, the righteousness of Faith, or Christian righteousness, the which
we must diligently discern from the other before rehearsed: for they are quite
contrary to this righteousness, both because they flow out of the laws of
Emperors, the traditions of the Pope, and the commandments of God, and
because they consist also in our works, and may be wrought of us either by our
pure natural strength (as the Sophisters term it), or else by the gift of
God. For these kinds of righteousness are also the gift of God, like as other
good things are which we do enjoy.

But this most excellent righteousness, of Faith I mean, (which God through
Christ, without works imputes unto us) is neither Political, nor
Ceremonial, nor the righteousness of Gods law, nor consists in works, The
righteousness of faith aptlye called the passive righteousness, because it
consists in suffering and receiving: like as the righteousness of the law is
called the active righteousness, because it consists in doing and vvorking.
but is clean contrary: that is to say, a mere passive righteousness, as the
other above are active. For in this we work nothing, we render nothing unto
God: but only we receive and suffer an other to work in us, that is to say,
God. There ^e it seems good unto me to call this righteousness of faith, or
Christian righteousness, the passive righteousness.

This is a righteousness hidden in a mystery, which the world does not know, yea
Christians them selves do not thoroughly understand it, and can hardly take
hold of it in their tentations. Therefore it must be diligently taught and
continually practiced. And who so does not understand or apprehend this
righteousness in afflictions and terrors of conscience, must neades be
overthrown. For there is no comfort of conscience so firm and so sure as this
passive righteousness is.

The infirmity of man in temptations.
But man's weakness and misery is so great, that in the terrors of conscience
and danger of death, we behold nothing else but our works, our worthiness and
the law: which when it shows unto us our sin, by and by cure evil life
past comes to remembrance. Then the poor sinner with great anguish of
spirit groneth, and thus thinks with him self: Alas how desperately have I
lived? would to God I might live longer: Then would I amend my life. Thus man's
reason can not restrain it self from the sight and beholding of this active
or working righteousness, that is to say, her own righteousness: nor lift up her
eyes to the beholding of the passive or christian righteousness, but rests
altogether in the active righteousness: So deeply is this evil rooted in us.

On the other side, Satan abusing the infirmity of our nature, does increase
and aggrauate these cogitations in us. Then can it not be but that the pore
conscience must be more grievously troubled, confounded, and terrified. For it
is impossible that the mind of man, of it self should conceive any comfort,
or look up unto grace only, in the feeling and horror of sin, or constantly
reject all disputing and reasoning about works. For this is far above man's
strength and capacity, yea, and above the law of God also. True it is, that
of all things in the world, The law can not comfort us in afflictions.
the law is most excellent: yet is it not able to quiet a troubled conscience,
but increases terrors, and drives it to desperation. For by the law, sin
is made above measure sinful. Romans the seventh, and thirtene verse.

Wherefore the afflicted and troubled conscience has no remedy against
desperation and eternal death, unless it take hold of the forgiveness of
sins by grace, freely offered in Christ Jesus: that is to say, this passive
righteousness of Faith or Christian righteousness. Which if it can apprehend,
then may it be at quiet, and boldly say: I seek not this active or working
righteousness: although I know that I ought to have it, and to fulfill it.
But be it so that I had it, and did fulfill it in deed: yet notwithstanding I
can not trust unto it, neither dare I set it against the judgment of God. Thus
I abandone my self from al active righteousness, both of mine own and of
Gods law, and embrace only that passive righteousness, which is the
righteousness of grace, mercy, and forgeuenes of sins: briefly I rest only
upon that righteousness which is the righteousness of Christ and of the holy
Ghost.

Like as the earth engenders not rain, nor is able by her own strength,
labor and travel to procure the same, but receaueth it of the mere gift of
God from above: so this heavenly righteousness is given us of God without our
works or deseruinges. Look then how much the earth of it self is able to do
in getting and procuring to it self seasonable showers of rain to make it
fruteful: even so much and no more are we able to do by our own strength and
works in winning this heavenly and eternal righteousness, and therefore shall
never be able to attain unto it, unless God him self by mere imputation and by
his unspeakable gift do bestow it upon us. The greatest knowledge then and the
greatest wisdom of Christians is, not to know the law, to be ignorant of
works and of the whole active righteousness, especially when the conscience
wrestleth with the judgment of God. Like as on the contrary, amongst those
which are not of the number of Gods people, the greatest point of wisdom is,
to know and earnestly to urge the law and the active righteousness

But it is a thing very strange and unknown to the world, The law is not
given to a righteous man: but to the lavvlesse and disobedient. Tit. 1, 9 Romans
3, 20.
to teach Christians to learn to be ignorant of the law, and so to live
before God, as if there were no law. For except thou be ignorant of the law,
and be assuredly persuaded in thine heart that there is now no law nor wrath of
God: but altogether grace and mercy for Christ's sake, thou can not be saved:
for by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Contrariwise, works and the
keeping of the law must be so streitly required in the world, as if there were
no promise or grace: and that because of the stubborn, proud, and hard
hearted, before whose eyes nothing must be set but the law, that they may be
terrified and humbled. For the law is given to terrify and to kill such, and
to exercise the old man: And both the word of grace and of wrath must be
rightly divided, according to the saying of the Apostle in the second Epistle
of Timothe, Chapter. 2. verse. 15.

Here is then required a wise and a faithful disposer of the word of God,
which can so moderate the law, that it may be kept within his bounds. He that
teaches that men are justified before God by the observation of the law,
passes the bounds of the law, and confounds these two kinds of
righteousness, active and passive, and is but an ill Logician, for he does not
rightly divide. Contrariwise, he that sets forth the law and works to the
old man, and the promise of forgiveness of sins and Gods mercy to the new man,
divides the word well. For the flesh or the old man must be coupled with the
law and works: the spirit or new man must be joined with the promise of God
and his mercy. Wherefore, when I see a man that is bruised enough already,
oppressed with the law, terrified with sin, and thirsting for comfort, it is
time that I should remove out of his sight the law and active righteousness,
and that I should set before him by the Gospel the Christian and passive
righteousness: which excluding Moses with his law, offers the promise made in
Christ, who came for the afflicted, and for sins. Here is man raised up
again, and conceaueth good hope: neither is he any longer under the law, but
under grace. How not under the law? According to the new man, to whom the
law does not pertain. For the law has his bounds but unto Christ, Romans 6,
14. Romans 10, 4. Galat. 3, 24
as Paul says afterward: The law continues unto Christ: who being come,
Moses cease with his law, Circumcision, the Sacrifices, the Sabbothes, yea,
and all the Prophets.

This is our divinity: whereby we teach how to put a difference between these
two kinds of righteousness, active and passive: to the end that manners and
faith, works and grace, policy and religion, should not be confounded or taken
the one for the other. Both are necesry: but both must be kept within their
bounds. Christian righteousness pertains to the new man, and the
righteousness of the law pertains to the old man, Po. 1, 1^.
which is borne of flesh and blood. Wpon this old man, as upon an ass, there
must be laid a burden that may press him down: and he must not enjoy the
freedom of the spirit or grace, except he first put upon him the new man by
faith in Christ, (which notwithstanding is not fully done in this life): then
may he enjoy the kingdom and inestimable gift of grace.

This I say to the end that no man should think we reiecte or forbid good
works, as the Papists do most falsely sclaunder us, Good works not
forbidden.
neither understanding what they themselves say, nor what we teach. They know
nothing but the righteousness of the law, and yet they will judge of that
doctrine which is far above the law: of which it is impossible that the
carnal man should be able to judge. Therefore they must needs be offended:
for they can see no higher then the law. What so ever then is above the law,
is to them a great offense. But we imagine, as it were two worlds: the one
heavenly, and the other earthly. In these we place these two kinds of
righteousness, being separate the one far from the other. The righteousness of
the law is earthly and has to do with earthly things, and by it we do good
works. But as the earth brings not forth fruit except first it be watered
and made fruitful from above: even so by the righteousness of the law in doing
many things we do nothing, and in fullfilling of the law we fulfill it not,
except first, without any merit or work of ours, we be made righteous by the
Christian righteousness, which nothing pertains to the righteousness of the
law or to the earthly and active righteousness. But this righteousness is
heavenly: which (as is said) we have not of our selves, Christian
righteousness not vvroughte by us, but wrought in us. 1. Cor. 15.49.
but receive it from heaven: which we work not, but which by grace is wrought
in us, and apprehended by faith: whereby we mount up above all laws and
works. Wherefore like as we have borne (as S. Paul says) the image of the
earthly Adam: so let us bear the image of the heavenly, which is the new man
in a new world, where is no law, no sin no remorse of conscience, no death,
but perfect joy, righteousness, grace, peace, life, salvation and glory.

Why? do we then nothing? do we work nothing for the obtaining of this
righteousness? I answer: nothing at all. We ca^ do nothing for the obtaining
of Christian righteousness. Io. 16, 10. Heb. 1, 3. 1. Cor. 1, 30. Heb. 4.15.
Romans 4, 15.
For this is perfect righteousness, to do nothing, to hear nothing, to know
nothing of the law, or of works: but to know and to believe this only, that
Christ is gone to the father, and is not now seen: that he sits in heaven
at the right hand of his Father, not as a judge, but made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, holiness and redemption: Breefely, that he is our
high Priest, entreating for us, and reigning over us and in us by grace. In
this heavenly righteousness, sin can have no place: for there is no law,
and where no law is, there can be no transgression.

Seeing then that sin has here no place, there can be no anguish of
conscience, no fear, no heaviness. Therefore S. John says: 1. Io. 5, 18.
he that is borne of God, 1. John. 5.18.
can not sin. But if there be any fear or grief of conscience, it is a
token that this righteousness is withdrawn, that grace is hidden and out of
sight, and that Christ is darkened and not to be seen. But where Christ is
truly seen is deed, there must needs be full and perfect joy in the Lord,
with peace of conscience, which most certainly thus thinks: Although I am a
sinner by the law, and under the condemnation of the law, yet I despair not,
yet I die not because Christ lives, who is both my righteousness and my
everlasting life. In that righteousness and life I have no sin, no fear, no
sting of conscience, no care of death. I am in deed a sinner as touching this
present life, and the righteousness thereof, as the child of Adam: where the
law accuses me, death reigns over me, and at length will devour me. But I
have an other righteousness and life above this life, which is Christ the
son of God, who knows no sin nor death, but is righteousness and life
eternal: by whom, this my body being dead and brought into dust, Romans 1.
verse. 19.20.21. etc.
shall be raised up again, and delivered from the bondage of the law and sin,
and shall be sanctified together with the spirit.

So both these continue whilst we here live. The flesh is accused, exercised
with temptations, oppressed with heaviness and sorrow, bruised by this active
righteousness of the law: but the spirit reigns, rejoices, and is saved by
this passive and christian righteousness, because it knows that it has a
Lord in heaven at the right hand of his father, who has abolished the law,
sin, death, and has trodden under his feet all evils, led them captive, and
triumphed over them in him self. Coloss. 2.15.

The drifte of the Apostle in the Epistle to the Galathia^s.
S. Paul therefore in this Epistle goes about diligently to instruct us, to
comfort us, to hold us in the perfect knowledge of this most excellent and
christian righteousness. For if the article of Justification be once lost,
then is all true christian doctrine lost. And as many as are in the world, yt
hold not this doctrine, are either Jews, Turks, Papists, or heretics. For
between the righteousness of the law, and the christian righteousness, there
is no mean. He then that strayeth from this christian righteousness, must
needs fall into the righteousness of the law: that is to say, when he has
lost Christ, he must fall into the confidence of his own works.

Therefore do we so often repeat, and so earnestly set forth this doctrine of
Faith or Christian righteousness, that by this means it may be kept in
continual exercise, and may be plainly discerned from the active
righteousness of the law. Otherwise we shall never be able to hold the true
divinity (for by this only doctrine yt Church is built, and in this it
consists) but by and by we shall either become Canonists, obseruers of
Ceremonies, obseruers of the law, or papists, See what we fall into, when we
neglecte this doctrine, or want true zeal to advance the same.
and Christ so darkened, that none in the Church shall be either rightly
taught or comforted. Wherefore, if we will be teachers and leaders of other, it
behooves us to have a great care of these matters, and to mark well this
distinction between the righteousness of the law, and the righteousness of
Christ. And this distinction is easy to be uttered in words: but in use and
experience it is very hard, although it be never so diligently exercised and
practiced, for that in the hour of death, or in other agonies of the
conscience, these two sorts of righteousness do encounter more nere together,
then thou would wish or desire. Wherefore I do admonish you, especially
such as shall become instructers and guiders of consciences, and also every one
apart, that ye exercise your selves continually by study, by reading, by
meditation of the word, and by prayer, that in the time of temptation ye may
be able to instruct and comfort both your own consciences and others, and to
bring them from the law to grace, from the active and working righteousness,
to the passive and received righteousness: and to conclude, from Moises to
Christ. For the devil is wont in affliction, and in the conflict of
conscience, by the law to make us afraid, and to lay against us the conscience
of sin, our wicked life past, the wrath and judgment of God, hell and
eternal death, that by this means he may drive us to desperation, make us
bondslaues to him self, and pluck us from Christ. Furthermore, he is wont to
set against us those places of the gospel, wherein Christ him self requires
works of us, and with plain words threatens danmation to those that do
them not. Now, if here we be not able to judge between these two kinds of
righteousness: if we take not hold of Christ by faith sitting at the right hand
of God, who makes intercession unto the father for us miserable sinners, 1.
Cor. 1.30. Heb. 7.25.
then are we under the law and not under grace, and Christ is no more a
Savior but a law geuer: so that now there remains no more salvation, but
certain desperation and everlasting death except repentance follow.

Let us then diligently learn to judge between these two kinds of
righteousness, that we may know how far we ought to obey the law. Now, we have
said before, that yt law in a Christian ought not to pass his bounds, but
ought to have dominion only upon the flesh, which is in subjection unto it and
remains under the same. When it is thus, the law is kept within his bounds.
But if it shall presume to creep into thy conscience and there seek to
reign, see thou play the cunning Logician, and make true division. Give no
more to the law then is convenient: but say thou: O law, thou would clime
up into the kingdom of my conscience and there reign and reprove it of sin,
and would take from me the joy of my heart which I have by faith in Christ,
and drive me to desperation, that I might be without all hope and utterly
perish. This thou do besides thine office, keep thy self within thy
bounds, and exercise thy power upon the flesh: but touch not my conscience,
Romans 4. 15.
for I am baptized, and by the gospel am called to the pertaking of
righteousness and of everlasting life, to the kingdom of Christ, wherein my
conscience is at rest, where no law is, but altogether forgeuenes of sins,
peace, quietness, joy, health and everlasting life. Trouble me not in these
matters, for I will not suffer thee so intolerable a tyrante and cruel
tormenter to reign in my conscience: for it is the seat and temple of Christ
the son of God, 1. Cor. 6.19.
who is the King of righteousness and peace, and my most sweet Savior and
Mediator: he shall keep my conscience joyful and quiet in the sound and pure
doctrine of the gospel and in the knowledge of this Christian and heavenly
righteousness.

When I have this righteousness reigning in my heart, I descend from heaven as
the rain making fruitful the earth: that is to say, I come forth into an
other kingdom, and I do good works how and whenever occasion is offered.
If I be a minister of ye word, I preach, I comfort the broken hearted, I
administer the sacraments. If I be a householder, I govern my house and my
family, I bring up my children in the knowledge and fear of God. If I be a
magistrate, the charge that is given me from above I diligently execute. If I
be a servant, I do my masters business faithfully. To conclude, whosoever he be
that is assuredly persuaded that Christ is his righteousness, he does not only
chearefully and gladly work well in his vocation, but also submits him
self through love to the magistrates and to their laws, yea though they be
severe, sharp, and cruel, and (if necessity do so require) to all manner of
burdens and dangers of this present life, because he knows that this is the
will of God, and that this obedience is acceptable unto him. Thus far as
concerning the argument of this Epistle, which S. Paul has taken in hand to
entreat of, taking occasion of false teachers which had darkened this
righteousness of faith amongst the Galathians, against whom he commends his
authority and office.

The first Chapter.
Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ,
and God the father which has raised him from the dead.
Now that we have declared the argument and sum of this Epistle to the
Galathians, The occasion of writing this Epistle to the Galathians.
we think it good before we come to the matter it self, to show what was the
occasion that S. Paul wrote this Epistle. He had planted among the Galathians
the pure doctrine of the gospel, and the righteousness of faith: but by and
by after his departure, there crept in certain false teachers which overthrew
all that he had planted and rightly taught among them. The Devil hates the
gospel, and stirs up wicked me^ against it.
For the Devil can no otherwise do, but furiously impugn this doctrine with
all force and subteltie, and never rests whilst he sees one spark thereof
remaining. We also for this only cause that we preach the gospel, do suffer of
the world, the devil and his ministers, both on the left hand and on the
right, all the mischief that they can work against us.

For the gospel is such a doctrine as teaches a far higher matter then is
the wisdom, righteousness, and religion of the world: that is to say, free
remission of sins through Christ. etc. The doctrine of the gospel.
It leaves these things in their degree, to be as they are, and commends
them as the good creatures of God. But ye world prefers these creatures
before the creator: and moreover by them would put away sin, be delivered
from death, and deserve everlasting life. This does the gospel condemn.
Contrariwise, the world can not suffer those things to be condemned, The
accusatio^s vvhervvith the world charge the gospel.
which it most esteems and best likes of, and therefore it charge the
gospel that it is a seditious doctrine and full of errors, and that it
overthrows common wealths, countries, dominions, kingdoms, and Empires, and
therefore offends both against God and the Emperor, abolish^^h laws,
corrupts good manners, and sets all men at liberty to do what they list.
Wherefore the world in his most fervent zeal and high service of God, (as to
him it seems) persecuteth this doctrine, and abhoreth the teachers and
professors thereof, as ye greatest plague that can be in the whole earth.

Moreover, by the preaching of this doctrine, The effects of the gospel.
the devil is overthrown, his kingdom is destroyed, the law, sin, and
death (wherewith, as most mighty and invincible tyraunts, he has brought all
ma^kinde in subjection under his tyranny) are wrested out of his hands:
Brefely, Coloss 1. ver. 1^.
his prisoners are translated out of the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom
of light and liberty. Should the devil suffer all this? Should not the father
of lies employ all his force and subtle policies, to darke^, to corrupt, and
utterly to root out this doctrine of salvation and everlasting life? In deed
S. Paul co^plaineth in this and all other his Epistles, that even in his time
the devil showed him self a cunning workman in this business.

We thought good to show here by the way, that the gospel is such a doctrine
as condemns all manner of righteousness, and preaches the only righteousness
of Christ, and to them that embrace the same, it brings peace of conscience
and all good things: and yet notwithstanding, the world hates and persecuteth
it most bitterly.

I said that the occasion why S. Paul wrote this Epistle, was for that by and
by after his departure, false teachers had destroyed those things among the
Galathians, which he with long and great travel had builded. The authority of
the false Apostels.
And these false Apostles being of the circumcision and sect of the Phariseis,
were men of great estimation and authority, which bragged among the people
that they were of that holy and chosen stock of the Jews, Io. 8. Romans 4, 4.5.6.
that they were Israelites, of the seed of Abraham, that they had the promises
and the fathers: and finally, that they were the ministers of Christ and the
Apostles scholars, with whom they had been conversant and had seen their
miracles, and perhaps had also wrought some signs or miracles them selves:
Math. 7, ver. 22
For Christ witnesses that the wicked also do work miracles. Moreover these
false Apostles by all the crafty means they could devise, defaced the
authority of S. Paul, saying: Why do ye so highly esteem of Paul? why have
ye him in so great reverence? Forsooth he was but the last of all that were
converted unto Christ. But we are ye disciples of the Apostles, and were
familiarly conversant with them. We have seen Christ working miracles and heard
him preach. Paul came after us, and is inferior unto us: and it is not
possible that God should suffer us to err which are of his holy people, the
ministers of Christ, and have received the holy Ghost. Again, we are many and
Paul is but one and alone, who neither was conversant with the Apostles nor
has seen Christ: yea he persecuted the church of Christ a great while. Would
God, think ye, for Paul's sake only, suffer so many churches to be deceived?

When men having such authority come into any country or city, by and by the
people have them in great admiration, and under this color of godliness and
religion, they do not only deceive the simple, but also the learned, yea and
those also which seem to be somewhat confirmed in the faith: especially when
they brag (as these did) that they are the offspring of the Patriarks, the
ministers of Christ, the Apostles scollers etc. Even so the Pope at this day,
when he has no authority of the scripture to defend him self withal, The
argument of the papists against us.
uses this one argument contenually against us: The church, the church.
Think thou that God is so offended, that for a few heretics of Luthers
sect, he will cast of his whole church? Think thou that he would leave his
church in error so many hundredth years? And this conclusion he chiefly stands
upon: that the church can not be overthrown. Now like as many are moved with
this argument at this day: so in Paul's time these false Apostles through
great bragging and setting forth of their own praises, blinded the eyes of
the Galathians: so that Paul lost his authority among them, and his doctrine
was brought into suspicion.

Against this vain bragging and boasting of the false Apostles, Paul with
great constancy and boldness sets his apostolical authority, highly
commending his vocation and defending his ministry. And (although elsewhere he
never does the like) he will not give place to any, With how great
consta^cie S. Paul defends his vocation and authority against the false
Apostles.
no not to the apostles them selves, much less to any of their scholars. And
to abate their pharisaical pride and shameless boldness, he makes mention of the
history done in Antiochia, where he wtstode Peter himself. Besides this, not
regarding the offense that might rise thereof, he says plainly in the text,
that he was bold to accuse and reprove eue^ Peter him self the chief of the
Apostles, who had seen Christ, and had been most familiarly conversant with
him. I am an Apostle (says he) and such a one as pass not what others are:
yea, I was not afraid to chide the very pillar of all the rest of the Apostles.
And to conclude, in ye first two chapters he does in a manner, The sum of the
two first chapters.
nothing else but set out his vocation, his office and his gospel, affirming
that it was not of men and that he had not received it by man, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ: Also, that if he, Galat. 5.
yea or an Angel from heaven should bring any other gospel then that which he
had preached, he should be holden accursed.

The certainty of calling.
But what means Paul by this his boasting? I answer: This common place
serves to this end, The minister of God must be sure of his calling.
that every minister of Gods word should be sure of his calling, that before
God and man he may with a bold conscience glory herein that he preaches the
gospel as one that is called and sent: Even as the Ambassador of a King
glories and vaunteth in this, that he comes not as a private person, but as
the Kings Ambassador, and because of this dignity that he is the Kings
Ambassador, he is honored and set in the highest place. Which honor should
not be given unto him, if he came as a private person. Wherefore let the
preacher of the gospel be certain that his calling is from God. And it is
expedient that according to ye example of Paul he should magnify this his
calling, to the end that he may win credit and authority among the people,
like as the Kings Ambassador magnifieth his office and calling. And thus to
glory, is not a vain but a necessary kind of glorying, because he glories not
in him self but in the King which has sent him: whose authority he desires
to be honored and magnified.

Likewise when Paul so highly commends his calling, he seeks not his own
praise, The glorying of S. Paul necessary and holy.
but with a necessary and holy pride he magnifieth his ministry: As to the
Romans 11. he says: For as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I will
magnify mine office: that is to say, I will that men receive me, Romans 11.13.
not as Paul of Tharsus, but as Paul the Apostle or Ambassador of Jesus
Christ. And this he does of necessity, to maintain his authority, that the
people in hearing this, might be more attent and willing to give ear unto him.
For they hear not only Paul, The Preachers are to be received as messengers
from God, by whose ministry God himself speaks.
but in Paul, Christ himself, and God the father sending him out in his
message: whose authority and majesty, like as men ought religiously to
honor, so ought they with great reverence to receive and to hear his
messengers bringing his word and message.

This is a notable place therefore: wherein Paul so glories and boasts as
touching his vocation, yt he despises all others. If any man after the manner
of the world should despise all others in respect of him self, and attribute
al unto him self alone, he should not only show him self a very fool, but also
grievously offend. But this manner of boasting is necessary, and pertains not
to the glory of Paul, but to the glory of God: whereby is offered unto him the
sacrifice of praise and thankesgeuing. For by this boasting, the name, the
grace and the mercy of God is made known unto the world. Thus then he
begins this Epistle.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle not of men. etc.
Here in the very beginning he touches those false teachers, which boasted
them selves to be the disciples of the Apostles, and to be sent of them: but
despised Paul as one that was neither the Apostles scholar, nor sent of any
to preach the gospel, but came in some other way, and of his own head thrust
him self into that office. Against those Paul defends his calling, saying:
My calling seems base to your preachers. But whosoever they be which have
come unto you, are sent either of men or by man: that is to say, they have
entered either of them selves being not called, or else called by others. But my
calling is neither of men nor by man, but it is above all manner of calling that
can be done by the Apostles, for it is by Jesus Christ and by God the father
etc.

Where he says of men, I mean such as call and thrust in themselves when
neither God nor man calls nor sends them, but they run and speak of them
selves. As at this day certain fantastical spirits, which either creep in
corners and seek places where they may power out their poison, and come not
into public congregations: or else they go thither, where the gospel is planted
already. These I call such as are sent of men. But where he says, by man,
understand such as have a divine calling, but yet by man as by means. God
calls then two manner of ways: by means and without means. He calls us to
the ministry of his word at this day, not immediately by him self but by
other means, that is to say, by man. But the Apostles were called immediately
of Christ him self, as the Prophets in the old time were called of God
himself. Therefore when Paul says: Not of men, neither by man, he beats
down the false Apostles. As though he would say: Albeit those vipers brag
never so much, what can they brag more then that they are either come from
men, that is to say, of them selves with out any calling, or, by man, that is
to say: sent of others. I pass not upon any of these things, neither ought you
to regard them.

As for me, I am called and sent, neither of men, nor by man, but without
means, that is to wit, by Jesus Christ him self, and my calling is like in
all points to the calling of the Apostles, The calling of the Apostles.
and I am in deed an Apostle. Paul therefore handles this place of the
calling of the Apostles effectually. And elswher he seperateth the degree of
Apostleship from others, as in the first to the Corinth cap. 12. 1 Cor. 10.28.
Ephesians. 4.11.
and in the fourth to ye Ephesians, where he says: And God has ordained some
in the Church, as first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers, Who be
Apostles.
etc. setting Apostles in the first place: so that they be properly called
Apostles which are sent immediately of God him self without any other ordinary
means.

So Mathias was called only of God. For when the other Apostles had appointed
two, Acts. 1.24.25. The calling of Mathias.
they durst not choose the one nor the other, but they cast lots, and prayed
that God would show which of them he would have. For seeing he should be an
Apostle, it behooved that he should be called of God. Acts. 9.15.
So was Paul called to be the Apostle of the Gentiles. The Apostles saints.
Hereof the Apostles also are called Saints. For they are sure of their
calling and doctrine, and have continued faithful in their office, Math. 27 5.
and none of them became a cast away save Judas, because their calling is holy.

This is the first assault yt Paul makes against the false Apostles, which
ran when no man sent them. Calling therefore is not to be despised. For it is
not enough for a man to have the word and pure doctrine, but also he must be
assured of his calling, and he that enters without this certainty, They
which be not called, do kill and destroy.
enters to no other end but to kill and to destroy. For God never prospers
the labor of those that are not called. And although they teach some good and
profitable matters withal, yet they edify not. The certainty of calling.
So our fantastical spirits at this day have the words of Faith in their
mouths, but yet they yield no fruit, but their chief end and purpose is to
draw men to their false and perverse opinions. They that have a certain and
holy calling, must sustain many and great conflictes: as they must do whose
doctrine is pure and sound, that they may constantly abide in their lawful
calling, against the infinite and continual assaults of the Devil and rage
of the world. Here, what should he do whose calling is uncertain and
doctrine corrupt?

This is then our comfort which are in the Ministry of the word, that we
have an office which is heavenly and holy, to the which we being lawfully
called, do triumph against all the gates of hell. On the other side it is an
horrible thing when the conscience says: This thou have done without any
lawful calling. What danger they be in which have no lavvfull calling.
Herein such terror shakes a man's mind which is not called, that he would
wish he had never heard the word which he teaches. For by his disobedience he
makes all his works evil, were they never so good, in so much that even his
greatest works and labors become his greateste sins.

We see then how good and necessary this boasting and glorying of our
ministry is. In times past when I was a young divine and teacher, me thought
Paul did unwisely in glorying so often of his calling in all his Epistles: but I
did not understand his purpose. For I knew not that the ministry of Gods word
was so weighty a matter. I knew nothing of the doctrine of faith, and a true
conscience in deed, Why Paul exalts his calling so in every place.
for that there was then no certainty taught either in the Schools or
Churches, but al was full of Sophistical subtilties of the Schooleme^. And
therefore no man was able to understand the dignity and power of this holy and
spiritual boasting of the true and lawful calling, which serves first to the
glory of God, and secondly to the aduauncing of our office, and moreover to the
salvation of our selves, and of the people. For by this our boasting we seek
not estimation in the world, The profit of extolling our calling.
or praise among men, or money, or pleasures, or favor of the world: But for as
much as we be in a divine calling and in the work of God, and the people have
great need to be assured of our calling, that they may know our word to be the
word of God, therefore we proudly vaunt and boast of it. It is not then a vain,
A holy pride.
but a most holy pride against the devil and the world, and true humility
before God.

Verse. 1. And by God the Father, which has raised him from the dead.
Paul is so enflamed here with zeal, that he can not tarry till he come to
the matter it self, but forthwith in the very title he bursteth out and
utters what he has in his heart. The sum of the Epistle to the Galathia^s.
His intent in this Epistle is to treat of the righteousness that comes by
faith, and to defend the same: Again, to overthrow the law, and the
righteousness that comes by works. Of such cogitations he is full, and out of
this wonderful and exceeding great abundance of the excellent wisdom and
knowledge of Christ in his heart, his mouth speaks. This flame, Math. 12.34.
this great burning fire of his heart ca^ not be hid, nor suffer him to hold
his tongue: and therefore he thought it not enough to say that he was an Apostle
sent by Jesus Christ, but also adds: by God the Father which raised him up
from the dead.

But the adding of these words: And by God the father etc, seems not
necessary. But because (as I said) Paul speaks out of the abundance of his
heart: his mind burns with desire to set forth even in the very entry of
his Epistle, the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to preach the righteousness
of God, which is called the resurrection of the dead. Christ who lives and is
risen again, speaks out of him, and moves him thus to speak: therefore not
without cause he adds, that he is also an Apostle By God the father, which
has raised up Jesus Christ from the dead. As if he would say: I have to deal
with Satan and with those vipers, the instruments of Satan, which go about to
spoil me of the righteousness of Christ, who was raised up by God the to spoil
me of the righteousness of Christ, who was raised up by God ye father from the
dead: by which alone we are made righteous, by which also we shall be raised up
in the last day from death to everlasting life. But they that in such sort go
about to overthrow Christ's righteousness, do resist the father and the son,
and the work of them both.

What Paul goes about in this Epistle.
Thus Paul even at the first entrance, bursteth out into the whole matter
whereof he treats in this Epistle. For (as I said) he treats of the
resurrection of Christ, who rose again to make us righteous, and in so doing
he has overcome the law, Romans 4.24.25.
sin, death, and all euels. Christ's victory then is the ouerco^ming of the
law, The victory of Christ is ours.
of sin, our flesh, the world, the devil, death, hell and all evils: and this
his victory has he given unto us. Although then that these tyraunts and
enemies of ours do accuse us and make us afraid: yet can they not drive us to
despair, nor condemn us. For Christ whom God the father has raised up from
the dead, 1. Cor. 15.57.
is our righteousness and victory. Therefore thanks be to God, who has given us
victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

But mark how fitly and to the purpose Paul here speaks. He says not by
God that has made heaven and earth, which is Lord of the Angels: which
commanded Abraham to go out of his own country: which sent Moises to Pharao
the king: which brought Israel out of Egypt, (as the false Apostles did, who
boasted of the God of their fathers, the creator, maintainer, and preserver of
all things, working wonders among his people): but Paul had an other thing in
his heart, namely the righteousness of Christ, and therefore he speaks words
that make much for this his matter, saying: I am an Apostle, neither of men nor
by men, but by Jesus Christ and God the father, who has raised him up from
the dead. Ye see then with what feruencie of spirit Paul is led in this matter
which he goes about to establish and maintain against the whole kingdom of
hell, the power and wisdom of the world, and against the Devil and his
apostles.

Verse. 2. And all the Brethern with me.
This makes much for the stopping of the mouths of these false Apostles. For all his arguments tend to the aduauncing and magnifying of his ministry, and
contrariwise to the discrediting of theirs. As if he should thus say: Although
it be enough, yt I through a divine calling am sent as an Apostle by Jesus
Christ and God the father, which has raised him up from the dead, yet lest I
should be alone, I add over and besides (which is more then needs) all the
brethern which are not Apostles, but fellow soldiers: they write this Epistle
as well as I, and bear witness with me that my doctrine is true and godly.
Wherefore we be sure that Christ is present with us, and that he teaches and
speaks in the midst of us and in our church. As for the false Apostles, if
they be any thing, they be but sent either of me^ or by men: but I am sent of
God the Father, and of Jesus Christ, who is our life and resurrection. John.
11.25.
My other brethern are sent from God, howbeit by man, that is to wit, by me.
Therefore lest they might say, Why he says and all the brethern.
that I only set my self proudly against them, I have my brethern with me all
of one mind, as faithful witnesses: which think, write, and teach the self
same thing that I do. Thus much concerning the title of the writer. Now to the
parties to whom he writes.

Verse. 1. Unto the Churches of Galatia.
Paul had preached the gospel through out all Galatia: and albeit he had not
wholly converted it unto Christ, yet he had many Churches in it, into the which
the false Apostles, Satan's ministers had crept. So likewise at this day the
fantastical Anabaptists come not to those places where the adversaries of the
gospel bear rule: but where Christians and good men are which love the gospel.
These fantastical spirits fly the cross, and therefore betake them selves to
such places where they may live at ease.
With such they wind in themselves even in the dominions of tyrans and
persecuters of the gospel; where they creeping into houses under crafty
pretense, pour out their poison to the subversion of many. But why go they
not rather into the cities, countries and dominions of the papists, and there
profess and maintain their doctrine in the presence of wicked Princes,
Bishops and Doctors in the universities, as we by Gods help and assistance
have done? These tender Martyrs will adventure no peril, but they resort
thither where ye gospel has an harborow already, where they may live without
danger in great peace and quietness. So the false Apostles would not endau^ger
themselves to come to Jerusalem to Caiphas, or to Rome to the Emperor, or to
other places where no man had preached before, as Paul and the other Apostles
did: but they came into Galatia, which was won unto Christ already by the
labor and travel of Paul, and into Asia, Corinth, and such other places,
where good me^ were and professed ye name of Christ, persecuting no man, but
suffering al things quietly. There might ye enemies of christ's cross live in
great security, and without any persecution.

And here we may learn that it is the lot of all godly teachers, The condition
of all godly preachers.
that besides the persecution which they suffer of the wicked and unthankful
world, and the great travel which they sustain in planting of churches, they
are compelled to suffer that thing which they of long time before had purely
taught, to be quickly overthrown of fantastical spirits, who afterward
reign and rule over them. This greueth godly ministers more then any
persecution of Tyrants. Therefore let him not be a minister of the gospel that
is not content to be thus despised, or is loath to bear this reproach: or if he
be, let him give over his charge to an other. The comfort of faithful teachers
laboring under the cross.
We also at this day find the same thing true by experience. We be extremely
despised and vexed outwardly by Tyraunts, inwardly by those whom we have
restored to liberty by the gospel, 1. Cor. 2, 9.
and also by false brethern. But this is our comfort and glory, that being
called of God, we have a promise of everlasting life, and look for that
reward, which eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered into the
heart of man. The constant faith of Luther
For when the great shepard Christ shall appear, 1 Pet. 5, 4.
we shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory: who here also in this world
will not suffer us to perish for hunger.

Jerome moves here a great question, why Paul calls those churches, which
were no churches. Is it (says he) because Paul writes to the Galathians that
were perverted and turned back from Christ and from grace, unto Moises and the
law? Hereunto I answer, that Paul calls them the Churches of Galatia, by
putting a part for the whole, which is a common thing in the scriptures. For
writing in like manner to the Corinthians, he reioyseth on their behalf, that
the grace of God was given them in Christ, namely, that they were made rich
through him in all utterance and knowledge: and yet many of the^ were misled by
false Apostles, and believed not the resurrection of the dead.

Allbeit then that the Galathians were fallen away from the doctrine of Paul,
yet did baptism, the word, and the name of Christ remain among them. There
were also some good men that were not revolted, which had a good opinion of the
word and sacraments, and used them rightly. Moreover these things could not be
defiled through them that were revolted. For baptism, the gospel, and other
things are not therefore made unholy because many are polluted and unholy, The
word and sacraments are not polluted by our ungodliness.
and have an evil opinion of them: but they abide holy, and the same that they
were, whether they be among the godly or the ungodly: by whom they can neither
be polluted, nor made holy. By our good or evil conversation, by our good or
evil life and manners they be polluted or made holy in the sight of the
heathen, but not before God. Wherefore wheresoever the substance of the word and
sacraments remains, there is the holy Church, although Antichrist there
reign, who (as the scripture witnesses, (sits not in a stable of Feends,
or in a Swinestie, The seat of Antichrist.
or in a company of Infidels, but in the highest and holiest place of all,
namely in ye temple of God. Wherefore although spiritual Tyraunts reign, yet
there must be a temple of God, 2. These. 2.4.
and the same must be preserved under them. Therefore I answer briefly to
this question: that the Church is universal throughout the whole world, The
church dispersed through the world.
wheresoever the Gospel of God and the sacraments be. The Jews, the Turcks,
and other fantastical spirits are not the church because they fight against
these things, and do deny them. Now follows the greeting of Paul.

Verse. 3. Grace be with you and peace from God the father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ.
I hope ye are not ignorant what grace and peace means, Grace. Peace.
seeing that these terms are common in Paul, and now not obscure or
unknown. But forasmuch as we take in hand to expound this Epistle (which we
do, not because it is needful, or for any hardness that is in it, but that
our consciences may be confirmed against heresies yet to come), let it not be
tedious unto you if we repeat these things again, that elsewhere and at other
times we teach, preach, singe, and set out by writing. For if we neglect the
article of justification, The article of of justification is continually to be
beaten into our heds.
we lose altogether. Therefore most necessary it is chiefly and above all
things, that we teach and repete this article continually: Like as Moses says
of his law: for it can not be beaten into our ears enough or to much. Yea
though we learn it and understand it well, yet is there none that takes hold
of it perfectly, or believes it with his whole heart: so frail a thing is our
flesh and disobedient to the spirit.

This greeting of the Apostle is strange unto the world, The greeting of the
Apostle strange and unheard of to the world.
and was never heard of before the preaching of the Gospel. And these two
words Grace and Peace comprehend in them whatsoever belongs to Christianity.
Grace releaseth sin, and peace makes the conscience quiet. The two Feends
that torment us, are sin and conscience. Sin. Conscience.
But Christ has vanquished these two Monsters and trodden them under foot both
in this world and in the world to come. This the world does not know, and
therefore it can teach no certainty of the ouercomming of sin, conscience,
and death. The doctrine of Christians.
Only Christians have this kind of doctrine, and are exercised and armed with
it, to get victory against sin, despair, and everlasting death. And it is a
kind of doctrine neither proceeding of free will, nor invented by the reason or
wisdom of of man, Grace, Peace.
but given from above. Moreover these two words Grace and Peace do contain in
them the whole sum of Christianity. Grace contains the remission of
sins, peace a quiet and joyful conscience. But peace of conscience can never
be had, unless sin be first forgiven. But it is not forgeuen for the
fulfilling of the law: For no man is able to satisfy the law: but the law does
rather show sin, accuse and terrify the conscience, declare the wrath of
God, and drive to desperation. Much less is sin taken away by the works and
inventions of men, as wicked worshippings, straung religious, vows and
pilgrimages. Finally there is no work that can take away sin: but sin is
rather increased by works. For the Iusticiaries and Meritmongers, the more they
sweat and labor to bring them selves out of sin, ye deeper they are plunged
therein. Sin is not released, but by grace alone.
For there is no means to take away sin but grace alone. Therefore Paul in
all the greetings of his epistles sets grace and peace against sin and an
evil conscience. This thing must be diligently marked. The words are easy: but
in tentation it is ye hardest thing that can be, to be certainly persuaded in
our hearts that by grace alone, without any other means either in heaven or
earth, we have remission of sins and peace with God.

The world understands not this doctrine, and therefore it neither will nor
can abide it, The world knovveth not the doctrine of true godliness.
but condemns it as heretical and wicked. It braggeth of free will, of the
light of reason, and the soundnes of the powers and qualities of nature, and of
good works, as means whereby it could deserve and attain grace and peace,
that is to say, forgeuenes of sins and a quiet conscience. But it is
impossible that the conscience should be quiet and joyful, Only by grace is
the conscience quieted.
unless it have peace through grace, that is to say, through the forgiveness of
sins promised in Christ. Many have carefully labored by finding out diverse
and sundry religions, orders and exercises for this purpose, to attain peace
and quietness of conscience: but by so doing they have plunged them selves in
more and greater miseries: for all such devises are but means to increase
doubtfulnes and despair. Therefore there shall be no rest to my bones or thine,
unless we hear the word of grace and cleave unto it steadfastly and
faithfully: Then shall our conscience undoubtedly find grace and peace.

What peace Paul wishes to Christians.
The Apostle does fittly distinguish this grace and peace from al other kinds of
grace and peace whatsoever. He wishes to the Galathians Grace and Peace, not
from the Emperor, or Kings and Princes: for these do commonly persecute the
Godly and rise up against the Lord and Christ his anointed. Psalm. 2.2.
Psalm. 2. nor from the world (for in the world, says Christ, ye shall have
trouble): John. 10.23
but from God our father etc. which is as much to say, as he wishes unto them
a heavenly peace. So Christ says: My peace I leave unto you: my peace I give
you: John. 14.27.
not as the world gives it, do I give it unto you. The peace of the world
grants nothing but the peace of our goods and bodies. Peace of the world.
So the Grace or favor of the world gives us leave to enjoy our goods, and
casts us not out of our possessions. But in affliction and in the hour of
death, The grace of te world.
the grace and favor of the world can not help us, they can not deliver us
from affliction, despair and death. But when the Grace and Peace of God are in
the heart, then is man strong, so that he can neither be cast down with
adversity, nor puffed up with prosperity, but walks on plainly and keeps
the hie way. For he takes heart and courage in the victory of Christ's death,
and the confidence thereof begins to reign in his conscience over sin and
death, because through him he has assured forgeuenes of his sins: which
after he has once obtained, his conscience is at rest, and by the word of
Grace is comforted. So then a man being comforted and hartened by the Grace of
God, that is, by forgeuenes of sins and by this peace of conscience, is able
valiantly to bear and overcome all troubles, yea even death it self. This
Peace of God is not given to the world, because the world never longs after
it, nor understands it, but to them that believe: and this comes to pass
by no other mean, then by the only Grace of God.

A rule to be observed, that men ought to abstain from the curious searching
of Gods majesty.
But why does the Apostle join in this salutation: Why this is added and from
our Lord Jesus Christ.
And from our Lord Jesus Christ? Was it not enough to say: And from God our
father? why then does he couple Jesus Christ with the father? Ye have often
times heard of us, how it is a rule and principle in the scriptures diligently
to be marked, that we must abstain from the curious searching of Gods
majesty, which is intolerable to man's body, and much more to his mind. No man
(says the scripture) shall see me and live. Exodus 23, ^0
The Pope, the Turks, the Jews, That Meritemongers or such as seek to
justify the^ selves, by the^ selves shut out Christ, and will only have to
do with God.
and all such as trust in their own merits, regard not this rule: and
therefore removing Christ the Mediator out of their sight, they speak only
of God, and before him only they pray, and do all that they do.

As for example, the Monk imagines thus: These works which I do, please God.
God will regard these my vows, and for them will save me. The Turk says: If
I keep the things that are commanded in the Alcoran, The Alcoran is a book
containing the Turks religion, received from Mahomet a false prophet that was
among them.
God will accept me, and give me everlasting life. The Jew thinks thus: If
I keep those things which the law commands, I shall find God merciful to
me, and so shall I be saved. So also a sort of fond heads at this day,
bragging of the spirit, of revelations, of visions, and such other monstrous
matters I wot not what, do walk in wonders above their reaches. These new
Monks have invented a new cross and new works, and they dream that by doing
them, they please God. To be brief, as many as know not the Article of
Justification, take away Christ the mercy seat, and will needs comprehend God
in his majesty by the judgment of reason, and pacify him with their works.

But true Christian divinity (as I give you often warning) sets not God
forth unto us in his majesty, as Moises and other doctrines do. It commands
us not to search out the nature of God: but to know his will set out to us in
Christ, The will of God is to be sought in Christ.
whom he would have to take our flesh upon him, to be borne and to die for our
sins, and that this should be preached among all nations. For seeing the
world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the
foolishnes of preaching to save the^ that believe. 1. Cor. 1.21.
1. Cor. 1. Wherefore, when thy conscience stands in the conflict, wrestling
against the law, sin, and death in the presence of God, there is nothing more
dangerous then to wander with curious speculatio^s in heaven, and there to
search out God in his incomprehensible power, wisdom and majesty, how he
created the world and how he governs it. If thou seek thus to comprehend
God, and would pacify him without Christ the Mediator, making thy works a
mean between him and thy self, it can not be but that thou must fall as
Lucifer did, The fall of Lucifer.

What God is in his own nature.


and in horrible despair lose God and altogether. For as God is in his own
nature unmeasurable, incomprehensible, and infinite, so is he to man's nature
intolerable.

Wherefore, if thou would be in safety and out of peril of conscience and
salvation, bridle this climing and presumptuous spirit, and so seek God as
Paul teaches thee. 1. Cor. 1.13.
1. Cor. 1. We (says he) preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block unto the
Jews, and foolishnes unto the Grecians: but unto the^ which are called, both
of the Jews and Grecians, we preach Christ the power of God and the
wisdoms of God. Therefore begin thou there where Christ began, namely in the
womb of the virgin, Where the vvil of God is to be sought.
in the maunger, and at his mothers breasts. etc. For to this end he came
down, was borne, was conversant among men, suffered, was crucified and died,
that by all means he might set forth him self plainly before our eyes, and
fasten the eyes of our hearts upon him self, that he thereby might keep us
from climing up into heaven, and from the curious searching of the divine
majesty.

Whenever thou have to do therefore in the matter of justification, Job.
36.23, 24.25 Esaias. 2, 10. Proverb. 25, 27. 2 Esdras. 12, 4. 2 Esdras. 13.52,
Eccles. 3, 22. Romans 12, 3.
and disputest with thy self how God is to be found that justifies and
accepts sinners, where and in what sort he is to be sought, then know thou
that there is no other God besides this man Christ Jesus. Embrace him and
cleave to him with all thy heart, setting aside all curious speculations of the
divine majesty: For he that is a searcher of Gods majesty shall be overwhelmed
of his glory, I know by experience what I say. But these vain spirits which
so deal with God, that they exclude the Mediator, believe me not. Christ him
self says: Io. 14, 6.
I am the way, the truth and the life: No man comes to the father but by me.
Therefore besides this way Christ, Christ the way, the truth and the life
thou shall find no way to the father, but wandering: no verity, but
hypocrisy and lying: no life, but eternal death. Wherefore mark this well in
the matter of justification, that when any of us all shall have to wrestle with
the law, sin, death and all other evils, we must look upon no other God but
only this God incarnate and clothed with man's nature.

But out of the matter of justification, when thou must dispute with Jews,
Turks, Papists, Heretics etc. concerning the power, wisdom, and majesty of
God, then employ all thy wit and industry to that end, and be as profound
and as subtle a disputer as thou can: for then thou art in an other vein.
But in the case of conscience, The afflicted conscience wrestling with the
judgment of God by faith only in Christ is comforted. Mat. 11, 28.
of righteousness and life (which I wish here diligently to be marked) against
the law, sin, death, and the devil, or in the matter of satisfaction, of
remission of sins, of reconciliation, and of everlasting life, thou must
withdraw thy mind wholly from all cogitations and searching of the majesty of
God, and look only upon this man Jesus Christ, who sets himself forth
unto us to be a Mediator, and says: Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden and I will refreshe you. Thus doing thou shall perceive the love,
goodness and sweetenes of God: thou shall see his wisdom, power and majesty
sweetened and tempered to thy capacity: yea and thou shall find in this
mirror and pleasant contemplation, all things according to that saying of
Paul to the Colossians, Chap. 2. Verse. 3. Coloss. 2, 3.2, 9.
In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Also in the
second chapter. Verse. 9. For in him dwells the fulness of the Godhead
bodily. The world is ignorant of this, and therefore it searches out the will
of God, setting aside the promise in Christ, Mat. 11.27. Io. 10.15.
to his great destruction. For no man knovveth the father but the son, and he
to whom the son will reveal him.

And this is the cause why Paul is wont so often to couple Jesus Christ with
God the father, even to teach us what true Christian religion is: which
begins not at the highest as other religions do, but at the lowest. Genes.
28.12.
It will have us to clime up by Jacobs ladder, whereupon God him self leans,
whose feet touch the very earth, hard by the head of Jacob. Wherefore when so
ever thou art occupied in the matter of thy salvation, setting aside all
curious speculatio^s of Gods unsearchable majesty, all cogitations of works,
of traditions, of philosophy, yea and of Gods law too, Christian divinity
begins at Christ lying in the lap of the virgin Mary.
run straight to the maunger and embrace this infant, and the virgins little
babe in thine arms, and behold him as he was borne, sucking, growing up,
conversant among men, teaching, dying, rising again, ascending up above all
the heavens and having power above all things. By this means thou may shake
of all terrors and errors, like as the sun drives away the clouds. And
this sight and contemplation will keep thee in the right way, that thou may
follow whether Christ is gonne. Therefore Paul in wishing Grace and Peace, not
only from God the father, but also from Jesus Christ, teaches, first that we
should abstain from the curious searching of the divine majesty (for God no
man knows), and to hear Christ, Io. 1.18.
who is in the bosom of the father, and utters to us his will, who also is
appointed of the father to be a teacher, to the end that every one of us should
hear him.

Christ is God by nature.
The other thing that Paul teaches here, is a confirmation of our Faith,
Christ God.
That Christ is very God. And such like sentences as this is concerning the
Godhead of Christ, are to be gathered together and marked diligently, The
devil an adversary to faith.
not only against the Arians and other heretics which either have been or
shall be hereafter, but also for the confirmation of our faith. For Satan will
not fail to impugn in us all the articles of our Faith, ere we die. He is a
most deadly enemy to Faith, because he knows, 1. John. 5.4.
that it is the victory which ouercometh the world. Wherefore it stands us in
hand to labor that our Faith may be certain, and may increase and be
strengthened by diligent and continual exercise of the word and fervent
prayer, that we may be able to withstand Satan.

Now that Christ is very God, hereby it is evidently declared, The power of
the father and of Christ equal.
in that Paul attributes the same things equally unto him, which he does unto
the father, namely divine power, as the giving of grace, the forgeuenes of
sins, peace of conscience, life, victory over sin, death, the devil and
hell. This were by no means lawful for him to do, nay it were sacrilege thus
to do, except he were very God, according to that saying: I will not give my
glory unto any other. Esaias. 42.8.
Again, No man gives that to others, which he him self has not. But seeing
Christ gives Grace, Peace, and the holy Ghost, delivers from the power of
the devil, from sin and death: it is certain that he has an infinite and
divine power equal in all points to the power of the father.

And in that Christ gives Grace and Peace, he gives it not as the Apostles
gave and brought the same unto men by preaching of the gospel: but he gives
it as the author and creator. The father creates and gives life, Grace,
Peace, and all other good things. The self same things also the son creates
and gives. Now, to give Grace, Peace, How Christ gives grace and peace.
everlasting life, to forgive sins, to make righteous, to quicken, to deliver
from death and the devil, are not the works of any creature, but of the
divine Majesty alone. The Angels can neither create nor give these things.
Therefore these works pertain only to the glory of the sovereign Majesty,
the maker of all things. The works of Christ are divine and proper to God.
And seeing Paul does attribute the self same power of creating, and giving
all these things unto Christ equally with the father, it must needs follow that
Christ is verily and naturally God.

Many such arguments are in John, where it is proved and concluded by the
works which are attributed to the son as well as to the father, that the
divinity of the father and of the son is all one. One and the self same
Godhead of the father and of the son.
Therefore the gifts which we receive of the father, and which we receive of
the son are all one. For else Paul would have spoken otherwise, after this
manner: Grace from God the father, and Peace from our Lord Jesus Christ. But in
knitting them both together, he attributes them equally, as well to the son
as to the father. I do therefore so diligently admonish you of this thing,
because it is dangerous lest among so many errors, and in so great variety
and confusion of sects, there might step up some Arrians, Eunomians,
Macedonians, and such other heretics, that might do harm to the Churches
with their subteltie.

Arrians.
In deed the Arrians were sharp and subtle fellows. They granted that
Christ has two natures, and that he is called very God of very God, howbeit in
name only. Christ (said they) is a most noble and perfect creature above the
Angels, whereby God afterward created heaven and earth, Mahomet.
and all other things. So Mahomet also speaks honorably of Christ. But all this is nothing else but goodly imaginations and words pleasant and plausible to
man's reason, whereby the fantastical spirits do deceive men except they take
good head. But Paul speaks otherwise of Christ: Ye (says he) are rooted and
stablished in this belief, namely that Christ is not only a perfect creature,
but very God, who does the self same things that God the father does. He has
the divine works, The works of Christ.
not of a creature, but of the creator, because he gives Grace and Peace: and
to give them, is to condemn sin, to vanquish death, and to tread the devil
under foot. These things no Angel can give: but seeing they are attributed
unto Christ, it must needs follow, that he is very God by nature.

Verse. 4. Which gave himself for our sins.
Paul in a manner in every word handles the argument of this Epistle. He has
nothing in his mouth but christ, and therefore in every word there is a feruencie
of spirit and life. And mark how well and to the purpose he speaks. He
says not, which has received our works at our hands, nor, which has received
the sacrifices of Moises law, worshippings, religions, Masses, vows, and
pilgrimages: But has given. What? not gold nor silver, nor beasts, nor
paschall lambs, nor an angel, but him self. Which has given himself.
For what? Not for a crown, not for a kingdom, not for our holiness or
righteousness, but for our sins. These words are very thu^der claps from
heaven against all kinds of righteousness: like as is also this sentence of
John: John. 1.36.
Behold the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Therefore
we must with diligent attention mark every word of Paul, and not slenderly
consider them or lightly pass them over: for they are full of consolation, and
confirm fearful consciences exceedingly.

But how may we obtain remission of our sins? Paul answers, that the man
which is called Jesus Christ the son of God has given him self for them.
These are excellent and most comfortable words, and are promises of the old
law, that our sins are taken away by none other mean, then by the son of
God delivered unto death. With such gunnes and such artillarie must the Papacy
be destroyed, and all the all the religions of the heathen, all works, all
merits and all superstitious ceremonies. For if our sins may be taken away by
our own works, merits and satisfactions, what needed the son of God to be
given for them? But seeing he was given for them, it follows, that we can not
do them away by our own works.

Again, by this sentence it is declared, that our sins are so great, so
infinite and invincible, that it is impossible for the whole world to satisfy
for one of them: and surely the greatness of the ransom (namely Christ the
son of God, who gave himself for our sins) declares sufficiently, that we
can neither satisfy for sin, nor have dominion over it. The force and power
of sin is set forth and amplified by these words excedingly: which gave
himself for our sins. The greatness of sin is to be vveied by the greatness of
the price.
Therefore here is to be marked the infinite greatness of the price bestowed for
it, and then will it appear evidently, that the power of it is so great, that
by no means it could be put away, but that the son of God must needs be
given for it. He that considers these things well, understands that this
one word Sin, comprehends Gods everlasting wrath, and the whole kingdom of
Satan, and that it is a thing more horrible then can be expressed: which
ought to move us, and make us affraide in deed. But we are careless, yea we
make light of sin and a matter of nothing: which although it bring with it
the sting and remorse of conscience, yet notwithstanding we think it not to be
of such weight and force but that by some little work or merit we may put it
away.

This sentence therefore witnesses, that all men are servant and bondslaues
of sin, Romans 17 14.
and (as Paul says in an other place) are sold under sin. And again,
Sin a puisa^t tiraunt holding all men captives.
that sin is a most cruel and mighty tiraunt over all men: which can not be
vanquished by the power of any creatures, whether they be Angels or men, but by
the sovereign and infinite power of Jesus Christ, who has given him self for
the same.

Furthermore, this sentence sets out to the consciences of all men which are
terrified with the greatness of their sins, a singular comfort. For albeit
sin be never so invincible a tyrant: yet notwithstanding forasmuch as Christ
has overcome it through his death, it can not hurt the^ that believe in him.
Moreover, if we arm our selves with this belief, and cleave with all our
hearts unto this man Jesus Christ, The judgment of the Godly.
then is light opened and a sound judgment given unto us, so as we may most
certainly and freely judge of all kinds of life. For when we hear that sin
is such an invincible Tyrant, thus incontinent by a a necessary consequence we
infer: Then what do the Papists, Monks, Nuns, Priests, Mahometists,
Anabaptists, and al such as trust in their works, which will abolish and
overcome sin by their own traditions, works preparatiue, satisfactions.
etc? Here forthwith we judge all those sects to be wicked and pernicious:
whereby the glory of God and of Christ is not only defaced, but also utterly
taken away, and our own advanced and established,

But wey diligently every word of Paul, and specially mark well this pronoune
Our. A great vehemency alvvayes to be marked in pronovvnes.
For the effect of altogether consists in the well applying of the pronownes,
which we find very often in ye scriptures. Wherein also there is ever some
vehemency and power. Thou will easily say and believe that Christ the son of
God was given for the sins of Peter, of Paul, and of other Saints, whom we
account to have been worthy of this grace. But it is a very hard thing that
thou which iudgest thy self unworthy of this grace, should from thy heart
say and believe, that Christ was given for thine invincible, infinite, and
horrible sins. Therefore in general and without the pronowne it is an easy
matter to magnify and amplify the benefit of Christ, namely that Christ was
given for sins: but for other men's sins which are worthy. But when it
comes to the putting too of this pronowne Our, there our weak nature and
reason starteth back, and dare not come near unto God, nor promise to her
self that so great a treasure should be freely given unto her: and therefore
she will not have to do with God except first she be pure and without sin.
Wherefore although she read or hear this sentence: which gave himself for our
sins, or such like, yet does she not apply this pronowne Our to her self,
but unto others which are worthy and holy. And as for her self, she will tarry
till she be made worthy by her own works?

Man's reason does extenuate and lessen sin.
This then is nothing else, but that man's reason feign would that sin were of
no greater force and power, the^ she her self dreameth it to be. Hereof it
comes that the hypocrites being ignorant of Christ, although they feel the
remorse of sin, do think notwithstanding that they shall be able easily to put
it away by their good works and merits, The hypocrites would that these words
were rather spoken to show the humility of Paul then the greatness of our
sins: for that they can not hear.
and secretly in their hearts they wish that these words: which gave himself
for our sins, were but as words spoken in humility, and would have their
sins not to be true and very sins in deed, but light and small matters. To
be short, man's reason would feign bring and present unto God a fained and a
counterfeit sinner, which is nothing afraid, nor has any feeling of sin. It
would bring him that is whole, and not him that has need of a Phisician, and
when it feels no sin, then would it believe that Christ was given for our
sins.

The whole world is thus affected, and specially they that would be counted
more holy and religious then others, as Monks, The picture of the Iusticiaries
and meritmongers.
and all Iusticiaries. These confess with their mouth that they are sinners,
and they confess also that they commit sins daily, howbeit not so great and
many, but that they are able to put them away by their own works: yea and
besides all this, they will bring their righteousness and deserts to Christ's
judgment seat, and demand the recompense of eternal life for them at the
judges hand. In the mean while notwithstanding, (as they pretend great
humility) because they will not vaunt themselves to be utterly void of sin,
they feign certain sins, that for the forgeuenes thereof, they may with great
devotion pray with the publican, Luke. 1^.11.
God be merciful unto me a sinner. Unto them these words of S. Paul: for our
sins, seem to be but light and trifeling: Therefore they neither understand
them, nor in temptation when they feel sin in deed, can they take any
comfort of them, but they are compelled flatly to despair.

This is then the chief knowledge and true wisdom of Christians, The chief
wisdoms of Christians.
to count these words of Paul, that Christ was delivered to death, not for
our righteousness or holiness, but for our sins (which are very sins in deed,
great, many, yea infinite and invincible) to be most true, effectual, and of
great importau^ce. Therefore think them not to be small, and such as may be done
away by thine own works: neither yet despair thou for the greatness of them if
thou feel thy self oppressed therewith either in life or death: but learn
here of Paul to believe ye Christ was given, not for fained or counterfeit
sins, nor yet for small sins, but for great and huge sins: not for one or
two, but for all: not for vanquished sins (for no man, no nor Angel is able
to overcome the least sin that is) but for invincible sins. And except thou
be found in the number of those that say: Our sins, that is, which have this
doctrine of faith, and teach, hear, learn, love, and believe the same, there is
no salvation for thee.

Labor therefore diligently that, not only out of the time of tentation, but
also in the danger and conflict of death, when thy conscience is thoroughly
afraid with the remembrance of thy sins past, and the Devil assaileth thee
with great violence, going about to ouerwhelme thee with heaps, floudes and
whole seas of sins, to terrify thee, to draw thee from Christ, and to drive
thee to despair: that then I say, thou may be able to say with sure
confidence: Christ ye son of god was given, not for ye righteous and holy,
but for ye unrighteous and sinners. If I were righteous and had no sin, I
should have no need of Christ to be my reconciler. Why then, O thou peuish
holy Satan, will thou make me to be holy and to seek righteousness in my self,
when in very deed I have nothing in me but sins, and most grievous sins?
not fained or trifeling sins, Sins against the first table.
but such as are against the first table: to wit, great infidelity, douting,
despair, contempt of God, hatred, ignorance, and blaspheming of God,
unthankfulness, abusing of Gods name, neglecting, lothing and despising the word
of god, and such like: And moreover these carnal sins against the second
Table: as not to yield honor to my parents, not to obey the magistrates, to
covet an other man's goods, his wife, and such like: howbeit that these be light
faults in respect of those former sins. And admit that I have not committed
murder, whoredom, theft, and such other sins against the second table in
fact: yet I have committed them in heart, and therefore I am a transgressour of
al Gods commandments, and the multitude of my sins is so great, that they
ca^ not be numbered: For I have sinned above the number of the sands of the sea.

Satan is vvo^t to change our righteousness into sins.
Besides this, satan is such a cunning iuggler, yt he can make of my
righteousness and good works, great sins. For So Much then as my sins are so
weighty, so infinite, so horrible and invincible, and that my righteousness
does nothing further me, but rather hinder me before God: therefore Christ the
son of God was given to death for them, to put them away, and to save me and
all men which believe. Herein then consists the effect of eternal salvation,
namely in taking these words to be effectual, true, and of great importance.
I say not this for naught, for I have oftentimes proved by experience, and I
daily find what an hard matter it is to believe (especially in the conflict of
conscience) that Christ was given, not for the holy, righteous, worthy, and
such as were his friends, but for wicked sinners, unworthy, and his enemies,
which have deserved Gods wrath and everlasting death.

Let us therefore arm our hearts with these and such like sentences of ye holy
scipture, yt we may be able to answer ye devil (accusing us and saying: thou
art a sinner and therefore thou art damned) in this sort. Because thou say I
am a sinner, therefore will I be righteous and saved. Nay (says the devil) thou
shall be damned. No (say I) for I fly unto Christ, who has given himself for
my sins. How we must answer the devil, reasoning with us.
Therefore satan thou shall nothing preuail against me in yt thou ghost about to
terrify me in setting forth ye greatness of my sins, and so to bring me into
heaviness, distrust, despair, hatred, contempt and blaspheming of God: yea
rather by this, that thou say I am a sinner, thou geuest me armor and weapon
against thy self, that with thine own sword I may cut thy throat, and tread
the under my feet: for Christ died for sinners. Moreover thou thy self
preachest unto me the glory of God. Io. 5.24. Io. 11.25. 1 Io. 4.9.
For thou put me in mind of Gods fatherly love toward me wretched and
damned sinner, who so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him might not perish but have everlasting life.
Also as often as thou obiectest that I am a sinner, so often thou call to my
remembrance the benefit of Christ my redemer, upon whose shoulders, and not
upon mine, lie all my sins: For the Lord has laid all our iniquity upon
him. Esaias. 53.6.
Again: For the transgression of his people was he smitten. Esaias. 53.8.
Wherefore when thou obiectest that I am a sinner, thou do not terrify me,
but comfort me above measure.

Who so knows this one point of cunning well, shall easily avoid all the
engines and snares of the Devil, who by putting man in mind of his sins,
drives him to despair and destroieth him, unless he wtstand him with this
cunning, and with this heavenly wisdom: whereby only sin, death and the
Devil are overcome. But the man that puts not away the remembrance of his
sin, but keeps it still and tormenteth him self with his own cogitations,
thinking either to help him self by his own strength and policy, or to tarry
the time till his conscience may be quieted, falls into Satan's snares and
miserably afflicts him self, and at length is overcome with the continuance
of the tentation: For the Devil will never cease to accuse his conscience.

Against this tentation we must use the words of Paul, The proper and true
definition of Christ.
in the which he gives a very good and a true definition of Christ in this
manner: Christ is the son of God and of the virgin, delivered and put to
death for our sins. Here if the Devil aledge any other definition of Christ,
say thou: The definition and the thing defined are false: therefore I will not
receive this definition. I speak not this without cause: For I know what
moves me to be so earnest that we should learn to define Christ out of the
words of Paul. For in deed Christ is no cruel exactor, but a forgeuer of the
sins of the whole world. Wherefore if thou be a sinner (as in deed we are
all) set not Christ down upon the reign bow as a judge (for so shall thou be
terrified and despair of his mercy): but take hold of his true definition,
namely that Christ ye son of God and of the virgin, is a person, not that
terrifieth, not that afflicts, not that condemns us of sin, not that
demands an account of us for our life evil passed: but gave him self for
our sins, Galat. 1.4. Ebr. 10.10. Colos. 2.14.
and with one oblation has put away the sins of the whole world, has nailed
them to the cross, and put them clean out by him self.

Let every man learn to apply this pronovvne our to him self.
Learn this definition diligently, and especially so exercise this pronoune
our, that this one syllable being believed, may swallow up all thy sins: that
is to say, yt thou may know assuredly that Christ has taken away the sins,
not of certain men only, but also of thee, yea and of ye whole world. The^ let
not thy sins be sins only, but even thy own sins: That is to wit,
believe thou that Christ was not only given for other men's sins, but also
for thine. Hold this fast and suffer not thy self by any means to be drawn
away from this most sweet definition of Christ, The true picture of Christ.
which rejoices eue^ the very angels in heaven: that is to say, that Christ
according to his proper and true definition, is no Moses, no lawgeuer, no
tyrant, but a Mediator for sins, a free geuer of grace, righteousness and
life: who gave him self, not for our merits, holiness, righteousness and godly
life, but for our sins. In deed Christ is an enterpreter of the law, but
that is not his proper and principal office.

These things, as touching the words, we know well enough and ca^ talk of them:
but in practice and in the conflict, when the devil goes about to deface
Christ, and to pluck the word of grace out of our hearts, we find that we do
not yet know them well and as we should do. He that at that time could define
Christ truly, and could magnify him and behold him as his most sweet Savior
and high Priest, and not as a strait Judge, this man had overcome all evils,
and were already in ye kingdom of heaven. But this to do in the conflict, is
of all things the most hardest. I speak this by experience: for I know the
Devils subtilties, who at that time not only goes about to fear us with the
terror of the law, yea and also of a little mote makes many beams, that is
to say, of that which is no sin he makes a very hell (for he is marvelous
crafty both in aggravating sin, and in puffing up the conscience even in
good works): but also is wont to fear us with the very person of the
Mediator: into the which he transformeth him self, and laying before us some
place of the scripture or some saying of Christ, suddenly he strikes our
hearts, and shows him self unto us in such sort as if he were Christ in
deed, leaving us sticking so fast in that cogitation, yt our conscience would
swear it were the same Christ whose saying he alleged. Moreover such is the
subtilty of this enemy, that he will not set before us Christ entierly and
wholly, but a piece of Christ only, What snares Satan lays for us.
namely that he is the soon of God, and man borne of the virgin: and by and by
he patcheth thereto some other thing: that is to say, some saying of Christ
wherewith he terrifieth the impenitent sinners, such as that is in the 13. of
Luke: Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish: And so corrupting the
true definition of Christ with his poison, he brings to pass that albeit we
believe him to be Christ the true Mediator, yet in very deed our troubled
conscience feels and judges him to be a tiraunt and a judge. Thus we being
deceived by Satan, do easily lose that sweet sight of our high Priest and
savior Christ: which being once lost, we shun him no less then the devil
him self.

And this is the cause why I do so earnestly call upon you, to learn the true
and proper definition of Christ out of these words of Paul: which gave him
self for our sins, This sentence is diligently to be urged: which gave him
self for us.
If he gave him self to death for our sins, then undoubtedly he is no
tiraunt or judge, which will condemn us for our sins: He is no caster down
of the afflicted, but a raiser up of those that are fallen, a merciful releuer
and comforter of ye heavy and broken hearted. Else should Paul lie in saying,
which gave him self for our sins. If I define Christ thus, I define him
rightly, and take hold of the true Christ and possess him in deed. Also I
let pass the curious speculations touching the divine majesty, and I stay
my self in the humanity of Christ, and so I learn truly to know the will of
God. Here is then no fear, but altogether sweetness, joy, peace of conscience
and such like. And herewtall a light also is opened, which shows me the true
knowledge of God, of my self, of all creatures, and of all the iniquity of
the Devils kingdom. We teach no new thing, but we repeat and establish old
things, which the apostles and all godly teachers have taught before us. And
would to God we could so teach and establish them, that we might not only have
them in our mouth, but also well grounded in the bottom of our heart, and
especially that we might be able to use them in the agony and conflicte of
death.

Verse. 4. That he might deliver us from this present evil world.
In these words also Paul handles yet more largely the argument of this
Epistle. He calls this whole world, which has been, Why Paul does call
this world present and evil.
is and shall be, the present world, to put a difference betwixt this, and
that everlasting world which is to come. Moreover he calls it an evil world,
because that whatsoever is in this world, is subject to the malice of the Devil
reigning over the whole world. Io. 12.31.
For this cause the world is said to be the kingdom of the Devil. For there
is nothing else in this world, but ignorance, contenpt, blasphemy, and hatred
of God. Also disobedience against all the words and works of God. In and under
this kingdom of the world are we.

Here again you see that no man is able by his own works or his own
strength to put away sin, because this present world is evil, and as S. John
says, 1. John. 5.19.
is set upon mischief. As many therefore, as are in the world, are the bond
slaves of the devil, constrained to serve him, and to do all things at his
pleasure. What auailed it then to set up so many orders of religions for the
putting away of sins: to devise so many great and exceeding painful works,
to wear heary coats, to beat the body with whips till the blood followed, to
go on pilgrimage to S. James in harnes and such other like? Be it so that thou
do all these things, yet nevertheless does this determinate sentence remain
still, That thou art in this present euel world, and not in the kingdom of
Christ. And if thou be not in the kingdom of Christ, it is certain that thou
do belong unto the kingdom of Satan which is this evil world. Therefore all
gifts either of the body or of the mind which thou possessest, That the
ungodly with al their gifts do serve the Devil.
as wisdom, righteousness, holiness, eloquence, power, beauty, riches, are but
the slavish instruments of the hellish tyranny, and with all these thou art
compelled to serve the devil, and to promote and enlarge his kingdom.

First with thy wisdom thou do darken the wisdom and knowledge of Christ,
and by thy wicked doctrine leadest men out of the way, so that they can not
come to the grace and knowledge of Christ. Thou set out and praisest thine
own righteousness and holiness: but the righteousness of Christ, They that know
not Christ, the more wise and righteous they are, the more do they hate and
persecute the gospel.
by which only we are justified and quickened, thou do detest and condemn
as wicked and deuillish. To be short by thy power thou destroyest the kingdom
of Christ, and do abuse the same to root out the gospel, to persecute and
kill the ministers of Christ, and so many as hear them. Wherefore if thou be
without Christ, this thy wisdom is double foolishnes, thy righteousness
double sin and impiety, because it knows not the wisdom and righteousness
of Christ: moreover it darkneth, hinders, blasphemeth, and persecuteth the
same. Galat. 1.4.
Therefore Paul does rightly call it the evil or wicked world: for when it
is at the best, then is it worst. In the religious, wise, and learned men the
world is at the best, and yet in very deed in them it is double evil. I
ouerpasse those gross vices which are against the second table, as
disobedience to parents, to magistrates, addulteries, whoredoms, covetousness,
thefts, murders, and maliciousnes, wherein the world is altogether drowned,
which notwithstanding are light faults if ye compare them with the wisdom and
righteousness of the wicked, wherewith they fight against the first table. This
white Devil which forces men to commit spiritual sins, The white devil.

Spiritual vvhoredomes the most abominable.


that they may sell them for righteousness, is far more dangerous then the
black devil, which only enforces them to commit fleshly sins which the
world acknowledges to be sins.

By these words then: That he might deliver us etc. Paul shows what is the
argument of this Epistle: to wit, that we have need of grace and of Christ,
and that no other creature, Christ only delivers us out of this present evil
world.
neither man nor Angel, can deliver man out of this present evil world. For
these works are only belonging to the divine Majesty, and are not in the
power of any, either man or Angel, that Christ has put away sin, and has
delivered us from the tyranny and kingdom of the Devil, that is to say, from
this wicked world, which is an obedient servant, and a willing follower of the
Devil his God. Whatsoever that murderer and father of lies either does or
speaks, that the world, The world obayeth his prince the devil.
as his most loyal and obedient son, diligently follows and performs.
And therefore it is full of the ignorance of God, of hatred, lying, errors,
blasphemy, and of the contempt of God: Moreover of gross sins, murders,
adulteries, fornications, theftes, robberies, What sins are in the world.
and such like, because he follows his father the devil, who is a lier and a
murderer. And the more wise, righteous and holy men are without Christ, so
much the more hurt they do to the gospel. So we also that were religious men,
were double wicked in the Papacy, before God did lighten us with the knowledge
of his gospel, and yet notwithstanding under the color of true piety and
holiness.

Let these words then of Paul stand as they are in deed, true and effectual,
not colored or cou^terfait, namely: What the world is with all his virtues
and righteousness.
that this present world is evil. Let it nothing at all move thee that in a
great nombre of men there be many excellent virtues, and that there is so great
a show of holiness in hypocrites. But mark thou rather what Paul says: out
of whose words thou may boldly and freely pronounce this sentence against
the world: That the world with all his wisdom, power, and righteousness is the
kingdom of the devil, out of the which God only is able to deliver us by his
only begotten son.

Therefore let us praise God the father, and give him hearty thanks for this his
unmeasurable mercy, that has delivered us out of ye kingdom of the Devil, (in
which we were holden captives) by his own son, when it was impossible to be
done by our own strength. And let us acknowledge together with Paul, Phil.
3.8.
that all our works and righteousness (with all which we could not make the
devil to stoop one hear breadth) are but loss and dung. Also let us cast under
our feet and utterly abhor all the power of free will, all Pharasaicall
wisdom and righteousness, all religious orders, all Masses, ceremonies, vows,
fastings, Esaias. 64.6.
and such like, as a most filthy defiled cloth, and as the most dangerous
poison of the Devil. Contrariwise let us extol and magnify the glory of
Christ, who has delivered us by his death, not out of a world only, but out
of an evil world.

Paul then by this word Evil, shows that the kingdom of the world, or the
Devils kingdom is a kingdom of iniquity, ignorance, error, The kingdom of
the world.
sin, death, blasphemy, desperation and everlasting damnation. On the other
side, the kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of equity, light, The kingdom of
Christ. Colossa. 13.
grace, remission of sins, peace, consolation, saving health, and everlasting
life, into the which we are translated by our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory world without end. So be it.

Verse. 4. According to the will of God, even our father.
Here Paul so places and sets in order every word, that there is not one
of them but it fights against those false Apostles for the article of
justification. Christ (says he) has delivered us out of this most wicked
kingdom of the devil and the world. And this has he done according to the
will, good pleasure and commandment of the father. wherefore we be not
delivered by our own will or running, nor by our own wisdom or policy, but
for that God has taken mercy upon us, and has loved us: like as it is written
also in an other place. Herein has appeared the great love of God toward
us, John. 3.16. John. 4.10.
not that we have loved God, but that he has loved us, and has sent his
only begotten son to be a reconciliation for our sins: That we then are
delivered from this present evil world, it is of mere grace, and no desert of
our ours. Paul is so plentiful and so vehement in amplifying and extolling
the grace of God, that he sharpeneth and directs every word against the false
Apostles.

There is also here another cause why Paul makes mention of the Fathers will,
which also in many places of S. John's gospel is declared, where christ
co^me^ding his office, John. 8.16.
calls us back to his fathers will, that in his words and works we should not
so much look upon him, It is a great consolation to know that Christ is given
for us by the will of his father.
as upon the father. For Christ came into this world and took man's nature upon
him, yt he might be made a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, and so
reco^cile us to God the father, that he alone might declare unto us how that
this was done through the good pleasure of his father, yt we by fastening our
eyes upon Christ, might be drawn and carried straight unto the father.

For we must not think (as I have warned you before) that by the curious
searching of the Majesty of God, any thing concerning God can be known to our
salvation: but by taking hold of Christ, who according to the will of the
father, has given himself to ye death for our sins. When thou shall
acknowledge this to be the will of God through christ, then wrath cease, fear
and trembling vanishes away, neither does God appear any other then
merciful, who by his determinate counsel would that his son should die for
us, that we might live through him. This knowledge makes the heart cheerful, so
that it steadfastly believes that God is not angry, but yt he so loves us
wretched sinners, that he gave his only begotten son for us. It is not for
naught therefore, that Paul does so often repeat and beat into our minds that
Christ was given for our sins, and that by the good will of the father. On
the contrary part, the curious searching of the Majesty of God and his
dreadful judgments, namely how he destroyed the whole world with the flood,
how he destroyed Sodom, and such other things are very dangerous, for they
bring men to desperation and cast them down headlong into utter destruction,
as I have showed before.

Verse. 4. Of God and our Father.
This word OUR, must be referred to both, God is a common father both to Christ
and to us.
that the meaning may be this: of our God and of our father. Then is Christ's
father and our father all one. So in the 20. of John Christ says to Mary
Magdalen: Go to my brethern and say unto them: John. 10.17.
I ascend unto my father and your father, to my God and to your God. Therefore
God is our father and our God, but through Christ. And this is an Apostolic
manner of speech, and even Paul's own phrase, who indede speaks not with
such picked and gay words, but yet very fit and to the purpose, and full of
burning zeal.

Verse. 5. To whom be glory for ever and ever.
The Hebrews are wont in their wrytings to intermingle praise and giving of
thanks. This custom the Hebrews and Apostles themselves do observe. Which
thing may very often be seen in Paul. For the name of the Lord ought to be
had in great reverence, and never to be named without praise and thanksgeuing.
And thus to do is a certain kind of worship and service of God. So in worldly
matters, when we mention the names of kings or princes we are wont to do it
with some comely gesture, reverence and bowing of the knee: much more ought we,
when we speak of God to bow the knee of our heart, What knees we ought to
bow when we mention the name of God.
and to name the name of God with thankfulness and great reverence.

Verse. 6. Imaruell.
Ye see here how Paul handles his Galathians, which were fallen away and
seduced by the false Apostles. He does not at the first set upon them with
vehement and rigorous words, but after a very fatherly sort, not only
patiently bearing their fall, but also in a manner excusing the same.
Farthermore he shows toward them a motherly affection, and speaks them
very fair, and yet in such sort, as he reproves them notwithstanding,
howbeit with very fit words and wisely framed to the purpose. Contrariwise he
is very hot and full of indignation against those false Apostles their
seducers, upon whom he lays the whole fault. And therefore forthwt even in the
entrance of his Epistle, he bursteth out into plain thunderings and
lightenings against them. Gal. 1.8.9. Galat. 5.10.
If any man (says he) preach any other Gospel then that you have received, be
he accursed. And afterward in the fifte chapter he threateneth damnation unto
them: Who so troubles you shall bear his condemnation whatsoever he be.
Moreover he curses them with horrible words saying. I would to God they were
cut of which trouble you. These are dreadful thunderclaps against the
righteousness of the flesh, or of the law.

He might have handled the Galathians more discourteously, and have inueied
against them more roughly after this manner: Out upon this backsliding. I am
ashamed of you, your unthankfulness greueth me: I am angry with you: Or else thus
tragically have cried out against the^: O ungracious world, How Preachers
ought to behave the^ selves in bringing back such as are gone astray, and
fallen through weakness.
O wicked dealings etc. But forasmuch as his purpose is to raise up them that
were fallen, and with a fatherly care to call them back again from their
error to the purity of the gospel, he leaves those rough and sharp words,
especially in the first entrau^ce, and most gently and mildly he speaks unto
them. For seeing he went about to heal them that were wounded, it was not
meet that he should now further vex their green woo^d by laying to it a
sharp and a fretting plaster and so rather hurt the wounded then heal them.
Therefore of all the sweetest and mildest words, he could not have chosen any
one more fit then this: I marvel: whereby he signifies both that it grieved
him, and also yt it displeased him that they had fallen away from him.

And here Paul is mindful of his own rule, which he gives hereafter in the
6 chapter, where he says: Brethern if a man be fallen by occasion into any
fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one with the spirit of
meekenes, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. This example must
we also follow, that we may show our selves to bear like affection toward
such as are misled, as parents bear toward their children, that they may
perceive our fatherly and motherly affection toward them, and may see that we
seek not their destruction but their welfare. But as for the Devil and his
ministers, the authors of false doctrine and sects, against them we ought by
the example of the Apostle, to be impatient, proud, sharp and bitter,
detesting and condemning their false iugglings and deceits with as much rigor
and severity as may be. So parents when their child is hurt with the biting
of a dog, are wont to pursue the dog only, but the weeping child they
bemone and speak fair unto it, comforting it with most sweet words.

The spirit therefore that is in Paul, is a wonderful craftsmaster in
handling the afflicted consciences of such as are fallen. Contrariwise the Pope
(because he is lead with a wicked spirit) breaks out violently like a
tiraunt, and rappeth out his thundercracks and cursings against the miserable
and terrified in conscience: which thing may be seen in his Bulls, and
especially in that Bull touching the Lords supper. The Bishops also do their
duty never a whit better. The study of Bishopes to maintain their Lordeship
and soueraintie.
They teach not the Gospel, they are not careful for the saving of men's
souls, but only they seek Lordshippe and soueraintie over them, and
therefore their speakings and doings are altogether to maintain and supporte
the same. In like manner are all the vainglorious Doctors and teachers affected.

Verse. 6. That so soon.
Ye see how Paul himself complains, that to fall and to err in the faith,
is an easy matter. In respect whereof he warns the Christians in an other
place, that he which stands, 1 Cor. 10.12.
should take heed that he fall nor. And we daily prove by experience, how
hardly the mind of man conceaueth and keeps a sure and steadfast faith: What
an hard thing it is to plant a church.
Also with what great difficulty a perfect people is gotten to the Lord. A
man may labor half a score years ere he shall get some little church to be
righly and religiously ordered, and when it is so ordered, there creepith in some
mad brain, yea and a very unlearned idiote, which knows nothing but to
speak sclaunderously against the sincere preachers of the word, and he in one
moment overthrows all. Whom would not this wicked dealing move?

We by the grace of of God have gotten here at VVitenberge the form of a
Christian church. The word among us is purely taught, the sacraments are
rightly used, exhortations and prayers are made also for all estates, and to be
brief, all things go forward prousperously. This most happy course of the
gospel some mad head would soon stop, and in one moment would ouerturne
all that we in many years with great labor have builded. That which in long
time of godly preachers if builded, up of one wicked teachers is quickly
destroyed.
Even so it befell to Paul the elect vessel of Christ. He had won the
churches of Galatia with great care and travel, which the false Apostles in a
short time after his departure overthrew, as this and diverse other of his
Epistles do witness. So great is the weakness and wreatchednes of this
present life: and we so walk in the midst of Satan's snares, that one
fantastical head may destroy and utterly overthrow in a short space, all that
which many true ministers, laboring night and day, have builded up many years
before. This we learn at this day by experience, to our great grief, and yet
we can not remedy this enormitie.

The Church is a most tender thing.
Seeing then that the church is so soft and so tender a thing, and is so soon
overthrown, men must watch cherefully against these fantastical spirits: who
when they have heard a few Sermons or have read a few leaves in the holy
scriptures, He speaks of the Anabaptists.
by and by they make themselves masters and controulers of all learners and
teachers, contrary to the authority of all men. Many such also thou may
find at this day among handicrafts men, bold and malapert fellows, who having
been tried by no temptations, The right picture of fantastical spirits.
have never learned to fear God, nor have had any taste or feeling of grace.
These, for that they are void of ye holy Ghost, teach what likes them selves,
and such things as are plausible to the common people. Then the unskillful
multitude, longing to hear news, do by and by join them selves unto them:
yea and many also which think themselves well seen in the doctrine of faith,
and after a sort have been tried with temptations, are seduced by them.

Since Paul therefore by his own experience may teach us, that congregations
which are won by exceeding great labor, The churches are overthrown
while the teachers sleep. 1. Peter. 5.8. Math. 13.25.
are easily and soon overthrown, we ought with singular care to watch against
the Devil raunging every where, lest he come while we sleep, and sow tares
among the wheat: for though the shepardes be never so watchful and diligent,
yet is the Christian flock in danger of Satan. For Paul (as I said) with
singular study and diligence had planted churches in Galathia, and yet he had
scarsly set his foot (as they say) out of the door, but by and by the false
Apostles overthrew some, whose fall afterward was the cause of great ruins in
the churches of Galatia. This so sudden and so great a loss, no doubt was
more bitter unto the Apostle then death. Therefore let us watch diligently,
first every one for him self, secondly all Teachers, not only for them
selves, but also for the whole church, that we enter not into temptation.

Verse. 6. Ye are removed away.
Here once again he uses not a sharp, but a most gentle word. He says not.
I marvel that ye slide so soon back: that ye are so disobedient, light,
inconstant and unthankful: but that ye are so soon removed away. As if he
would say: Ye are altogether patients or sufferers. For ye have done no harm,
but ye have suffered and received harm. To the intent therefore that he might
call back again those backesliders, he rather accuses those that did remove,
then those that were removed, and yet very modestly he blames them also when
he complains that they were removed. As if he would say: Albeit I embrace you
with a fatherly affection, and know that ye are deceived, not by your own
fault, but by the fault of these false Apostles, yet notwithstanding I would
have wished, that ye had grown up a little more in the strength of sound
doctrine. Ye took not hold enough upon the word, ye rooted not your selves
deep enough in it, and that is the cause that at so light a blast of wind, ye
are carried away and removed. What Hierom would that Paul should mean by
calling them Galathians.
Jerome thinks that Paul meant to enterprete the name of the Galathians by
alluding to the Hebrew word Galath, which is as much to say, as, fallen or
carried away. As though he would say: Ye are right Galathians both in name and
in deed, that is to say, fallen, or removed away. Some think that we Germans
are descended of the Galathians. Neither is this divination perhaps untrue. The
disposition of the Germans.
For we Germans are not much unlike to them in nature. And I my self also am
constrained to wish to my cuntreimen more stedfastnes and constancy. For in
all things that we do, at the first brunt we be very hot: but when that
heat of our first affections is alaied, anon we become more slack, and look
with what rashness we begin things, with the same we give them over and
utterly reject them.

This may well be said of us English men, for our heat is sone cooled, and that
may appear by our cold proceedings at this day.
At the first when the light of the gospel, after so great darkness of men's
traditions began to appear, many were zelously bent to godliness: they heard
Sermons greedely, and had the ministers of Gods word in reverence. But now when
the doctrine of piety and godliness is happily reformed, with so great increase
of Gods word, many which before seemed earnest disciples, become contemners and
very enemies. Who not only cast of the study and zeal of Gods word, and
despise the ministers thereof, but also hate all good learning, and become
plain hogs and belly Gods, worthy doutles to be compared unto those foolish
and inconstant Galathians.

Verse. 6. From him that has called you in the grace of Christ.
A double exposition upon this place.
This place is somewhat doubtful, and therefore it has a double understanding.
The first is: From that Christ that has called you in grace. The other is:
From him, that is to say, from God which has called you in the grace of
Christ. I embrace the former. For it likes me that even as Paul a little
before made Christ the Redemer, who by his death delivers us from this
present evil world: also the giver of Grace and Peace equally with God the
father: so he should also make him here the caller in grace: For Paul's
special purpose is, to beat into our minds the benefit of Christ, by whom we
come unto the father.

There is also in these words: From him that has called us in grace, a great
vehemency. Wherein is contained withal a contrary relation. As if he would say:
Alas, how lightly do you suffer your selves to be withdrawn and removed from
Christ, which has called you: not as Moises did, to the law, works, sin,
wrath and damnation, but altogether to grace. So we also complain at this day
with Paul, that the blindness and perverseness of men is horrible, in that none
will receive the doctrine of grace and salvation. Or if there be any that
receive it, yet they quickly slide back again and fall from it, whereas
notwithstanding it brings with it all good things, What good things the
doctrine of grace brings with it.
as well ghostly as bodily, namely forgeuenes of sins, true righteousness,
peace of conscience, and everlasting life. Moreover it brings light and sound
judgment of all kinds of doctrine and trades of life. It approves and
establishes civil government, household government, and all kinds of life
that are ordained and appointed of God. It rooteth up all doctrines of error,
sedition, confusion and such like: and it puts away the fear of sin and
death, and to be short, it discovers all subtle slights and works of the
Devil, and opens the benefits and love of God toward us in Christ. What
(with a mischief) means the world to hate this word, this glad tidings of
everlasting comfort, grace, salvation and eternal life so bitterly, and to
persecute it with such hellish outrage?

Paul before called this present world, evil and wicked, that is to say, the
Devils kingdom: For else it would acknowledge the benefit and mercy of God:
The world hates the light, and loves darkness. Io. 1.9.10.
but forasmuch as it is under the dominion of the devil, it does therefore
carelessly and desperately despise and persecute these things, loving darkness,
errors and the kingdom of the Devil, more then the light, truth, and
kingdom of Christ. And this it does not through ignorance or error, but
through the malice of the devil. Which thing hereby may sufficiently appear,
in that Christ the son of God by giving him self to death for the sins of
all men, has gained nothing else of this froward and forlorn world, What
revvard the wicked would repay to Christ for his benefits. Io. 1.5.
but that for this his inestimable benefit, it blasphemeth him, and
persecuteth his most healthful word, and feign would yet still nail him to
the cross, if it could. Therefore not only the world dwells in darkness,
but it is darkness it self, as it is written in the first of John.

Paul therefore amplifieth these words: From Christ who has called you. As
though he would say: My preaching was not of the hard laws of Moses, neither
taught I that you should be bondslaues under the yoke: but I preached the only
doctrine of grace and freedom from the law, sin, death, the devil and
damnation: That is to say, that Christ has mercifully called you in grace,
that ye should be freemen under Christ, and not bo^dmen under Moses, whose
Disciples ye are now become again by means of your false Apostles, who by the
law of Moises called you not unto grace, but unto wrath, to the hating of God,
to sin and death. The calling of Christ.
But Christ's calling brings grace and saving health. For they that be called
by him, instead of the law that works sorrow, do gain the glad tidings of
the Gospel, and are translated out of Gods wrath into his favor, out of sin
into righteousness, and out of death into life. And will you suffer your selves
to be carried, yea and that so soon and so easily an other way, from such a
living fountain, full of grace and and life? Now if Moses call men to Gods
wrath and to sin by the law of God, whither shall the Pope call men by his
own traditions? The other sense, that the father calls in the grace of
Christ, is also good: but the former sense concerning Christ, serves more
fitly for the comforting of afflicted consciences.

Verse. 6, Unto an other Gospel.
Here we may learn to epsy the crafty sleights and subtilties of the Devil.
No heretic comes under the title of errors and of the Devil, The white
Devil.
neither does the Devil himself come as a Devil in his own likeness,
especially that white Devil which we spoke of before. Yea even the black
devil, which forces men to manifest wickedness, makes a cloak for them to
cover that sin which they commit or purpose to commit. The murderer in
his rage sees not that murder is so great and horrible a sin as it is in
deed, for that he has a cloak to cover the same. Whoremasters, thieves,
covetous persons, drunkards and such others, have wherewith to flatter them
selves and cover their sins. The black Devil.
So the black devil also comes out disguised and counterfeit in all his
works and devises. But in spiritual matters, where Satan comes forth, not
black, but white in the likeness of an Angel or of God him self, Satan
chau^geth himself into an Angel of light.
there he passes himself with most crafty dissimulation and wonderful
sleights, and is wont to set forth to sale his most deadly poison for the
doctrine of grace, for the word of God, for the Gospel of Christ. For this
cause Paul calls the doctrine of the false Apostles Satan's ministers, a
gospel also, saying: unto an other Gospel: but in derision. As though he
would say: ye Galathians have now other Evangelists and an other Gospel. My
Gospel is now despised of you: it is now no more in estimation among you.

Hereby it may easily be gathered, that these false Apostles had condemned the
Gospel of Paul among the Galathians, The false Apostles condemn Paul's
doctrine. Acts. 15.5.
saying: Paul in deed has begun well, but to have begun well it is not
enough: for there remain yet many higher matters. Like as they say in ye.15.
of the Acts: It is not enough for you to believe in Christ or to be baptized,
but it behooves also that ye be circumcised: For except ye be circumcised after
the law of Moses, ye can not be saved. This is as much to say, as Christ is a
good workman, which has in deed begun a building, but he has not finished
it: for this must Moses do.

The nature of heretics lively painted out
So at this day, when the fantastical Anabaptists and others can not
manifestly condemn us, they say: These Lutherans have the spirit of
fearefulnes, they dare not franckly and freely profess the truth, and go
through with it. In deed they have laid a foundation, that is to say, they have
well taught faith in Christ, but the beginning, middle, and end must be joined
together. To bring this to pass, God has not given it unto them, but has
left it unto us. So these perverse and deuelish spirits, set out and advance
their own wicked preachings, calling them the word of God, The Devil will
not be black in his Ministers.
and so deceive many under the color of Gods name. For the Devil will not be
ougly and black in his ministers, but fair and white. And to the end he may
appear to be such a one, he sets out and decketh all his words and works
with the color of truth, and with the name of God. A proverb among ths
Germains.
Hereof is sprung that common proverb among the Germains: In Gods name
begins all mischief.

Wherefore let us learn that this is a special point of the devils cunning,
that if he can not hurt by persecuting and destroying, The Devil does more
hurt on the right hand then on the left.
he does it under a color of correcting and building up. So now a days he
persecuteth us with force and sword, that when we are once taken away and
dispatched, he may not only deface the Gospel, but utterly overthrow it. But
hitherto he has prevailed nothing, for he has slain many, who have
constantly confessed this our doctrine to be holy and heavenly: through whose
blood the Church is not destroyed but wattred. Forasmuch therefore as he could
prevail nothing that way, he stirs up wicked spirits and ungodly teachers,
which at the first allow our doctrine, and teach the same with a common consent
together with us. But afterward they say, that it is our vocation to teach the
first principles of Christian doctrine, and that the very mysteries of the
scriptures are reueiled unto them from above by God himself, and that they are
called for this purpose, that they should open them to the world. After this
manner does the Devil hinder the course of the Gospel, both on the right hand
and on the left, but more on the right hand (as I said before) by building and
correcting, then on the left by persecuting and killing.

Wherefore it behooves us to pray without ceasing, to read the holy
scriptures, to cleave fast unto Christ and his holy word, that we may overcome
the Devils craft and subtilties, with which he assaileth us both on the right
hand and on the left. Ephesians. 6.22.
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against
power, against the vvorldly gonerners, the Princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual vvickednesses in heavenly things.

Verse. 7. Which is not an other Gospel, but that there be some which
trouble you.
Here again he excuses the Galathians, and most bitterly reproves the false
Apostles. As though he would say: Ye Galathians are borne in hand, that the
Gospel which ye have received of me, is not the true and sincere gospel, and
therefore ye think ye do well to receive that new gospel which the false
apostles do teach, and that it is better then mine. I do not so much charge
you with this fault, as those disturbers which trouble your consciences, and
pull you out of my hand. The troublers of the church.
Here you see again, how vehement and hoate he is against those deceauers, and
with what rough and sharp words he painteth them out, calling them troublers
of the Churches: which do nothing else but seduce and deceive innumerable
poor consciences, giving occasions of horrible mischiefs and calamities in
the congregations. This great mischief we also at this day are constrained to
see, to the great grief of our hearts, and yet are we no more able to remedy
it, then Paul was at that time.

How the false Apostles had slaundered Paul.
This place witnesses, that those counterfeit Apostles had reported Paul to be
an imperfect Apostle, and also a weak and erroneous preacher. Therefore here
on the other side he calls them troublers of the Churches, and ouerthrowers
of Christ's gospel. Thus they condemned each other. The false Apostles
condemned Paul, and Paul again the false Apostles. And the like contending
and condemning has ever been in the Church, specially when the doctrine of the
gospel has flourished, to wit, that wicked teachers do persecute, condemn,
and oppress the godly: and on the contrary part, that the godly do reprove
and condemn the ungodly.

That ungodly teachers condemn and persecute the godly.
The Papists, and bragging spirits do at this day hate us deadly, and condemn
our doctrine as wicked and erroneous. Yea moreover they lie in wait for our
goods and lives. And we again do with a perfect hatred detest and condenme
their wicked and blasphemous doctrine. In the mean while the miserable people
are at a stay, wauing hither and thither as uncertain and doubtful to which
part they may lean, or whom they may safely follow: and this is, because it is
not given to every one to judge Christianly of such great and weighty matters.
But the end will show which part teaches truly, and which of them does
justly condemn other.

Sure it is that we persecute no man, oppress no man, put no man to death,
neither does our doctrine disquiet men's consciences, but delivers them out of
innumerable errors and snares of the Devil. For the truth hereof we have the
testimony of many good men, who give thanks unto God, for that by our
doctrine they have received certain and sure consolation to their consciences.
Wherefore like as Paul at that time was not to be blamed that the Churches were
troubled, but the false Apostles: so also at this day it is not our fault, but
the fault of the Anabaptists and such fantastical spirits, that many and great
troubles are in the Church.

Mark here diligently, Every one that teaches works, is a troubler of men's
consciences.
that every teacher of works and of the righteousness of the law, is a troubler
of the Church, and of the consciences of men. And who would ever have believed
that the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, and that whole Sinagoge of Satan,
specially the Founders of those holy religious orders (of which number
nevertheless God might save some by miracle) were troublers of consciences? Yea
verily they be yet far worse then were those false Apostles. For the false
Apostles taught, that besides faith in Christ, the works of the law of God
were also necessary to salvation. The Papists worse then the false Apostles
among the Galathians.
But the Papists omitting Faith, have taught men's traditions and works not
commanded of God, but devised by themselves without and against the word of
God: and these have they not only made equal with the word of God, but also
exalted them far above it. But the more holy that the heretics seem to be
in outward show, so much the more mischief they do. For if the false Apostles
had not ben endued with notable gifts, with great authority, and a show of
holiness, and had not vaunted themselves to be Christ's ministers, the Apostles
disciples, and sincere preachers of the gospel: they could not so easily have
defaced Paul's authority, and led the Galathians out of the way.

Now, the cause why he inueyeth so sharply against them, calling them the
troublers of the Churches, is, for that besides Faith in Christ, they taught
that Circumcision and the keeping of the law was necessary to salvation. The
which thing Paul him self witnesses in the fifte Chapter following. And
Luke in the fiftenth of the Acts declares the same thing in these words:
That certain men coming down from Judea, taught the brethern, saying:
Acts. 15.1.
Except ye be circumcised after the custom of Moises, ye can not be saved.

Wherefore the false Apostles most earnestly and obstinately contended that the
law ought to be observed. Unto whom the stifnecked Jews forthwith joined them
selves, and so afterward easily persuaded such as were not stablished in the
Faith, that Paul was not a sincere teacher because he regarded not the law,
but preached such a doctrine as did abolish and overthrow the law. It seemed
unto them a very strange thing that the law of God should utterly be taken
away, and the Jews which had ever until that time been counted the people of
God, to whom also the promises were made, should be now rejected. Yea it seemed
yet a more strange thing unto them, that the Gentiles being wicked Idolaters,
should attain to this glory and dignity, to be the people of God without
Circumcision, and without the works of the law, by grace only and Faith in
Christ.

These things had the false Apostles amplified and set forth to the uttermost,
that they might bring Paul into more hatred among the Galathians. And to the
end they might set them the more sharply against him, they said that he
preached unto the Gentiles fredome from the law, False Apostles brag of their
own doings and dispraise other men's.
to bring into contempt, yea and utterly to abolish the law of God and the
kingdom of the Jews, contrary to the law of God, contrary to the custom of
the Jewish nation, contrary to the example of the Apostles, and to be short,
contrary to his own example: Wherefore he was to be shunned as an open
blasphemer against God, and a rebel against the whole common weal of the
Jews, saying that they themselves ought rather to be heard, who besides that
they preached the Gospel rightly, were also the very disciples of the
Apostles: with whom Paul was never conversant. By this policy they defamed
and defaced Paul among the Galathians: so that by this their perverse dealing,
of very necessity Paul is compelled with all his might to set him self
against these false Apostles: whom he boldly reproves and condemns, say-ing
that they are the troublers of the Churches and ouerthrowers of Christ's
gospel, as follows:

Verse. 7. And intends to pervert the Gospel of Christ.
False Apostles trouble and overthrow the gospel of Christ.
That is to say, they do not only go about to trouble you, but also utterly
to abolish and overthrow Christ's Gospel. For these two things the Devil
practices most busily. First, he is not contented to trouble and deceive many
by his false Apostles, but moreover he labors utterly to overthrow the
Gospel by them, and never rests till he have brought it to pass. The most
wicked teachers would be taken for holy instructers.
Yet such peruerters of the Gospel can abide nothing less, then to hear that
they are the Apostles of the Devil: nay rather they glory above others in the
name of Christ, and boast themselves to be the most sincere preachers of the
Gospel.

But because they mingle the law and the Gospel together, they can not but be
the peruerters of the Gospel. For either Christ must remain and the law
perish: or the law must remain and Christ perish: For Christ and the law can
by no means agree and reign together in the conscience. Where the
righteousness of the law rules, there can not the righteousness of grace rule.
And again, where the righteousness of grace reigns, there can not the
righteousness of the law reign: for one of them must needs give place unto
the other. And if thou can not believe, The righteousness of the law, and the
righteousness of grace are contrary.
that God will forgive thy sins for Christ's sake, whom he sent into the
world to be our high priest: how then I pray thee, will thou believe that he
will forgive the same for the works of the law, which thou could never
perform: Or for thine own works, which (as thou must be compelled to
confess) be such, as it is impossible for them to counteruaile the judgment
of God?

Wherefore the doctrine of Grace can by no means stand with the Doctrine of
the Law. The one must simplye be refused and abolished, and the other
confirmed and stablished, They that mingle the righteousness of the law and
grace together, are subuerters of the gospel of Christ.
For as Paul says here, to mingle the one with the other, is to overthrow
the Gospel of Christ. And yet if it come to debating, the greater part
overcomes the better. For Christ with his side is weak, and the Gospel is
but a foolish preaching. Contrariwise, the kingdom of the world and the Devil
the prince thereof, are strong. Besides that, the wisdom and righteousness of
the flesh carry a goodly show. And by this means the righteousness of grace and
Faith is lost, and the other righteousness of the law and works advanced and
maintained. But this is our comfort, that the Devil with all his limbs, can
not do what he would. He may trouble many, but he can not overthrow Christ's
Gospel. The truth may be assailed, and may come in danger, but pearish it can
not. It may be assailed, but vanquished it can not be: For the word of the
Lord indureth for ever.

The discommodities that follovv the mingling of faith and works together.
It seems to be a light matter, to mingle the law and the Gospel, faith and
works together: but it does more mischief then man's reason can conceive. For
it does not only blemish and darken the knowledge of grace, but also it takes
away Christ with all his benefits, and it utterly overthrows the Gospel, as
Paul says in this place. The cause of this great evil is our flesh: which
being plunged in sins, sees no way how to get out but by works, and
therefore it would live in the righteousness of the law, and rest in the trust
and confidence of her own works. Wherefore it is utterly ignorant of the
doctrine of faith and grace: without which notwithstanding it is impossible for
the conscience to find rest and quietness.

It appears also by these words of Paul: And intend to pervert the Gospel
of Christ, that the false Apostles were exceeding bold and shameless, which
with all their might set them selves against Paul. Wherefore he again, using
his spirit of zeal and feruencie, and being fully persuaded of the certainty
of his calling, sets him self strongly against them, and wonderfully
magnifieth his ministry, saying:

Verse. 8. But though that we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you
otherwise then that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.
The vehement zeal of Paul against the false Apostles.
Here Paul casts out very flames of fire, and his zeal is so fervent that he
begins also almost to curse the Angels. Although, says he, that we our
selves, even I and my brethren Timothy and Titus, and as many as teach Christ
purely with me (I speak not now of those seducers of consciences): yea or if
an angel from heaven preach unto you etc. notwithstanding I would rather, that
I my self, my brethren, yea and the very Angels from heaven also, should be
holden accursed, then that my Gospel should be overthrown. This is in deed a
vehement zeal, that he dare so boldly curse, not only him self and his
brethren, but also even an Angel from heaven.

The Greek word Anathema, in Hebrew Herem, signifies a thing accursed,
execrable, and detestable: which has nothing to do, no participation, or
communion with God. So the city Hierico (says Joshua) shall be accursed for
ever, Joshua. 6.26.
that it never be builded up again. And in the last of Leuiticus it is
written: Nothing separate from the common use, which shall be separate from
man, Leuit. 16.29.
shall be redeemed but die the death, whether it be man or beast. Exodus 17.14.
So God had appointed that Amalech, and certain other cities accursed by gods
own sentence, should be utterly rased and destroyed. This then is Paul's
mind: I had rather that my self, and other my brethren, yea and an Angel
from heaven should be accursed, then that we or others should preach any other
Gospel, then that which we have preached already. So Paul first curses him
self: for cunning artificers are wont first to find fault with themselves,
that they may the more freely and sharply afterward reprove others.

Paul therefore concludes, that there is no other Gospel besides that, which
he himself had preached. The Gospel of Paul.
But he preached not a Gospel which he had him self devised, but the same
which God promised before by his Prophets in the holy scriptures. Romans 1.
Therefore he pronounces him self and others, yea even an Angel from heaven,
Acts. 13.2. Romans 1.2. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act. 3.22.
to be undoubtedly accursed, if they teach any thing contrary unto the first
Gospel. For the voice of the Gospel once sent forth shall not be called back
again til the day of judgment.

Verse. 9. As we said before so say we now again, if any man preach unto
you otherwise then that you have received, let him be accursed.
He repeteth the self same thing, only changing the persons. Before he
cursed him self, his brethren, and an Angel from heaven. Here if there be any
(says he) besides us, which preach unto you any other Gospel then that ye
have received of us, let them also be accursed. Therefore he plainly
excommunicateth and curses all teachers in general, him self, his brethren,
an Angel, The vehemency of Paul against the false Apostles.
and moreover all others whatsoever, namely all those false teachers his
adversaries. Here appears an exceeding great feruencie of spirit in the
Apostle, that dare curse all teachers through out the whole world and in heaven,
which pervert his Gospel and teach any other. For all men must either believe
that Gospel that Paul preached, or else they must be accursed and condemned. An
horrible sentence against the Papists.
O would to God this terrible sentence of the Apostle might strike a fear into
their hearts that seek to pervert the Gospel of Paul: of which sort at this
day (the more it is to be lamented) the world is full.

The changing of persons is here to be marked. For Paul speaks otherwise in
his first cursing, then he does in this second. In the first he says: If we
or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you any other Gospel then that we have
preached unto you. In the second: then that you have received. And this he does
of purpose, lest the Galathians should say: We, o Paul, do not pervert the
gospel that thou have preached unto us: we understood thee not rightly, but
the teachers that came after thee, have declared unto us the true meaning
thereof. This (says he) will I in no case admit. They ought to add nothing,
neither to correct it: but that which you heard of me, is the sincere word of
God: let this only remain. Neither do I desire my self to be an other manner
of teacher then I was, nor you other disciples. Wherefore, if ye hear any man,
bringing any other Gospel then that ye have heard of me, or bragging that he
will deliver better things then ye have received of me, let him and his
disciples be both accursed.

The contents of the two first chapters.
The first two chapters, in a manner contain nothing else but defenses of his
doctrine, and confutations of errors. For in the end of the second chapter,
at the last he begins to handle the article of justification.
Notwithstanding, this sentence of Paul ought to admonish us, that so many as
think the Pope to be the judge of holy scripture, are accursed. Which thing
the Popes Scholemen have wickedly taught, The reason of the Papists, to prove
that the Church is above the scripture.
standing upon this ground: The church has allowed four Gospels only:
therefore there are but four. For if it had allowed more, there had been more.
Now seeing the Church might receive and allow such and so many Gospels as it
would, therefore the Church is above the Gospel. A goodly argument forsooth. I
approve the scrpture, Ergo I am above the scripture. John Baptist acknowledges
and confesses Christ and points to him with his finger, therefore he is above
Christ. The Church approves the Christian faith and doctrine, therefore the
Church is above them. For the overthrowing of this their wicked and blasphemous
doctrine against God, thou have here a plain text like a thunderbolt, wherein
Paul subiecteth both him self and an Angel from heaven, and Doctors upon
earth, and all other teachers and masters whatsoever, under the authority of
the scripture. For they ought not to be masters, judges, or arbiters, but
only witnesses, disciples and confessors of the Church, The word of God must
only be taught in the church.
whether it be the Pope, Luther, Augustine, Paul, or an Angel from heaven.
Neither ought any doctrine to be taught or heard in the Church besides the word
of God, that is to say, the holy scripture. Otherwise accursed be both the
teachers and hearers together with their doctrine.

Verse. 10. For now preach I man's doctrine or Gods?
These words are spoken with the same vehemency that the former were. As if he
would say: Am I Paul so unknown amongst you, which have preached so openly
in your churches? Are my bitter conflicts and so many sharp battails against
the Jews, yet unknown unto you? It appears, I think, sufficiently unto you
by my preaching, by so many and great afflictions which I have suffered,
whether I serve men or God. What revvard Paul received for his pains taking.

What the ministers of God ought to seek.


For all men see that by this my preaching I have not only stirred up
persecution against me in every place, but have also procured the cruel hatred
both of mine own nation and of all other men. I show therefore plainly enough
that I seek not by my preaching the favor or liking of men, but to set forth
the goodness and glory of God.

Neither do we (be it spoken without brag) seek the favor of men by our
doctrine. Ephesians. 2.3.
For we teach that all men are wicked by nature, and the children of wrath. We
condenme man's freewill, The sum and effect of the doctrine of the Gospel.
his strength, wisdom and righteousness, and all religion of our devising. And
to be short, we say that there is nothing in us that is able to deserve grace
and the forgeuenes of sins: but we preach, that we obtain this grace by the
free mercy of God only for Christ's sake. Psalm. 19.^
For so the heavens show forth the glory of God and his works, condemning
all men generally with their works. This certes is not to preach for the favor
of men and of the world. For the world can abide nothing less then to hear
his wisdom, righteousness, religion, and power condemned. And to speak
against those mighty and glorious gifts of the world, is not to flatter the
world, but rather to procure hatred and indignation of the world. For if we
speak against men or against any such things as pertain to their glory, it
can not be, but that cruel hatred, persecutions, excommunications, murders
and condemnations thereupon must needs follow,

If then (says Paul) they see other matters, why see they not this also, that
I teach the things yt are of God and not of men? that is to say: To teach the
things that are of God,
yt I seek no man's favor by my doctrine, but I set out Gods mercy offered
unto us in Christ. For if I sought the favor of men, I would not condenme
their works. Now for as much as I condemn men's works, that is to say,
because I show Gods judgment out of his word (whereof I am a Minister) against
all men, how that they are sinners, unrighteous, wicked, children of wrath,
bondslaues of the devil and damned, and that they are not made righteous by
works, or by circumcision, but by grace only and faith in Christ: therefore I
procure unto my self the deadly hatred of men. For they ca^ abide nothing
less, than to be taken for such manner of men: nay rather they would be praised
for wise, righteous, and holy. Wherefore this witnesses sufficiently, that I
teach not man's doctrine. After the same manner Christ speaks also in the
seventh of John: John. 7.7. Why the world hates Christ. John. 3.19.
The world can not hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it that
the works thereof are evil. And in the third of John: This is condemnation,
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light,
because rheir works were evil.

Now, that I teach the things which are of God (says the Apostle) hereby it
may sufficiently appear, that I preach the grace, goodness and glory of God
alone. Moreover, he that speaks (as Christ says) those things which his Lord
and master has commanded him, and glorifieth not him self, but him whose
messenger he is, brings and teaches the true word of God. But I teach
those things only which are commanded me from above: neither glorify I my
self, but him that sent me. Signs that testify Paul's doctrine to be true.
Besides that, I stir up against my self the wrath and indignation both of
the Jews and Gentiles: Therefore my doctrine is true, pure, certain and of
God, neither can there be any other, (much less then, any better) then this my
doctrine is. Wherefore whatsoever doctrine else teaches not as mine does, that
all men are sinners and are justified by faith only in Christ, must needs be
false, wicked, blasphemous, accursed and deuillish: and such also are all they
which either teach it or receive it.

So we with Paul both boldly and assuredly do pronounce all such doctrine to
be accursed and abominable, as dissenteth from ours. For in deed we seek not
by our preaching the praise of men or the favor of Princes or Bishops, but the
favor of God alone, whose only grace and mercy we preach, despising and
treading under our feet whatsoever is of our selves. Whosoever he be then
which shall teach any other gospel, or that which is contrary to ours, let us
be bold to say that he is sent of the Devil, and hold him accursed.

Verse. 10. Or go I about to please men?
That is, do I serve men or God? He has always a glaunce at the false
Apostles. False Apostles seek to please men.
These (says he) must needs seek to please and to flatter men: for by this
means they seek, that they again may glory in their flesh. Moreover, because
they will not bear the hatred and persecution of men, they teach circumcision,
only to avoid the persecution of the cross of Christ, as follows in the 5
chapter.

So at this day you may find many which labor to please men, Teachers of men's
traditions do please men.
and to the end they may live in peace and security of the flesh, they teach
man's doctrine, that is to say, wicked things, or else they allow the blasphemies
and wicked judgments of the adversaries, contrary to the word of God and
against their own conscience, that they may keep still the favor of Princes
and Bishops, and enjoy their goods: But we, because we endeavor to please God
and not me^, The revvard of godly teachers.
do stir up against us the malice of the Devil and of hell it self: we
bear the reproaches and sclaunders of the world, death, and all the mischiefs
that can be wrought against us.

So says Paul here: I seek not to please men, that they may praise my
doctrine, and report me to be an excellent teacher, but I desire only that my
doctrine may please God: and by this means I make men my mortal enemies. Which
thing I find by experience to be most true: for they requite me with infamy,
sclaunder, imprisonment and sword. Contrariwise, the false Apostles teach the
things that are of men, that is to say, such things as be pleasant and
plausible to man's reason, and that to the end they may live in ease and
purchase the favor, good will and praise of the people. And such men find
that they seek for. The revvard of false and ungodly teachers. Mat. 6.2.
For they are praised and magnified of men. So says Christ also. Math. 6. That
hypocrites do al things to be praised of me^. And in the. 5. of John he sharply
reproves such: How can ye believe (says he) which receive honor one of an
other, and seek not the honor that comes of God alone? These things which
Paul has hitherto taught, Io. 5.44.
are in a manner examples only. In the mean time notwithstanding he is very
earnest every where, in proving his doctrine to be sincere and unfeigned.
Therefore he exhorts the Galathians that they forsake it not for any other
doctrine.

Verse. 10. For if I should yet please men I were not the servant of God?
All these things are to be referred to the whole office and ministry of
Paul, to show what a contrariety there was between his conversation before in
the Jewish law, and his conversation now under the gospel. As if he would say:
Do ye think that I go about still to please men, as I did in times past? So
he speaks afterward in the fifte chapter. Verse. 11.
If I yet preach Circumcision, why do I suffer persecution? As though he
would say: Do ye not see and hear of my daily conflictes, great persecutions
and afflictions? After I was converted and called to office of Apostleship, I
never taught man's doctrine, neither sought I to please men, but God only. That
is to say: I seek not by my ministry and doctrine the praise and favor of
men, but of God.

Here again is to be marked how maliciously and craftily the false apostles
went about to bring Paul into hatred among the Galathians. Lies and scla^ders
devised by the false Apostles against Paul.
They picked out of his preachings and wrytings certain co^tradictions (as our
adversaries at this day do out of our books), and by this means they would
have co^uinced him yt he had taught contrary things. Wherefore they said yt there
was no credit to be given unto him: but ye Circu^cisio^ and the law ought to be
kept. Which thing he himself also by his example had allowed, Acts. 16.5. Acts.
18.13. Acts. 21.24.
because he had circumcised Timothy according to the law, had purified him
self with other four men in the temple at Jerusalem, and had shaven his head
at Cenchrea. These cauillers surmised that Paul was constrained to do these
things by the commandment and authority of the Apostles. Which notwtstanding
he had kept as indifferent, bearing with the infirmity of the weak brethern
(which yet understood not the christian liberty) lest they should be offended.
To whose cauillations thus he answers: How true it is which the false
apostles forge against me for the overthrowing of my gospel, and setting up of
the law and Circumcision again, the matter it self sufficiently declares.
For if I would preach the law and Circumcision, and commend the strength,
power, and will of man, I should not be so hated of them, but should please
them maruelously well.

Verse. 11.12. Now I certefie you brethern, that the gospel which was
preached of me, 1 Cor. 15.1. Acts. 9.1.
was not after man. For neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.
The chief purpose of Paul in this disputation.
Here is the principal point of all this matter: which contains a confutation
of his adversaries, and a defense of his doctrine to the end of the second
chapter. This he urges, this he stands upon, and with an oath confirms it,
yt he learned not his gospel of any man, but received the same by the
revelation of Jesus Christ. And in that he swears, he is constrained so to
do, yt the Galathians may believe him, and also, that they should give no ear
to yt false Apostles: who^ he reproves as liers, because they had said, yt he
learned and received his gospel of ye Apostles.

Where he says that his gospel is not after man, he means not, that his
gospel is not earthly, (for that is manifest of it self: and the false
apostles bragged also that their doctrine was not earthly but heavenly): Paul's
doctrine was not after man.
but he means that he learned not his gospel by the ministry of men, or
received it by any earthly means (as we all learn it either by the ministry
of men, or else receive it by some earthly means: some by hearing, some by
reading, and some by writing): but he received the same only by the revelation
of Jesus Christ. If any man list to make any other distinction, I am not
against it. Christ both God and man
The Apostle shows here by the way, that Christ is not only man, but that he
is both very God and very man, when he says: that he received not his gospel
by man.

Now, Paul received his gospel in the way as he was going to Damascus, where
Christ appeared unto him, and talked with him. Afterward also he talked with
him in the temple at Jerusalem: Where Paul received the Gospel. Acts. 9.71.
but he received his gospel upon the way, as Luke recites the story in the.9.
of the Acts. Arise (says Christ) and go into the City, and it shall be told
thee what thou must do. He does not bid him go into the city, that he might
learn the gospel of Ananias: but Ananias was bid to go and baptize him, to
lay his hands upon him, to commit the ministry of the word unto him, and to
commend him unto the Church: and not to teach him the Gospel, which he had
received before (as he glories in this place) by the only revelation of Jesus
Christ. And this Ananias himself confesses, saying: Brother Saul, Verse. 1^.
the Lord which appeared to thee in the way has sent me, that thou might
receive thy sight. Therefore he received not his doctrine of Ananias, but being
already called, lightened, and taught of Christ in the way, he was sent to
Ananias, that he might also have the testimony of men, that he was called of
God to preach the gospel of Christ.

This Paul was constrained to recite, to put away the sclaunder of the false
Apostles, who labored to bring him into hatred among the Galathians, saying
that Paul was inferior to the rest of the Apostles scholars: who had
received of the Apostles that which they taught and kept: whose conversation
also they had seen a long time: and that Paul him self had also received the
same things of them, although he did now deny it. Why then would they rather
obey an inferior, and despise the authority of the Apostles themselves, who
were not only the fore elders and teachers of the Galathians, but also of all the Churches through out the whole world.

The argument of the false Apostles taken from the authority of the Apostles.
This argument, which the false Apostles grounded upon the authority of the
Apostles, was strong and mighty, whereby the Galathians were suddenly
overthrown, especially in this matter. I would never have believed, had I not
ben taught bp these examples of the Churches of Galatia, of the Corinthians and
others, that they which had received the word of God in the beginning with such
joy (among whom were many notable men) could so quickly be overthrown. Oh good
God, what horrible and infinite mischeefes may one only argument easily bring:
which so pearceth a man's conscience when God withdraws his grace, that in one
moment he loses altogether. By this crafty pretense then the false Apostles
deceived the Galathians, being not fully stablished and grounded, but as yet
weak in the Faith.

Moreover, the matter of justification is brickle: not of it self (for of it
self it is most sure and certain) but in respect of us. Whereof I my self
have good experience. For I know in what hours of darkness I sometimes wrestle.
I know how often suddenly I lose the beams of the gospel and grace, as being
shadowed from me with thick and dark clouds. So great is the weakness eue^
of the godly, that they are hardli drawn to Gods promises, though they be most
certain.
Briefly I know in what a slippery place even such also do stand, as are well
exercised, and seem to have sure footing in matters of faith. We have good
experience of this matter: For we are able to teach it unto others, and this is
a sure token that we understand it. But when in the very conflict we should use
the gospel, which is the word of grace, consolation and life, there does the
law, the word of wrath, heaviness and death prevent the gospel, and begins
to rage: and the terrors which it raises up in the conscience, The office of
the law.
are no less then was that horrible show in the mount Synai. Exodus 19.18.
So that even one place out of the scripture containing some threatening of the
law, He alludeth to the giving of the law in mount Synai.
drowneth and bears down all consolations besides, and so shakes all our
inward powers, that it makes us to forget Justification, Grace, Christ, the
gospel, and altogether.

The conflictes of the godly.
Therefore in respect of us, it is a very brickle matter, because we are brickle.
Again, we have against us eue^ the one half of our selves: that is to say,
reason, and all ye powers thereof. Besides all this, ye flesh resists the
spirit, Galat. 5.17.
which can not believe assuredly yt the promises of God are true. It fights
therefore against the spirit, and (as Paul says) it holds the spirit
captive: Romans 7.23.
so that it can not believe so steadfastly as it would. Wherefore we teach
continually that the knowledge of Christ and of Faith, is no work of man, but
simply the gift of God, Faith is the gift of God.
who as he creates Faith, so does he keep it in us. And even as he first
gives Faith unto us through the word, so afterward he exercises,
increases, strengthens and makes perfect the same in us by the word.
Therefore the greatest service that a man can do unto God, The chief service
of God.

What inconveniences follovv the lothing of Gods word.


and the very Sabbath of Sabboths is to exercise him self in true godliness,
diligently to read and to hear the word. Contrariwise there is nothing more
dangerous then to be weary of the word. He therefore that is so cold that he
thinks him self to know enough, and begins by little and little to loathe
the word, that man has lost Christ and the gospel, and that which he thinks
him self to know, he attaineth only by bare Speculatio^ is a naked knowledge
without practice. Iam. 1.23.24.
speculation: And he is like unto a man (as S. James says): Who beholding his
face in a glass, goes his way, and by and by forgets what his
countenance was.

Wherefore let every faithful man labor and strive with all diligence to
learn and to keep this doctrine: The doctrine of true godliness is kept by
prayer and earnest study of the word.
And to that end let him use humble and hearty prayer, with continual study
and meditation of the word. And when we have striuen never so much, yet shall
we have enough to keep us occupied. For we have to do with no small enemies,
but strong and mighty, and such as are in continual war against us, namely
our own flesh, all the dangers of the world, The enemies of the godly.
the law, sin, death, the wrath and judgment of God, and the Devil
himself: who never cease to tempt us inwardly by his fiery darts, and
outwardly by his false Apostles, to the end that he may overthrow, if not all,
yet the most part of us.

This argument therefore of the false apostles had a goodly show, The reason
which at this day is used against us, and prevails with many.
and seemed to be very strong. Which also at this day moves many, namely that
the Apostles, the holy fathers and their successors have so taught: that the
Church so thinks and believes: Moreover that it is impossible that Christ
should suffer his Church so long time to err. Art thou alone (say they) wiser
then so many holy men? wiser then ye whole church? After this manner the devil
being changed into an Angel of light, sets upon us craftily at this day by
certain pestiferous hypocrites, who say: We pass not for the Pope, nor for
the Bishops those great persecutors and contemners of Gods word: we abhor
also ye hypocrisy and deceitfulnes of Monks and such like: but we would have
the authority of holy Church to remain untouched. The Church has thus
believed and taught this long time. So have all the Doctors of the primative
Church, The Devils argument.
holy men, more ancient and better learned then thou. Who art thou, that
dare dissent from all these, and bring unto us a contrary doctrine? When
Satan reasons thus, conspiring with the flesh and reason, then is thy
conscience terrified and utterly despaireth, unless thou constantly return
to thy self again, and say: Whether it be Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, either
S. Peter, Paul or John, yea or an Angel from heaven that teaches otherwise,
yet this I know assuredly, that I teach not the things of men, but of God: that
is to say, I attribute all things to God alone, and nothing to man.

When I first took upon me the defense of the Gospel, I remember that Doctor
Staupitius a worthy man, Doctor Staupitius a favorer of Luthers doctrine,
when he began to preach.
said thus unto me. This likes me well that this doctrine which thou
preachest, yeldeth glory and all things else unto God alone, and nothing unto
man: for unto God there can not be attributed too much glory, goodness, mercy.
etc. This saying did then greatly comfort and confirm me. And true it is that
the doctrine of the Gospel takes from men all glory, The doctrine of the
gospel attributes all things unto God, and nothing to man.
wisdom, righteousness. etc. and gives them to the creator alone, who made
all things of nothing. We may also more safely attribute too much unto God then
to man. For in this case I may say boldly: Be it so that the Church, Augustine
and other Doctors, also Peter and Apollo: yea even an Angel from heaven,
teach a contrary doctrine, yet my doctrine is such, that it sets forth and
preaches the grace and glory of God alone, and in the matter of salvation, it
condemns the righteousness and wisdom of all men. In this case I can not
offend, because I give both to God and man, that which properly and truly
belongs unto them both.

But thou will say: The Church is holy, The Fathers are holy. It is true:
notwithstanding, albeit the church be holy, yet is it compelled to pray: Mat.
1.1^.
forgive us our trespasses. So, though the fathers be holy, yet are they saved
through the forgeuenes of sins. Therefore neither am I to be believed, Neither
Angels nor Apostles, or any other to be believed: if they teach any thing
against the word of God.
nor the Church, nor the Fathers, nor the Apostles, no nor an Angel from
heaven, if we teach any thing against the word of God, but let the word of God
abide for ever: For else this argument of the false Apostles had mightily
prevailed against Paul's doctrine. For in deed it was a great matter, a great
matter I say, to set before the Galathians the whole Church, with all the
company of the Apostles, against Paul alone, but lately sprung up and of
small authority. This was therefore a strong argument, and concluded mightily.
For no man says willingly that the Church erreth, and yet it is necessary to
say that it erreth, if it teach any thing besides or against Gods word.

Peter the chief of the Apostles taught both in life and doctrine besides Gods
word, therefore he erred and was deceived. The error of Peter.
Neither did Paul dissemble that error (although it seemed to be but a light
fault) because he saw it would turn to the hurt of the whole Church, but
vvithstoode him even to his face, Galat. 2.11.
because he vvalked not after the truth of the Gospel. Therefore neither is
the Church, nor Peter, A chief argument against us.
nor the Apostles, nor Angels from heaven to be heard, unless they bring and
teach the pure word of God.

This argument even at this day is not a little prejudicial to our cause. For
if we may neither believe the Pope, nor the Fathers, nor Luther, nor any other,
except they teach us ye pure word of God, whom shall we then believe? Who in
the mean while shall certefie our consciences which part teaches the pure
word of God, we or our adversaries? For they brag, that they also have the
pure word of God and teach it. Again, we believe not the Papists, because
they teach not the word of God, neither can they teach it. Contrariwise, they
hate us most bitterly, and persecute us, as most pestilent heretics and
seducers of the people. What is to be done in this case? Shall it be lawful
for every fantastical spirit, to teach what him self lists, seeing the
world can neither hear nor abide our doctrine? For although we glory with
Paul, that we teach the pure Gospel of Christ (unto which, not only the
Emperor, Pope, and the whole world ought to give credit, but also ought
gladly and thankfully to receive and embrace it, yea, and diligently to
provide, that it be taught in every place: and if any should teach the
contrary, were he the Pope, an Apostle, or an Angel from heaven, to hold him
accurssed together with his Gospel), yet for all that, we profit nothing, but
are compelled to hear, that this our glorying is not only vain, rash, and
arrogant, but also Deuilish and full of blasphemy. But if we abase our selves,
and give place to the rage of our adversaries, then both the Papists and
Anabaptists wax proud. The Anabaptists will vaunt ye they bring and teach us
some strange thing which the world never heard of before. The Papists will
set up again and stablishe their old abominations. Let every man therefore
take heed, A preacher must be sure of his calling and doctrine. Galat. 1.8.
that he be most sure of his calling and doctrine, that he may boldly say with
Paul: Although we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Verse. 13. For you have heard of my conversation in times past in the Jewish
religion, how thar I persecuted the Church of God extremely and waste it:
And profited in the Jewish religion, above many of my companions of mine own
nation.
This place has in it no singular doctrine. Notwithstanding Paul alleges
here his own example, saying: I have defended the observations of the
Phariseis and the law more constantly then ye, and all your false teachers.
Wherefore if the righteousness of the law had been any thing worth, The zeal of
Paul.
I had not turned back from it: in the keeping whereof notwithstanding before I
knew Christ, I did so exercise my self, and so profit therein, that I excelled
many of my companions of mine own nation. Moreover I was so zealous in defense
of the same, yt I persecuted the church of God extremely, and wasted it. For
having received authority of the high priests, Acts. 8.1. Acts. 9.12. Acts.
16.4. Romans 9.3.
I put many in prison, and when they should be put to death I pronounced the
sentence, and punishing them through out all the Sinagoges I compelled them to
blaspheme, and was so exceeding mad upon them, that I persecuted them even unto
strange cities.

Verse. 14. And was much more zealous of the traditions of my fathers.
He calls not here the Pharisaicall or humane traditions: the traditions of
his fathers, for here he treats not of the Pharisaicall traditions, but of a
far higher matter, and therefore he calls even that holy law of Moises,
What Paul calls the traditions of the fathers.
his fathers traditions: that is to say, received and left as an inheritance
from the fathers. For these (says he) when I was in the Jewish religion, I
was very zealous. He speaks after the same manner to the Philippians. Phil.
3.5.
As concerning the law (says he) I was a Pharisee, concerning zeal I
persecuted the church, and as concerning the righteousness of the law I was
unrebukable. As though he would say: Here I may glory, and may compare with
the whole nation of the Jews, yea even with the best and the holiest of all
those which are of the Circumcision: Let them show me if they can, a more
zealous and earnest defender of Moises law, then I have been.

This thing (O ye Galathians) ought to have persuaded you, not to believe these
seducers and deceauers, which magnify the righteousness of the law, as a matter
of great importance, when as, if there were any cause to glory in the
righteousness of the law, I have more cause to glory then any other.

In like manner say I of my self, that before I was lightened with the knowledge
of the gospel, I was as zealous for the papistical laws and traditions of the
fathers, as ever any was, most earnestly maintaining and defending them as holy
and necessary to salvation. Moreover, I did my endeavor to observe and keep
them my self as much as was possible for me to do, punishing my pore body with
fasting, watching, praying and other exercises, more the^ all they which at
this day do so bitterly hate and persecute me because now I take from them the
glory of justifying. For I was so diligent and superstitious in the observation
hereof, that I laid more upon my body, then without danger of health it was
able to bear. I honored the Pope of mere conscience and unfeignedly, not
seking after prebe^ds, promotions and livings: but whatsoever I did, I did it
with a single heart, of a good zeal and for ye glory of god. But those things
which then were gainful unto me, Phil. 3.^.
now with Paul I count to be but loss for the excellency of ye knowledge of
Jesus Christ my Lord. But our adversaries, as idle bellies and tried with no
tentations, believe not that I and many others have endured such things: I
speak of such as with great desire sought for peace and quietness of
conscience, which notwithstanding in so great darkness it was not possible for
them to find.

Verse. 15.16.17. But when it had pleased God (which had separated me from my
mothers womb, and called me by his grace) to reveal his son in me, that I
should preach him among the Gentiles, immediately I communicated not with
flesh and blood. Neither came I again to Jerusalem to them which were
Apostles before me, but I went into Arabia, and turned again unto Damascus.
This is the first journey of Paul. And here he witnesses, The first journey
of Paul.
that straight way, after he was called by the grace of God to preach Christ
among the Gentiles, he went into Arabia without the advice of any man, to that
work whereunto he was called. And this place witnesses by whom he was
taught, and by what means he came to the knowledge of the Gospel and to his
Apostleship. When it pleased God (says he.) As if he would say: I have not
deserved it, because I was zealous for the law of God without judgment, nay
rather this foolish and wicked zeal stirred me up, that God so permitting, I
fell hedlong into more abominable and outrageous sins. I persecuted the
church of God, I was an enemy of Christ, I blasphemed his Gospel, and to
conclude, Paul's merit or desert.
I was the author of sheding much innocent blood. This was my desert. In ye
midst of this cruel rage I was called to so great and inestimable grace.
What? was it because of this outrageous cruelty? No forsooth. But the abundant
grace of God who calls and shows mercy to whom he will, pardoned and
forgave me all these blasphemies: and for these my horrible sins (which then
I thought to be perfect righteousness, and an acceptable service unto God) he
gave unto me his grace, By what deserts we attain to grace
the knowledge of his truth, and called me to be an Apostle.

We also are come at this day to the knowledge of grace by the self same
merits. I crucified Christ daily in my monkesh life, and blasphemed God through
my false faith wherein I then continually lived. Outwardly I was not as other
men, extorcioners, unjust, whoremongers: but I kept chastity, poverty and
obedience. Moreover I was far from the cares of this present life. I was
only given to fasting, watching, praying, saying of Mass and such like.
Notwithstanding in the mean time I fostred under this cloked holiness, and
trust in mine own righteousness, continual mistrust, doubtfulnes, fear,
hatred and blasphemy against God. And this my righteousness was nothing else, but
a stinking puddle and a pleasant kingdom of the Devil. For Satan loves such
Saints and accomteth them for his dear darlings, What manner of Saints the
Devil loves.
who destroy their own bodies and souls and deprive themselves of all the
blessings of Gods gifts. In the mean time notwithstanding wickedness, blindness,
contempt of God, ignorance of the gospel, profanation of the sacraments,
blaspheming and treading of Christ under foot, and abuse of all the benefits
and gifts of God reign in them at the full. To conclude, such Saints are the
bondslaues of Satan, and therefore are driven to speak, think, and do
whatsoever he will, although outwardly they seem to excel all others in good
works, in holiness and streitnes of life.

Such were we under the Popedom: verily no less (if not more) contumelious
and blasphemous against Christ and his Gospel then Paul himself, and
especially I: for I did so highly esteem the Popes authority, that to dissent
from him even in the least point, I thought it a sin worthy of everlasting
death. And that wicked opinion caused me to think that John Hus was a cursed
heretic, John Hus.
yea and I accounted it an heinous offense, but once to think of him. And I
would my self in defense of ye Popes authority have ministered fire and sword,
for ye burning and destroying of that heretic, and thought it an high service
unto God so to do. Wherefore if you compare Publicanes and harlots with these holy
Hipocrits, they are not evil. For they, when they offend, Publicans and
sinners are far better then meritmongers.
have remorse of conscience, and do not justify their wicked doings: but these
men are so far of from acknowledging their abhominatio^s, idolatries, wicked
wilworshippings and ceremonies to be sins, yt they affirm ye same to be
righteousness and a most aceptable sacrifice unto god, yea they adore the^ as
matters of singular holiness, and through them do promise salvation unto others,
and also sell the^ for money, as things available to salvation.

This is then our goodly righteousness, Our desert.
this is our high merit which brings unto us ye knowledge of grace: to wit,
yt we have so deadly and so deuelishly persecuted, blasphemed, trode^ under
foot, and condemned God, Christ the gospel, faith, yt sacraments, al godly
men, the true worship of God, and have taught and stablished quite contrary
things. And ye more holy we were, ye more were we blinded, and ye more did we
worship ye devil. The Papists a bloody generation.
There was not one of us, but he was a bloudsucker: if not in deed, yet in heart.

Verse. 15. When it pleased God.
As though he would say: It is the alone and inestimable favor of God, that
not only he has spared me so wicked and so cursed a wretch, such a
blasphemor, a persecutor, and a rebel against God, but besides yt also has
given unto me ye knowledge of salvation, his spirit, By what deserts we
attain grace.
Christ his son, ye office of an Apostle and everlasting life. So God
beholding us guilty in ye like sins, has not only pardoned our impieties and
blasphemies, of his mere mercy for Christ's sake, but has also overwhelmed us
with great benefits and spiritual gifts. But many of us are not only unthankful
unto God for this his inestimable grace, and as it is written 2. Pet. 1. Do
forget the clensing of their old sins, 2 Pet. 1.^.
but also opening again a window to ye Devil, they begin to loath his word,
and many also corrupt it, and so become authors of new errors. Mat. 12.45.
The ends of these men are worse then the beginnings.

Verse. 15. Which had separated me from my mothers womb.
This is an Hebrew phrase. As if he said: which had sanctified, ordained,
prepared me. That is, GOD had appointed when I was yet in my mothers womb,
that I should so rage against his church, and that afterward he should
mercifully call me back again from the midst of my cruelty and blasphemy by
his mere grace, into the way of truth and salvation. To be short, when I was
not yet borne, I was an Apostle in the sight of God, and when the time was
come, I was declared an Apostle before the whole world.

Thus Paul cutteth of all deserts, and gives glory to God alone, but to
himself all shame and confusion. As though he would say: All the gifts both
small and great, as well spiritual as corporal, which God purposed to give
unto me, and all the good things which at any time in all my life I should do,
God himself had before appointed when I was yet in my mothers womb, The
deserts of S. Paul.
where I could neither wish, think, nor do any good thing. Therefore this
gift also came unto me by the mere predestination and free mercy of God before
I was yet borne. Moreover, after I was borne he supported me, being laden with
innumerable and monstrous evils and iniquities. And that he might the more
manifestly declare the unspeakable and inestimable greatenes of his mercy
toward me, he of his mere mercy forgave me my great and innumerable sins,
and moreover replenished me with such plenty of his grace, that not only I my
self should know what things are given unto us in Christ, but that I should
preach the same unto others also. Such then were the deserts and merits of all
men, and especially of those old dotards, who exercised themselves far above
others in the stinking dunghils of man's righteousness.

Verse. 15. And called me by his grace.
Mark the diligence of the Apostle. He called me (says he.) How? Was it for
my pharisaicall religion? or for my blameles and holy life? for my prayers,
fastings and works? No. Much less then for my blasphemies, persecutions,
oppressions? How then? By his mere grace.

Verse. 16. To reueile his son in me.
Paul's doctrine.
You hear in this place, what manner of doctrine is given and committed to
Paul: to wit, the doctrine of the Gospel, which is the revelation of ye
son of God. This is a doctrine quite contrary to the law, which reueileth
not the son of God, but it shows fourth sin, it terrifieth the
conscience, it reueileth death, the wrath and judgment of God, and hell.

The Gospel then is such a doctrine, as admits no law. Now, he that in this
case could rightly distinguish, would not seek the Gospel in the law, but
would separate the Gospel as far from the law, as there is distance between
heaven and earth. This difference in it self is easy, certain and plain,
but unto us it is hard, and almost not to be comprehended. For it is an easy
matter to say, that the Gospel is nothing else but the reueiling of the son
of the God, or the knowledge of Jesus Christ: and that it is not ye reueiling
of the law. But in the very agony and conflict of conscience, to hold this
fast, and to practice it in deed, it is a hard matter, yea to them also yt be
most exercised therein. The definition of the Gospel.


Now, if the Gospel be the reueiling of the son of God (as Paul defines it
in this place), then surely it accuses not, it fears not the conscience, it
threateneth not death, it brings not to despair, as the law does: but it is
a doctrine concerning Christ, which is neither law, nor work, but our
righteousness, wisdom, sanctification and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30. The crafty
Sophists have turned the Gospel into the law of love, and Christ into Moses.
Although this thing be more clear then the sun light, yet notwtstanding the
madness and blindness of the Papists has been so great, that of the Gospel
they have made a law of charity, and of Christ a lawegiuer, which should give
more streit and heavy commandments then Moses himself. But the Gospel
teaches that Christ came not to set forth a new law, and to give
commandments as touching manners: Heb. 10.10.
but that he came to this end, that he might be made an oblation for the sins
of the whole world, and that our sins might be forgiven, and everlasting
life given unto us for his sake, and not for the works of the law, or for our
rightesousnes sake. Of this inestimable treasure freely bestowed upon us, the
Gospel properly preaches unto us. The Gospel is not learned by any study of
man, but is taught from above, of God.
Wherefore it is a kind of doctrine that is not learned or gotten by any study,
diligence or wisdom of man, nor yet by the law of God, but is reueiled by God
himself (as Paul says in this place), first by the eternal word: then by the
working of Gods spirit inwardly. The Gospel then is a divine word, that came
down from heaven and is reueiled by the holy Ghost (who was also sent for the
same purpose): yet in such sort notwithstanding, that the outward word must go
before. For Paul himself had no inward revelation until he had heard the
outward word from heaven, which was this: Saul Saul why persecutest thou me?
Acts. 9.4.
First therefore he heard the outward word, the^ afterward followed revelations,
the knowledge of the word, faith, and the gifts of the holy Ghost.

Verse. 16. That I should preach him among the Gentiles.
It pleased God (says he) to reveal his son in me. To what purpose? Not
only, that I my self should believe in the son of God, but also that I
should preach him among the Gentiles. Paul is the Apostle of the Gentiles. To.
15.15.16.17
And why not among the Jews? Lo here we see that Paul is properly the
Apostle of the Gentiles, albeit he preached Christ among the Jews also.

Paul comprehe^deth here in few words (as he is wont) his whole divinity,
Paul's divinity.
which is to preach Christ among the Gentiles. As if he would say: I will not
burden the Gentiles with the law, because I am the Apostle and Evangelist of
the Gentiles, and not their law geuer. Thus he directs all his words against
the false Apostles. As though he would say: The office of Paul to the Gentiles.
O ye Galathia^s, ye have not heard the righteousness of the law, or of works
to be taught by me: for this belongs to Moises and not to me Paul, being the
Apostle of the Gentiles. For my office and ministry is to bring the gospel
unto you, and to show unto you the same revelation which I my self have had.
Therefore ought you to hear no teacher to teach the law. For among the
Gentiles, the law ought not to be preached, but the Gospel, not Moises but the
son of God, not the righteousness of works, but the righteousness of Faith.
This is the preaching that properly belongs to the Gentiles.

Verse. 16. Immediately I communicated not with flesh and blood.
In that he makes mention here of flesh and blood, he speaks not of the
Apostles. For by and by he adds: Neither came I again to Jerusalem, to them
which were Apostles before me. But this is Paul's meaning, that after he had
once received the revelation of the gospel from Christ, he consulted not with
any man in Damascus, much less did he desire any man to teach him the gospel:
Again, that he went not to Jerusalem, to Peter and the other Apostles to
learn the gospel of them, but that forthwith he preached Jesus Christ in
Damascus, where he received baptism of Ananias, and imposition of hands: for
it was necessary for him to have the outward sign and testimony of his
calling. The same also writes Luke. Act. 9.

Verse. 17. Neither came I to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles before me,
but went into Arabia, and turned again unto Damascus.
That is, I went into Arabia before I saw the Apostles or consulted with them,
and forthwith I took upon me the office of preaching among the Gentiles: for
thereunto I was called, and had also received a revelation from God. He did not
then receive his gospel of any man, or of the Apostles them selves, but was
content with his heavenly calling, and with the revelation of Jesus Christ
alone. Wherefore this whole place is a confutation of the false Apostles
argument, The confutation of the argument of the false Apostles.
which they used against Paul: saying, that he was but a scholar and hearer
of the Apostles, who lived after the law: moreover, that Paul himself also
had lived according to the law, and therefore it was necessary that the Gentiles
them selves should keep the law and be circumcised. To the end therefore that
he might stop the mouths of these cauillers, he rehearses this long history.
Before my conversion (says he) I learned not my Gospel of the Apostles, nor
of any other of the brethern that believed (for I persecuted extremely, not
only this doctrine, but also the Church of God, and wasted it): neither after
my conversion, for I preached straight ways, not Moses with his law, but Jesus
Christ at Damascus, consulting with no man, neither as yet having seen any of
the Apostles.

Verse. 18. Then after.iij. years I came again to Jerusalem, to visit Peter,
and abode with him.xv. days. And none other of the Apostles savve I, save
James the Lords brother.
Paul grants that he was with the Apostles, but not with all the Apostles.
Howbeit he declares that he went up to Jerusalem to them, not commanded, but
of his own accord: Moreover, not to learn any thing of them, but to see
Peter. The same thing Luke also writes in the ninth chapter of the Acts: that
Barnabas led Paul to the Apostles, and declared to them, how he had seen the
Lord in the way, and how he spoke unto him: Also how he had preached boldly at
Damascus in the name of Jesus. This witness bears Barnabas of him. All his
words therefore are so framed to the purpose, yt they prove his gospel not to
be of man. In deed he grants that he had seen Peter and James the brother
of our Lord, but none other of the Apostles besides these two, and that he
learned nothing of them.

He grau^teth then that he was at Jerusalem with the Apostles: and this did the
false Apostles truly report. He grants moreover that he had lived after ye
manner of the Jews, but yet only among ye Jews. And this is it which he says
in the. Paul became all things to all men. 1. Cor. 9.20.
1. Cor. 9. when I was free from all men, I made my self servant to all
men, that I might vvin the more. To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might
vvin the Jews, and I was made all things to all me^, that I might by all
means save some. He yeldeth then that he was at Jerusalem with the Apostles,
but he denies that he had learned his gospel of them. Also he denies that he
was constrained to teach the Gospel as the Apostles had prescribed. The whole
effect then of this matter lies in this word, to see: I went (says he) to see
Peter, and not to learn of him. Therefore neither is Peter my master, nor yet
James. And as for the other Apostles, he utterly denies that he saw any of
them.

But why does Paul repete this so often, that he learned not his gospel of
men, Why Paul glories so much that he has not learned his gospel of any man.
nor of the Apostles them selves? His purpose is this, to persuade the churches
of Galatia which were now led away by the false Apostles, and to put them out
of all dout that his gospel was the true word of God, and for this cause he
repeteth it so often. And if he had not prevailed herein, he could never have
stopped the mouths of the false apostles. For thus they would have objected
against him: We are as good as Paul: we are the disciples of the Apostles as
well as he: Moreover, he is but one alone and we are many, therefore we excel
him, both in authority and in number also.

Here Paul was constrained to boast, to affirm, and swear, that he learned
not his gospel of any man, neither received it of the Apostles themselves. For
his ministry was here in great danger, and all the churches likewise which
had used him as their chief pastor and teacher. The necessity therefore of his
Ministry and of all the Churches required, that with a necessary and holy
pride he should vaunt of his vocation, and of the revelation of the Gospel
made open unto him by Christ, that their consciences might be thoroughly
persuaded yt his doctrine was the true word of God. Here had Paul a weighty
matter in hand: namely, that all the Churches in Galatia might be kept in sound
doctrine: and to be short, the matter was concerning life and death
everlasting. For if the pure and certain word of God be once taken away, there
remains no more consolation, life, or salvation. The cause therefore why he
recites these things, is to retain the Churches still in true doctrine, and
not to maintain his own glory, as Porphirie and Julian do falsely sclaunder
him. His purpose is then to show by this history, that he received his gospel
of no man: Again, that he preached for a certain time, namely the space of
three or four years, the self same Gospel that the Apostles had preached, by
revelation from God, both in Damascus and Arabia, before he had seen any of
the Apostles.

Verse. 20. And now the things which I write unto you, he hold I witness
before God, I lie not.
Wherefore adds he an oath? Because he reports an history he is constrained
to swear, to the end that the churches might believe him, and also that the
false Apostles should not say: Paul svveareth.
who knows whether Paul speaks the truth or no? Here you see that Paul
the elect vessel of God was in so great contempt among his own Galathians, to
whom he had preached, that it was necessary for him to swear that he spoke the
truth If this happened then to the Apostles, to have so mighty adversaries,
that they durst despise them and accuse them of lying, what marvel is it, if
the like at this day happen unto us, which in no respect are worthy to be
compared with the Apostles? He swears therefore in a matter (as it seems) of
no weight, yt he speaks the truth, namely that he tarried not with Peter to
learn of him, but only to see him: but if you way the matter diligently, it
is very weighty and of great importance, as may appear by that is said before.
In like manner we swear after ye example of Paul: God knovveth that we lie
not. etc.

Verse. 21. After that, I went into the coasts of Syria and Cilicia.
Syria and Cilicia are countries near situate together. This is it that he
still goes about to persuade, that as well before he had seen the Apostles as
after, he was always a teacher of the Gospel, and that he received it by the
revelation of Christ, and was never any disciple of the Apostels.

Verse. 22, 23. For I was unknown by face unto the churches of Judea, which
were in Christ. But they heard only some say, he which persecuted in times
past, now preaches the faith which before he destroyed. And they glorified
God.
This he adds for the sequel and continuance of the history, The testimony
of all the churches in Judea for Paul.
that after he had seen Peter, he went into Syria and Cilicia, and there
preached, and so preached that he won the testimony of all the churches in
Judea. As though he would say: I appeal to the testimony of all the churches,
yea even of those which are in Judea. For the churches do witness, not only
in Damascus, Arabia, Syria, and Cilicia, but also in Judea, that I have
preached the same faith which I once withstoode and persecuted. And they
glorify God in me: not because I taught that circumcision and the law of Moses
ought to be kept, but for the preaching of faith and for the edifying of the
churches by my ministry in the Gospel. Ye therefore have the testimony, not
only of the people of Damascus and of Arabia, but also of the whole Catholic
or universal church in Judea.

The second Chapter.
Verse. 1. Then fourtene years after I went up to Jerusalem.
PAVLE taught that the Gentiles were justified by faith only without the works
of the law. Paul's doctrine.
This doctrine when he had published abroad among the Gentiles, he comes to
Antioch, and declares to the Disciples what he had done. Then they which had
been trained up in the old customs of the law, Contention of such as were
turned from the Jews, against Paul. Acts. 15.89. The declaration of Paul
and Barnabas as touching those things which were done among the Gentiles.
rose against Paul with great indignation, for that he preached to the
Gentiles liberty from the bondage of the law. Whereupon followed great
dissension, which afterward stirred up new troubles. Paul and Barnabas stood
strongly to the truth, and testified, saying: wheresoever we preached among the
Gentiles, the holy Ghost came and fell upon those which heard the word: and
this was done through out all the churches of the Gentiles. But we preached not
circumcision, neither did we require the keeping of the law, but we preached
only faith in Jesus Christ: and at this preaching of faith, God gave to the
hearers the holy Ghost. The holy Ghost therefore does approve the Faith of the
Gentiles without the law and Circumcision. For if the preaching of the Gospel
and faith of the Gentiles in Christ had not pleased him, he had not come down
in a visible shape upon the uncircumcised which heard the word. Seeing then by
the only hearing of faith he came down upon them, it is certain that the holy
ghost by this sign has approved the faith of ye Gentiles. For it does not
appear that this was ever done before at the preaching of the law.

Then the Jews and many of the Phariseis which did believe, and
notwithstanding bare yet a great zeal to the law, earnestly striving to
maintain the glory thereof, set themselves fiercely against Paul, What
they aunsvvere to Paul in this disputation, which are so earnest for the
law.
(who affirmed that the Gentiles were justified by faith only without the
works of the law) contending that the law ought to be kept, and that the
Gentiles ought to be circumcised: for otherwise they could not be saved. And no
marvel: for the very name of the law of God is holy and dreadful. The
heathen man, which never knew any thing of the law of God, if he hear any man
say: This doctrine is the law of God, doubtless he is moved. How the^ could it
be but yt the Jews must needs be moved, and vehemently contend for the
maintenance of the law of God, which even from their infancy had been nusled
and trained up therein? They that were converted from among the Jews hardly
forsook the law.


We see at this day how obstinate the Papists be in defending their traditions
and doctrines of Devils. Wherefore it was much less to be marvelled, that the
Jews did so vehemently and zelously strive for the maintenance of their law,
which they had received from god. Custom is of such force, that where as
nature is of it self inclined to the observation of the law, by long
continuance it so confirms nature that now it becomes a double nature.
Custom is a double nature
Therefore it was impossible for the Jews which were newly converted to
Christ, suddenly to forsake the law: who though they had received the faith of
Christ, thought it necessary notwithstanding to observe the law. And with this
their weakness God did bear for a time, until the doctrine of the Gospel
might be plainly discerned from the law. God alvvayes bears with the
infirmities of his people. 1 Reg. 8.21. Exodus 34.6.7.
So he bare with the infirmity of Israel in the time of King Achab, when the
people halted between two religions. He bare also with our weakness, while we
were under the blindness of the Pope: For he is long suffering and full of
mercy. But we must not abuse this goodness and patience of the Lord, nor
continue still in our weakness and error, since the truth is now reueiled
by the clear light of the Gospel.

Moreover, they that stood against Paul, What they had to say for themselves
that resisted Paul.
affirming that the Gentiles ought to be circumcised, had to lay for
themselves, first the law and custom of the country, then the example of the
Apostles, and last of all the example of Paul himself who had circumcised
Timothy. Wherefore if Paul in his defense said, that he did not this of
necessity, but for Christian love and liberty, lest they which were weak in
faith should be offended: which of them would believe him? Hereunto all the
people would answer: Since it is evident that thou have circumcised Timothy,
thou may say what thou will: notwithstanding thou have done it. For this is a
matter far passing all man's capacity, and therefore they could not understand
it.

Moreover, no defense can serve when a man has lost the favor of the people
and is fallen into such deadly hatred and contempt. Paul therefore seeing this
contention and these clamours daily to increase more and more, and being also
warned by revelation from God: after fourtene years (besides those wherein he
had preached in Damascus and Arabia) he goes up again to Jerusalem, to
confer his Gospel with the other Apostles: yet not for his own cause, but
for ye peoples sake.

Now this contention touching the observation of the law, exercised Paul a
long time after, and wrought him much trouble. But I do not think yt this is
the contention which Luke speaks of in the.15. of the Acts, which happened
(as it appears) by and by after ye beginning of the Gospel. But this history
which Paul here mencioneth, seems to be done long after, when Paul had now
almost eightene years preached the Gospel.

Verse. 1. With Barnabas, and took with me Titus.
Paul takes unto him vvitnesses Barnabas and Titus.
He joins unto himself two witnesses, Barnabas and Titus. Barnabas was Paul's
companion in preaching to the Gentiles freedom from the servitude of the law.
He was also a witness of all those things which Paul did, Barnabas.
and had seen the holy Ghost given unto the Gentiles which were circumcised
and free from Moses law, by the only preaching of faith in Jesus Christ, and
he only stuck to Paul in this point: that it was not necessary that the
Gentiles should be burdened with the law, but that it was enough for them to
believe in Christ. Wherefore by his own experience he testifies with Paul
against the Jews, that the Gentiles were made the children of God and saved
by faith alone in Jesus Christ, without the law or circumcision.

Not as having any soueraintie, otherwise then an Evangelist, or chief of the
eldershippe of the churches. 1 Tit. 1.5.
Titus was not only a Christian but also the chief ouerseer in Crete: For unto
him Paul had committed the charge of governing the churches there. Tit, 1. And
this Titus was a Gentile.

Verse. 2. And I went up by revelation.
For unless Paul had been admonished by revelation, he had not gone up to
Jerusalem. But because God warned him by a special revelation, and commanded
him to go up, therefore he went. And this he did to bridle or at least to
appease the Jews that believed and yet obstinatly contended about the keeping
of the law, to the end that the truth of the gospel might be the more
advanced and confirmed.

Verse. 2. And I communicated with them touching the gospel.
You hear the^ that at length, after.18. years he went up to Jerusalem, and
conferred with the Apostles touching his gospel.

Verse. 2. Which I preach among the Gentiles.
For among the Jews he suffered the law and circumcision for a time, as the
other Apostles did: I am made al things unto all men, says he, 1. Cor. 9: yet
ever holding the true doctrine of the gospel, Paul so defends the gospel,
that he will have all things give place unto it. Acts. 13.3^.
which he preferred above the law, circumcision, the Apostles, yea and an
Angel from heaven. For thus says he unto the Jews: Through this Christ is
preached unto you the forgeuenes of sins. And he adds very plainly: And
from all things, from the which ye could not be justified by the law of
Moses, by him every one that believes is justified. For this cause he sets
forth and defends the doctrine of the gospel so diligently every where, and
never suffers it to come in danger. Notwtstanding he did not suddenly break
out at the first, but had regard unto ye weak. And because the weak should
not be offended, there is no doubt but he spoke to the Jews after this manner:
If that unprofitable service of Moses law which nothing avails to
righteousness, do so highly please you, ye may keep it still for me, so that the
Gentiles which are not bound to this law, be not charged therwithall.

Paul confesses then, that he co^ferred the gospel with the Apostles, (but
says he) they profited me or taught me nothing: but I rather for the defense
of the liberty of the gospel, in the presence of the Apostles did constantly
resist those which would needs force the observation of the law upon the
Gentiles, and so did overcome them. Wherefore your false apostles lie in saying
that I circumcised Timothy, that I shaued my head in Cenchrea, and that I went
up to Jerusalem at the commandment of the Apostles. Nay rather I glory that
in going up to Jerusalem by the revelation of God, and not at the commandment
of the Apostles, and there conferring my Gospel with them, I brought to pass
the contrary, that is to say, obtained that the Apostles did approve me, and
not those which were against me.

Now, The question that was handled in the meting of the Apostles.
the question whereupon the Apostles conferred together in this The practice of
the church in the time of the Apostles, as touching Synodes and conferences,
teach us now to use the same, when we have any controversy.
assembly, was this: whether the keeping of the law were necessary to
justification or no? To this Paul answers: I have preached unto the
Gentiles, according to my gospel which I received from God, faith in Christ and
not the law: and at this preaching of faith they received the holy Ghost: and
hereof Barnabas shall bear me witness. Wherefore I conclude that the Gentiles
ought not to be burdened with the law, nor to be circumcised. Notwithstanding I
give no restraint to the Jews herein. Who if they will needs keep the law and
be circumcised, I am not against it, so that they do it with fredome of
conscience. And thus have I taught and lived among the Jews, being made a Jew
unto the Jews: holding ever ye truth of the gospel notwtstanding.

Verse. 2. But particularly with them that were the chiefest.
That is to say, I did not only confer with the brethern, but with those
that were the chiefest among them.

Verse. 2. Lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain.
Why Paul says, lest I had run in vain.
Not that Paul doubted that he ran or had run in vain, for as much as he had
now preached the gospel.18. years (for it follows incontine^t in the text, ye
he had continued firm and constant all this while and had prevailed) but for
that many did think that Paul had therefore preached the gospel so many
years in vain, because he had set the Gentiles at liberty from the
observation of the law. Moreover, this opinion daily more and more increased,
that the law was necessary to justification. Wherefore in going up to Jerusalem
by revelation, he meant so to remedy this evil, yt by this conference all men
might plainly see his gospel to be in no point contrary to ye doctrine of the
other apostles: to the end yt by this means he might stop the mouths of the
adversaries, which would else have said that he ran or had run in vain. Note
here by the way, the virtue of man's righteousness, or of the righteousness of ye
law to be such, that they which teach it, do run and live in vain.

Verse. 3. But neither yet Titus which was with me, though he were a
Grecian, was compelled to be circumcised.
This word, was compelled, sufficiently declares what the conference and
conclusion was: What was decreed in this conference.
to wit, that the Gentiles should not be constrained to be circumcised, but
that circumcision should be permitted to ye Gentiles for a time: not as
necessary to righteousness, but for a reverence to the forefathers: also for
charities sake toward the weak (lest they should be offended) until they
were grown up more strong in faith: For it might have seemed strange and
unseemly upon a sudden to forsake the law and traditions of the fathers,
which had been given to this people from God with so great glory.

Paul then did not reject circumcision as a damnable thing, neither did he by
word or deed enforce the Jews to forsake it. For in the.1. Cor. 7. he says:
If any man be called being circumcised, How Paul refused circumcision. 1.
Cor. 7.18.
let him not add uncircumcision. But he rejected circumcision as a thing not
necessary to righteousness, seeing the fathers themselves were not justified
thereby, but it was unto the^ as a sign only or a seal of righteousness,
whereby they testified and exercised their faith. Notwithstanding the believing
Jews which were yet weak, and bare a zeal to the law, hearing that
circumcision was not necessary to righteousness, could understand this no
otherwise, but yt it was altogether unprofitable and damnable. And this fond
opinion of the weak Jews yt false apostles did increase, to the end that the
hearts of the people being stirred up against Paul, by this occasion, they
might thoroughly discredit his doctrine. How we teach fasting and other
Christian exercises now a days.
So we at this day do not reject fasting and other good exercises as damnable
things: but we teach yt by these exercises we do not obtain remission of
sins. When the people hear this, by and by they judge us to speak against
good works. The Papists also do confirm and increase this opinion in their
preachings and wrytings. But they lie, and do us great wrong. For many years
past there has been none that has more truly and faithfully taught concerning
good works, then we do at this day.

Paul then did not so condemn circumcision, as though it were sin to
receive it or keep it: What was determined in that meting of the Apostles.
for so the Jews would have been highly offended: but it was decided in this
conference and Council, that it was not necessary to justification, and
therefore not to be forced upon the Gentiles. So this moderation was found, that
for the reverence of the fathers, and charity toward the weak in faith, the
Jews should keep the law and circumcision still for a time, notwithstanding
they should not thereby seek to be justified: And also that the Gentiles should
not be burdened therewith, both because it would have been to them a very
strange thing, and also a burden intolerable: Acts. 15.^0.
briefly that none should be constrained to be circumcised, or any restrained
from circumcision.

Paul therefore compelled none yt would be circumcised, to remain
uncircumcised, so yt he knew circumcision not to be necessary to justification.
This co^straint would Paul take away. Therefore he suffered ye Jews to keep ye
law, so yt they did it with a free conscience. For he had ever taught, as well the
Jews as the Gentiles, yt in conscience they ought to be free from the law and
circumcision: like as all the Patriarks and all the faithful in ye old
Testament were free in conscience and justified by faith, and not by ye law or
circumcision. And in deed Paul might have suffered Titus to be circumcised:
Why Paul would not suffer Titus to be circumcised.
but because he saw that they would compel him thereunto, he would not. For if
they had prevailed therein, by and by they would have gathered that it had been
necessary to justification, and so through this sufferance they would have
triumphed against Paul.

Now, as the false apostles would not leave circumcision and the observation of
the law indifferent, but required the same as necessary to salvation: so at
this day our adversaries do obstinately contend that men's traditions ca^ not
be omitted without peril of salvation. And thus of an example of charity, they
make an example of faith, when notwithstanding there is but one example of
faith, which is to believe in Jesus Christ: And this, as it is alone necessary
to salvation, so does it also indifferently pertain to all men.
Notwithstanding the adversaries would rather worship the Devil ten times in
stead of God, The obstinate adversaries defend their wicked blasphemies by
tyranny and violence.
then they would suffer this. Therefore they are daily hardened more and more,
and seek to establish their impieties and blasphemies against God, defending
the same by force and tyranny, and will not agree or consent unto us in any
point. But what then? Let us go on boldly in the name of the Lord of hosts,
and for all this, let us not cease to set forth the glory of Jesus Christ: and
let us fight valiantly against the kingdom of Antichrist by the word and by
prayer, Math. 6.9.10.
that the name of God alone may be sanctified, that his kingdom may come, and
that his will may be done. And that this may spedely come to pass, we desire
even from the bottom of our hearts and say, Amen, Amen.

The victory of Paul against the false Apostles.
This triumph of Paul therefore was very glorious: namely, that Titus which was
a Gentile, although he were in the mids of the Apostles and all the faithful
where this question was so vehemently debated, was not yet constrained to be
circumcised. This victory Paul carries away, and says that in this
conference it was decided by the consent of all the Apostles, the whole Church
also approving the same, that Titus should not be circumcised. This is a strong
argument, and makes very much against the false apostles. And with this
argument: Neither was Titus compelled to be circumcised, Paul was able to
repress and mightily convince all his adversaries. As if he should say: Why
does these counterfeit apostles so falsely report of me, saying, that I am
compelled to keep circumcision by the commandment of the Apostles, seeing I
have the witness of all the faithful in Jerusalem, and moreover of all the
Apostles them selves, that by my pursuit and travail the contrary was there
determined: and that I did not only there prevail that Titus should not be
circumcised, but that the Apostles did also approve and ratify the same. Your
counterfeit apostles therefore do lie deadly, which sclau^der me under the name
of the Apostles, and thereby deceive you: for I have the Apostles and all the
faithful, not against me, but with me. And this I prove by the example of
Titus.

Notwithstanding, Paul (as I have often said) did not condemn circumcision as
an unprofitable thing, nor constrained any man thereunto. For it is neither
sin nor righteousness to be circumcised or uncircumcised, as it is neither
sin nor righteousness to eat or drink. For whether thou eat or eat not,
thou art neither better nor worse. 1. Cor. 8.8.
But if any man should add thereto either sin or righteousness, and say: If
thou eat thou sinnest, if thou abstain thou art righteous, he should show him
self both foolish and wicked. The Pope puts righteousness in the keeping of
his traditions, and damnation in breaking of them.
Therefore to join ceremonies with sin or righteousness, is great impiety: As
the Pope does, who in his form of excommunication, threatens to all those
that do not obey the law of the Bishop of Rome, Gods great curse and
indignation, and so makes all his laws necessary to salvation. Wherefore the
Devil him self speaks in the person of the Pope, and in all the Popes
decrees. For if salvation consists in keeping of the Popes laws, what need
have we of Christ to be our iustifier and Savior?

Verse. 4.5. For all the false brethern that crept in, who came in privily to
epsy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us
into bondage. To whom we gave not place by subjection for an hour, that the
truth of the Gospel might continue with you.
Here Paul shows the cause why he went up to Jerusalem, and there conferred
his gospel with the other Apostles, and why he would not circumcise Titus: Not
that he might be the more certain, or confirmed in the gospel by the
Apostles, for he nothing doubted thereof: but that the truth of the gospel
might continue in the Churches of the Galathians, and in all the Churches of
the Gentiles. We see then that this business of Paul was no light matter.

Now, where he speaks of the truth of the Gospel, he shows that there be
two gospels, a true and a false gospel. Indeed the gospel of it self is
simple, true and sincere, but by the malice of Satan's ministers it is corrupt
and defaced. Therefore where he says: The truth of the gospel, he would have us
to understand also the contrary. As if he would say: The gospel of the false
apostles.
The false apostles do also preach a faith and a gospel, but they are both
false. Therefore have I set my self so constantly against them: and in that I
would not give place unto them, I have brought to pass that the truth of the
gospel continues with you. The gospel of the Pope, and other heretics the
Anabaptists. Verse. 7.
So the Pope and the Anabaptists do brag at this day that they teach the
Gospel and faith in Christ. True it is: but with such fruit as the false
apostles once did, whom Paul calls before in the first chapter troublers of
the church, and subuerters of the gospel of Christ. On the other side he says
that he teaches the truth of the gospel. As if he should say: Those things
which the false apostles teach, Of preachers which preach Christ corruptly.
brag they never so much that they teach the truth, are nothing else but
stark lies. So all Heretics pretend the name of God, of Christ, and of the
Church. Also they pretend that they will not teach errors or lies, but most
certain truth and the pure Gospel of Christ.

The truth of the gospel, what it is.
Now the truth of the gospel is, that our righteousness comes by Faith only
without the works of the law. The corruption or falshode of the Gospel is,
The corruption of the gospel.
that we are justified by Faith, but not without the works of the law. With
the like condition the false apostles also preached the Gospel. Even so do our
Papists and crafty Sophisters at this day. The doctrine of the Papists
concerning faith.
For they say that we must believe in Christ, and that Faith is the foundation
of our salvation: but it justifies not, except it be furnished with charity.
This is not the truth of the Gospel, but falshode and dissimulation. But the
true Gospel in deed is, that works or charity are not the ornament or
perfection of faith: but that faith of it self is Gods gift and Gods work in
our hearts, which therefore justifies us because it apprehends Christ our
redemer. Man's reason has the law for his object, The object of reason.
thus thinking with it self: This I have done, this I have not done. But faith
being in her own proper office, has no other object but Jesus Christ the
son of god, The object of faith, is the thing whereunto the eye of faith
looks, which is Christ.
delivered to death for the sins of the whole world. It looks not to
charity. It says not: what have I done? what have I offended? what have I
deserved? but what has Christ done? what has he deserved? Here the truth of
the gospel answers thee: he has redeemed thee from thy sin, from the Devil
and from eternal death. Faith therefore acknowledges, that in this one person
Jesus Christ, it has forgeuenes of sins and eternal life. He that turns
his eyes away from this object, has not true Faith but a fantasy and a vain
opinion, and turns his eyes from the promise to the law, which terrifieth and
drives to desperation.

Wherefore those things which the Sophisters and Scholemen have taught
concerning the justifying faith being furnished with charity, Faith adorned
with charity.
are no thing else but mere dreams. For that faith which apprehe^deth Christ
the son of God and is furnished with him, is the same faith that justifies,
and not that faith which includes charity. For a true and a steadfast faith
must lay hold upon nothing else but Christ alone, and in the afflictions and
terrors of conscience it has nothing else to lean unto, but this Diamond
Christ Jesus. Wherefore he yt apprehends Christ by faith, True faith.
although he be never so much terrified with the law, and pressed down with
the weight of his sins, yet may he be bold to glory that he is righteous. How
or by what means? Even by that precious Pearl Christ which he possesses by
faith. This our adversaries understand not, and therefore they cast away this
precious Pearl Christ, and in his place they set charity, which they say is
their precious Diamund. Now, when they can not tell what Faith is, it is
impossible that they should have faith: much less can they teach it unto
others. And as for that which they will seem to have, it is nothing else but a
very dream, an opinion, and natural reason, and not faith.

This I say, to the end ye may perceive that Paul mentioning here the truth of
the Gospel, speaks with great feruencie of spirit for the more reproof of
the contrary. For by these words he reprehendeth the false apostles, for that
they had taught a false gospel: for they required circumcision and the
observation of the law as necessary to salvation. Moreover, Sleights practiced
of the false apostles against Paul.
they went about by crafty sleights and policy to entrap Paul: for they
watched him narowly, to see whether he would circumcise Titus or no: Also
whether he durst withstand them in ye presence of the Apostles, and for this
cause he reprehendeth them bitterly. They vve^t about (says he) to spy out
our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into
bondage. Wherefore the false apostles armed them selves on every side, that they
might convince and confound him before the whole congregation. Besides this,
they went about to abuse ye authority of ye Apostles, in whose presence they
accused him, saying: Paul has brought Titus being uncircumcised, into ye
company of all the faithful: he denies and condemns ye law in your presence
which are Apostles. If he dare be so bold to attempt this here and before you,
what will not he attempt in your absence among ye Gentiles?

Wherefore when he perceived yt he was so craftily assailed, he strongly wtstode
the false apostles, saying: we did not suffer our liberty which we have in
Christ Jesus to come in danger, although the false brethren sought by all
means to snare us, and put us to much trouble: but we overcame them even by
the judgment of the Apostles themselves, and we would not yield unto them, no
not one hour (for, no doubt, their drift was to have caused Paul to surcease
from this liberty for a time) since we saw yt they required the observation
of ye law as necessary to salvation. But if they had alleged nothing else but
charitable bearing with the brethren, no doubt but Paul would have given them
place. But it was an other thing that they sought, to wit, that they might
bring Paul and all that stuck to his doctrine into bondage. Therefore he
would not yield unto them, no not the space of one moment.

In like manner do we also offer to the Papists all that is to be offered, yea
and more then we ought. Only we except the liberty of conscience which we
have in Christ Jesus. For we will not suffer our consciences to be bound to any
work, so that by doing this thing or that, we should be righteous, or leaving
the same undone, we should be damned. These be the corruptions which Luther
here says, that he tolerateth more then he ought to do: but the safest way
is, quite to reject them.
We are contented to eat the same meats that they eat, we will keep their
feasts and fasting days, so that they will suffer us to do the same with a
free conscience, and leave these threatening words wherwt they have terrified
and brought under their subjection the whole world, The Popes thunderbolts.
saying: we commau^d, we charge, we charge again, we excommunicate, etc. but
this liberty we can not obtain: like as Paul also could not in his time.
Therefore we do as he did. For when he saw that he could not obtain this
liberty, he would not give place to the false Apostles, for the space of one
hour.

Wherefore like as our adversaries will not leave this free unto us, that only
faith in Christ justifies: so on the other side neither will we nor can we
give place unto them, that faith furnished with charity justifies. It is a
point of true godliness to be stout against the meritmongers for keeping our
Christian liberty.
Here we will and we ought also to be rebellious and obstinate against them, for
else we should lose the truth of the Gospel: we should lose our liberty which
we have, not in the Emperor, not in Kings and Princes, not in that mo^ster the
Pope, not in the world, not in flesh, blood, reason etc: but which we have in
Christ Jesus. We should lose faith in Christ, which (as before I have said)
apprehe^deth nothing else but that precious pearl Christ. This faith whereby we
are regenerate, justified, and engrafted into Christ, if our adversaries will
leave unto us sound and vncorrupt: we offer unto them that we will do all
things, so that they be not contrary to this faith. But because we can not
obtain this at their hands, we again for our part will not yield unto them
one hears breadth* For here is a great and a weighty matter in hand, namely
touching the death of the son of God: who by the will and commandment of
the father was made flesh, When faith is sound all things are safe
was crucified and died for the sins of the world. If faith here give place,
then is this death and resurrection of the son of God in vain: then is it
but a fable that Christ is the Savior of the world: The holy obstinacy and
stoutnes of the Godly.
then is God also found a lier because he has not performed that he promised.
Our stoutnes therefore in this matter is godly and holy: For by it we seek to
preserve our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, and thereby to retain the
truth of the Gospel: which if we lose, then do we also lose God, Christ, all
the promises, faith, righteousness, and everlasting life.

But some man will say: The law is divine and holy. The doctrine of the law.
Let the law have his glory: but yet no law, be it never so divine and holy,
ought to teach me that I am justified and shall live through it. I grant it
may teach me that I ought to love God and my neighbor: also to live in
chastity, sobernes, patience etc. but it ought not to show me how I should be
delivered from sin, the Devil, death and hell. Here I must take counsel of
the Gospel, The doctrine of the Gospel.
I must harken to the Gospel which teaches me, not what I ought to do (for
that is the proper office of the law): but what Jesus Christ the son of God
has done for me: to wit, that he suffered and died to deliver me from sin
and death. The Gospel wills me to receive this and to believe it. And this is
the truth of the Gospel. It is also the principal article of all Christian
doctrine: wherein the knowledge of all godliness consists. Most necessary it
is therefore that we should know this article well, teach it unto others, and
beat it into their heads continually. For as it is very tender, so is it
soon hurt. This Paul had well tried, and of this have all the godly also good
experience.

To conclude, Paul would not circumcise Titus, and (as he says) for no other
cause but for that certain false brethren were crept in, to epsy out their
liberty, and would have constrained Paul to circumcise Titus. Paul perceauing
this constraint and necessity, would give no place, no not for one hour, but
strongly resisted them: And therefore he says: Neither Titus which was with
me, being a Gentile, Galat. 2.3.
was compelled to be circumcised. If they had required this in the way of
brotherly charity, doubtless he would not have denied it. But sei^g they would
have done it as a necessary thing, and that by compulsion, to the ill example
of others, to the overthrowing of the Gospel and to bring men's consciences
into bondage, therefore he sets himself mightily against them, and
prevailed so, that Titus was not circumcised.

It may seem to be but a small matter to be or not to be circumcised. But when
a man has an affiance in keeping, or is in fear for not keeping of it, here God
is denied, Christ is rejected, the grace and all the promises of God are
refused. They are to be restrained to such as serve to edification or else we
ought to leave them.
But if circumcision be kept without this addition, there is no danger. If the
Pope would in this sort require of us the keeping of his traditions as bare
ceremonies, it should not be grievous unto us to keep them, forasmuch as we also
do use ceremonies: but to bind men's consciences to these ceremonies, and to
make of them an high and acceptable service unto God, yea and moreover to add,
that life and salvation, or death and everlasting damnation consists in the
observation hereof, is a deuilish superstition and full of blasphemy. Who so
will not cry out against this, accursed be he.

Verse. 6.7. And of them which seemed to be great, I was not taught (what
they were in times past, it is no matter to me. etc.)
Why Paul gives not unto the apostles any glorious title.
This is a vehement and a stout confutation. For he gives not to the true
Apostles themselves any glorious title: but as it were abasing their dignity,
he says: which seemed to be great, that is, which were in authority: upon
whom the determination of all matters depe^ded. Notwithstanding the authority
of the Apostles was in deed very great in all the churches. And Paul also
did not seek any whit to diminish their authority, but he thus contemptuously
answers ye false Apostles, which set ye authority and dignity of ye
Apostles against Paul in all the churches, yt thereby they might weaken his
authority and bring his whole ministry into contempt. This Paul might not
suffer. To ye end therefore that the truth of the Gospel and liberty of
conscience in Christ might continue among the Galathians and in all the
churches of the Gentiles, he answers stoutly to the false Apostles, that he
passed not how great the Apostles were or what they had been in time past: and
whereas they alleged the authority of the name of the Apostles against him, it
touches him nothing at all. He confesses that the Apostles are in deed
somewhat, and that their authority is to be reverenced. Notwithstanding his
Gospel and ministry ought not to be overthrown for the name or title of any
whatsoever, be he an Apostle or an Angeil from heaven.

And this was one of the greatest arguments that the false Apostles used
against Paul. The Apostles said they, were familiarly conversant with Christ
for the space of three years. They heard and saw all his preachings and
miracles. The argument of the false Apostles against Paul.
Moreover they themselves preached and wrought miracles whiles Christ was yet
living in the world: whom Paul never saw in the flesh, and as touching his
conversion, it was long after the glorification of Christ. Wherefore they
should now consider which of these they ought more to believe: Paul which was
but one and alone, and also but a disciple, yea and one of the last of all: or
the chiefest and most excellent Apostles, The word of God to be preferred
before all titles and persons whatsoever.
which long before Paul were sent and confirmed by Christ himself. To this
Paul answers: what of all this? This argument concludes nothing. Let the
Apostles be never so great, yea let them be Angels from heaven, it is no
matter to me. The question is not here concerning the excellency of the
Apostles, but concerning the word of God and the truth of the Gospel. Herein
consists all the weight of the matter, that the Gospel may be preserved pure
and vncorrupt: which also above all things ought to be preferred. Therefore how
great Peter and the other Apostles have been, what great miracles they have
wrought, it is no matter to me. This is it that I only seek, even that the
truth of the Gospel may continue among you. This seems to be but a slender
answer of Paul, when of purpose he so contemns the authority of the
Apostles which the false Apostles alleged against him, and gives no other
solution to their mighty argument then this: it is no matter to me.
Notwithstanding he adds a reason of the confutation.

Verse. 6. God accepts no man's person.
This place he alleges out of Moses, who uses ye same, God respects no
man's person. Deuteronomy. 10.17. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Romans 2.11. Eccles. 35.16. Acts. 10.34.
Ephesians. 6.9. Colos 3.26.
not once but many times: Thou shall not accept in judgment the person of the
rich man or of the pore. And this is a principle of divinity: God is no
acceptor of persons. With the which saying he stops the mouths of the false
apostles. As though he would say: Ye set those against me which seem to be
somewhat: but God cares not for such outward things. He regards not ye
office of Apostleship. It is not ye dignity or authority of me^ ye he looks
upon. And in toke^ hereof, Judas. Saul. Ismaell. Esau.
he suffered Judas one of ye chiefest Apostles, and Saul one of ye greatest
kings, yea and the first of all, to fall away and to be damned. Ismaell also
and Esau he refused, being both first born. So shall you find throughout al ye
whole scripture yt god oftentimes rejected those which in outward show were
very good and holy me^. And in these examples God seems sometimes to be cruel:
but it was most necessary yt such fearful examples should be showed and also
be written. For this vice is naturally grafted in us, that we highly esteem yt
persons and outward appearance of men and more regard the same then the word of
God. Contrariwise God will have us to fix our eyes and to rest wholly upon the
word it self: Man regards the person.
he will not have us to reverence and adore the Apostleship in the persons of
Peter and Paul, but Christ speaking in them, and the word which they bring and
preach unto us.

This the natural man can not see: but the spiritual man only discerns the
person from ye word, Every creature of God may be called the veil of God,
because God is, as it were covered and shadowed under it.
ye veil of God from God himself. Now this veil of God is every creature.
Moreover, God here in this life deals not with face to face, but covered and
shadowed from us: yt is, as Paul says in an other place: 1. Cor. 13.12.
we se him now as it were through a glass and darkely. Therefore we can not
be without veiles in this life. But wisdom is here required, which can discern
the veil from God himself: and this wisdom the world has not. The covetous
man hearing that man lives not by bread only, Deuteronomy. 5.10. Mat. 4.4.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, eats the bread,
but he sees not God in the bread: Man trusts to the veiles of God, and not
to God himself.
for he beholds the veil only and outward show. So he does with gold and
other creatures, trusting to them so long as he has them: but when they leave
him, he despaireth. And thus he honors not the creator, but the creatures,
not God but his own belly.

This I speak least any man should think yt Paul utterly condemns these
outward veiles or persons. For he says not that there ought to be no person,
but that there is no respect of persons with God. There must be persons and
outward veiles: The outvvard veiles are Gods good creatures, but we must not
trust in them, which is wicked.
God has given them and they are his good creatures: but we must put no trust
in them. All the matter is in the right using of things, and not in the things
themselves, as before I have said. There is no fault in circumcision or
uncircumcision (for circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing) but
in the use thereof. To put righteousness in the one, and unrighteousness in the
other, that use is damnable and ought to be taken away: which being removed,
circumcision and uncircumcision are things tolerable.

So the Prince, the magistrate, the preacher, the scholemaster, the scholar,
the father, the mother, the children, the master, the servant are persons and
outward veiles, which God will have us to acknowledge, love and reverence as
his creatures, which also must needs be had in this life: but he will not have
us so to reverence them or trust unto them, that we forget him. And to the end
that we should not too much magnify the outward persons or put any trust in
them, God leaves in them offenses and sins, yea great and foul sins, to
teach us what difference there is between the person and God him self. God
suffers his dear saints to fall into great vices, that we should not cleave
to their persons.
2. Sam. 11.4.17.
David that good king, because he should not seem to be a person upon whom men
should trust, fell into horrible sins, adultery and murder. Mat. 26.69.
Mark. 14.66. Luke. 22.55. John. 18.25. Men are but men.
Peter that excellent Apostle denied Christ. These and such like examples,
whereof the scripture is full, ought to warn us that we repose not our trust in
the person and outward veil, nor think that when we have the outward shows
and shadows, we have al things: As it is in Popery, where they judge all
things according to the outward veil, and therefore all Popery is nothing
else but a mere respecting of persons and outward shows. God has given his
creatures to our use and to do us service, and not as Idols, that we should do
service unto them. Let us then use bread, wine, apparel, possessions, gold,
silver, and all other creatures: but let us not trust or glory in them: for we
must trust and glory in God alone: He only is to be loved, he only is to be
feared and honored.

Paul calls here the person of man the Apostleship or office of the
Apostles, which wrought many and great miracles, Paul calls the Apostleship
the person of man.
taught and converted many to the faith, and were also familiar with Christ.
Briefly, this word person comprehends the whole outward conversation of the
Apostles which was holy, and their authority which was great. Notwithstanding
(says he) God esteems not these things: Not that he esteems them not at
all, but in the matter of justification he regards them not, be they never so
great and so glorious. For we must diligently mark this distinction, that in
matters of divinity we must speak far otherwise then in matters of policy.
In matters of policy (as I have said) God will have us to honor and reverence
these outward veiles or persons as his instruments by whom he governs and
preserves the world. But when the question is touching religion, conscience,
the fear of God, faith and the service of God, we must not fear these outward
persons, we must put no affiance in them, look for no comfort from them, The
outvvard person is not to be looked upon in judgment, Deuteronomy. 1.
or hope for deliverance by them either corporally or spiritually. For this
cause God will have no respect of persons in judgment: for judgment is a
divine thing. Wherefore I ought neither to fear the judge, nor trust to the
judge: but my fear and trust ought to be in God alone, who is the true judge.
The civil judge or magistrate I ought in deed to reverence for Gods cause,
whose minister he is: but my conscience may not stay or trust upon his justice
and equity, or be feared through his unjust dealing or tyranny, whereby I
might fall into any offense against God, either in lying, in bearing false
witness, or denying the truth etc. Otherwise I will reverence and honor the
magistrate with all my heart.

What can the Pope otherwise do being Antichrist but take upon him dominion
such as Gods word never allowed of?

Mark what servitude Luther was content to endure so that he and others
might enjoy the liberty of conscience.

Acts. 4.19.

The dominion of the Pope intolerable.


So I would also honor the Pope and love his person if he would leave my
conscience free and not compel me to sin against God. But he will so be
feared and adored as can not be done without offense to the majesty of God.
Here since we must needs lose the one, let us lose the person and stick to
God. We could be content to suffer ye dominion of the Pope: but because he
abuses the same so tirannously against us, and would compel us to deny and
blaspheme God, and him only to acknowledge as our Lord and master, clogging
our consciences, and spoiling us of the fear and trust which we should have in
God, therefore we are compelled by the commandment of God to resist the Pope:
for it is written that we must rather obey God then men. Therefore without offense
of conscience (which is our singular comfort) we contemn ye authority of ye
pope.

There is a vehemency in this word God: for in the cause of religion and the
word of God, there must be no respect of person: but in matters of policy we
must have regard to the person: otherwise there must needs follow a contempt
of all reverence and order. In this world god will have an order, a reverence
and a difference of persons. For else the child, the scholar, the servant,
the subject would say: I am a Christian as well as my father, my scholemaster,
my master, my Prince: why then should I reverence him? Before God there is no
respect of persons, neither of Grecian nor of Jew, Romans ^.9.10
but all are one in Christ: although not so before the world.

Thus Paul dissolueth the argument of ye false Apostles touching ye authority
of ye Apostles, saying that it is nothing to yt purpose. For the question is
not here concerning ye respect of persons, but there is a far weightier matter
in hand, yt is to say, a divine matter concerning God and his word, and whether
this word ought to be preferred before ye Apostleship or no. Whereunto Paul
answers: So that the truth of the gospel may continue, so that the word of
God and the righteousness of faith may be kept pure and vncorrupt, let the
Apostleship go, let an Angel from heaven, let Peter, let Paul and altogether
perish.

Verse. 6. Nevertheless they that seemed to be the chief, did communicate
nothing with me.
As though he would say: I did not so confer with the Apostles, that they
taught me any thing. For what should they teach me, since Christ by his
revelation had before sufficiently taught me all things? and moreover since I
have now preached ye Gospel the space of eightene years among the Gentiles,
and Christ has wrought so many miracles by me, whereby he has confirmed my
doctrine? Wherefore it was but a conference and no disputation. Wherein I
learned nothing, What Paul did in that conference.
neither did I reca^t, nor yet defend my cause, but only declared what things I
had done: to wit, that I had preached to the Gentiles faith only in Christ
without the law, and that by this preaching of faith the holy Ghost came down
upon the Gentiles, which immediately spoke with diverse tongues. Which thing when
ye Apostles heard, they witnessed yt I had taught ye truth. Wherefore the false
Apostles do me great wrong which pervert and turn all these things clean
contrary.

Now if Paul would give no place to the false Apostles which set the
authority of the true Apostles against him: much less ought we to give place
to our adversaries, which have nothing else to brag of but the authority of
their Idol the Pope. I know that the godly ought to be humble: The holy pride
of the godly against the Pope.
but against the Pope I will and I ought to be proud with an holy pride and
say: Thou Pope, I will not be subject unto thee: I will not take thee for my
master, for I am sure that my doctrine is true and godly. But the Pope will not
hear this doctrine. Nay he would force us to obey his laws and his decrees,
and if we will not, he will by and by excommunicate, curse and condemn us as
heretics. Such pride therefore against the Pope is most necessary. And if we
should not so be proud, and utterly condemn in ye holy Ghost both him wtal
his doctrine, and the devil ye father of lies speaking in him, VVhy^e the godly
are proud against the Pope.
we should never be able to defend this article of ye righteousness of faith. We
do not then contemn the authority of the Pope because we would bear rule
over him, neither do we go about to exalt our selves above all sovereign
power, since it is evident that we teach all men to humble and submit
themselves to the higher powers The Pope is no power ordained of God.
ordained of God: but this is it that we only seek, that the glory of God may
be maintained and the righteousness of faith may be kept pure and sound.

Wherefore if the Pope will grant unto us that God alone by his mere grace
through Christ does justify sumers, This is impossible for Antechrist the
son of perdition to acknovvledge.
we will not only carry him in our hands, but will also kiss his feet. But
since we can not obtain this, we again in God are proud against him above
measure, and will give no place, no not one hears breadth to all the Angels in
heaven, not to Peter, not to Paul, not to an hundredth Emperors, not to a
thousand Popes, nor to the whole world. Be it far from us that we should here
humble ourselves, since they would take from us our glory, even God himself
that has created us and given us all things, and Jesus Christ who has redeemed
us with his blood. Let this be then the conclusion of altogether, that we will
suffer our goods to be taken away, our name, our life, and all that we have:
but the Gospel, our faith, Jesus Christ we will never suffer to be wrested
from us. And cursed be that humility which here abaseth and submits it
self. Nay rather let every Christian man here be proud and spare not, except
he will deny Christ.

Wherefore God assisting me, my forehead shall be more hard then all men's
foreheads. Here I take upon me this title, according to the proverb: I give
place to none. Yea I am glad even wtal my heart in this point to be called
rebellious and obstinate. And here I confess that I am and ever will be stout
and stern and will not one inch give place to any creature. Charity gives
place: for it suffers all things, believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. Love
suffers all things, but faith can bear nothing
hops all things, endures all things. But faith gives no place, yea it can
suffer nothing, according to this ancient verse, Non patitur ludum fama,
fides, oculus: That is, man's good name, his faith, and his eye will not be
dalied withal. Wherefore a Christian, as touching his faith, can never be to
proud nor to stout, neither must he relent or give place, no not the breadth
of one hear. For faith makes a man here like unto God: 2 Pet. 1.4,
but God suffers nothing, he gives place to none, for he is immutable. So is
faith immutable, and therefore may suffer nothing, give place to no man. But as
touching charity let a Christian man yield and suffer all things, for therein he
is but a man.

Verse. 7.8. But contrariwise when they savve that the Gospel over
uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel over circumcision was
unto Peter (for he that was mighty by Peter in the Apostleship over the
circumcision, was also mighty by me toward the Gentiles.)
With these words Paul mightily confuteth the false Apostles: For here he
chalengeth to himself the same authority which the false Apostles attributed
to the true Apostles. And he uses here a figure which is called an Inuersion,
returning their argument against themselves. The false Apostles (says he) do
allege against me the authority of the great Apostles, to maintain their
cause. But I contrariwise do allege the same against them for my defense, for
the Apostles are on my side. Wherefore O my Galathians, believe not these
counterfeit apostles which brag so much of the authority of the Apostles
against me. For the Apostles when they saw the Gospel over the uncircumcision
to be committed to me, and knew of the grace that to me was given, gave to me
and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, approving my ministry and giving
thanks unto God for the gift which I had received. Thus he retourneth the
argument of the false apostles upon them selves. And here is also in these
words an ardent vehemency, and more contained in matter, then in words is
able to be expressed.

This seems to be a hard text, To Peter is committed the Gospel over
circumcision. and to Paul over uncircumcision. Acts. 10.17.
where Paul says that the gospel over the uncircumcision was committed unto
him, and over the circumcision unto Peter, when notwtstanding Paul almost
every where preached to the Jews in their Sinagoges, and Peter likewise to the
Gentiles. There are examples and testimonies of both in the Acts. Peter
converted the Centurian with his family, which was a Gentile. He wrote also to
the Gentiles, as his first epistle testifies. 1. Peter. 1.1.
Paul preaching Christ among the Gentiles, Acts. 9.20.
enters notwithstanding into the Sinagoges of the Jews, and there preaches
the gospel. And our Savior Christ in Matthew and Mark commands his
apostles to go throughout the whole world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. Mat. 23.9.10. Marc. 16.15.
Paul likewise says: The gospel preached to every creature which is under
heaven. Coloss. 1.5.6.
Why then does he call himself the Apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter with the
other, the Apostles of the circumcision?

This question is not hard. Paul here has respect unto this, that the other
Apostles remained specially in Jerusalem, until God called them unto other
places. Thus stood the matter then for the time, that whiles the political
state of the Jews continued, the Apostles still remained in Judea: but when ye
destruction of Jerusalem approached, they were dispersed throughout the whole
world. Acts. 13.1.2. Peter the Apostle of the Jews, and Paul of the
Gentiles.
But Paul as it is written in the Acts, by a singular vocation was chosen to
be the Apostle of the Gentiles, and being sent out of Judea, he traueled
through ye countries of the Gentiles. Now were the Jews dispersed almost
throughout ye whole world, and dwelt here and there in cities and other places
amongs the Gentiles. Paul coming thither was wont (as we read in the Acts)
to go into the Sinagoges of the Jews, Acts. 9.20. Paul preached also to the
Jews.
and by this occasion he first brought unto them as the children of the
kingdom, this glad tidings, that the promises made unto the fathers, were now
accomplished by Jesus Christ. When they would not hear this, he turned to the
Gentiles, as Luke witnesses, where he brings in Paul thus boldly speaking
against the Jews: Act. 13.45.46. Math. 10.6.
It was necessary that we should first preach the word of God unto you: but
seeing ye reject it, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo
we turn to the Gentiles. And in the Acts: Acts. 28.2^.
Be it known therefore unto you, that this salvation of God is sent unto the
Gentiles, and they shall hear it. Wherefore Paul was sent specially unto the
Gentiles. But because he was a detter unto all, Romans 1.14.
and became all things unto all me^, therefore, occasion being offered, he went
into the Sinagoges of the Jews, where not only the Jews, but also ye Gentiles
heard him preaching Christ. Otherwhiles he preached publicly in the market
place, in houses, and by the rivers sides. He was specially then the Apostle of
the Gentiles, as Peter was of the Jews: who notwithstanding preached Christ to
the Gentiles also when occasion was offered.

Vncircu^cisio^. Circumcision.
And here he calls uncircumcision the Gentiles, and circumcision the Jews by
a figure named Synecdoche, which under part comprehe^deth the whole: which
figure is commonly used in the scripture. The gospel then over uncircumcision,
is that which should be preached to the Gentiles. This gospel he says was
committed unto him, as the gospel over circumcision was unto Peter. For as
Peter preached the gospel among the Jews, so did he among the Gentiles.

Paul receaueth not his gospel of the other Apostles.
This he often repeteth, yt Peter, James and John, which seemed to be the pillars
of the church, taught him nothing, nor committed unto him the office of
preaching the Gospel, as having authority and rule over him. But they them
selves (says he) did see that the gospel was committed unto me: but not by
Peter. For as I did not receive or learn my gospel of man, so did I receive no
commandment by man to preach the same, but both the knowledge and the
commandment to preach it among the Gentiles, I received immediately from God:
like as the charge was given of God unto Peter to preach the same among the
Jews.

This place witnesses very plainly that the Apostles had like calling, The
Apostles calling equal.
like charge, and all one Gospel. Peter preached no other Gospel then the
rest of the Apostles did, neither did he appoint to others their charge and
office: Equality among the Apostles.
but there was an equality among them all, for they were all taught of God,
that is, both their vocation and charge was wholly and immediately from God.
There was none therefore greater then other: none that had any prerogative
above other. And therefore where the Pope vau^teth that Peter was the chief of
the Apostles, that thereby he might confirm and stablish his usurped primacie,
it is an impudent lie.

Verse. 8. For he that was mighty by Peter.
This is a confutation of an other argument of the false apostles. Why do the
false apostles boast (says he) that the Gospel of Peter was mighty, that he
converted many, that he wrought many and great miracles, raised up the dead,
and with his shadow cured the sick? Acts. 15.14. The Gospel of Peter mighty.
I grant all these things to be true: but Peter received this power from
heaven. God gave a virtue to his word that many did believe him, and great
miracles were wrought by him. The same power had I also: which I received not
of Peter, but the same God and the same spirit which was mighty in Peter, was
mighty in me also. I had the same grace: I taught many: I wrought many
miracles, and through my shadow also I cured the sick. And this Luke
testifies in the.19. Acts. 19.11.12.
of the Acts in these words: And God wrought no small miracles by the hands
of Paul, so that from his body were brought napkins and handkercheefes, and
the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them. Read
more hereof in the.13.16.20.28. of the Acts.

To conclude, Paul will be counted in no point inferior to the rest of the
Apostles: and herein he stands with a godly and a holy pride. For he was
compelled of necessity to take upon him stoutly against Peter, The stoutnes of
Paul is not carnal.
and the zeal of God constrained him to be proud whether he would or no.
Certain profane spirits, as Iulianus and Porphirius not considering this,
thought it to be but a carnal pride that caused Paul thus to do: such as at
this day we see in the Pope and his generation. But Paul had not here his own
business in hand, but a matter of Faith. Now, as concerning Faith we ought to
be invincible, and more hard if it might be, then the Adamant stone. But as
touching charity, we ought to be soft, and more flexible then the reed or
leaf that is shaken with the wind, and ready to yield to every thing.
Therefore the controversy was not here touching the glory of Paul, but the
glory of God, the word of God, the true worship of God, true religion, and the
righteousness of Faith, to the end that these things might still remain pure
and vncorrupt.

Verse. 9. And when James and Cephas and John knevv of the grace that was
given unto me, which are counted to be pillars, they gave to me and to
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should preach unto the
Gentiles, and they unto the circumcision.
That is to say, when they heard that I had received my calling and charge from
god to preach the gospel among the Gentiles, and that God had wrought so many
miracles by me: moreover, that so great a number of the Gentiles were come to
the knowledge of Christ through my ministry, and that the Gentiles had
received the holy Ghost without the law and circumcision by the only preaching
of faith, they glorified God for this grace which was given unto me.

What Paul calls grace in this place.
He calls grace here what so ever he had received of God: to wit, that of a
persecuter and waster of the Church, he was made an Apostle, was taught by
Jesus Christ, and enriched with spiritual gifts. And heerewithall he shows
that Peter gave testimony unto him, Peter alovveth the ministry of Paul.
that he was a true Apostle, sent and taught, not by him self nor by the other
Apostles, but by God alone, and not only acknowledged the ministry and
authority of Paul, and gifts of the spirit which were in him, as heavenly
things, but also approved and confirmed the same, and yet not as a superior
and ruler, but as a brother and witness. James and John did ^^^^wise the same.
Wherefore he concludes that they which are esse^^^ for the chief pillars
amongst the Apostles, are wholly with him and not against him.

Verse. 9. The right hands of fellowship.
As if they should have said: We (O Paul) in preaching the gospel, do agree
with thee in all things. Therefore in doctrine we are companions and have
fellowship together therein: that is to say, we have all one doctrine, Paul and
the other Apostles taught all one gospel.
for we preach one gospel, one baptism, one Christ and one faith. Wherefore
we can teach or enjoin thee nothing, since there is one mutual consent
betwixt us in all things. For we do not teach any other or more excellent
things then thou do: but the same gifts which we have, we see to be in thee
also, saving that to thee is committed the Gospel over the uncircumcision, as
the Gospel over the circumcision is unto us. But we conclude here that neither
uncircumcision nor circumcision ought to hinder our society and fellowship,
since it is but one gospel which we both preach.

Hitherto Paul has proved by manifest witness, not only from god, but also
from man, that is to say, the apostles, yt he had truly and faithfully
preached the gospel. Therefore he shows that what so ever the false apostles
said to diminish his authority, is but fained and forged matter, and yt the
testimony of the Apostles makes for him, and not for the false apostles. But
for that he is alone and without witness, therefore he adds an oath, and calls
God to record that ye things which he has spoken are true.

Verse. 10. Warning only that we should remember the poor: which thing
also I was diligent to do.
After the preaching of the Gospel, A good minister must be careful for the
poor. Esaias. 61.1. Math. 11.1. Luke. 4.16.
the office and charge of a true and faithful Pastor is, to be mindful of ye
poor. For where the Church is, there must needs be poor: who for the most
part are the only true disciples of the Gospel, as Christ says: The poor
receive the glad tidings of the Gospel. For the world and the Devil do
persecute the Church, and bring many to poverty, who are afterward forsaken
and despised of the world. Moreover the world not only offends herein, The
world is forvvard to give for the maintenance of ungodliness, but it cares
not for Gods ministers.
but is also careless for the maintenance and preservation of the gospel,
true religion, and the true service of God. There is none that will now take
any care for the nourishing of the ministers of the Church, and erecting of
schools: but for the erecting and stablishing of false worship, superstition
and idolatry, no cost was spared, but every man was ready to give largely what
so ever could be made. And hereof came up so many Monasteries, so many
cathedral Churches, so many Bishopprickes in the Popes church where all
impiety reigned, with so great revenues provided for their sustentation: where
as now a whole City thinks it much to find one or two poor ministers and
preachers of the Gospel, which before, whiles the Pope and all impiety
reigned, was charged and burdened with finding so many Monasteries and infinite
swarms of massing Priests. To be brief, true religion is ever in need. And
Christ complains, that he is hungry, thirsty, harbourles, naked and sick.
Contrariwise, Math. 25.3^.
false religion and impiety flourishes and abounds with all worldly wealth
and prosperity. Wherefore a true and faithful Pastor must have a care of the
poor also: and this care Paul here confesses that he had.

Verse. 11. And when Peter was come to Antiochia, I vvithstoode him to his
face: for he was to be blamed.
Paul goes on still in his confutation, saying that he not only has for his
defense the testimony of Peter and the other Apostles which were at Jerusalem:
but also that he withstoode Peter in the presence of the whole Church of
Antioche. He shows here a matter not done in a corner, but in the face of the
whole church. For (as before I have said) he has here no trifeling matter in
hand, but the chiefest article of all Christian doctrine. The majesty of this
article of justification.
The value and majesty where of who so rightly estemeth, to him all other
things shall seem but vile and naught worth. For what is Peter? what is Paul?
what is an Angel from heaven? what are all other creatures to the article of
Justification? which if we know, then are we in the clear light: but if we be
ignorant thereof, the^ are we in most miserable darkness. Wherefore if ye see
this article impugned or defaced, fear not to resist either Peter or an Angel
from heaven, following the example of Paul, who seeing the majesty of this
article to be in danger for the dignity of Peter, did nothing regard his
dignity and estimation, yt he might keep ye same pure and vncorrupt. For it
is written: Mar. 10.39. Math. 16.25.
He that loves father or mother, or his own life more then me, is not
worthy of me.

It behooves us to be obstinate in Gods matter.
Wherefore we are not ashamed for the defense of the truth, to be counted and
called of the hypocrites proud and obstinate, and such as will be only wise,
will hear none, will give place to none. Very necessary it is here to be
inflexible and obstinate. For the cause why we offend man, that is to say,
tread down the majesty of the person or of the world, is such, that the
sins which the world judges to be most heinous, are counted singular virtues
before God. In that we love our parents, honor the Magistrate, show
reverence to Peter and other ministers of the word, we do well. But here we
have in hand the cause neither of Peter nor parents, nor Magistrate, nor of the
world, nor of any other creatures, but of god him self. Here if I give no
place to my parents, to the Magistrate, or an Angel from heaven, I do well.
For what is the creature in respect of the creator? Yea, what are all creatures
compared unto him? Even as one drop of water in respect of the whole sea. Why
then should I so highly esteem Peter which is but a drop, and set God aside
which is the whole sea? Let the drop therefore give place to the sea, and let
Peter give place unto God. This I say, to the end that ye should diligently
weye and consider the matter whereof Paul entreats: For he entreats of God,
who can never be magnified enough.

And here of purpose he adds this clause, to his face, against the venomous
vipers and apostles of Satan, which sclaunder those that are absent, and in
their presence dare not once open their mouth: as the false apostles did, whom
also here he touches by the way: A Christian will openly reprove vices in his
brother
which durst not speak evil of him in his presence, but in his absence
sclaundered him most spitefully. So did not I (says he) speak evil of
Peter, but frankly and openly I withstoode him, not of any colorable pretense,
ambition, or other carnal affection, but because he was to be blamed.

Here let other men debate whether an Apostle may sin or no. The Prophets and
Apostles have sinned, and had their infirmities, and yet God has delivered
unto us by their ministry, whatsoever he would have us to follow without
corruption.
This say I, that we ought not to make Peter's fault less then it was in deed.
The Prophets themselves have sometimes erred and ben deceived. 2. Sam. 7.3.4.5
Acts 1.6. Peter sinned. Math. 28. Acts. 10.11.
Nathan of his own spirit said unto David that he should build the house of
the Lord. But this Prophecy was by and by after corrected by a revelation from
God, that it should not be David, because he was a man of war and had shed
much blood, but his son Solomon yt should build up the house of ye Lord. So
did the Apostles err also. For they imagined that the kingdom of Christ should
be carnal and worldly, as we may see in the first of the Acts. And Peter him
self, although he heard this commandment of Christ: Go into the whole
world. etc. Yet he had not gone unto Cornelius, if he had not ben admonished
by a vision. But in this matter he did not only err, but also committed a
great sin, and if Paul had not resisted him, all the Gentiles which did
believe, had been constrained to receive circumcision, and to keep the law. The
believing Jews also had been confirmed in their opinion: to wit, that the
observation of these things was necessary to salvation, and by this means they
had received again the law instead of the Gospel, Moises instead of
Christ: No Saints without sin.
and of all this great enormitie and horrible sin Peter by his dissimulation
had been the only occasion. Therefore we may not attribute to the Saints such
perfection, as though they could not sin.

Luke witnesses yt there was such great dissension between Paul and Barnabas,
Dissension between Paul and Barnabas. Acts. 15.1.2.3.
(which were put a part together for the ministry of ye gospel among the
Gentiles, and had traueled through many regions, and preached unto them the
gospel) yt the one departed from the other. Here we must needs say yt there
was a fault either in Paul or in Barnabas. And doubtless it could not be but
that the discord was exceeding great which separated these two companions being
joined together in such a holy fellowship, as the text witnesses. The fauls of
the Saints bring great comfort unto us.
Such examples are written for our consolation. For it is a great comfort unto
us when we hear that even ye saints which have the spirit of god, do sin.
Which comfort they would take from us which say that the saints do not sin.

Judges. 1.6. 2 Samuel 11.24. Job. 3.12. Job. 4 etc. Ierem. 10.14. Jonas. 4 3.
Sampson, David and many other excellentmen, full of the holy Ghost, fell into
great sins. Job and Jeremy curse the day of their nativity. Elias and Jonas
are weary of their life, and desire death. Such errors and offenses of the
saints, the scripture sets forth to the comfort of those that are
afflicted and oppressed with desperation, and to the terror of the proud. No
man has so grievously fallen at any time, but he may rise again. And on the
other side, no man takes so fast footing but he may fall. If Peter fell, I may
likewise fall. If he rose again, I may also rise again. And such examples as
these are, ye weak hearted and tender consciences ought to make much of, that
they may the better understand what they pray for when they say: forgive us our
trespases: and, I believe the forgeuenes of sins. We have the self same
spirit of grace and prayer which the Apostles and all the saints had, neither
had they any prerogative above us. We have ye same gifts which they had, the
same Christ, baptism, word, forgeuenes of sins, all which they had no less
need of then we have, and by the same are sanctified and saved as we be.

Verse. 12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles.
Peter lives with the Gentiles like a Gentile.
The Gentiles which were converted to the faith, did eat meats forbidden by
the law, and Peter being conversant with the Gentiles which were converted, did
eat with them, and drunk wine also which was forbidden, knowing that herein
he did well, and therefore boldly transgressed the law with the Gentiles. Paul
confesses that he also did the like when he says that he became as a Jew to
the Jews, and to them that were without law, 1 Cor. ^.20.21.
as though he were without law: That is to say, with the Gentiles he did eat
and drink like a Gentile and kept no law at all: with the Jews, according to
the law he abstained from all things forbidden in the law. For he labored to
serve and please all men that he might gain all. Wherefore Peter in eating and
drinking with the Gentiles sinned not, but did well, and knew that it was
lawful for him so to do: For he showed by this transgression, that the law
was not necessary to righteousness, and also delivered the Gentiles from the
observation of the law. For if it were lawful for Peter in one thing to break
the law, it was lawful for him to break it in all things. And Paul does not
here reprove Peter for his transgression, but for his dissimulation, as
follows.

Verse. 12. But when they were come, he vvithdrevve and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the circumcision.
Here then ye see Peter's offense, as Paul plainly sets it forth. The
offense of Peter.
Paul accuses him not of malice or ignorance, but of dissimulation and
infirmity, in that he absteined from meats forbidden in the law, fearing lest
the Jews which came from James, should be offended thereby, and had more
respect to the Jews then to ye Gentiles: whereby he gave occasion as much as in
him was, to overthrow the Christian liberty and truth of the Gospel. For in
that he did withdraw and utterly separate himself, abstaining from meats
forbidden in the law (which notwithstanding he had eaten of before) he
ministered a scruple of conscience to the faithful, thus to gather upon his
example: What the believing Jews gathered of Peter's abstaining.
Peter abstaineth from meats forbidden in the law: therefore he that eats
meats forbidden in the law, sins and transgresses the law: but he that
abstaineth is righteous and keeps the law, for else would not Peter have
withdrawn himself. But because he did so, and of purpose refused those meats
which before he did eat, it is a sure argument that such as eat against the
law do sin, and such as abstain from meats which the law forbids, do
keep the law and are justified thereby.

Here note, that the end of this fact of Peter is reproved of Paul, and not
the fact it self: for the fact in it self was not evil. A fact is one
thing and the end of a fact an other.
To eat and drink, or not to eat and drink is nothing. But the end, that
is: If thou eat thou sinnest: If thou abstain thou art righteous, is evil.
So circumcision of it self is good, but this end is evil: If thou be not
circumcised after the law of Moses, thou can not be saved. Also to eat
meats prohibited in the law, is not evil: but this shrinking and
dissimulation of Peter is evil. For it might be said: Peter abstaineth from
meats forbidden in the law: wherefore if thou do not likewise abstain, thou
can not be saved. This Paul might in no wise dissemble: for the truth of ye
Gospel was here in danger. To the end therefore that this truth might
continue sound and vncorrupt, he resisted Peter to his face.

And here we must make a distinction. Meats may be refused two manner of
ways. 1 Cor. 9.
For meats may be refused two manner of ways. First for christian charities
sake. And herein there is no danger: for to bear with the infirmity of my
brother it is good. So Paul himself both did and taught. Secondly, by
abstaining from them to obtain righteousness, and for not abstaining to sin
and to be be damned. Here accursed be charity with all the service and works
of charity whatsoever. For thus to refrain from meats is to deny Christ, to
tread his blood under our feet, to blaspheme the holy Ghost, and to despise
all holy things. Wherefore if we must lose the one, let us rather lose man our
friend and brother, then God our father. For if we lose god our father, man our
friend and brother can not continue.

Jerome, who neither understood this place nor the whole epistle besides,
thinks this to be but a fained reprehension of Paul, and therefore he
excuses Peter's fall, saying, that it was done by ignorance. But Peter offended
through dissimulation, The dissimulation of Peter
and thereby he had established ye necessity of the law, he had constrained both
Gentiles and Jews to revolt from the truth of the Gospel, he had given them
great occasion to forsake Christ, to despise grace, to return to ye Jewish
religion and to bear all ye burdens of ye law, if Paul had not reproved him
and by that means revoked ye gentiles and Jews which were offended through
this example of Peter, to ye liberty which is in Christ Jesus and to the truth
of ye gospel.

The sin of Peter.
Wherefore if a man would here set forth and amplify Peter's offense, it should
appear to be very great, and yet was it not done by malice or ignorance, but
by occasion and fear only. Thus we see what ruins may come by one man's fall
and offense if it be not well seen to and corrected in time. Wherefore we may
not trifle with this article of justification: A fall in doctrine is easy.
neither is it without good cause that we do so often and so diligently put you
in mind thereof.

The Council holden at Jerusalem.
And it is much to be marueled that Peter being such an excellent Apostle should
thus do: who before in ye Council of Jerusalem stood in a manner alone in the
defense of this article and prevailed therein, namely yt salvation comes by
faith without the law. Acts. 15.
He that before did so constantly defend the truth and liberty of the gospel,
now by his fall in abstaining from meats forbidden in ye law, 1. Cor. 10.12.
is not only the cause of great offense, but also offends against his own
decree. Wherefore let him which thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.
Ceremonies are dangerous: and if such offense come by keeping those which
were commanded of God, what may we think of such as Antechrist has
devised, serving to no edification?
No man would think what dangers and perils do ensue of traditions and
ceremonies: which not wtstanding we can not want. What is more necessary then
ye law and the works thereof? and yet there is great danger lest by the same,
men be brought to ye denial of Christ. For of the law often times comes a
trust and affiance in works, and where that is, there can be no affiance in
Christ. Christ therefore is soon denied and sone lost, as we may see by this
example of Peter, who knew this article of justification better then we do, and
yet how easily did he give occasion of such an horrible ruin, that all ye
Gentiles should thereby have fallen away from the preaching of Paul, and by this
means should have lost ye gospel and Christ himself. And all this should
have been done under a holy pretense. For they might have said: Paul, hitherto
thou have taught us yt we must be justified by grace without the law. Thou
see now that Peter does the contrary: for he abstaineth from meats forbidden
in the law, and hereby he teaches us yt we can not be saved except we receive
circumcision and observe the law.

Verse. 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, in so much
that Barnabas was brought into their dissimulation also.
Here ye may plainly see that Paul charge Peter with dissimulation. If Peter
dissembled, Peter's dissimulation.
then did he certainly know what was the truth and what was not. He that
dissembleth sins not of ignorance, Dissimulation what it is.
but deceaueth by a color which he knows himself to be false. And other
(says he) dissembled likewise with Peter, in so much that Barnabas also (who
was Paul's companion, and had now a long time preached among the Gentiles faith
in Christ without the law, together with Paul) was brought into their
dissimulation. Ye have here then Peter's offense plainly described to be mere
dissimulation, which afterward had been an occasion of the ruin of the Gospel
then newly received, if Paul had not resisted him.

And this is a wonderful matter, that God preserved the church being yet but
young, and the Gospel it self, by one only person. Paul alone stands to
the truth: for he had lost Barnabas his companion, and Peter was against him.
So sometime one man is able to do more in a Council then the whole Council
besides. Which thing the Papists themselves do witness. And for example they
allege Paphnutius stood in the defense of the marriage of ministers against
the whole Council.
Paphnutius, who wtstoode ye whole Council of Nice (which was the best of all
that were after the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem) and prevailed
against it.

This I say, The law and the Gospel must be discerned one from the other.
to the end that we should diligently learn the article of Justification, and
make a plain difference between the law and the Gospel, and that in this
matter we should do nothing by dissimulation, or give place to any man, if we
will retain the truth of the gospel and faith sound and vncorrupt: which (as
I have said) are soon hurt. Wherefore in this case away with reason, The law
and reason are against faith.
which is an enemy to Faith: which also in tentations of sin and death,
leans not to the righteousness of Faith (for thereof it is utterly ignorant),
but to her own righteousness, or at least to the righteousness of the law. Now
as soon as the law and reason join together, faith loses her virginity: for
nothing more strongly fights against faith then the law and reason. And
these two enemies can not be conquered but with great labor and difficulty:
which we must conquer notwithstanding if we will be saved.

What we must do when our conscience is terrified.
Wherefore, when thy conscience is terrified with the law, and wrestleth with
the judgment of God, ask counsel neither of reason nor of the law, but rest
only upon grace and the word of consolation, and so stand herein, as if thou
had never heard any thing of the law: but ascend up to the glass of faith,
where neither the law nor reason do shine, but only the light of Faith, which
assures us that we are saved by Christ alone without any law. Thus the gospel
leads us beyond and above the light of the law and reason, into the inward
and deep secrets of Faith, where the law and reason have nothing to do.
Notwithstanding we must hearken also unto the law, but in place and time.
Moises whiles he was in the mountain, Exodus 19.16. Moises in the mountain
was above the law: so in matters of faith, we must have nothing to do with
the law.
where he talked with God face to face, had no law, made no law, ministered no
law: but when he was come down from the mountain, he was a lawgeuer, and
governed the people by the law. So the conscience must be free from the law,
but the body must be obedient unto the law.

Hereby it appears yt Paul reproved Peter for no light matter, but for the
chiefest article of all Christian doctrine, which by Peter's dissimulation was
in great danger. For Barnabas and the other Jews dissembled together with
him, which did all offend: not through ignorance or malice, but for fear of ye
Jews: whereby their hearts were so blinded that they did not see their sin.
And certainly it is much to be marvelled, that such excellent men as Peter,
Barnabas and others, should so suddenly and so lightly fall, especially in that
thing which they knew to be well done, and had also before taught unto others.
It is a perilous thing therefore to trust to our own strength, We must not
trust in our own strength.
be we never so holy, never so well learned, and although we think our selves
never so sure of that we know, For in that whereof we think our selves most
sure, we may err and fall, and bring our selves and other into great danger.
Let us therefore diligently and with all humility employ our selves in the
study of the holy scriptures, and let us heartely pray that we never lose the
truth of the gospel.

Without Gods assistance we can do nothing.
Thus we see then that we are nothing, with all our gifts be they never so
great, except God assist us. When he leaves us to our selves, our wisdom and
knowledge is nothing. For in the hour of tentation it may suddenly come to
pass, that by the subteltie of the Devil, all the comfortable places of the
scripture shall be taken out of our sight, and such places only as contain
threatenings shall be set before our eyes and shall oppress and utterly confound
us. Let us learn therefore yt if God wtdraw his hand we may soon be
overthrown. Neither let any man vaunt and glory of his own righteousness,
wisdom and other gifts, but let him humble himself and pray with the
Apostle: Luc. 17.5.
Lord increase our faith.

Verse. 14. But when I savv that they went not the right way to the truth of
the Gospel.
This is a wonderful example of such excellent men and pillars of the church.
There is none but Paul that has his eyes open and sees the offense of Peter,
Peter knovveth not his error.
Barnabas and the other Jews which dissembled with Peter. On the other side,
they do not see their own offense: nay they rather think that they do well
in bearing with the infirmity of the weak Jews. Wherefore it was very
necessary that Paul should reprove their offense and not dissemble it, and
therefore he accuses Peter, Barnabas and other, that they went not ye right
way to the truth of the Gospel: that is to say, they swarued from the truth of
the Gospel. It is a great matter that Peter should be accused of Paul as one
that was fallen from the truth of the Gospel. He could not be more grievously
reprehended. Yet he suffered it patiently, and no doubt but he gladly
acknowledged his offense. I said before that many have the Gospel but not the
truth of the Gospel. So Paul says here, that Peter, Barnabas and other of
the Jews went not the right way to the truth of the Gospel: that is to
say, they had the Gospel, but they walked not uprightly according to the
Gospel. For albeit they preached the Gospel, yet through their dissimulation
(which could not stand with the truth of the Gospel) they established the law:
but the establishing of the law is the abolishing of the Gospel.

Who so then can rightly judge between the law and the Gospel, let him thank
God, and know that he is a right Divine. In the time of tentation, The
difference of the law and the Gospel is most diligently to be learned.
I confess that I my self do not know how to do it as I ought. Now, the way
to discern the one from the other, is to place the Gospel in heaven and the
law on the earth: to call the righteousness of the Gospel heavenly, and the
righteousness of the law earthly: and to put as great difference between the
righteousness of the gospel and of the law, as God has made between heaven and
earth, between light and darkness, The difference between the law and the
Gospel.
between day and night. Let the one be as the light and the day, and the
other as the darkness and the night. And would to God we could yet further
separate the one from the other. Wherefore if the question be concerning the
matter of faith or conscience, let us utterly exclude the law, and leave it on
the earth: but if we have to do with works, then let us lighten the lantern
of works and of the righteousness of ye law. So let the Sun and the
inestimable light of the Gospel and grace shine in the day, and the lantern
of the law in the night. Wherefore if thy conscience be terrified with the
sense and feeling of sin, think thus with thy self: Thou art now remaining
upon earth: there let the Ass labor and travel: there let him serve and carry
the burden that is laid upon him, that is to say, let the body with his
members be subject to the law. But when thou mountest up into heaven, then
leave the Ass with his burden on the earth: for the conscience has nothing
to do with the law or works, or with the earthly righteousness. So does the
Ass remain in the valley, but the conscience ascends with Isaac into the
mountain, knowing nothing at all of the law or works thereof, but only
looking to the remission of sins and pure righteousness offered and freely
given unto us in Christ.

When the law is to be urged.
Contrariwise in civil policy, obedience to the law must be severely required.
There nothing must be known as concerning the Gospel, conscience, grace,
remission of sins, heavenly righteousness, or Christ himself: but Moses only
with the law and the works thereof. If we mark well this distinction, neither
the one nor the other shall pass his bounds, but the law shall abide without
heaven, that is, without the heart and conscience, and contrariwise the
liberty of the Gospel shall abide without the earth, that is to say, without
the body and members thereof. Now therefore as soon as the law and sin come
into heaven, that is, The law has nothing to do with the conscience.
into the conscience, let them by and by be cast out. For the conscience being
feared with the terror of the wrath and judgment of God, ought to know
nothing of the law and sin, but of Christ only. And on the other side, when
grace and liberty come into the earth, that is, into the body, then say: thou
ought not to dwell in the dregs and dunghill of this corporal life, but
thou belongest unto heaven.

This distinction of the law and the Gospel Peter confounded through his
dissimulation, and thereby persuaded the believing Jews that they must be
justified by the Gospel and the law together. This might not Paul suffer, and
therefore he reproved Peter, not to put him to any reproach, but to the end
that he might again establish a plain difference between these two: namely
that the Gospel justifies in heaven and the law on earth. The Pope makes
the Gospel law, and confounds them both together.
The Pope has not only mixed the law with the Gospel, but also of the
Gospel has made mere laws, yea and such as are ceremonial only. He has
also confounded and mixed political and ecclesiastical matters together:
which is a deuilish and an hellish confusion.

This place touching the difference between the law and the Gospel, is very
necessary to be known: How necessary this difference is to be known.
for it contains the sum of all Christian doctrine. Wherefore let all that
love and fear God, diligently learn to discern ye one from the other, not
only in words, but in effect and practice, yt is to say, in heart and
conscience. For as touching ye words, the distinction is soon made: but in
time of tentation thou shall find the Gospel but as a stranger and a rare
gest in thy conscience: The Gospel a stranger in tentations: The law a
continual gest.
but the law contrariwise thou shall find a familiar and continual dweller
within thee: for reason has the knowledge of ye law naturally. Wherefore when
thy conscience is terrified with sin, which the law utters and increases,
then say thou: There is a time to die and a time to live: there is a time to
hear the law and a time to despise the law: there is a time to hear the
Gospel, The time of the Gospel.
and there is a time to be ignorant of the Gospel. Let the law now depart and
let the Gospel come: for there is now no time to hear the law, but the
Gospel. An objection of the law.
But thou have done no good: nay thou have done wickedly and have grievously
sinned. I grant: notwithstanding I have remission of all my sins for
Christ's sake. But out of the conflicte of conscience, When we must hear the
law.
when external duties must be done, there is no time to harken to the Gospel:
then must thou follow thy vocation and the works thereof.

Verse. 14. I said unto Peter openly: If thou being a Jew live as the
Gentiles and not as the Jews, why constrainest thou the Gentiles to do like
the Jews.
That is to wit, To live like the Jews
thou art a Jew and therefore art bound to live like a Jew, that is, to
abstain from meats forbidden in the law. Notwithstanding thou live like a
Gentile: that is to say, thou do contrary to the law and transgressest the
law. For as a Gentile which is free from ye law, thou eatest common and
unclean meats, and therein thou do well. But in that thou being afraid at
the presence of the brethren converted from the Jewish religion, abstainest
from meats forbidden in the law and keep the law, thou compellest the Jews
likewise to keep the law: that is, thou constrainest them of necessity to
observe the law. For in that thou abstainest from profane meats, thou geuest
occasion to the Gentiles thus to think: Peter abstaineth from those meats
which the Gentiles use to eat, which also he himself before did eat,
therefore we ought likewise to avoid the same, and to live after the manner of
the Jews: Peter through his dissimulation compelled the Gentiles to live like
the Jews
otherwise we can not be justified or saved. We see the^ yt Paul reproves not
ignorance in Peter, (for he knew that he might freely eat with the Gentiles
all manner of meats,) but dissimulation, whereby he compelled the Gentiles to
live like the Jews.

Here I say again, that to live as the Jew, is not evil of it self, for it is
a thing indifferent either to eat swines flesh or any other meats. But so to
play the Jew that for conscience sake thou abstainest from certain meats,
Things indifdifferent may not clogge men's consciences.
this is to deny Christ and to overthrow the Gospel. Therefore when Paul saw
that Peter's act tended to this end, he resisted him and said: Thou know that
the keeping of the law is not necessary to righteousness, but that we are
justified only through faith in Christ, and therefore thou keep not the law,
but transgressest the law and eatest all manner of meats. Notwithstanding by
thy example thou constrainest the Gentiles to forsake Christ and to return to
the law. For thou geuest them occasion thus to think: Faith only is not
suffient to righteousness, but the law and works are also required. And this
Peter teaches us by his example. Therefore the observation of the law must
needs be joined with faith in Christ if we will be saved. Wherefore Peter by
this example is not only prejudicial to the purity of doctrine, Peter's error.
but also to the truth of faith and christian righteousness. For the Gentiles
received this of him, that the keeping of the law was necessary to righteousness:
which error in case it be admitted, then Christ profits nothing.

Hereby it plainly appears to what end this discord between Paul and Peter
tends. Paul does nothing by dissimulation, but deals sincerely and goes
plainly to work. Peter dissembleth, but this dissimulation Paul reproves.
The controversy was for the maintenance of pure doctrine and the verity of
the Gospel: and in this quarrel Paul did not care for the offense of any. In
this case all people and nations, all Kings and Princes, all Judges and
Magistrates ought to give place. Since then it is so dangerous a thing to have
to do with the law, and that this fall was so sudden and so great as if it
had been from heaven above even down into hell, let every Christian diligently
learn to discern between the law and the Gospel. Let him suffer the law to
rule over the body and members thereof, but not over the conscience. For that
Queen and spouse may not be defiled with the law, Liberty of conscience. 2.
Cor. 11.^.
but must be kept without spot for her only husband Christ, as Paul says. 2.
Cor. 11. I have espoused you to one husband. etc. Let the conscience then have
her bride chamber, not in the low valley, but in the high mountain: in the
which let Christ lie and there rule and reign, who does not terrify and
afflict sinners, but comfort them, pardons their sins and saves them.
What an afflicted conscience ought chiefly to look upon.
Wherefore let the afflicted conscience think upon nothing, know nothing, set
nothing against the judgment of God, but the word of Christ, which is the
word of grace, of remission of sins, of salvation and everlasting life. But
this to perform in deed, is a hard matter. For man's reason and nature can not
steadfastly cleave unto Christ, but oftentimes it is carried away with the
cogitations of the law and sin, and so always seeks to be at liberty
after the flesh, but according to conscience a servant and slave.

Verse. 15. We which are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.
That is to say: we are borne unto the righteousness of the law, to Moses, and
to circumcision, and eue^ in our birth we bring the law with us. We have the
righteousness of the law by nature, as Paul before says of him self in the
first chapter: Galat. 1.14.
Being zealous of the traditions of the fathers. Wherefore if we be compared to
the Gentiles, we are no sinners: we are not without the law and without works
as the Gentiles: The prerogative of the Jews.
but we are Jews borne, we are borne righteous and brought up in righteousness.
Our righteousness begins eue^ with our birth, for ye Jewish religion is
natural unto us. Genesis 17.10.
For God commanded Abraham to circumcise every man child the eight day. This
law of circumcision received from the fathers, Moses afterward confirmed. It is
a great matter therefore that we are Jews by nature. Notwithstanding, although
we have this prerogative, that we are righteous by nature, borne to the law and
the works thereof, and are not sinners as the Gentiles, yet are we not therefore
righteous before God.

Hereby it is evident that Paul speaks not of ceremonies, or of the
ceremonial law, as some do affirm, but of a far waightier matter, namely
of the nativity of the Jews, whom he denies to be righteous, although they
be borne holy, be circumcised, keep the law, have the adoption, the glory,
the covenant, the fathers, the true worship, God, Christ, the promises, live
in them and glory in the same: John. 8.33.
as they say John. 8. We are the seed of Abraham. Also, we have one father,
Romans 2.17.
which is God. And to the Romans: Behold, thou art called a Jew, and
restest in the law. etc. Wherefore, although that Peter and the other Apostles
were the children of God, righteous according to the law, the works and the
righteousness thereof, circumcision, the adoption, the couenau^ts, the promises,
the Apostleship and all such like: yet Christian righteousness comes not
thereby: for none of all these is faith in Christ, Faith only justifies.
which only (as follows in the text) justifies, and not the law: Not that
the law is evil or damnable, for the law circumcision, and such like, are not
therefore condemned because they justify not: but Paul therefore takes from
them the office of justification, because the false apostles contended that by
them, without faith, and only by the work wrought, men are justified and
saved. This was not to be suffered of Paul. All things deadly without faith.
For where faith cease, all things are deadly: the law, circumcision, the
adoption, the temple, the worship of God, the promises, yea God and Christ him
self without faith profits nothing. Paul therefore speaks generally
against all things which are contrary to faith, and not against ceremonies
only.

Verse. 16. Know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ.
The work of the law.
This clause the work of the law, reaches far, and comprehe^deth much. We
take the work of the law therefore generally for that which is contrary to
grace. What so ever is not grace, is the law, whether it be Judicial,
ceremonial, or the ten commandments. Wherefore if thou could do the
works of the law according to this commandment: Thou shall love the Lord
thy God vvithall thy heart. etc. (which no man yet ever did or could do)
notwithstanding thou should not be justified before God: for a man is not
justified by the works of the law. But hereof we will speak more largely
hereafter.

The work of the law then according to Paul, signifies the work of the
whole law, whether it be ceremonial or Moral. Now if ye work of the moral
law do not justify, much less does circumcision justify, which is a work
of the ceremonial law. Wherefore, when Paul says, (as he oftentimes does) that
by the law, or by the works of the law (which are both one) a man is not
justified, he speaks generally of the whole law, setting the righteousness of
faith against the righteousness of the whole law. For the righteousness of the
law (says he) a man is not pronounced righteous before God: but the
righteousness of faith God imputes freely through grace, for Christ's sake. The
law (no doubt), is holy, righteous and good, and consequently the works of the
law are holy, righteous, and good: yet notwithstanding a man is not justified
thereby before God.

Now, Works done before justification, and after justification.
the works of the law may be done either before justification or after. There
were many good men even amongst the Paganes, as Xenophon, Aristides, Fabius,
Cicero, Pomponius Atticus and others, which before justification performed the
deeds of the law, and did notable works. Cicero suffered death valiantly in
a good and a just cause. Pomponius was a constant man, and loved truth, Cicero
Pomponius Atticus.
for he never made lie him self nor could suffer the same in any other. Now,
constancy and truth are noble virtues and excellent works of the law, and yet
were they not justified thereby. After justification, Peter, Paul, and al other
christians have done and do the works of the law, but yet are they not
justified thereby. I know not my self guilty in anything (says Paul) and yet
am I not thereby justified. We see then that he speaks not of any part of the
law, Paul entreats of the whole law.
but of the whole law, and all the works thereof.

The Divinity of the Sophisters, commonly called the Scholemen.
Wherefore the wicked and pernicious opinion of the Papists, The Papists
Divinity.
is utterly to be condemned, which do attribute the merit of grace and
remission of sins to ye work wrought. For they say yt a good work before
grace, is available to obtain grace of Congruence, Merit of Congruence.
which they call meritum de Congruo, because it is meet and convenient that
God should reward such a work. But when grace is obtained, ye work following
deserves everlasting life of due det and worthiness, which they call meritum de
Condigno. As for example: If a man being in deadly sin, without grace, Merit of
duty and worthiness.
do a good work of his own good natural inclination: that is, if he say or
hear a Mass, or give alms, and such like, this man of co^gruence deserves
grace. When he has thus obtained grace, he does a work which of worthiness
deserves everlasting life. For the first, god is no detter: but because he is
just and good, it behooves him to approve such a good work though it be done
in deadly sin, and to give grace for such a service. But when grace is
obtained, God is become a detter, and is constrained of right and duty to
give eternal life. For now it is not only a work of freewill done according
to the substance, but also done in grace which makes gracious, that is to say,
in love.

This is the Divinity of the Antichristian kingdom. Which here I recite to the
end that the disputation of Paul may be the better understand. The doctrine
of the Papists wicked and blasphemous against Christ and his righteousness.
(For two contrary things being set together be the better known): and
moreover that all me^ may see how far from the truth these blind guides and
leaders of the blind have strayed, and how by this wicked and blasphemous
doctrine they have not only darkened, but taken away the Gospel, and buried
Christ utterly. For if I being in deadly sin, can do any little work which
is not only acceptable in Gods sight according to the substance, but also is
able to deserve grace of congruence: and when I have received this grace, I may
do works according to grace, that is to say, according to love, and get of
right and duty eternal life, what need have I now of the grace of God,
forgeuenes of sins, of the promise, and of the death and victory of Christ?
Christ is now to me in vain and of none effect: For I have freewill and power
to do good works, whereby I deserve grace of congruence, and afterward of
duty, and by the worthiness of my work, eternal life.

Such monstrous and horrible blasphemies should be set forth rather to the
Turks and Jews, then to the church of Christ. And this plainly declares that
the Pope with his Bishops, Doctors, priests, and with all his religious rabble,
had no knowledge or regard of holy matters: and that they were not careful for
the health of the seely and miserably scattered flock. For if they had seen
but through a cloud, what Paul calls sin and what he calls grace, they
would never have compelled the people to believe such abominations and
execrable lies as they have done. What the Papists call deadly sin.
By deadly sin they understood only the external work committed against
the law, as murder, theft, and such like. They could not see that ignorance,
hatred, and contempt of God in the heart, ingratitude, murmuring against God,
and resisting the will of God, are also deadly sin: and that the flesh can
not think, speak, or do any thing, but that which is deuelish and altogether
against God. If they had seen these mischeefes fast rooted in the nature of
man, they would never have devised such impudent and execrable dreams touching
the desert of congruence and worthiness.

A description of a deadly or mortal sinner.
Wherefore we must properly and plainly define what a wicked man or a deadly
sinner is. He is such a holy and bloody hypocrite as Paul was when he went to
Damascus to persecute Jesus of Nazareth, to abolish the doctrine of the gospel,
to murder ye faithful, and utterly to overthrow the church of Christ. And who
will not say but yt these were horrible sins? Yet could not Paul see them.
For he was so blinded with a perverse zeal of God, that he thought these
abhominatio^s to be perfect righteousness and high service unto God: and shall
we say that such as defend these horrible sins to be perfect righteousness,
do deserve grace?

Wherefore with Paul we utterly deny the merit of congruence and worthiness,
and affirm that these speculatio^s are nothing else but mere deceites of
Satan, which were never done in deed, nor notified by any examples. Desert of
congruence and worthiness a vain and folish toy.
For God never gave to any man grace and everlasting life for the merit of
congruence or worthiness. These disputatio^s therefore of the Scholemen touching
the merit of congruence and worthiness, are nothing else but vain toys and
dreams of idle brains, to no other end and purpose but to draw men from the
true worship of God. The ground of the whole Popedom.
And hereupon is the whole papacy grounded. For there is no religious person,
but he has this imagination: I am able by the observation of my holy order to
deserve grace of congruence: and by the works which I do after that I have
received this grace, I am able to heap up such treasure of merit, as shall
not only be sufficient for me to obtain eternal life, but also to give or
sell unto others. Thus have all the religious orders taught, and thus have they
lived. And to defend this horrible blasphemy against Christ, the Papists do
at this day attempt against us what they can. And there is not one of them all,
but the more holy hypocrite and meritemunger he is, the more cruel and deadly
enemy he is to the Gospel of Christ.

The true way to Christianity.
Now, the true way to Christianity is this, The first point of true
Christianity is, that a man do acknovvledge himself to be a sinner.
that a man above al things do acknowledge him self to be a sinner by the
law, and that it is impossible for him to do any good work. For the law
says: Thou art an evil tree, and therefore all that thou think, speak,
or do, is against God. Thou can not therefore deserve grace by thy works.
Which if thou go about to do, thou committest yet a more grievous offense:
For since thou art an evil tree, Math. 7.1^.
thou can not but bring forth evil fruits, that is to say, sins: For what
so ever is not of Faith, Romans 14.23.
is sin. Wherefore he that would deserve grace by works going before Faith,
goes about to please God with sins, which is nothing else but to heap sin
upon sin, to mock God, and to provoke his wrath. When a man is thus
instructed by the law, then is he terrified and humbled, then he sees in deed
the greatness of his sin, and can not find in him self one jot of the love
of God: therefore he justifies God in his word, and confesses that he is
guilty of death and eternal damnation. The first part then of Christianity is
the preaching of repentance, and the knowledge of our selves.

The second part, is to believe the forgeuenes of our sins. John. 3.17.
The second part is: If thou will be saved, thou may not seek salvation by
works, for God has sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might
live through him. He was crucified and died for thee, and offered up thy sins
in his own body. Here is no congruence or work done before grace, but wrath,
sin, terror and death. Wherefore the law does nothing else but utter sin,
The office of the law.
terrify and humble, and by this means prepares us to justification, and
drives us to Christ. For God has reveled unto us by his word, that he will be
unto us a merciful father, and without our deserts (seeing we can deserve
nothing) will freely give unto us remission of sins, righteousness, and life
everlasting for Christ his sons sake. For God gives his gifts freely unto
all, and yt is the praise and glory of his divinity. But the Iusticiaries will
not receive grace and everlasting life of him freely, Meritmo^gers take from
God the glory of his Godhead.
but will deserve the same by their works. For this cause they would utterly
take from him the glory of his Divinity. To the end therefore that he may
maintain and defend the same, he is compelled to send his law before, which as
a lightning and thundering from heaven, may bruise and break those hard rocks.

This briefly is our doctrine as touching Christian righteousness, against the
abominations and monstrous dreams of the Papists concerning the merit of
congruence and worthiness, The vanity of the Papists in that foolish
distinction of congrunuum and condig^m.
or works before and after grace. For a sort of idle monks (which never had
any regard of God or his glory, nor of the health of their own souls: which
were never exercised with any tentations, never had any true feling of sin,
or of the terror of death) have forged these vain toys and blasphemies of
their own brain, and therefore they know not what they say, or what they
teach. Moreover, they can show no example of any work done either before or
after grace that could justify before God. Wherefore these are nothing else but
vain fables and lies whereby the Papists deceive both them selves and other.
For Paul here plainly affirms, that a man is not justified by the works of
the law, either going before grace (whereof he here speaks) or coming after.
You see then that Christian righteousness is not such an essential quality
engrafted in the nature of man, as the Scholemen do imagine when they say:

The Divinity of the Schole men.
When a man does any good work, God accepts it, and for that good work he
pours into him charity. This infused charity (say they) is a quality
grafted in the heart, What the Papists call formal righteousness.
and this they call formal righteousness (which manner of speaking it is
expedient for you to know:) and they ca^ abide nothing less then to hear yt
this quality furnishing the soul as whitenes does the wall, should not be
counted righteousness. The Papists take their formal righteousness, which they
call charity, to be that grace vvherby we are made acceptable unto God.
They can clime no higher then to this cogitatio^ of man's reason: yt man is
righteous hy his own formal righteousness, which is grace making him
acceptable unto God, that is to say, love or charity. So to this quality
cleaving unto the soul, that is to wit, charity (which is a work after the
law, for the law says: Thou shall love the Lord thy God. etc.) they attribute
formal righteousness, and they say that this righteousness is worthy of
everlasting life, and he that has it, is formally righteous: and moreover he
is effectually or actually righteous, because he now does good works,
whereunto everlasting life is due. This is the opinion of the Scholemen, yea
even of the best among them.

Some other there be which are not so good, as Scotus and Occam, Scotus.
which said that for the obtaining of the grace of God, Occam.
this charity infused or given of God, is not necessary: The pernicious opinion
of the Papists. John. 17.1.
but that a man even by his own natural strength may procure this charity
above all things. For so reasons Scotus: If a man may love a creature, a young
man a maiden, a covetous man money, which are the less good, he may also love
God which is the greater good. If he have a love of ye creature through his
natural strength, much more has he a love of the creator. With this argument
were all the Sophisters convicted, and none of them all was able to soil it.
Notwithstanding thus they reply.

The scripture compels us to confess (say they) that God, besides that
natural love and charity which is engrafted in us, The doctrine of the
Sophisters.
(wherewith alone he is not contented) requires also charity which he him
self gives. And hereby they accuse God as a tyranne and a cruel exactor,
who is not content that we keep and fulfill his law, but above the law, which we
are of our selves able to fulfill, requires also that we should accomplish it
with other circumstaunce and furniture, as apparel to the same. As if a
Mistres should not be contented that her Cook had dressed her meat
excellently well, but should chide her for that she did not prepare the same,
being decked with precious apparel and having a croune of gold upon her head.
What a mistres were this, who besides that which her Cook was only bound to
do and also exactly performed, would require moreover precious apparel or a
croune of gold which she could not have? Even so, what a one should God be if
he should require his law to be fulfilled of us (which otherwise by our own
natural strength we observe and fulfill) with such furniture as we can not
have?

But here lest they should seem to aduouch contrary things, they make a
distinction, and say that the law is fulfilled two manner of ways: first
according to the substance of the deed, The law fulfilled two manner of
ways, say the Papists, according to the substance of the deed, and
according to the intent or purpose of the Commau^der.
and secondly according to the mind of the commander. According to the
substance of the deed (say they) we may fulfill al things which the law
commands, but not according to the meaning of the Commander, which is, that
God is not contented that thou have done all things which are commanded in the
law, although he can require no more of thee: but he yet further requires,
that thou should fulfill the law in charity: not that charity which thou
have by nature, but that which is above nature and heavenly, which he himself
gives. And what is this else but to make of God a tyranne and a tormentor,
which requires of us that we are not able to perform. And it is in a manner as
much as if they should say that the fault is not in us if we be damned, but in
God, which with this circumstance requires his law to be accomplished of us.

These things I do the more diligently repete, that you may see how far they
have wa^dred from the true sense of the scripture, which have said that we by
our own natural strength may love God above all things, or at least, by ye
work wrought we may deserve everlasting life. And because God is not content
that we fulfill the law according to the substance of the deed, but will have
us also to fulfill the same according to the meaning of the Commander:
therefore the scripture further compels us to have a quality above nature
poured into us from above, and that is charity which they call formal
righteousness adorning and bewtifying faith, being also the cause that faith
justifies us. So faith is the body, and the shell: charity the life, the
kernel, the form and furniture. These are the dreams of the Scholemen.

True Christian faith.
But we in the steed of this charity do place faith, and we say that faith
apprehends Jesus Christ, who is the form which adorneth and furnishes
faith, as the color adorneth and bewtifieth the wall. Christian faith the^ is
not an idle quality or empty husk in the heart, which may be in deadly sin
(as they say) until charity come and quicken it: but if it be true faith, it
is a sure trust and confidence of the heart, and a firm consent whereby Christ
is apprehended: So that Christ is the object of faith, yea rather even in faith
Christ himself is present. Christ is the object which faith beholds and
looks upon.
Faith therefore is a certain obscure knowledge, or rather darkness which
sees nothing, and yet Christ apprehended by faith sits in this darkness:
like as God in Sinai and in the temple satte in the midst of darkness. Exodus
19.9. 1. Reg. 8.10. Formal righteousness.
Wherefore our formal righteousness is not charity furnishing and beutifying
faith, but it is faith it self which is as it were a certain cloud in our
hearts: that is to say, a steadfast trust and affiance in the thing which we see
not, which is Christ: who although he be not seen at all, yet is he present.

Faith therefore justifies because it apprehends and possesses this
treasure, even Christ present. But this presence ca^ not be comprehended of us,
because it is in darkness, as I have said. Wherefore, where assured trust and
affiance of the heart is, there Christ is present, yea even in the cloud and
obscurity of faith. And this is that formal righteousness, whereby a man is
justified, and not by charity, as the popish Scholemen do affirm.

To conclude, like as the Scholemen say that charity furnishes and adorneth
faith: so do we say that it is Christ ye furnishes and adorneth faith, or
rather that he is the very form and perfection of faith. Wherefore Christ
apprehended by faith and dwelling in ye heart, is true christian righteousness,
for the which God counts us righteous and gives us eternal life. Here is
undoubtedly no work of the law, no such charity or love as the Sophisters
dream of: but a far other manner of righteousness, and a certain new world
beyond and above the law: For Christ or faith is not the law nor work of the
law. But concerni^g this matter, which the Scholemen neither well understood
nor taught, we entende to speak more largely hereafter. Now it shall be enough
that we have showed that Paul speaks not here only of the ceremonial law,
but of the whole law.

The true rule of Christianity.
Contrary to these vain trifles and doting dreams (as we have also noted
before) we teach faith, and give a true rule of Christianity in this sort:
First that a man must be taught by the law to know him self, that so he may
learn to say with the Prophet: All have sinned and have need of the glory of
God. Romans 3.15. Psalm. 14.1. Psalm. 53.4. Psalm. 51.4.
Also, there is not one righteous, no not one: Not one that understands, not
one that seeks after God: All have gone astray. Also, against thee only have
I sinned. Thus we by a contrary way, do drive men from the merit of congruence
and worthiness. Now, when a man is humbled by the law and brought to the
knowledge of himself, then follows true repentance (for true repentance
begins at the fear and judgment of God) and he sees himself to be so
great a sinner, that he can find no means how he may be delivered from his
sin by his own strength, Romans 7.14.
works, or merits. Then he perceaueth well what Paul means when he says,
that man is the servant and bondslaue of sin. Romans 11.32. Romans 3.19.
Also, that God has shut up all under sin: and that the whole world is gilty
before god etc. Then he sees that all the divinity of the Scholemen touching
the merit of congruence and worthiness, is nothing else but mere foolishnes,
and that by this means the whole Papacye falls to ruin.

Here then he begins to sigh, and says in this wise: Who then can give
succor? For he being thus terrified with the law, utterly despaireth of his
own strength: The.^. part of the Gospel.
he looks about, and sigheth for the help of a Mediator and Savior. Here
then comes in good time the wholesome word of the Gospel, Mat. 9.1.
and says: Son, thy sins are forgeuen the. Believe in Christ Jesus
crucified for thy sins. If thou feel thy sins and the burden thereof,
look not upon them in thy self, but remember that they are translated and
laid upon Christ, Esai. 53.4. 1. Pet. 2.24.
whose stripes have made thee whole.

This is the beginning of health and salvation. By this means we are delivered
from sin, justified, and made inheritours of everlasting life: not for our
own works and deserts, but for our faith, whereby we lay hold upon Christ.
Wherefore we also do acknowledge a quality and a formal righteousness in the
heart: not charity (as the Scholemen do) but faith, and yet so
notwithstanding that the heart do behold nothing, apprehend nothing but Christ
the Savior. And here it is necessary that you know the true definition of
Christ. The Scholemen being utterly ignorant hereof, have made Christ a judge
and a tormentor, devising this fond fantasy concerning ye merit of congruence
and worthiness.

Christ is no lavvgeuer.
But Christ, according to his true definition, is no lawgiuer, but he is a
forgiuer of sins and a Savior. This does faith apprehend and undoubtedly
believe, that he has wrought works and merits of congruence and worthiness
before and after grace abundantly. For he might have satisfied for all the
sins of the world by one only drop of his blood. Verse. 12.
But now he has shed it plentifully and has satisfied abundantly. Ebr. 9. By
his own blood has he entered into the holy place once for all, and obtained
eternal redemption for us. Also Romans 3. Verse. 24.25.
And we are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation unto us through
faith in his blood. Wherefore it is a great matter to lay hold upon Christ by
faith bearing the sins of the world. Romans 3.25. Romans 4.3.
And this faith alone is counted for righteousness, as the Apostle teaches in
the third and fourth Chapters to the Romans.

Here is to be noted that these three things, faith, Christ, Christ. Faith.
Imputation.
acceptance or imputation must be joined together. Faith takes hold of Christ
and has him present, and holds him enclosed as the ring does the precious
stone. And who so ever shall be found having this confidence in Christ
apprehended in the heart, him will God account for righteous. This is the mean
and this is the merit whereby we attain the remission of sins and
righteousness. Because thou beleuest in me, says God, and thy faith lays hold
upon Christ whom I have freely given unto thee that he might be thy Mediator
and high Priest, Ebr. 4.
therefore be thou justified and righteous. Wherefore God does accept or
account us as righteous, only for our faith in Christ.

And this acceptance or imputation is very necessary: First because we are not
yet perfectly righteous, Acceptance necessary.
but whiles we remain in this life, sin dwells still in our flesh: and
this remnant of sin God purges in us. Moreover we are sometimes left of the
holy Ghost and fall into sins, as did Peter, David and other holy men.
Notwithstanding we have always recourse to this article: They that believe in
Christ shall not be charged with their sins. Psalm. 32. Romans 4.21.
That our sins are covered, and that God will not lay them to our charge.
Psalm. 32. and Romans 4. Not that sin is not in us (as the Sophisters have
taught, saying that we must be always working well until we feel that there
is no gilt of sin remaining in us): yea sin is in deed always in us, and
the godly do feel it: but it is covered and is not imputed unto us of God for
Christ's sake: whom because we do apprehend by Faith, all our sins are now
no sins. But where Christ and faith be not, there is no remission or covering
of sins, but mere imputation of sins and condemnation. Thus will God
glorify his son, Io. 17.^.
and will be glorified him self in us through him.

When we have thus taught faith in Christ, then do we teach also good works.
The doctrine of good works to be taught after the doctrine of faith.
Because thou have laid hold upon Christ by faith, through whom thou art made
righteousness, begin now to work well. Love God and thy neighbor: call upon
God, give thanks unto him, praise him, confess him. These are good works in
deed, which flow out of this faith and this chearefulnes conceived in the
heart for that we have remission of sins freely by Christ.

The Cross.
Now, what cross or afflictions so ever do afterward ensue, they are easily
borne, and cheerfully suffered. For the yoke that Christ lays upon us, Math.
11.30.
is svvete, and his burden is easy. When sin is pardoned and the conscience
delivered from the burden and sting of sin, then may a Christian bear all
things easily. Because he feels all things within sweet and comfortable,
therefore he does and suffers all things willingly. But when a man walks in
his own righteousness, what so ever he does is grievous and tedious unto him,
because he does it unwillingly.

We therefore do make this definition of a Christian man: that he is a right
christian to whom God imputes not his sin, Who is a right Christian.
through faith in Christ. This doctrine brings great consolation to poor
afflicted consciences in serious and inward terrors. It is not without good
cause therefore that we do so often repete and beat into your minds the
forgeuenes of sins, and imputation of righteousness for Christ's sake: A
Christian man has nothing to do with the law.
also that a Christian has nothing to do with the law and sin, specially in
the time of tentation. For in that he is a Christian, he is above the law and
sin. For he has Christ the Lord of the law present and enclosed in his heart
(as we have said) even as a ring has a Jewel or precious stone enclosed in it.
Therefore when the law accuses and sin terrifieth him, he looks upon
Christ, and when he has apprehended him by faith, he has present with him the
conqueror of the law, sin, death, and the devil: who reigns and rules
over them, so that they can not hurt him. Wherefore a Christian man, if ye
define him rightly, is free from all laws, and is not subject unto any
creature, either within or without: In that he is a Christian (I say) and not
in that he is a man or a woman, that is to say, in that he has his conscience
adorned and bewtified with this faith, with this great and inestimable
treasure, 1. Cor. 9.15.
or as ( Paul says) this unspeakable gift: which can not be magnified and
praised enough, for it makes us the children and heirs of God. And by this
means a Christian is greater then the whole world. For he has such a gift,
such a treasure in his heart that although it seems to be but little, yet
notwithstanding the smalnes thereof is greater then heaven and earth: for Christ
which is this gift and this treasure is greater then all things.

Whiles this doctrine pacifying and quieting the conscience abides sound and
vncorrupt, Christians are made judges over all kinds of doctrine, and are
Lords over the laws of the whole world. Christians are Judges of all kinds of
doctrine.
Then ca^ they certainly judge that the Turk with his Alcoran is damned
because he goes not the right way, that is, he acknowledges not himself to
be miserable and damnable, nor apprehends Christ by faith, for whose sake he
might be assured that his sins are pardoned. In like manner they boldly
pronounce sentence against the Pope, The doctrine of the Pope.
that he is condemned with all his kingdom, because he so walks and so
teaches (with all his religious rabble of Sophisters and Scholeme^), that by
the merit of congruence we must come to grace, and that afterward by the
merit of worthiness we are received into heaven. Here says the Christian, this
is not the right way to justify us, neither does this way lead us to heaven.
For I can not (says he) by my works going before grace, deserve grace, nor by
my works following grace deserve eternal life: But to him that believes, sin
is pardoned and righteousness imputed. This trust and this confidence makes him
the child of God and heir of his kingdom: For in hope he possesses already
everlasting life assured unto him by promise. Through faith in Christ therefore
all things are given unto us, grace, peace, forgeuenes of sins, salvation and
everlasting life, and not for the merit of congruence and worthiness.

Wherefore this doctrine of the Scholemen, with their ceremonies, Masses, and
infinite foundations of the Papisticall kingdom, are most abominable
blasphemies against God, sacrileges and plain denials of Christ, as Peter has
foretold in these words. There shall be (says he) false teachers among you which
shall privily bring in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that has bought
them etc. 2. Pet. ^.^.
As though he would say: the Lord has redeemed and bought us with his blood,
that he might justify and save us: this is the way of righteousness and
salvation. But there shall come false teachers, which denying the Lord, shall
blaspheme the way of truth, of righteousness and salvation: they shall find out
new ways of falsehode and destruction, The Papacy lively painted out.
and many shall follow their perdiction. Peter throughout this whole chapter
most lively painteth out the Papacy, which neglecting and despising the
Gospel and faith in Christ, has taught the works and traditions of men: as
the merit of congruence and worthiness, ye difference of days, meats, vows,
invocation of Saints, pilgrimages, purgatory and such like. In these
fantastical opinions the Papists are so nusled, that it is impossible for
them to understand one syllable of ye gospel, of faith, or of Christ.

And this the thing it self does well declare. For they take that privilege
unto them selves which belongs unto Christ alone. He only forgeueth sins,
he only gives righteousness and everlasting life: and they most impudently and
wickedly do vaunte that they are able to obtain these things by their own
merits and worthiness before and after grace. Peter and the other Apostles call
these damnable heresies and sects of perdition. For by these means they deny
Christ, tread his blood under their feet, blaspheme the holy Ghost, and
despise the grace of God. Papisticall Idolatry.
Wherefore no man can sufficiently conceive how horrible the idolatry of the
Papists is. As inestimable as the gift is which is offered unto us by Christ:
even so and no less abominable are these prophanations of the Papists. They
ought not then to be lightly esteemed or forgotten: but diligently wayed and
considered. And this makes also very much for the amplifying of ye grace of
God and benefit of Christ, as by the contrary. For the more we know the
profanation of the papisticall Mass, so much the more we do abhor and
detest the same, and embrace the true use of the holy communion, The true use
of the Communion taken away by the Pope.
which the Pope has taken away, and has made merchandise of it, yt being
bought for money, it might profit others. For he says yt the Massing priest,
an apostata, denying Christ and blasphemi^g the holy Ghost, standing at ye
altar does a good work, not only for him self, but also for others both
quick and dead, and for the whole church, and that only by the work
wrought, and by none other means.

Wherefore even by this we may plainly see the inestimable patience of God, in
that he has not long ago destroyed the whole Papacy and consumed it with fire
and brimstone, as he did Sodom and Gomorre. But now these ioly fellows go
about, not only to cover, but highly to advance their impiety and filthiness.
This we may in no case dissemble. We must therefore with all diligence set
forth the article of justification, that the same, as a most clear Sun, may
bring to light the darkness of their hypocrisy, and may discover their
filthiness and shame. For this cause we do so often repete and so earnestly set
forth ye righteousness of faith, that the adversaries may be confounded and this
article established and confirmed in our hearts. And this is a most necessary
thing: for if we once lose this Sun, we fall again into our former darkness.
And most horrible it is yt the Pope should ever be able to bring this to pass
in the church, that Christ should be denied, trodden under foot, The horrible
abuse of the gospel, and Sacraments in the Popedom.
spitte upon, blasphemed, yea and that even by the Gospel and sacraments:
which he has so darkened and turned into such an horrible abuse, that he has
made them to serve him against Christ, to set up and stablish his detestable
abominations. O deep darkness, O horrible wrath of God.

Verse. 16. Even we I say, have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified.
This is the true mean to become a Christian, even to be justified by faith in
Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the law. Here we may not stand upon the
wicked gloss of the Scholemen, which say that faith then justifies, when
charity and good works are joined withal. That the Scholemens gloss is
wicked which says that faith adorned with charity justifies.
With this pestilent gloss the Sophisters have darkened and perverted this and
such other like sentences in Paul, wherein he manifestly attributes
justification to faith only in Christ. But when a man hears that he ought to
believe in Christ, and yet faith notwithstanding justifies not except it be
formed and adorned with charity, by and by faith fails him and thus he
thinks with him self: If faith without charity justifies not, then is
faith in vain and unprofitable, and charity only justifies: For except Faith
be adorned and furnished with charity, it is nothing.

And to approve this their pernicious and pestilent gloss, they allege this
place out of the Corinthes: 1. Cor. 1^.1,
Though I speak with the tounges of men and angels, and have no love I am
nothing. This place is their brazen wall. But these men are without
understanding, and therefore they can see or understand nothing in Paul. And
moreover they have not only done injury to ye words of Paul, but also they
have denied Christ and buried al his benefits. Faith justifies without the
law.
Wherefore we must avoid this their gloss as a most deadly and deuilish poison
and conclude with Paul that we are justified, not by faith furnished with
charity, but by faith only and alone.

We grant that we must also teach good works and charity, The doctrine of
good works is not to be neglected.
but it must be done in time and place, that is to say, when the question is
concerning works, and touches not this article of justification. But here the
matter rests in this point, to know by what means we are justified and
attain eternal life. To this we answer with Paul, that by faith only in
Christ we are pronounced righteous, and not by the works of the law or
charity: Not because we reject good works, but for that we will not suffer
our selves to be removed from this anchor hold of our salvation: which Satan
most desires. Since then we are now in the matter of justification, we reject
and condemn all good works: for this place will admit no disputation of
good works. Wherefore in this matter we do generally cut of all laws and all
the works of the law.

But the law is good, just and holy. True it is. But when we are in the matter
of justification there is no time or place to speak of the law: but the
question is, Christ.
what Christ is, and what benefit he has brought unto us. Christ is not the
law, he is not my work, or the work of the law: he is not my charity, my
chastity, my obedience, my poverty, but he is the Lord of life and death, a
Mediator, a Savior, a redemer of those that are under the law and sin.
John. 6.56.
In him we are by faith and he in us. This bridegroom must be alone with the
bride in his secret chamber, all the servants and family being put apart. But
afterward when the door is open and he comes forth, then may the servants
and ha^dmaides return, to minister unto them. Then may charity and good
works begin to do their office.

Let us learn therefore to discern all laws, yea even the law of God, and
all works, from faith and from Christ, that we may define Christ rightly, Io.
1.36. Faith only justifies because it only takes hold of the benefit of
Christ.
and know that he is not the law, and therefore he is no exactor of the law and
works, but he is the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.
This does faith alone lay hold of, and not charity, which notwithstanding as a
certain thankfulness, must follow faith. Wherefore victory over sin and
death, salvation and everlasting life come not by the law nor by the works of
the law, nor yet by the power of free will, but by ye Lord Jesus Christ only
and alone.

Verse. 16. That we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the
works of the law.
Paul speaks of the whole law.
Paul speaks not here of the ceremonial law only (as before we have said)
but of the whole law. For the ceremonial law was as well the law of God as the
moral law was. As for example, Circumcision, the institution of the
Priesthood, the service and ceremonies of the temple were commanded of God no
less then the ten commandments. Moreover, when Abraham was commanded to
offer up his son Isaac in sacrifice, it was a law. This work of Abraham
pleased God no less then other works of the ceremonial law did, and yet was
not he justified by this work, but by faith: for the scripture says, Genes.
15.6. Romans 4.3.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.

But since the reueiling of Christ (say they) the ceremonial law kills and
brings death. Yea, so does the law of the ten commandments also without
faith in Christ. Moreover, The law in any wise is not to be suffered to
reign in the conscience. Romans 5.2. Romans 7.7.
there may no law be suffered to reign in the conscience, but only the law of
the spirit and life, whereby we are made free in Christ from the law of the
letter and of death, from the works thereof, and from all sins: Not because
the law is evil, but for that it is not able to justify us: for it has a
plain contrary effect and working. It is an high and an excellent matter to be
at peace with God: and therefore in this case we have need of a far other
Mediator then Moses or the law. Here we must do nothing at all, but only
receive the treasure, which is Christ, Our salvation consists not in doing,
but in receiving.
and apprehend him in our hearts by Faith, although we feel our selves to be
full of sin. These words therefore of the Apostle: that we might be justified
by faith, and not by the works of the law, are very effectual, and not in
vain or unprofitable, as the Scholemen think, and therefore they pass them
over so lightly.

Hitherto ye have heard the words of Paul which he spoke unto Peter: Hitherto
has Paul spoken to Peter.
wherein he has briefly comprised the principal article of all Christian
doctrine, which makes true Christians in deed. Now he turns to the
Galathians to whom he writes, and thus he concludes: Since it is so that we
are justified by faith in Christ, then by the works of the law shall no flesh
be justified.

Verse. 16. Because by the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be justified.
Flesh in Paul does not signify (as the Scholemen dream) manifest and gross
sins, What Paul calls the flesh. Galat. 9.19.20.
for those he uses to call by their proper names, as adultery, fornication,
uncleanness and such like: but by flesh Paul means here as Christ does in the
third chapter of John. That which is borne of flesh (says he) is flesh.
John. 3.6.
Flesh therefore signifies the whole nature of man, with reason and all other
powers what so ever do belong to man. This flesh (says he) is not justified
by works, no not of the law. Flesh therefore, according to Paul, signifies
all the righteousness, wisdom, devotion, religion, understanding and will that
is possible to be in a natural man: So that if a man be never so righteous
according to reason and the law of God, yet withal his righteousness, works,
merits, devotion, and religion he is not justified.

The blindenes of the Papists.
This the Papists do not believe, but being blind and obstinate, they defend
their abominations against their own conscience, continuing in this their
blasphemy, and having yet still in their mouths these execrable words: He
that does this good work or that, deserves forgeuenes of his sins: who so
ever enters into this or that holy order and keeps his rule, to him we
assuredly promise everlasting life. The Pope attributes the virtue of
justifying to his own traditions, which Paul takes from the law of God.
It can not be uttered what an horrible blasphemy it is to attribute that to
the doctrine of Deuilles, to the decrees and ordinances of men, to the wicked
traditions of the Pope, to the hypocritical works and merits of Monks and
Friars, which Paul the Apostle of Christ takes away from the law of God. For
if no flesh be justified by the works of the law, much less shall it be
justified by the rule of Benedict, Fraunces, or Augustine, in which there is
not one jot of true Faith in Christ: but this only they urge, that who so
ever keeps these things, has life everlasting.

Wherefore I have much and often marueled, that these sects of perdition
reigning so many years in such great darkness and errors, the Church could
endure and continue as it has done. Some there were whom God called by the
letter of the Gospel and by baptism. Who were saved in the kingdom of the
Pope.
These walked in simplicity and humblenes of heart, thinking the Monks and
Friars, and such only as were anointed of the Bishops, to be religious and
holy, and them selves to be profane and secular, and not worthy to be compared
unto them. Wherefore they finding in them selves no good works to set against
the wrath and judgment of God, did fly to the death and passion of Christ,
and were saved in this simplicity.

Horrible and unspeakable is the wrath of God, in that he has so long time
punished the contempt of the Gospel and of Christ in the Papists, and also
their ingratitude, giving them over into a reprobate sense, Romans 1.28.
in so much that they blaspheming and denying Christ altogether as touching his
office, instead of the gospel have received the execrable rules, With the
Papists, man's traditions are preferred before the Gospel.
ordinances and traditions of men, which they have devoutly adored and
honored, yea and preferred the same far above the word of God, until at
length they were forbidden to marry, and were bound to that incestuous single
life: wherein they were outwardly polluted and defiled with all kinds of
horrible wickedness, as adultrie, whoredom, uncleanness, Sodomitrie and such other
abominations. This was the fruit of that filthy single life.

So God punishing sin with sin, inwardly gave them over into a reprobate
mind, and outwardly suffered them to fall into such horrible abominations: and
that justly, because they blasphemed the only son of God, in whom the father
would be glorified, and whom he delivered to death, that al which believe in
him, might be saved by him, and not by their own execrable rules and orders.
Sam. 2.30. John. 5.23.
Him that honors me (says he) I will honor. Now God is honored in his
son. Who so the^ believes that the son is our Mediator and Savior, he
honors the father, and him again does God honor, that is to say, adorneth
him with his gifts, forgeuenes of sins, righteousness, the holy Ghost, and
everlasting life. Contrariwise: They that despise me (says he) shall be
despised.

This is then a general conclusion: The dignity of the law.
Because by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified. The law of God is
greater then ye whole world, for it comprehends all men, and the works of the
law do far excel even the most glorious wilworkes of all the Meritmongers:
and yet Paul says, that neither the law nor the works of the law do
justify. Therefore we conclude with Paul that faith only justifies. This
proposition he goes about to confirm in this manner.

Verse. 18. If then while we seek to be made righteous by Christ, we our
selves are found sinners, is Christ therefore the minister of sin? God
forbid.
If this be true (says he) that we are justified by Christ, then is it
impossible that we should be sinners, or should be justified by the law. On
the contrary, if this be not true, The first argument in defense of the
righteousness of faith.
but that we must be justified by the law and the works of the law, it is
then impossible that we should be justified by Christ. One of these two must
needs be false. Either we are not justified by Christ, or we are not justified
by the law. But the truth is, that we are justified by Christ: therefore we
are not justified by the law. He reasons therefore after this manner: If then
while we seek to be made. etc. That is: If we seek to be justified by
Christ, and so being justified we are yet found sinners, having need of the
law to justify us being sinners: If we have need (I say) of the observation
of the law to justify us, so that they which are righteous in Christ are not
righteous, but have yet need of the law to justify them: Or if he that is
justified by Christ must yet further be justified by the law, then is Christ
nothing else but a lawgeuer and a minister of sin. Therefore he that is
justified and holy in Christ, is not justified or holy, but has yet need of
the righteousness and holiness of the law.

But we are in deed justified and made righteous in Christ: For the truth of
the Gospel teaches us that a man is not justified in the law, but in Christ.
Now, if they which are justified in Christ are yet found sinners, that is, do
yet still belong to the law, and are under the law (as the false Apostles
teach) then are they not yet justified. For the law accuses them, and shows
them to be yet sinners: It requires of them the works of the law as
necessary to their justification, and so it follows that Christ is not a
iustifier, but a minister of the law.

With these words he vehemently charge the false Apostles and all
Meritemongers, The Iusticiaries make Moses Christ, and the law grace.
that they peruerte altogether: for they make of the law grace and of grace
the law, of Moses Christ and of Christ Moses. For they teach that besides
Christ and all the righteousness of Christ, the observation of the law is
necessary to justification. And thus we see that by their intolerable
perverseness they make the law Christ: for by this means they attribute that to
the law, which properly belongs unto Christ. If thou do the works of the
law (say they) thou shall be saved: but if thou do them not, thou shall not
be justified although thou do believe in Christ never so much. Now, if it be so
that Christ justifies not, but is the minister of sin (as it must needs
follow by their doctrine) then is Christ the law: for we have nothing else of
him, seeing he teaches that we are sinners, then that we have by the law. So
Christ being the minister of sin, sends us to the law and to Moses, as to
our iustifier.

It can not be therefore but that the Papists and all such as are ignorant of ye
righteousness of Christ, or have not the true knowledge thereof, must needs make
of Christ Moses and the law, and of the law Christ. For thus they teach: It is
true (say they) that faith in Christ justifies, but withal we must needs
keep the commandments of God. For it is written: Math. 19.17.
If thou vvilt enter into life, keep the commandments. Here even at the
first dash Christ is denied and Faith abolished, because that is attributed to
the commandments of God or to the law, which belongs to Christ alone. For
Christ, Christ.
according to his true definition, is a Iustifier and a Redemer from sins. If
I attribute this to the law, then is the law my Iustifier, delivering me from
my sins, because I do the works thereof and so now the law is Christ, and
Christ utterly loses his name, his office and glory, and is nothing else but a
minister of the law, reproving, accusing, terrifying, presenting and sending
the sinner to an other, that may justify him: which is the proper office of
the law.

But the proper office of Christ is, after the law has pronounced a man to be
guilty, to raise him up again, and to loose him from his sins, if he believe
the Gospel. For to all that do believe, The office of Christ. Romans 1.16. John.
1.36.
Christ is the end and full finishing of the law unto righteousness: He is
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. But the Papists
and Anabaptists, because they understand not this doctrine, do pervert
altogether, making of Christ Moses, and of Moses Christ. And this is in deed
(although they will say otherwise) their principal proposition: That Christ is
Moses. Meritemo^gers scorn the true preachers of faith.
Moreover they deride and mock us, because we do so diligently teach, and so
earnestly require Faith. Ha ha (say they) faith faith: wait thou the time until
thou come to heaven by faith. Nay, thou must strive to do greater and
waightier matters. Thou must fulfill the law, according to that saying: Luke.
10.18.
Do this and thou shall line. Faith which ye so highly extol, does nothing
else but make men careless, idle, and negligent. Thus are they become nothing
else but ministers of the law, and laweworkers, calling back the people from
baptism, faith, the promises of Christ, to the law and works, turning grace
into the law, and the law into grace.

Who would ever believe that these things could so easily be confounded and
mingled together. There is no man so insensible, which does not perceive this
distinction of the law and grace to be most plain and manifest. For the very
nature and signification of the words makes this distinction and difference.
The difference of the law and grace is very easy, but yet are they soon
confounded and mixed together.
For who understands not yt these words, Law and grace, do differ in name
and signification? Wherefore it is a monstrous thing, that this distinction
being so plain, the adversaries should fall to such deuelish peruersenes, so
to mingle together the law and grace, and to transform Christ into Moses. For
this cause I do often repete and teach, that this doctrine of faith is very
plain, and that every man may easily understand this distinction of the law
and grace as touching the words, but touching the use and inward practice, it
is very hard.

The Pope co^foundeth the law and grace together.
The Pope and his Scholedoctors do plainly confess that the law and grace are
diverse and distinct things: and yet when they come to the use and practice
thereof, they teach clean contrary. Faith in Christ (say they) whether it be
gotten by the strength, Faith infused, the Scholeme^ call that faith which is
poured into us, or given unto us of God.
operation and qualities of nature, or whether it be Faith infused and poured
into us of God, yet is it but a dead Faith if charity be not joined therewith.
Where is now the distinction and difference of the law and grace? In deed
they do distinguish them in name, but in effect they call grace charity. Thus
do all they which so straightly require the observation of the law, and
attribute justification to the law and works. Wherefore who so ever do not
perfectly understand the article of justification, must needs confound and
mingle the law and grace together.

Let every man therefore diligently learn above all things to put a difference
between the law and grace in deed and in practice: not in words only as the
Pope and the fantastical Anabaptists do: Who as touching the words, do
confess that they are two distinct things: but in very deed (as I have said)
they confound and mingle them together: for they will not grant that faith
justifies without works. If this be true, The Papists and Anabaptists
against the sound doctrine of justification.
then Christ profits me nothing. For though my faith be never so perfect, yet
after their opinion, if this faith be without charity, I am not justified. And
thus Christ apprehended by faith is not a iustifier, grace profits nothing,
neither can faith be true faith without charity, (or as the Anabaptists say)
without the cross, without suffering and effusion of blood: but if charity be
joined withal, then is it true faith and justifies.

They that say, the law is necessary to righteousness, are like to the false
apostles.
With this doctrine these lying spirits and sects of perdition do darken
again the benefit of Christ at this day: they take away from him the glory of
a iustifier, and make him a minister of sin. They are in all things like to
the false Apostles. For even as they throughout all the Churches did require
circumcision and the observation of the law besides faith in Christ, in so
much that without circumcision and keeping of the law, they denied the
justification of faith (for except ye be circumcised, said they, after the law
of Moses, ye can not be saved): even so at this day these strait exactors of
the law, besides the righteousness of Faith, do require the keeping of the
commandments of God, Luke. 10.2^.
according to that saying: Do this and thou shall live. Also, If thou vvilt
enter into life, keep the commaundeme^ts. Math. 19.1^.
Wherefore there is not one among them, be he never so wise, that understands
that difference between the law and grace.

But we put a difference, and say, that we do not here dispute whether we ought
to do good works: whether the law be good, holy and just: whether it ought to
be kept or no: for this is an other manner of question. But our question is
concerning justification, The state of the matter.
and whether the law do justify or no. This the adversaries will not hear:
they will not answer to this question, nor make any distinction as we do:
but only cry out, that good works ought to be done, that the law ought to
be observed. We know that well enough. But because these are diverse and
distinct matters, we will not suffer them to be mingled together. That good
works ought to be done, we will hereafter declare when time shall serve. But
since we are now in the matter of justification, we set aside here all good
works, for the which the adversaries do so earnestly strive, ascribing unto
them wholly the office of justifying: which is to take from Christ his glory,
and to ascribe the same unto works.

Wherefore this is a strong argument, which I have oftentimes used to my great
comfort: Verse. 17.
If then while we seek to be made righteous by Christ. etc. As though Paul
should say: If our righteousness come by the law, then is Christ in vain.
If we being justified by Christ, are counted yet as not justified and
righteous, but as sinners which are yet to be justified by the law, then may
we not seek justification in Christ but in the law. But if justification
comes by the law, then comes it not by grace. Now, if justification comes
not by grace, but by the law, what has Christ done and wrought by his death,
by his preaching, by his victory which he has obtained over the law, sin
and death, and by sending the holy Ghost? We must conclude therefore, that
either we are justified by Christ, or else that we are made sinners, culpable,
and guilty through him. But if the law do justify, then can it not be
avoided, but needs it must follow that we are made sinners through Christ, and
so Christ is a minister of sin. The case standing thus, let us then set down
this proposition: Every one that believes in the Lord Jesus Christ is a sinner
and is guilty of eternal death, and if he fly not unto the law doing the
works thereof, he shall not be saved.

The holy Scripture, especially the new Testament, makes often mention of
faith in Christ, and highly aduau^ceth ye same: which says, Faith in Christ.
that whosoever believes in him, is saved, perishes not, is not judged, is
not confounded, Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 5.^4.
has eternal life etc. But contrariwise they say: he that believes in him is
condemned, because he has faith without works which does condemn. Thus do
they pervert all things, making of Christ a destroyer and a murderer, and of
Moses a Savior. And is not this an horrible blasphemy, so to teach that by
doing good works thou shall be made worthy of eternal life? but by believing in
Christ thou shall be made culpable and guilty of eternal death? that the law
being kept and accomplished saves? and faith in Christ conde^neth?

These self same words (I grant) the adversaries do not use: but in very
deed such is their doctrine. For faith infused (say they) which properly they
call faith in Christ, does not make us free from sin, but that faith which is
furnished with charity. Hereof it follows that faith in Christ without the
law saves us not. This is plainly to affirm that Christ leaves us in our
sins and in the wrath of God, and makes us guilty of eternal death. On the
other side, if thou keep the law and do the works thereof, The doctrine of the
Papists.
then faith justifies thee because it has works, without the which faith
avails nothing: Therefore works justify and not faith. O horrible impiety.
What pernicious and cursed doctrine is this?

Paul therefore groundeth his Argument upon an impossibility and a sufficient
division. If we being justified in Christ are yet found sinners, and can not be
justified but by any other mean the^ by Christ, that is to wit, by the law,
then can not Christ justify us, but he only accuses and condemns us: and
so consequently it follows that Christ dyed in vain, and that these with
other like places are false: Behold the la^be of God that takes away the
sins of the world. Ioh. 1.2^.36.
Also: He that believes in him has everlasting life: yea the whole scripture
is false, which bears witness that Christ is the Iustifier and Savior of
the world. For if we be found sinners after that we be justified by Christ, it
follows of necessity that they which fulfill the law are justified without
Christ. If this be true, the^ are we either Turks, or Jews, or Tartaria^s,
professing the name and word of God in outward show, but in deed and verity
utterly denying Christ and his word. It is great impiety therefore to affirm
that faith, The Papists are touched.
except it be adorned with charity, justifies not. But if the adversaries will
needs defend this doctrine, why do they not then reject faith in Christ
altogether: especially seeing they make nothing else of it but a vain quality
in the soul, which without Christ avails nothing? why do they not say in
plain words that works do justify and not faith? Yea why do they not
generally deny, not only Paul, but also ye whole gospel (as in very deed
they do) which attribute righteousness to works, and not to faith alone? For if
faith and works together do justify, then is the disputation of Paul
altogether false, which plainly prononceth that a man is not justified by the
deeds of the law, but by faith alone in Jesus Christ.

Verse. 17. Is Christ therefore the minister of sin?
This is a kind of speech used of the Hebrews, 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.
which Paul in the 2. Cor. 3. does also use: Where he most divinely and
plainly speaks of these two ministeries, to wit, of the letter and the
spirit, of the law and grace, or of death and life. The ministry of Moses,
And he says that Moses the minister of the law, has the ministry of sin
(as he calls it) and of death and condemnation. For Paul is wont to give
reproachful names unto the law, and among all the Apostles, he only uses this
manner of speech: the other do not so speak. And very necessary it is that such
as are studious of the holy scripture, should understand this manner of speech
used of the Apostle.

Now, a minister of sin is nothing else, A minister of sin.
but a lawgiuer or a Scholemaster of the law, which teaches good works and
charity, and that a man must suffer the cross and afflictions, and follow the
example of Christ and of the Saints. He that teaches and requires this, is
a minister of the law, of sin, of wrath, and of death: For by this doctrine
he does nothing else but terrify and afflict men's consciences and shuts them
under sin. Let all Papists and Anabaptists mark this point, that even in
the justified, there is not perfect fredom from sin. Romans 7.23. 1. Timot. 1.7.
For it is impossible for the nature of man to accomplish the law: yea in those
that are justified and have the holy Ghost, the law of the members fights
against the law of the mind. What will it not then do in the wicked which have
not the holy Ghost? Wherefore he that teaches that righteousness comes by the
law, does not understand what he says, or what he affirms, and much less
does he keep the law: but rather he deceaueth himself and others, and lays
upon them such a burden as they are not able to bear, requiring and teaching
impossible things, and at the last he brings himself and his disciples unto
desperation.

The right use and end therefore of the law is, The office and use of the law
to accuse and condemn as guilty, such as live in security, that they may see
themselves to be in danger of sin, wrath, and death eternal, that so they
may be terrified and brought even to the brinke of desperation, trembling and
quaking at the falling of a leaf. And in that they are such, they are under
the law. For the law requires perfect obedience unto God, and condemns al
those that do not accomplish the same. Now, it is certain that there is no
man living which is able to perform this obedience, which notwithstanding God
streitly requires of us. To be under the law. Deuteronomy. 27.6. Galat. 3.10.
The law therefore justifies not but condemns, according to that saying:
Cursed is he that abides not in all things that are written in this book.
Therefore he that teaches the law is a minister of the law.

2. Cor. 3.7.
Wherefore it is not without good cause that Paul in the 2. Cor. 3. calls the
minister of the law, The ministry of the law is the ministry of sin.
the minister of sin: For the law shows and utters sin, which without
the law is dead. Now the knowledge of sin (I speak not here of that
speculatiue knowledge of hypocrites, but of a true knowledge, by the which we
see the wrath of God against sin and feel a true taste of death) terrifieth
ye heart, drives down to desperation, Romans 7.11.
kills and destroys. Romans 7. Wherefore these Scholemasters of the law and
works are called in the scripture oppressors and tirants. Exodus 5. The
scripture calls the teachers of the law exactors and tirants.

The teachers of the law bring men's souls into spiritual slavery.


For as the taskemasters in Egypt did oppress the children of Israel with
corporal servitude, so do these lawgiuers and taskemasters drive men into
most miserable bondage of soul, and at length bring them to desperation and
utter destruction. These do neither know themselves nor the force of the law.
And it is not possible for them to have quietness and peace of conscience in
great and inward terrors and in the agony of death, yea though they have
observed the law, loved their neighbors, done many good works, and suffered
great afflictions: for the law always terrifieth and accuses, saying: thou
never did accomplish all that is commanded in the law: but accursed is he
yt has not done all things contained therein. Wherefore these terrors remain
still in the conscience and increase more and more. And if such Scholemasters
of the law be not raised up by Faith and the righteousness of Christ, they are
driven down headlong to desperation.

The history of the delivery of the law in Exodus 19.20. Verse. 17.
This also was notably figured when the law was given, as we may see in the.19.
and.20. of Exodus. Moses, brought the people out of the tents to meet with
the Lord, that they might hear him speak unto them out of the dark cloud.
Then the people being astonished and trembling for fear, fled back (which a
little before had promised to do all that God had commanded), and standing
aloof of, said unto Moses: Who can abide to see the fire, and to hear the
thundrings and noise of the trumpet? Talk thou with us, and we will hear
thee: but let not God talk with us lest we die. So the proper office of the
law is to lead us out of our tents and tabernacles, that is to say, from the
quietness and security wherein we dwell, The office of the law.
and from trusting in our selves, and to bring us before the presence of God,
to reueile his wrath unto us, and to set before us our sins. Here the
conscience feels that it has not satisfied the law, and that it is not able
to satisfy it, nor to bear the wrath of God, which the law reueileth when it
brings us forth after this manner before the presence of God, that is to say,
when it fears us, accuses us, and sets before us our sins. Here it is
impossible that we should be able to stand: and therefore being thoroughly
afraid, we fly, and we cry out with the children of Israel: we shall die, we
shall die: Let not the Lord speak unto us, but speak thou unto us etc.

He then which teaches that faith in Christ justifies not without the
observation of the law, makes Christ a minister of sin, Who make Christ a
minister of sin.
that is to say, a Scholemaster of the law, which teaches the self same
doctrine yt Moses did. By this means Christ is no Savior, no geuer of grace,
but a cruel tirant, which requires such things (as Moses did) which no man is
able to perform. See how all the meritmongers do take Christ to be but a new
lawgeuer, and the Gospel to be nothing else but a certain book which
contains new laws concerning works, as the Turks dream of their Alcoran.
But as touching laws, there is enough in Moses. The Gospel then is a
preaching of Christ, The Gospel what it is.
which forgeueth sins, gives grace, justifies and saves sinners. Now,
whereas there are commandments found in the Gospel, Commandments in the
Gospel what they are.
they are not the Gospel, but expositions of the law and matters depending
upon the Gospel.

To conclude, if the law be the ministry of sin, then is it also the
ministry of wrath and of death. For as the law reueileth sin, The law is
the ministry of sin, wrath, and death.
so does it terrify a man, it shows unto him his sin and the wrath of God,
and strikes into him a terror of death and damnation. For thus the conscience
by and by gathers: Thou have not kept the commandments of God, therefore
God is angry with thee. And it thinks this to be an infallible consequence: I
have sinned, therefore I must die. The Conscience thus gathers: Thou have
sinned, therefore thou art guilty of everlasting death.
And so it follows that the ministry of sin is the ministry of wrath and
condemnation. For after that sin is reueiled, by and by ensues the wrath of
God, death, and damnation. And hereof it comes that many which are not able to
bear the judgment and wrath of God which the law sets before their eyes,
do kill, hang or drown themselves.

Verse. 17. God forbid.
A picture of Christ.
As though he would say: Christ is not the minister of sin, but the geuer of
righteousness and eternal life. Wherefore Paul separateth Moses far from
Christ. Let Moses then tarry on the earth: Let him be the Scholemaster of the
letter, and exactor of the law: Let him torment and crucify sinners. But the
beleuers (says Paul) have an other Scholemaster in their conscience: not
Moses but Christ, which has abolished the law and sin, has overcome the
wrath of God, and destroyed death. He bids us that labor and are oppressed
with all kinds of evils, to come unto him. Therefore when we fly unto him,
Moses with his law vanishes away, Deuteronomy 34.
so that his sepulcher can no where be seen: sin and death can hurt us no
more. For Christ our instructor is Lord over the law, sin and death, so that
they which believe in him, are delivered from the same. It is therefore the
proper office of Christ to deliver from sin and from death. And this Paul
teaches and repeteth every where.

The law. Christ.
We are condemned and killed by the law, but by Christ we are justified and
restored to life. The law astonisheth us and drives us from God: but Christ
reconcileth us to God, and makes for us an entrance, that we may boldly come
unto him: For he is the Lamb of God that has taken away the sins of the
world. Now, if the sin of the world be taken away, then is it taken away from
me also which do believe in him. Christ has taken away all evils, and has
brought unto us all good things.
If sin be taken away, then is the wrath of God, death and damnation taken
away also: And in the place of sin succedeth righteousness, in the place of
wrath, reconciliation and grace, in the place of death, life, and in the place
of damnation, salvation. Let us learn to practice this distinction, not in
words only, but in life and lively experience, and with an inward feeling.
For where Christ is, there must needs be joy of heart and peace of conscience:
For Christ is our reconciliation, righteousness, peace, life, and salvation.
Briefly, what so ever the pore afflicted conscience desires, it finds in
Christ abundantly. Now Paul goes about to amplify this argument, and to
persuade as follows.

Verse. 18. For if I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my
self a trespasser.
As if he should say: I have not preached to this end that I might build
again those things which I once destroyed. For if I should so do, I should not
only labor in daine, but should make my self also a tra^sgressor and
overthrow altogether, as the false Apostles do: that is to say, of grace and
of Christ I should again make the law and Moses: and contrariwise of the law
and Moses I should make grace and Christ. Now, by the ministry of the Gospel
I have abolished sin, What Paul had destroyed by the ministry of the
Gospel.
heaviness of heart, wrath and death. For thus have I taught: Thy conscience O
man, is subject to the law, sin, and death: from which thou can not be
delivered either by men or Angels. But now comes the Gospel and preaches
unto thee remission of sins by Jesus Christ, who has abolished the law, and
has destroyed sin and death. Believe in him: so shall thou be delivered from
the curse of the law and from the tyranny of sin and death: thou shall
become righteous and have eternal life.

Behold how I have destroyed the law by the preaching of the Gospel, to the
end that it should not reign in thy conscience any more. For when the new Gest
Christ Jesus comes into the new house there to dwell alone, Moses gives place
to christ and the law to the gospel.
Moses the old inhabiter must give place unto him and depart some whether else.
Also where Christ the new Gest is come to dwell, there can sin, wrath and
death have no place: but there now dwells mere grace, righteousness, joy,
life, true affiance and trust in the father, now pacified and reconciled unto
us, gracious, long suffering and full of mercy for his son Christ's sake.
Should I then, driving out Christ and destroying his kingdom which I have
planted through the preaching of the Gospel, now build up again the law and
set up the kingdom of Moses? In deed this should I do if I should teach
circumcision and the observation of the law to be necessary to salvation, as
the false Apostles do: and by this means, in the steed of righteousness and
life, I should restore again sin and death. For the law does nothing else but
utter sin, procure Gods wrath, kill and destroy.

What are the Papists (I pray you) yea the best of them all, The Papists are
destroyers of the kingdom of Christ.
but destroyers of the kingdom of Christ and builders up of the kingdom of
the Devil and of sin, of wrath and eternal death? Yea they destroy the
church, which is Gods building, not by the law of Moses, as did the false
Apostles, but by men's traditions and doctrines of Devils. And even so the
fantastical heads which are at this day and shall come after us, do destroy
and shall destroy those things which we have built: do build and shall build
up again those things which we have destroyed.

But we by the grace of Christ holding the article of justification, do
assuredly know that we are justified and reputed righteous before God by faith
only in Christ. The difference of the law and the Gospel diligently to be
marked.
Therefore we do not mingle the law and grace, faith and works together: but we
separate them far asunder. And this distinction or difference between the law
and grace, let every man that fears God mark diligently, and let him suffer
the same to take place, not in letters and syllables, but in practice and
inward experience: So that when he hears, that good works ought to be done,
and that the example of Christ is to be followed, he may be able to judge
rightly and say: well, all these things will I gladly do. What then follows?
Thou shall then be saved and obtain everlasting life. Nay, not so. I grant in
deed that I ought to do good works, patiently to suffer troubles and
aflictio^s, and to sheed my blood also if need be, for Christ's cause: but yet
am I not justified, neither do I obtain salvation thereby.

We must not therefore draw good works in to the article of justification as
the Monks have done, which say, that not only good works, but also the
punishments and torments which malefactors suffer for their wicked deeds, How
the Monks were wont to comfort condemned Persons at the time of their death.
do deserve everlasting life. For thus they comfort them when they are brought
to the gallows or place of execution. Suffer willingly and patiently this
shameful death: which if thou do, thou shall deserve remission of thy sins
and everlasting life. What an horrible thing is this, that a wretched thief, a
murderer, a robber should be so miserably seduced in that extreme anguish and
distress, that even at the very point of death, when he is now ready to be
hanged or to have his head cut of, he should refuse the Gospel and sweet
promises in Christ, which are only able to bring comfort and salvation, and
should be commanded to hope for pardon of his sins, if he willingly and
patiently endure that opprobrious death which he suffers for his mischeuous
deeds? What is this else but to heap upon him that is already most miserably
afflicted, extreme perdition and destruction, and through a false confidence in
his own death, to show him the ready way to hell?

Hereby these hypocrites do plainly declare, that they neither teach nor
understand one letter or syllable concerning grace, the Gospel, or Christ.
They retain only in outward show the name of the Gospel and of Christ,
that they may begile the hearts of the people. Notwithstanding they denying
and rejecting Christ in deed, do attribute more to the traditions of men then
to the Gospel of Christ. Which thing to be true, so many kinds of false
worship, so many religious orders, so many ceremonies, and so many wilworkes
do witness: All which things were instituted as auailable to deserve grace,
righteousness, and everlasting life. The manner of Popish confessions,
In their confessions they make no mention of faith or the merit of Christ,
but teach and set forth the satisfactions and merits of men, as it may plainly
appear in this form of absolution (I speak nothing here of other matters)
which the Monks used among themselves, yea and such as would be counted more
devout and more religious then others: which I think good here to set down,
that our posterity may see how great and how horrible the kingdom of the
Pope is.

The form of a Monkish absolution.
God forgive thee, my brother. The merit of the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of blessed Saint Mary always a virgin, and of all the Saints:
the merit of thine order, the streitnes of thy religion, the humility of thy
confession, the contrition of thy heart, the good works which thou have done
and shall do for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto thee available
for the remission of thy sins, the increase of desert and grace, and the
reward of everlasting life. Amen.

Ye hear the merit of Christ mentioned in these words: but if ye weye them
well, ye shall perceive that Christ is there altogether unprofitable, and that
the glory and name of a iustifier and Savior is quite taken from him, and
given to Monkish merits. Is not this to take the name of God in vain? Is not
this to confess Christ in words, and in very deed to deny his power, and
blaspheme his name? I my self also was once entangled with this error. I
thought Christ to be a judge (although I confessed with my mouth that he
suffered and died for man's redemption) and ought to be pacified by the
observation of my rule and order. Therefore when I prayed or when I said Mass,
I used to add this in the end: O Lord Jesus, I come unto thee, and I pray thee
yt these burdens and this streitnes of my rule and religion may be a full
recompense for all my sins. But now I give thanks unto God ye father of all
mercies, which has called me out of darkness unto ye light of his glorious
Gospel, and has given unto me plentiful knowledge of Christ Jesus my lord:
for whose sake I count al things to be but loss, yea I esteem them but as
dunge that I may gain Christ, and that I may be found in him, not having mine
own righteousness out of the rule of Augustine, but that righteousness which
comes by faith in Christ: Unto whom with the father and the holy ghost be
praise and glory world without end. Amen.

Faith without works.
We conclude therefore with Paul, that we are justified by faith only in
Christ, without the law. Now, after that a man is once justified and possesses
Christ by faith, and knows that he is his righteousness and life, doubtless he
will not be idle, but as a good tree he will bring forth good fruits. For the
believing man has the holy Ghost, and where the holy Ghost dwells, it will not
suffer a man to be idle, but stirs him up to all exercises of piety and
godliness and of true religion, to the love of God, to the patient suffering of
afflictions, to prayer, to thanks giving, to the exercise of charity toward
all men.

Hitherto we have handled the first argument, wherein Paul contendeth that
either we can not be justified by the law, or else that Christ must needs be
the minister of sin. But this is impossible: wherefore we conclude that
justification comes not by the law. Of this place we have largely entreated,
as it is well worthy, and yet can it not be caught and setforth sufficiently.

Verse. 19. For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto
God.
Paul's manner of speech unknown to man's reason.
These are marvelous words and unknown kinds of speech, which man's reason can
in no wise understand. And although they be but few, yet are they uttered with
great zeal and vehemency of spirit, and as it were in great displeasure.
As if he should say: why do ye boast so much of the law? whereof in this case I
will be ignorant. But if ye will needs have the law, I also have the law.
Wherefore, as though he were moved through indignation of the holy Ghost, Paul
calls grace the law
he calls grace it self the law, giving a new name to the effect and working
of grace, in contempt of the law of Moses and the false Apostles, which
contended that the law was necessary to justification: Phrases of speech only
proper to the scripture.

The law against the law.


and so he sets the law against the law. And this is a sweet kind of speech
and full of consolation, when in the scriptures, and specially in Paul, the
law is set against the law, sin against sin, death against death,
captivity against captivity, hell against hell, the altar against the altar,
the lamb against the lamb, the passover against the passover.

In the.8. to the Romans it is said: For sin he condemned sin. Psalm. 68.
and Ephesians. 4. He has led captivity captive. Hosee. 13. Psalm. 68.19. Ephesians
4.8. Hos. 13.14.
O death I will be thy death, O hell I will be thy destruction. So he says
here, that through the law he is dead to the law. As if he said: The law of
Moses accuses and condemns me: but against that accusing and condemning
law, I have an other law, 1. Cor. 15.55.
which is grace and liberty. This law accuses the accusing law, and
condemns the condemning law. So death kills death: but this killing death
is life it self. But it is called the death of death by abundance of spirit,
Death against death.
or vehement indignation against death. So righteousness boroweth the name of
sin, because it condemns sin, and this co^demning of sin is true righteousness.

And here Paul seems to be an heretic: Paul's heresy.
yea of all heretics the greatest, and his heresy is strange and monstrous.
For he says, that he being dead to the law, lives to God. He that is dead to
the law, lives to God.
The false apostles taught this doctrine: Except thou live to the law, thou
art dead to God: that is to say, unless thou live after the law, thou art
dead before God. But Paul says quite contrary: If thou be not dead to the
law, thou can not live to God. The doctrine of the papists.
The doctrine of our adversaries at this day is like to the doctrine of the
false apostles of that time. If thou will live to God (say they) live to the
law or after the law. But contrariwise we say: If thou will live to God, thou
must be utterly dead to the law. Man's reason and wisdom understands not this
doctrine: therefore it teaches always ye contrary: that is: If thou will live
unto God, thou must keep the law: for it is written: Do this and thou shall
live. A special principle amongst the divines.
And this is a special principle amongst all Divines: he that lives after the
law, lives unto God. Paul says the contrary: that is, we can not live unto
God unless we be thoroughly dead to the law. Wherefore we must mount up to this
heavenly altitude, that we may be assured that we are far above the law, yea
that we are utterly dead unto the law. Now if we be dead unto the law, then
has the law no power over us, as also it has no power over Christ, who has
delivered us from the same, that we might live unto God. All these things tend
to this end, to prove that we are not justified by the law, but by faith
only in Jesus Christ.

And here Paul speaks not of the ceremonial law only, (as before we have
declared more at large) but of the whole law, whether it be ceremonial or
moral: which to a Christian is utterly abrogate, That the law is abrogated.
for he is dead unto it. Not that the law is utterly taken away: nay it
remains, lives, and reigns still in the wicked. But a godly man is dead
unto the law, like as he is dead unto sin, the Devil, death and hell: which
notwithstanding do still remain, and the world with all the wicked shall
still abide in them. Wherefore when the Papist understands that the
ceremonial law only is abolished, understand thou that Paul and every
Christian is dead to the whole law, and yet the law remains still.

Christ free from the grave.
As for example: Christ rising from death is free from the grave, and yet the
grave remains still. Peter is delivered from the prison, the sick of the
palsy from his bed, the young man from his coffen, the maiden from her couch,
and yet the prison, the bed, the coffen, the couch do remain still. Even so
the law is abolished when I am not subject unto it, the law is dead when I am
dead unto it, and yet it remains still. But because I die unto it by an other
law, it dies also unto me: As the grave of Christ, the prison of Peter, the
couch of the maiden. etc. do still remain, and yet Christ by his resurrection
dies to the grave, Peter by his deliverance is freed from the prison, and the
maid through life is delivered from the couch.

I am dead to the law.
Wherefore these words: I am dead to the law, are very effectual. For he says
not: I am free from the law for a time, or I am Lord of the law: but simply,
I am dead to the law, that is to say, I have nothing to do with the law. Paul
could have vttred nothing more effectually against justification of the law,
then to say: I am dead to ye law, that is, I care nothing at all for the law:
therefore I am not justified by it.

What it is to die to the law.
Now, to die to the law, is, not to be bound to the law, but to be free from the
law and not to know it. Therefore let him that will live to God, endeavor that
he may be found without the law, and let him come out of the grave with Christ.
The soldiers were astonished when Christ was risen out of the grave: and they
also which saw the maiden raised up from death to life, were amazed. So man's
reason and wisdom is astonished and becomes foolish when it hears yt we are
not justified, except we be dead to the law: for it is not able to reach unto
this mystery. But we know yt when we apprehend Christ by faith inwardly in
conscience, we enter into a certain new law, which swaloweth up the old law
that held us captives. As the grave in which Christ lay dead, after that he was
risen again, was void and empty, and Christ vanished away: so when I believe
in Christ, I rise again with him, and die to my grave, that is to say, the
law, which held me captive: So that now the law is void, and I am escaped out
of my prison and grave, that is to say, the law. Wherefore the law has no
right to accuse me, or to hold me any longer, for I am risen again.

It is necessary yt men's consciences should be diligently instructed, that they
may well understand the difference between yt righteousness of the law and grace.
The righteousness of grace or the liberty of conscience does in no wise
pertain to the flesh. For the flesh may not be at liberty, The flesh is
subject to the law, but not to the conscience.
but must remain in the grave, the prison, the couch: it must be in subjection
to the law, and exercised by the Egyptians. But the christian conscience must
be dead to the law, that is to say, free from the law, and must have nothing at
all to do with it. It is good to know this: for it helps very much to the
comforting of poor afflicted consciences. Wherefore when you see a man
terrified and cast down with the sense and feeling of his sin, say unto him:
Brother, thou do not rightly distinguish. Thou placest the law in thy
conscience, which should be placed in the flesh. Awake, arise up, and remember
that thou must believe in Christ the conqueror of the law and sin. With this
faith thou shall mount up above and beyond the law into that heaven of grace
where is no law nor sin. And albeit the law and sin do still remain, yet
they pertain nothing to thee: for thou art dead to the law and sin.

This is easily said: but blessed is he which knows how to lay sure hold on
these things in time of distress, that is, which can say, when sin
ouerwayeth him, and the law accuses him: what is this to me, O law, that thou
accusest me, and say yt I have committed many sins? In deed I grant that
I have committed many sins, yea and yet still I do commit sins daily
without number. This touches me nothing: I am now deaf, and can not hear:
therefore thou talkest to me in vain, for I am dead unto thee. But if thou will needs dispute with me as touching my sins, get thee to the flesh and
members, my servant: teach them, exercise and crucify them. But trouble not
me Conscience, which am a Lady and a Queen, and have nothing to do with
thee: for I am dead to thee, and now I live to Christ, The conscience
answering to the accusation of the law.
with whom I am under an other law, to wit, the law of grace, which rules
over sin and the law. By what means? By faith in Christ, as Paul declares
hereafter.

But this seems a strange and a wonderful definition, that to live to the
law is to die to God: and to die to the law, is to live to God. These two
propositions are clean contrary to reason, and therefore no crafty Sophister
or lawworker can understand them. But learn thou the true understanding
thereof. He that lives to the law, that is, seeks to be justified by the
works of the law, is and remains a sinner: therefore he is dead and
condemned. For ye law can not justify and save him, but accuses, terrifieth,
and kills him. Therefore to live unto the law, is to die unto God: and
contrariwise, to die to the law is to live unto God. Wherefore if thou will
live unto God, thou must die to the law: but if thou will live to the law,
thou shall die to God. Now, To live unto God.
to live unto God, is to be justified by grace or by faith for Christ's sake,
without the law and works.

This is then the proper and true definition of a Christian, that he is the
child of grace and remission of sins, Who is a Christian.
because he is under no law, but is above the law, sin, death, and hell.
And even as Christ is free from the grave, and Peter from the prison, so is a
Christian free from the law. And such a respect there is between the justified
conscience and the law, as is between Christ raised up from the grave, and the
grave: and as is between Peter delivered from the prison, and the prison. And
like as Christ by his death and resurrection is dead to the grave, so that it
has now no power over him, nor is able any longer to hold him, but the stone
being rolled away, the seals broken, and the kepers astonished, he rises
again and goes away without any let: and as Peter by his deliverance is
freed from the prison, and goes whether he will: even so the conscience by
grace is delivered from the law. So is every one that is borne of the spirit.
But the flesh knows not from whence this comes, nor whether it goes, for it
can not judge but after the law. But on the contrary, the spirit says: let
the law accuse me, let sin and death terrify me never so much, yet I do not
therefore despair: for I have the law against the law, sin against sin,
and death against death.

Therefore when I feel the remorse and sting of conscience for sin, I behold
that brazen serpent Christ hanging upon the cross. There I find an other
sin against my sin which accuses and deuoureth me. Now this other sin,
namely in the flesh of Christ, which takes away the sins of the world, is
almighty: it condemns and swaloweth up my sin. So my sin is condemned by
sin, that is, by Christ crucified: 1. Cor. ^.21.
who is made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God
through him. In like manner I find death in my flesh, which afflicts and
kills me: but I have in me a contrary death, Death against death.
which is the death: for this death crucifieth and swaloweth up my death.

These things be not done by the law or works, but by Christ crucified: upon
whose shoulders lie all the evils of mankind, the law, sin, death, the
Devil, and hell: and all these do die in him, for by his death he has killed
them. But we must receive this benefit of Christ with a sure faith. For like
as neither the law nor any work thereof is offered unto us, but Christ alone:
so nothing is required of us but Faith alone, whereby we apprehend Christ, and
believe that our sins and our death are condemned and abolished in the sin
and death of Christ.

Thus have we always most certain and sure arguments, which necessarily
conclude that justification comes by faith alone. The law makes us not
righteous, but faith only.
For how should the law and works avail to justification, seeing that Paul
is so earnest both against the law and works, and says plainly that we
must be dead to the law, if we will live to God. But if we be dead to the
law, and the law be dead to us, then has it nothing to do with us. How then
should it avail any thing at all to our justification? Wherefore we must
needs say, that we be justified by grace alone, or by faith alone in Christ,
without the law and works.

This the blind Sophisters do not understand, and therefore they dream that
Faith justifies not except it do the works of charity. By this means Faith
which believes in Christ becomes unprofitable and of none effect: for the
virtue of justifying is taken from it except it be furnished with charity. But
let us now set aparte the law and charity until an other time, and let us
rest only upon the point of this present matter: which is this, The very point
of all this matter.
that Jesus Christ the son of God died upon the cross, did bear in his body
my sins, the law, death, the Devil and hell. These invincible enemies and
tyrannes do oppress, vex, and trouble me, and therefore I am careful how I
may be delivered out of their hands, justified and saved. Here I find neither
law, work nor charity which is able to deliver me from their tyranny. There
is none but the Lord Jesus only and alone, which takes away the law, kills
and destroys my death in his body, and by this means spoyleth hell, judges,
and crucifieth the Devil, and throws him down into hell. To be brief, all
the enemies which did before torment and oppress me, Christ Jesus has brought
to naught: Has spoiled them, and made a show of them openly, Coloss. 2.15.
triumphing by him self over them, in such sort that they can now rule and
reign no more over me, but are constrained to obey me.

By this we may plainly see, In the matter of justification there is nothing
for us to do, but to hear what Christ has done for us, and to apprehend the
same by faith.
that there is nothing here for us to do. Only it belongs unto us, to hear
that these things have been wrought and done in this sort, and by faith to
apprehend the same. And this is the true formed and furnished faith in deed.
Now, when I have thus apprehended Christ by faith, and through him am dead to
the law, justified from sin, delivered from death, the devil, and hell,
then I do good works, I love God, I give thanks to him, I exercise charity
toward my neighbor. Good works.
But this charity or works following do neither form nor adorn my faith, but
my faith forms and adorneth charity. This is our divinity: which seems
strange and marvelous, or rather foolish to carnal reason: to wit, that I
am not only blind and deaf to the law, yea delivered and freed from the
law, but also wholly dead unto the same.

This sentence well understand in the time of trouble, makes a man strong
against all tentations.
This sentence of Paul: Through the law I am dead to the law, is full of
consolation. Which, if it may enter into a man in due season, and take sure
hold in his heart with good understanding, it may so work that it will make
him able to stand against all dangers of death, and all terrors of conscience
and sin, although they assail him, accuse him, and would drive him to
desperation never so much. True it is that every man is tempted: if not in his
life, yet at his death. There, when the law accuses him and shows unto him
his sins, his conscience by and by says: A speech or Dialoge between the
law and conscience.
Thou have sinned. If then thou take good hold of yt which Paul here teaches,
thou will answer: I grant I have sinned. Then will God punish thee. Nay, he
will not so do. Why, does not the law of God so say? I have nothing to do
with that law. Why so? Because I have an other law which strikes this law
dumme, The law of liberty.
that is to say, liberty. A consolation against the terrors of the law. etc.
What liberty is that? The liberty of Christ, for by Christ I am utterly
freed from the law. Therefore that law which is and remains a law to the
wicked, is to me liberty, and binds that law which would condemn me: And by
this means that law which would bind me and hold me captive, is now fast
bound it self, and holden captive by grace and liberty, which is now my law:
which says to that accusing law: The binding law through Christ, is bound it
self.
Thou shall not hold this man bound and captive, for he is mine: but I will hold
thee in captivity, and bind thy hands that thou shall not hurt him, for he
lives now unto Christ, and is dead unto thee.

This to do, is to dash out the teeth of the law, to wrast his sting and all
his weapons from him, and to spoil him of all his force. And yet the same law
notwithstanding continues and remains still to the wicked and unbelievers: And
to us also that be weak, so far forth as we lack faith, it continues yet
still in his force: here it has his edge and teeth. But if I do believe in
Christ, although sin drive me never so much to despair, yet staying upon
this liberty which I have in Christ, I confess that I have sinned: Sin
condemned, and condemning.
but my sin which is a condemned sin, is in Christ which is a condemning
sin. Now this condemning sin is stronger then that which is condemned: for
it is justifying grace, righteousness, life and salvation. Thus when I feel the
terror of death, I say: Thou have nothing to do with me O death, Death
killed, and death killing.
for I have an other death which kills thee my death, and that death which
kills, is stronger then that which is killed.

Thus a faithful man by faith only in Christ, may raise up him self, and
conceive such sure and sound consolation, that he shall not need to fear the
devil, sin, death, or any evils. And although the Devil set upon him with
all might and maine, and go about with all the terrors of the world to
oppress him, As Satan is to others over vvho^ he has dominion, so is Christ
to Satan whom he holds bound, that he can not hurt us farther, the^ he
gives him leave. 1. John. 5.4.5.
yet he conceaueth good hope even in the mids thereof, and thus he says: Sir
Devil, I fear not thy threatninges and terrors, for there is one whose name
is Jesus Christ, in whom I believe: he has abolished the law, condemned sin,
vanquished death and destroyed hell: and he is thy Tormentor O Satan, for he
has bound thee, and holds thee captive, to the end that thou should no
more hurt me, or any that believes in him. This faith the Devil can not
overcome, but is overcome of it. For this is the victory (says S. John) that
ouercometh the world, even our faith. Who is it that ouercometh the world, but
he which believes that Jesus is the son of God?

Paul therefore through a vehement zeal and indignation of spirit, calls
grace it self the law, Why Paul calls grace the law.
which notwithstanding is an exceeding and inestimable liberty of grace which
we have in Christ Jesus. Moreover he gives this opprobrious name unto the law
for our consolation, to let us understand that there is a new name given unto
it: to wit, that it is not now alive any more, but dead and condemned. And
here (which is a pleasant sight to behold) he brings forth the law, and
sets it before us as a thief and a robber, which is already condemned and
adjudged to death. For he describes it as it were a prisoner having both
hands and feet fast bound, The law bound and condemned cannot accuse us.
and all his power taken away, so that it can not exercise his tyranny, that
is to say, it can not accuse and condemn any more: And with this most
pleasant sight he makes it odious and contemptible to the conscience: so that
now he which believes in Christ dare boldly and with a holy pride triumph over
the law after this manner. I am a sinner: A holy pride.
If thou can do any thing against me, O law, now do thy worst. So far
of is it then that the law is now terrible unto him which does believe.

Since Christ is risen from death, why should he now fear the grave? Since
Peter is delivered from the prison, why should he now fear it? When the maiden
was at the point of death, then might she in deed fear the bed: but being
now reised up, why should she fear it? In like manner, why should a Christian
which enjoys and possesses Christ by faith, fear the law? True it is that
he feels the terrors of the law, but he is not overcome of them: but staying
upon the liberty which he has in Christ, he says: I hear thee murmuring O
law, that thou would accuse and condemn me: but this troubles me nothing
at all. Thou art to me as the grave was unto Christ. For I see that thou art
fast bound hand and foot: and this has my law done. How he calls liberty
the law.
What law is that? liberty, which is called the law, not because it binds
me, but because it binds my law. The law of the ten commandments did bind
me. But against that law I have an other law, even the law of grace: The law
of grace binding the law of the ten commau^dements.
which notwithstanding is to me no law, neither does it bind me, but sets me
at liberty. And this is a law against that accusing and condemning law: which
law it so binds, that it has no power to hurt me any more. So against my
death which binds me, I have an other death, Death killed by death: that is
the death which was due to me, is killed by Christ's death
that is to say, life, which quickneth me in Christ: and this death loses and
freeth me from the bonds of my death, and with the same bonds binds my
death. So death which bound me, is now fast bound, which killed me, is now
killed by death, that is to say, by life it self.

Thus Christ with most sweet names is called my law, my sin, my death, The
svveete and comfortable names of Christ.
against the law, against sin, against death: whereas in very deed he is
nothing else but mere liberty, righteousness, life and everlasting salvation.
And for this cause he is made the law of the law, the sin of sin, the death
of death, that he might redeem me from the curse of the law, justify me and
quicken me. So then, whiles Christ is the law, he is also liberty, whiles he
is sin he is righteousness, and whiles he is death he is life. For in that he
suffered the law to accuse him, sin to condemn him and death to devour him,
he abolished the law, he condemned sin, he destroyed death, he justified and
saved me. So is Christ the poison of the law, Christ a poison against death.
sin, and death, and the remedy for the obtaining of liberty, righteousness,
and everlasting life.

This manner of speech which Paul here uses and is proper unto him alone, The
law of the mind set against the law of the members.
is full of consolation. Likewise in the.7. chapter to the Romans he sets
the law of the spirit against the law of the members, And because this is a
strange and a marvelous manner of speaking, therefore it enters more easily
into the mind and sticks faster in the memory. Moreover, when he says: I
through the law am dead to the law, it sounds more swetely then if he
should say: I through liberty am dead to the law. For he sets before us as
it were a certain picture: as if the law were fighting against the law. As
though he should say: O law, if thou can accuse me, terrify me, and bind me,
I will set above and against thee an other law, that is to say, an other
tormentor, which shall accuse thee, bind thee and triumph over thee. When thou
art thus bound and suppressed, then am I at liberty. So then grace is a law,
not to me, for it binds me not, but to my law: which this law so binds that
it can not hurt me any more.

Thus Paul goes about to draw us wholly from the beholding of the law, sin,
death, and all other evils, and to bring us unto Christ, A most joyful combat.
that there we might behold this joyful conflict: to wit, the law fighting
against the law, that it may be to me liberty: sin against sin, that it
may be to me righteousness: death against death, that I may obtain life: Christ
fighting against the Devil, that I may be the child of God: and destroying
hell that I may enjoy the kingdom of heaven.

Verse. 19. That I might live unto God.
That is to say, that I might live before God. Ye see then that there is no
life unless ye be without the law, yea unless ye be utterly dead unto the
law, I mean in conscience. Notwithstanding in the mean season (as I have
often said) so long as the body lives, The flesh subject to the law, but not
the conscience.
the flesh must be exercised with laws and vexed with exactions and penalties
of laws, as were the Egyptians. But the inward man not subject to the law, but
delivered and freed from it, is a lively, just, and holy person, not of
himself, but in Christ, because he believes in him, as follows.

Verse. 20. I am crucified with Christ.
This he adds to declare that the law is a deuourer of the law. Not only
(says he) I am dead to the law through the law that I may live to God, but
also I am crucified with Christ. But Christ is Lord over the law because he is
crucified and dead unto the law: Therefore am I also Lord over the law: for I
likewise am crucified and dead unto the law for as much as I am crucified and
dead with Christ. By what means? By grace and faith. Through this faith,
because I am now crucified and dead unto the law, therefore the law loses
all his power which it had over me, even as it has lost all his power which it
had over Christ. To be crucified with Christ.
Wherefore even as Christ himself was crucified to the law, sin, death and
the Devil, so that they have no further power over him: even so I through
faith being now crucified with Christ in spirit, am crucified and dead to the
law, sin, death and the Devil, so that they have no further power over me,
but are now crucified and dead unto me.

Paul speaks not here of crucifying by imitation or example (for to follow
the example of Christ is also to be crucified with him), which crucifying
belongs to the flesh. 1. Pet. ^.21.
Whereof Peter speaks in his 1. epistle and.2. chapter. Christ suffered for us
(says he) leaving unto us an example that we should follovv his steps. But
he speaks here of that high crucifying, whereby sin, the devil and death are
crucified in Christ and not in me. Here Christ Jesus does all himself alone.
But I believing in Christ am by faith crucified also with Christ, so that all
these things are crucified and dead unto me.

Verse. 20. Thus I live.
I speak not so (says he) of my death and crucifying as though I now lived
not: Yea I live, for I am quickened by this death and crucifying through the
which I die: That is, for as much as I am delivered from the law, The true life
of the faithful
sin and death, I now live in deed. Wherefore that crucifying and that death
whereby I am crucified and dead to the law, sin, death and all evils, is to me
resurrection and life. For Christ crucifieth the Devil, he kills death,
condemns sin, and binds the law: and I believing this, am delivered from
the law, sin, death and the Devil. The law therefore is bound, dead and
crucified unto me, and I again am bound, dead, and crucified unto it. Wherefore
even by this death and crucifying, that is to say, by this grace or liberty I
now live.

Here (as before I have said) we must observe Paul's manner of speaking. He
says that we are dead and crucified to the law, where as in very deed the law
it self is dead and crucified unto us. The faithful crucified and dead to
the law.
But this manner of speech he uses here of purpose, that it may be the more
sweet and comfortable unto us. For the law (which notwithstanding continues,
lives and reigns in the whole world, which also accuses and condemns all
men) is crucified and dead unto those only which believe in Christ: The glory
of the faithful.
and therefore to them alone belongs this glory, that they are dead to sin,
hell, death, and the Devil.

Verse. 20. Yet now not I.
That is to say, not in mine own person nor in mine own substance. Here he
plainly shows by what means he lives: And he teaches what true Christian
righteousness is, namely that righteousness whereby Christ lives in us, and not
that which is in our person. Therefore when we speak of Christian righteousness
we must utterly reject the person. And here Christ and my conscience must
become one body, We must have Ghrist only before our eyes.
so that nothing remain in my sight but Christ crucified and raised from the
dead. But if I behold my self only and set Christ aside, I am gone. For by and
by I fall into this cogitation: Christ is in heaven and thou art on the earth:
how shall thou now come unto him? Forsooth I will live holily and do that which
the law requires: so shall I enter into life. Here returning to my self, and
considering what I am, what I ought to be, and what I am bound to do, I lose
Christ out of sight, who is my righteousness and life. Who being lost, there is
no counsel nor succor now remaining, but certain desperation and destruction
must needs follow.

And this is a common evil among men. For such is our misery, that when
tentation or death comes, by and by setting Christ aside, Such is our misery
that intentations and afflictions we set Christ aside and look back into our
own life past.
we consider our own life past and what we have done. Here, except we be
raised up again by faith, we must needs perish. Wherefore we must learn in
such conflicts and terrors of conscience forgetting our selves, and setting
the law, our life past, and all our works apart, which drive us to the
consideration of our selves only, to turn our eyes wholly to yt brazen serpent
Christ Jesus crucified, and assuredly believe that he is our righteousness and
life, not fearing the threatenings and terrors of the law, sin, death and the
judgment of God. For Christ, on whom our eyes are fixed, in whom we live, who
also lives in us, is Lord and conqueror of the law, sin, death and all
evils: In whom most certain and sure consolation is set forth unto us and
victory given.

Verse. 20. Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me.
Where he says: Thus I live, he speaks it as it were in his own person.
Therefore he by and by corrects himself, saying: yet not I now. That is to
say, I live not now in mine own person, but Christ lives in me. In deed the
person lives, but not in himself, nor for his own cause, nor for any thing
that is in him. But who is that I of whom he says: He speaks of the old
man.
yet not I. This I is he which has the law, and is bound to do the works
thereof: who also is a certain person separate from Christ. This person Paul
rejects. For as he is separate from Christ he belongs to death and hell.
Therefore he says: Now not I, but Christ lives in me. He is my form, my
furniture and perfection, adorning and beutifying my faith, as the color, the
clear light, or the whitnes do garnish and beutifie the wall. Thus are we
constrained grossly to set forth this matter. For we can not spiritually
conceive that Christ is so nerely joined and united unto us, as ye color or
whitenes are united unto the wall. Christ bestows himself and all that he
has, upon those that believe in him.
Christ therefore (says he) thus joined and united unto me and abiding in me,
lives this life in me which I now live: yea, Christ him self is this life
which I now live. Wherefore Christ and I in this behalf are both one.

Now Christ living in me abolisheth the law, condemns sin, and destroys
death: for it can not be but at his presence all these must needs vanish away.
For Christ is everlasting peace, consolation, righteousness and life: and to
these the terror of the law, heaviness of mind, sin, hell, and death must
needs give place. So Christ living and abiding in me, takes away and
swalloweth up all evils which vex and afflict me. This union or conjunction
then is the cause that I am delivered from the terror of the law and sin, am
separate from my self, and translated unto Christ and his kingdom, which is a
kingdom of grace, righteousness, peace, joy, life, salvation, and eternal glory.
Thus I now abiding and dwelling in him, what evil is there that can hurt me?

In the mean season the old man abides without and is subject to the law:
but as concerning justification, Christ and I must be entierly conjoined and
united together, so that he may live in me and I in him. And this is a
wonderful manner of speech. Now, because Christ lives in me, Whatsoever good
the godly have in the^, it is Christ's, and we are so knit together, that he
lives in us and we in him.
therefore look what grace, righteousness, life, peace, and salvation is in me,
it is his, and yet notwithstanding the same is mine also by that inseperable
union and conjunction which is through Faith: by which Christ and I are made
as it were one body in spirit. For as much then as Christ lives in me, it
follows, that as I must needs be with him pertaker of grace, righteousness,
life, and eternal salvation: so the law, sin, and death can have no place
in me: yea the law is crucified and swallowed up of the law, sin of sin,
and death of death. Thus Paul goes about to draw us from the beholding of our
selves, the law and works, and to plant in us true faith in Christ: so that in
the matter of justification we should think upon nothing else but grace,
separating the same far from the law and works, which in this matter ought to
have no place.

Paul has his peculiar phrase or kind of speech, Paul's excelent and heavenly
manner of speech.
which is not after the manner of men, but divine and heavenly: nor used of the
Evangelists or of the rest of the Apostles, saving only of John, who also is
wont sometimes so to speak. And if Paul had not first used this phrase and
set forth the same unto us in plain words, the very Saints themselves durst
not have used it. For it seems a very strange and a monstrous manner of
speaking thus to say: I live, I live not: I am dead, I am not dead: I am a
sinner, I am not a sinner: I have the law, I have not the law. Which phrase is
sweet and comfortable to all those that believe in Christ. For in that they
behold themselves, Albeit the faithful be sinners yet are they also righteous.
they have both the law and sin: but in that they look unto Christ, they are
dead to the law and have no sin. If then in the matter of justification thou
separate the person of Christ from thy person, then art thou in the law, thou
abidest in the law, thou live in the law and not in Christ, and so thou art
condemned of the law and dead before God. The Papists faith.
For thou have that faith which (as the Sophisters dream) is furnished with
charity. Thus I speak for examples sake. For there was never any one found
that was saved by this faith. And therefore what things soever the Sophisters
have written touching this faith, are nothing else but vain toys and mere
deceites of Satan. But let us grant that such there be as have this faith:
yet are they not therefore justified. For they have but an historical Faith
concerning Christ, which the Devil also and all the wicked have.

Faith therefore must be purely taught: namely that thou art so entirely and
nerely joined unto Christ, Faith so knitteth all beleuers and Christ together,
that they become one person.
that he and thou are made as it were one person, so that thou may boldly
say, I am now one with Christ, that is to say, Christ's righteousness, victory,
and life are mine. And again, Christ may say, I am that sinner, that is, his
sins and his death are mine because he is united and joined unto me and I
unto him. For by faith we are so joined together that we are become one flesh
and one bone. Ephesians. 5. we are the members of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30.
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: So that this faith does couple
Christ and me more near together then the husband is coupled to his wife. True
faith is not idle.
This faith therefore is not an idle quality, but the excellency thereof is
such, that it utterly confounds these foolish dreams of ye Sophisters
touching their formed faith and counterfeit charity, their merits, works and
worthiness. These things I would gladly set forth more amply if by any means I
could.

Hitherto we have declared this to be the first argument of Paul: that either
Christ must needs be the minister of sin, or else the law does not justify:
when he had finished this argument, he set forth himself for an example,
saying: that he was dead unto that old law by a certain new law. Now he
answers two objections which might be made against him. His first answer
is against the cauillations of the proud, and the offense of the weak. For
when remission of sins is freely preached, then do the malicious by and by
sclander this preaching. As Rom, 3: Let us do evil that good may come thereof.
For these fellows as soon as they hear that we are not justified by the law,
What occasion the malicious take of this doctrine.
forthwith do maliciously conclude and say: why, then let us reject the law.
Again, if grace do there abound (say they) where sin does abound, let us
then abound in sin that we may become righteous, and that grace may the more
abound. These are the malicious and proud spirits, which spitefully and
wittingly sclaunder the scriptures and sayings of the holy Ghost, even as they
sclaundered Paul whilst the apostles lived, to their own confusion and
condemnation, as it is said. 2. Pet. 3.

How the vveake are to be instructed.
Moreover, yt weak which are not malicious, are offended when they hear yt the
law and good works are not to be done as necessary to justification. These must
be helped, and must be instructed how good works do not justify: Good works
are not the cause but the fruits of righteousness.
how they ought to be done, how not to be done. They ought to be done, not as
the cause, but as the fruits of righteousness: and when we are made righteous we
ought to do them: but not contrariwise, to the end that when we are
unrighteous we may be made righteous. The tree makes the apple, but not the
apple the tree.

He said before: I am dead. etc. here the presumptious and malicious might
soon take occasion to cavil after this manner. What say thou Paul? art
thou dead? how then do thou speak? how do thou write? The weak also
might soon be offended and say unto him: what art thou Paul? Do we not see
yt thou art living, and do such things as pertain to this life? Life taken
two manner of ways.
To this he answers: I live in deed, and yet now not I, but Christ lives
in me. There is then a double life. The first is mine, which is natural: the
second is the life of an other, that is to say, the life of Christ in me. As
touching my natural life I am dead, and now I live an other life. I live not
now as Paul, but Paul is dead. Who is it then that lives? The Christian.
Paul therefore as he lives in him self, is wholly dead through the law: but as
he lives in Christ, or rather as Christ lives in him, he lives by an other
life: for Christ speaks in hin, lives in him, and exercises all the
operations of life in him. This comes not now of the life of Paul, but of the
life of the christian and regenerate person. Therefore thou malicious spirit,
where I say that I am dead, now sclaunder my words no more. And thou ye art
weak, be not offended, but distinguish and divide this matter rightly. For (as
I said) there are two lives: to wit, my natural life, and the life of an
other. By mine own life I live not: for it I did, The faithful live not their
own life, but the life of Christ.
the law would have dominion over me, and hold me in captivity. To the end
therefore that it should not hold me in captivity and bondage, I am dead to it
by an other law: and this death purchases unto me the life of an other, even
the life of Christ: which life is not mine by nature, but is given unto me by
Christ through faith.

The second answer is this. It might again be objected unto Paul: what
say thou Paul? Do thou not live by thine own life, or in thine own
flesh, but in Christ? we see thy flesh, but we see not Christ. Would thou
then delude us by thine inchauntments, that we should not see thee present in
flesh, living as thou did before, and doing all things in this corporal
life as others do? he answers.

Verse. 20. And in that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the son
of God.
That is to say, I live in deed in the flesh, but this life, Christ is our
life.
whatsoever it is, I esteem as no life, for it is no true life in deed, but a
shadow of life: under the which an other lives, that is to say, Christ, who is
my true life in deed, which life thou see not but only hear and I feel.
Thou hear the vvind, but know not whence it comes or whether it
goes. Ioh. 3. Even so thou see me speaking, eating, laboring, sleeping, and
doing other things, and yet thou see not my life. The faithful live in the
flesh but not according to the flesh.
This life which I now live, I live in deed in the flesh, but not through the
flesh or according to the flesh, but through faith and according to faith.
Paul then denies not that he lives in the flesh, because he does all things
that belong to a natural man. He uses also carnal things, as meat, drink,
apparel and such like, which is to live in the flesh: but he says that this
is not his life: and although he uses these things, yet he lives not through
them, as the world lives through the flesh and after the flesh: for it neither
knows nor hops for any life besides this.

Therefore (says he) this life which I now live in the flesh, To live in the
faith of the son of God.
whatsoever it is, I live in the faith of the son of God. For this word which
I now corporally speak is the word, not of flesh, but of the holy Ghost and of
Christ. This sight which goes in or comes out at mine eyes proceeds not of
flesh, that is to say, it is not governed of the flesh, but of the holy Ghost.
So my hearing comes not of the flesh, although it be in the flesh, but of the
holy Ghost. A Christian speaks none other but chaste, sober, and holy things,
which pertain unto Christ, to the glory of God and the profit of his
neighbor. These things come not of the flesh, neither are done according to
the flesh, and yet are they in the flesh. For I can not teach, write, pray or
give thanks but with these instruments of the flesh, which are necessary to the
accomplishing of these works: and yet notwithstanding these works proceed not
of the flesh, but are given by God from above. In like manner I behold a woman,
but with a chaste eye, not lusting after her. This beholding comes not of the
flesh, although it be in the flesh because the eyes are the carnal instruments
of this sight: but ye chastnes of this sight comes from heaven.

Thus a Christian uses the world and all creatures, so that there is no
difference between him and the Infidel. For in their apparel, in their
feeding, hearing, seeing, speaking, gestures, cou^tenances and such other things
they are like, and in outward apperance they seem to be all one (as Paul
speaks of Christ: Philip. 2.7.
In outvvard appearance he was found, The difference between the faithful
and unfaithful.
says he, as a man:) yet notwithstanding there is great difference. For I
live in the flesh (I grant) but I live not of my self: but in that I now
live, I live in the faith of the son of God. This which I now speak,
springs out of an other fountain then that which thou heardest of me before.
Paul before his conversion spoke with the same voice and tongue wherewith he
spoke afterward. But his voice and his tongue were then blasphemous, and
therefore he could speak nothing else but blasphemies and abominations against
Christ and his Church. After he was converted he had the same flesh, the same
voice and tongue which he had before, and nothing was changed: but his voice
and his tongue then uttered no blasphemies but spiritual and heavenly words: to
wit, thanks giving and the praise of God: which came of faith and the holy
Ghost. So then I live in the flesh, but not of the flesh or after the flesh,
but in the faith of the son of God.

Hereby we may plainly see whence this spiritual life comes: which we have
not of our selves but of an other, which the natural man can in no wise
understand, for he knows not what manner of life this is. He hears the wind,
but whence it comes or whither it goes he knows not. He hears the voice
of the spiritual man, he knows his face, his manners and his gestures: but he
sees not whence these works, which are not now wicked and blasphemous as
before, but holy and godly: or whence these motions and actions do come. For
this life is in the heart by Faith, where the flesh is killed and Christ
reigns with his holy spirit, who now sees, hears, speaks, works,
suffers and does all other things in him, although the flesh do resist. To
conclude, this is not the life of ye flesh, although it be in ye flesh: but of
Christ the son of God, whom the Christian possesses by faith.

Verse. 20. Who loved me and gave him self for me.
Here have ye the true mean of justification, The true way to justification.
and a perfect example of the assurance of faith set before your eyes. He that
can with a firm and constant faith say these words with Paul: I live by Faith
in the son of God, who has loved me, and given him self for me, is happy
in deed. And even with these words Paul takes away the whole righteousness
of the law and works, as afterward we will declare. But we must diligently
wey and consider these words: The son of God has loved me, and given him
self for me. It was not I then that first loved the son of God, and
delivered my self for him: as the Sophisters dream, that they love the son
of God and deliver themselves for him. For they teach that a man expuris
naturalibus, that is, The pestilent doctrine of the Papists and Pelagia^s.
of his own pure natural strength, can do meritorious works before grace, and
love God and Christ above all things. These fellows prevent the love of God and
Christ: for they do that which lies in them (as they are wont to say) that
is, they do not only keep the commandments, but they do also the works of
supererogation, and sell the overplus of their merits to laimen, and so (as
they imagine) they deliver them selves for Christ's sake, whereby they save
both themselves and others, turning ye words of Paul clean contrary, and
saying: These meritemo^gers turn these words of Paul vpside down.
we have loved Christ and given our selves for him. Thus, whiles the wicked
being puffed up with the wisdom of the flesh, imagine that they do what in them
lies, that they love God, and deliver them selves for Christ: what do they
else but abolish the gospel, deride, deny and blaspheme Christ, yea spit upon
him and tread him under foot? They confess in words yt he is a iustifier and
a Savior: but in very deed they take from him the power both to justify and
save, and give the same to their own wilworkes, ceremonies, and devotions.
This is to live in their own righteousness and works, and not in the faith of
the son of God.

This is not then the true means to attain justification, to do that which in
thee lies: To do what in us lies.
as the Sophisters and Scholedoctours do teach, which affirm that if a man
do what in him lies, God will undoubtedly give unto him his grace. But this
saying may not be straightly urged, say they. For if we do those works which may
be approved by the judgment of any good man, it is enough: for then grace
shall surely follow, because god, in that he is good and just, must needs give
grace as a recompense for such good works. And hereof comes this verse: Vitra
posse viri non vult Deus vlla requiri. That is,
God will no more require of man, then of him self perform he can.
In deed this is a good saying if it be used rightly and in place convenient:
yt is, in ye government of commonweals or families. And if I being in ye
kingdom of reason do execute ye office of a magistrate or govern a family,
doing yt in me lies, I am excused. This kingdom has his bounds and limits:
The Papists do apply matters of policy and civil government to the church.
Romans 7.14.
to the which also these sayings do pertain: To do what in us lies: To do
as much as we are able. But the Sophisters apply these sayings to the
spiritual kingdom, wherein a man can do nothing else but sin: for he is sold
under sin. But in external things (such I mean as pertain to civil and
household government) he is not a servant, but a Lord and a ruler. Wherefore
they have done wickedly in applying these sentences to the church, which
properly pertain to the government of commonweals and families. For the
kingdom of man's reason and the spiritual kingdom must be separate far
asunder.

Moreover, they say that nature is corrupt, but the qualities of nature
notwithstanding are sound and vncorrupt: which also they attribute even unto
Devils. Upon this ground they reason after this manner. If the natural
qualities of man be sound and vncorrupt, The Papists do grant that nature is
corrupt: but they say that the powers and qualities of nature remain sound
and vncorrupt
then is his understanding and his will sound and vncorrupt, and so
consequently all other qualities of nature are pure and perfect in him. To
know these things it is necessary for you, that ye may hold the sincerity of
the doctrine of faith. Where they say then that the natural qualities of man
are sound and vncorrupt, and thereof do infer, that a man is able of him self
to fulfill the law, and to love God with all his heart, applying these qualities
to the spiritual kingdom, I deny the consequence. And here I make a
distinction between the natural and the spiritual qualities (which they
confound and mingle together), and I say that the spiritual qualities are not
sound but corrupt, yea utterly quenched through sin both in man and devil,
so that there is in them nothing else but corrupt understanding and a will
continually striving against the will of God, which can think nothing else but
that which is altogether against god. Notwithstanding, I grant that the
natural qualities are vncorrupt. But what qualities are they? That a man being
drowned in sin and iniquity, and a bondslaue of Satan, has will, reason,
and power notwithstanding to execute the office of a magistrate, to govern a
family, to guide a ship, to build a house, and to do such other things as
are subject unto man: for these things are not taken from him. We do not then
deny but that these sentences are true in the corporal kingdom: But if ye
wrest them to the spiritual kingdom, I utterly deny them: for there (as I
said) we are clean overwhelmed and drowned in sin. Whatsoever is in our will,
is evil: whatsoever is in our understanding, is error. Wherefore in spiritual
matters man has nothing but darkness, errors, ignorance, malice, and
peruersenes both of will and understanding. How then should he work well,
fulfill the law, and love God?

Wherefore Paul says here that Christ first began and not we. He, Christ first
loved us, and not we him.
even he (says Paul) loved me and gave him self for me. As if he said: He
found in me no good will or right understanding: but this good Lord had mercy
upon me. He saw me to be nothing else but wicked, going astray, contemning God,
and flying from him more and more: yea rebelling against God, taken, led, and
carried away captive of the devil. Thus of his mere mercy preventing my reason,
my will, and my understanding, he loved me, and so loved me, that he gave him
self for me, to the end that I might be freed from the law, sin, the
devil, and death.

Again, these words: The son of God has loved me, and given him self for
me, are mighty thu^drings and lightnings from heaven against the righteousness
of the law and all the works thereof. So great and so horrible wickedness,
error, darkness and ignorance was in my will and understanding, that it was
impossible for me to be rau^somed by any other means then by such an
inestimable price. The bragging of the integrity of our natural qualities is
in vain.
Why do we then vau^t of the soundnes of nature, of the rule of reason, of free
will, and of doing what in us lies? Why do I offer unto god being angry with me
(who, as Moses says, is a co^suming fire) this my rotten stubble and straw,
yea horrible sins, and claim of him to reward me with grace and everlasting
life for them, since here I learn such wickedness to lie lurki^g in my nature,
that the whole world and all creatures therein were not able to counteruaile the
indignation of God, but that the very son of God him self must needs be
delivered for the same.

But let us consider well this price, and let us behold this captive delivered
(as Paul says) for me, the son of God I mean, and we shall see him without
all comparison to excede and excel all creatures. The greatness of the price to
be well vveyed, that was given for us.
What will thou do when thou hear the Apostle say that such an inestimable
price was given for thee? Will thou bring thy cowle, thy shaven crown, thy
chastity, thy obedience, thy poverty, thy works, thy merits? What shall all
these do? Yea what shall the law of Moses avail? What shall the works of all
men, and all the suffering of the Martyrs profit thee? What is the obedience
of all the holy angels in comparison of the son of God delivered, and that
most shamefully, even to the death of the cross, so that there was no drop
of his most precious blood but it was shed, and that for thy sins? If thou
could rightly consider this incomparable price, thou should hold as
accursed all these ceremonies, vows, works and merits before grace and after,
and throw them all down to hell. For it is an horrible blasphemy to imagine
that there is any work whereby thou should presume to pacify God, since
thou see that there is nothing which is able to pacify him but this
inestimable price, even ye death and blood of the son of god, one drop whereof
is more precious then al ye creatures in ye world.

Verse. 20. For me.
Who is this me? Even I wretched and damnable sinner, so dearly beloved of the
son of God that he gave himself for me. If I then through works or merits
could have loved the son of God and so come unto him, what needed he to
deliver himself for me? Hereby it appears how coldly the Papists handled,
The sluggishnes of the Papists in handling the holy scriptures.
yea how they utterly neglected the holy scriptures and doctrine of faith. For
if they had considered but only these words, that it behooved the son of God
to be given for me, it had been impossible that so many monstrous sects should
have spronge up amongst them. For faith would by and by have answered: why
do thou choose this kind of life, this religion, this work? Do thou this
to please God, or to be justified thereby? Do thou not hear, O thou wretch,
that the son of God shed his blood for thee? Thus true faith in Christ would
easily have withstand all manner of sects. How sects may be vvithstande.


Wherefore I say (as I have often times said) that there is no remedy against
Sects or power to resist them, but this only article of Christian
righteousness. If we lose this article, it is impossible for us to withstand any
errors or Sects: As we may see at this day in the phanaticall spirits the
Anabaptists and such like: who being fallen away from this article of
justification, will never cease to fall, err, and seduce until they come to
the fulness of all iniquity. There is no dout, but they will raise up
innumerable sects, and still devise new works. But what are al these things
(though they have never so goodly a show of holiness) if ye compare them to the
death and blood of the son of God, who gave himself for me. Consider well,
I pray you, who this son of God is, how glorious he is, how mighty he is.
What is heaven and earth in comparison of him? Let all the Papists and all the
authors of sects, yea though the whole world take their part, be thrown down
into hell, withal their righteousness, works, and merits, rather then the
truth of the Gospel should be blemished, and the glory of Christ perish. What
mean they they then, to brag so much of works and merits? If I being a
wretched and a damned sinner could be redeemed by any other price, what needed
the son of God to be given for me? But because there was no other price,
either in heaven or in earth, but Christ the son of God, therefore it was
most necessary yt he should be delivered for me. Moreover this he did of
inestimable love: For Paul says, which loved me.

Wherefore these words: which loved me, are full of faith. Has given himself
for me.
And he that can utter this little word Me, and apply it unto him self with a
true and constant faith as Paul did, shall be a good disputer with Paul against
the law. For he delivered neither sheep, ox, gold nor silver, but even God
him self entierly and wholly, for me, even for me (I say) a miserable and
wretched sinner. Now therefore in that the son of God was thus delivered to
death for me, I take comfort and apply this benefit unto my self. The true
force of faith.
And this manner of applying is the right force of faith in deed.

These words (which are the pure preaching of grace and Christian righteousness
in deed) Paul sets against the righteousness of the law. As if he said: Be
it so that the law is an heavenly doctrine, The law loves not sinners, but
accuses them.
and has also his glory: yet notwithstanding it loved not me, nor gave it
self for me: yea it accuses me, terrifieth me, and drives me to desperation.
But I have now an other which has delivered me from the terrors of the law,
sin and death, and has brought me unto liberty, the righteousness of God,
and eternal life: who is called the son of God: to whom be praise and glory
for evermore.

Faith therefore (as I have said) embraces and wrappeth in it self Christ
Jesus the son of God, delivered to death for us, as Paul here teaches, who
being apprehended by faith, gives unto us righteousness and life. And here he
sets out most lively the Priesthode and offices of Christ: which are to
pacify God, to make intercession for sinners, to offer up him self a
sacrifice for their sins, to redeem, to instruct, and to comfort them. Let us
learn therefore to give a true definition of Christ, not as the Scholedoctours
do and such as seek righteousness by their own works, which make him a new
law-geuer, who abolishing the old law has established a new. To these
Christ is nothing else but an exactor and a tyranne: A true definition of
Christ.
but let us define him as Paul here does: namely that he is the son of God,
who not for our desert or any righteousness of ours, but of his own free mercy
offered up him self a sacrifice for us sinners, that he might sanctify us
for ever.

Christ then is no Moses, no exactor, no geuer of laws, but a geuer of grace,
a Savior, and one that is full of mercy: briefly, he is nothing else but
infinite mercy and goodness, freely given and bountifully giving unto us. And
thus shall you paint out Christ in his right colors. If you suffer him to be
painted out to you any otherwise then thus, when tentation and trouble comes
you shall soon be overthrown. The greatest cunning that Christians can have,
is to define Christ rightly.
Now, as it is the greatest knowledge and cunning that Christians ca^ have,
thus to define Christ: so of all things it is the most hardest. For I my self
even in this great light of the Gospel, wherein I have been so long exercised,
have much a do to hold this definition of Christ which Paul here gives: So
depely has this doctrine and pestilent opinion that Christ is a lawgeuer,
entered in me, even as it were oil into my boanes. Ye young men therefore are in
this case much more happy then we that are old. For ye are not infected with
these pernicious errors, wherein I have been so nusled and so drowned even
from my youth, that at the very hearing of the name of Christ my heart has
tre^bled and quaked for fear: for I was persuaded that he was a severe judge.
Wherefore it is to me a double travail and trouble to correct and reform this
evil: First to forget, to condemn, and to withstand this old grounded
error, that Christ is a lawgeuer and a Judge: for it often returns and
plucketh me back. Then to plant in my heart a new and a true persuasion of
Christ, that he is a iustifier and a Savior. Ye (I say) that are young, may
learn with much less difficulty to know Christ purely and sincerely if ye
will. Wherefore if any man feel him self oppressed with heaviness and anguish
of heart, he must not impute it unto Christ, although it come under the name of
Christ, but unto the Devil, who oftentimes comes under the color of Christ,
and transformeth himself into an Angel of light.

Let us learn therefore to put a difference between Christ and a lawgeuer, not
only in word but in practice, and in deed also, that when ye Devil shall come
under the shadow of Christ, and shall go about to trouble us under his name, we
may know him, not to be Christ, but a very feend in deed. For Christ when he
comes, is nothing else but joy and sweetenes to a trembling and broken heart,
as here Paul witnesses, who sets him out with this most sweet and loving
title when he says: which loved me and gave him self for me. Christ loves
the afflicted, and such as feel the weight of their sins.
Christ therefore in very deed is a lover of those which are in bitterness of
mind, sin and death, and such a lover as gave him self for them: who is
also our high priest, that is to say, a mediator between God and us wretched
sinners. What could be said (I pray you) more sweet or comfortable to the
poor afflicted conscience? Now, if these things be true (as they are in deed
most true, or else the Gospel must be nothing else but a fable) then are we
not justified by the righteousness of the law: and much less by our own
righteousness.

Read therefore with diligent attention, and with great vehemency these words
Me and for me, and so practice with thy self, Me. For me.
that thou may well conceive and print this Me in thy heart, and apply it
unto thy self with a steadfast faith, not doubting but thou art of the number
of those to whom this Me belongs: Also that Christ has not only loved Peter
and Paul, and given him self for them, but that the same grace also which is
comprehended in this Me, does as well pertain and extend unto us as unto them.
For as we can not deny but that we are all sinners, and are constrained to say
that through the sin of Adam we were all lost, were made the enemies of God,
subject to the wrath and judgment of God, and guilty of eternal death (for
this do all terrified hearts feel and confess, and more in deed then they
should do) so can we not deny but that Christ died for our sins yt he might
make us righteous. For he died not to justify the righteous, but the
unrighteous, and to make them the children of God, and inheritours of all
spiritual and heavenly gifts. Therefore when I feel and confess my self to
be a sinner through Adams tra^sgression, As by Adam all became guilty, so by
Christ all that believe, are made righteous.
why should I not say that I am made righteous through the righteousness of
Christ, especially when I hear yt he loved me, and gave himself for me. This
did Paul most steadfastly believe, and therefore he speaks these words with so
great a vehemency and full assurance. Which he grant unto us, in some part at
the least, who has loised us and given him self for us.

Verse. 21. I do not abrogate or reject the grace of God
Now he prepares a way to the second argument of this epistle. And here ye
must diligently consider, They that seek to be made righteous by the law,
reject the grace of God.
yt to seek to be justified by the works of the law is to reject the grace of
God. But, I pray you, what sin ca^ be more execrable or horrible then to
reject the grace of God and to refuse that righteousness which comes by Christ?
It is enough and to much already that we are wicked sinners and transgressors
of all the commandments of God: and yet we commit moreover the most execrable
sin of all sins, in that we do so contemptuously refuse the grace of God
and remission of sins offered unto us by Christ. This blasphemy is more
horrible then can be expressed. There is no sin which Paul and the other
Apostles did so much detest as the contempt of grace and denial of Christ, and
yet there is no sin more common. Hereof it comes that Paul above ye rest
does so sharply inuey against Antichrist for that he despises the grace of God
and refuses the benefit of Christ our high Priest, Antichrist rejects
grace, and denies faith.
who offered up himself a sacrifice for our sins. Now thus to deny Christ,
what is it else but to spitte in his face, to tread him under foot, to set
himself in his place, and to say: I will justify thee and will save thee. By
what means? By masses, pilgrimages, pardons, merits and such like. We see then
how proudly Antichrist has lift up himself against and above God, and set
himself in the place of Christ, rejected the grace of God and denied the faith.
For this is his doctrine: Faith avails nothing (says he) unless it be
joined with works: and by this false and detestable doctrine he has defaced,
darkened, and utterly buried the benefit of Christ, and in the steed of the
grace of Christ and his kingdom, he has established the doctrine of works and
the kingdom of ceremonies, and has confirmed the same with mere trifles and
doting dreams, and by this means he has wrested the whole world out of
Christ's hands (who alone ought to reign in the conscience) and has thrown
it down hedlong into hell.

What it is to reject grace.
Hereby we may easily understand what it is to reject and refuse the grace of
God, even to seek righteousness by the law. Now, who has ever heard that a man
by keeping of the law rejects grace? Do we then sin in keeping of the law?
No forsooth. But we despise grace when we observe the law to this end, that we
may be justified through it. The law is good, holy and profitable, and yet it
justifies not. He then that keeps the law to be justified thereby, rejects
grace, denies Christ, despises his sacrifice, and will not be saved by this
inestimable price, but will satisfy for his sins through the righteousness of
the law, or deserve grace by his own righteousness: and this man blasphemeth
and despises the grace of God. Now what an horrible thing is it to say that
any man should be so deuilish, as to despise the grace and mercy of God? And
yet notwithstanding all the world does so. The world is so vntovvard that it
rejects the grace of God.
Albeit it can not abide that any man should so judge of it, but will seem to
do high service and honor unto God. Now follows the second argument.

Verse. 21. For if righteousness come by the law, then Christ died in vain.
Here again I admonish you that Paul speaks not of the ceremonial law
only (for this the Papists do always allege) but of the whole law.
Corrupters of Paul.
And these words of Paul are diligently to be considered in this wise. It is
true that Christ suffered death or not? Again, did he suffer in vain or not?
Here we are constrained to answer, except we be stark mad, that he
suffered in very deed: and that he suffered not in vain nor for himself, but
for us. If then he suffered not in vain, it follows of necessity that
righteousness comes not by the law.

Take now therefore the whole law, and imagine that by the merit of co^gruence
or works going before grace, thou have so much profited, that thou have
received grace and the spirit of God, which is a thing impossible unto
nature: If the desert of congruence avail ought, then is Christ dead in vain.
but yet admit (I say) that in doing what in thee lies, thou have obtained
grace, art made righteous, and have received the holy Ghost by the merit of
congruence: then have thou no need of Christ, he is to thee unprofitable and
his death of none effect.

Moreover take even the law of the ten commandments, wherein is contained the
true religion and the highest service of God: If the law justify, Christ died
in vain.
that is to say, faith, the fear of God, the love of God, and the love of our
neighbor, and show me any man that has been justified thereby: yet is it true
notwithstanding that Christ died in vain. For he that is justified by the law,
has power in himself to obtain righteousness. For in that he does what in him
lies, he deserves grace, and the holy Ghost is powered into him, whereby he is
now able to love God and his neighbor. This being granted, it must needs
follow that Christ died in vain. For what need of Christ has he which both
loves Christ and gives himself for him, so that he is able by the merit of
congruence before grace to obtain grace, and then to do such works as by the
merit of worthiness after grace he is able to deserve eternal life? Then take
away Christ withal his benefits, for he is utterly unprofitable. But why was
he borne? why was he crucified? why did he suffer? why was he made my high
Priest loving me and giving Himself an inestimable sacrifice for me? In vain
(no doubt) and to no purpose at all if righteousness come by no other means
then the Papists teach: for I find no righteousness but either in my self or
in the law, without grace and without Christ.

Is this horrible blasphemy to be suffered or dissembled, that the divine
majesty not sparing his own dear son, but delivering him to death for us
all, should not do all these things seriously and in good earnest, The
righteousness of all Saints is nothing in comparison of the righteousness of
Christ.
but as it were in sport? Before I would admit this blasphemy, I would not
only that the holiness of all the Papists and meritmongers, but also of all the
Saints and holy angels should be thrown down into the bottom of hell, and
condemned with the devil. Mine eyes shall behold nothing else but this
inestimable price my Lord and Savior Christ. He ought to be such a treasure
unto me, that all other things should be but dunge in comparison of him. He
ought to be such a light unto me, yt when I have apprehended him by faith, I
should not know whether there be any law, any sin, any righteousness or any
unrighteousness in ye world. For what is al yt is either in heaven or earth in
co^pariso^ of ye son of god Christ Jesus my lord and Savior, who loved me
and gave himself for me.

A common sin to reject the grace of God.
Wherefore, to reject the grace of God, is an horrible sin and commonly
reigning throughout the world: whereof al they are guilty which seek
righteousness by their own works. For whiles they seek to be justified by
their own works and merits or by the law, they reject the grace of God and
Christ, The Pope the chief author of all abominations in the church.
as I have said. And of all these abominations the Pope has been the only
author. For he has not only defaced and trodden the Gospel of Christ under
his feet, but has also replenished the world with his cursed traditions. And
hereof amongst other enormities, The Popes pardons.
his bulls and pardons are a sufficient witness: whereby he absolueth, not such
as believe, but such as are contrite, make confession to a Priest, and reach out
their helping hand to the maintenance of his pomp and his traditions. Yet
notwithstanding in this great light of the Gospel the blind and obstinate
Papists do continue still in their damnable doting dreams, saying that the
qualities of nature do remain sound and vncorrupt, and that men are able to
prepare themselves to grace, or to deserve grace by their own works and
merits. And so far of is it that they will acknowledge their error and
impiety, that they do yet still obstinatly defend the same even against their
own conscience.

But we do constantly affirm with Paul (for we will not reject the grace of
God) that either Christ died in vain, If the law justify, then is Christ
died in vain.
or else the law justifies not. But Christ died not in vain: therefore the law
justifies not. Christ the son of God of his own free grace and mercy has
justified us: therefore the law could not justify us: for if it could, then had
Christ done unwisely in that he gave himself for our sins that we thereby
might be justified. We conclude therefore that we are justified neither by our
own works and merits before grace or after, neither yet by the law.

Now, if my salvation was so costly and dear a price unto Christ, that he was
constrained to die for my sins, the^ all my works, with all the righteousness
of the law, A comparing of Christ and the law together.
are but vile and nothing worth in comparison of this inestimable price. For
how can I bie yt for a farthing which cost many thousand talents of gold? Now
the law (to speak nothing of other matters which are of much less value) with
all the works and righteousness thereof, is but as a farthing if ye compare it
unto Christ: who by his death has vanquished my death and has purchased
righteousness and everlasting life. Should I then despise and reject this
incomparable price, and by the law or by the works and merits of me^ (vile
dross and dung, for so Paul calls them, if they be compared unto Christ)
seek that righteousness which Christ freely and of mere love has given unto
me already, and has cost him so great a price that he was constrained to give
himself and even his own heart blood for me? This (as I have said) the whole
world does, and specially such as will be counted more holy and religious then
others. Whereby they plainly witness that Christ died in vain, The deuilish
perverseness of the world.
although with their mouths they confess the contrary never so much. Which is
most horribly to blasphemy the son of god, to spit in his face, to tread him
under foot, to count the blood of the testament as an unholy thing, and
utterly to despise the spirit of grace.

Paul here disputing of righteousness, has no civil matter in hand, that is,
he speaks not of civil righteousness: which God notwithstanding allows and
requires, Civil righteousness has her rewards.
and gives certain rewards thereunto accordingly: which also reason is able in
some part to perform. But he entreats here of the righteousness that avails
before God, whereby we are delivered from the law, sin, death, and all evils,
and are made partakers of grace righteousness, and everlasting life, and finally
are now become Lords of heaven and earth and all other creatures. The
righteousness of faith, is the righteousness that pleases God.
This righteousness neither man's law, neither the law of God is able to perform.

The law is given besides and above reason to be a light and a help to man,
and to show him what he ought to do, and what to leave undone. Notwithstanding
man with all his strength and reason, Reason although it be lightened with the
law, yea and the law of God, yet it can not justify.
yea with this great light also and heavenly benefit (the law I mean) can not
be justified. Now, if that which is the most excellent thing in the world (the
law I say) which as a bright shining sun is joined to the dim and obscure
light of man's reason, to lighten and to direct it, is not able to justify,
what can reason do (I pray you) without the law? What? Doutles nothing else
but that which ye Pope with his dreaming Sophisters and his whole Sinagoge has
done, who with their own traditions have darkened the light even of the first
commandment. Wherefore there is not one of them that is able rightly to
understand any one syllable of the law, but every man walks in mere darkness
of man's reason. And this error is much more pernicious and deadly then that
which proceeds of the doctrine of works and the law.

These words therefore are very effectual and full of power, where he says:
Galath. 2.21.
If righteousness come by the law, then Christ died in vain. He speaks here
nothing of man's strength, reason or wisdom, be it never so great (for the
greater it is, the sooner it deceaueth a man), but he says plainly without all
condition: If by the law. etc. Wherefore reason lightened, aided, and directed
by the law, yea even by the law of God, is so unable to attain righteousness,
that it draws a man from righteousness and rejects Christ. Set thou therefore
the death of Christ simply against all laws, and with Paul know nothing but
Jesus Christ crucified. Receive no light either of reason, or of the law, or
of any thing else then of Christ alone. Then shall thou be learned in deed,
righteous and holy, and shall receive the holy Ghost, which shall preserve thee
in the purity of the word and faith: but set Christ aside, and all things are
but unprofitable and vain what so ever they be.

Here again we see what a goodly commendation Paul gives to the righteousness
of the law, or man's own righteousness, in that he teaches it to be a contempt
and rejecting of the grace of God, and an abolishing of the death of Christ.
The praise of the righteousness of the law.
Paul is no great Rhetorician, and yet see what matter he ministers to him
that lists to play the Rhetorician. What eloquence is able sufficiently to
set out these words: To reject grace: the grace of God: Also, that Christ died
in vain. The horriblenes whereof is such, that all the eloquence in the world
is not able to comprehend it. To say that any man dies in vain, it is but a
small matter: but to say that Christ died in vain, it is to take him quite away
and make of him nothing at all. Who so lists to play the Rhetorician has
here matter enough to dilate and amplify at large, what an horrible and
blasphemous doctrine it is to set up the righteousness of the law and works.
For what can be more blasphemous and horrible, then to make the death of Christ
unprofitable? Who make Christ to have died in vain.
and what do they else which observe the law to the end they may be justified
thereby? Now, to make the death of Christ unprofitable, is also to make his
resurrection, his victory, his glory, his kingdom, heaven, earth, God
himself, the majesty of God, and briefly all things else whatsoever, but
unprofitable and of none effect.

This thundering and lightning from heaven against the righteousness of the law
and man's own righteousness, should fear us and make us to abhor it. And here
with this thunderbolt falls down all the orders of Monks and Friars, with
all the rablement of such supersticious religion. For who will not detest his
own vows, his cowle, his shaven croune, all men's traditions, yea the very law
of Moses also, if he hear that for these things he rejects the grace of god
and makes the death of Christ unprofitable? The world hearing this, does not
believe that it is true. It thinks that such horrible wickedness can not enter
into any man's heart, that he should reject the grace of God and esteem the
death of Christ as a thing of naught. And yet this sin commonly reigns. For
whosoever seeks righteousness without Christ, either by works, merits,
satisfactions, afflictions, or by the law, rejects the grace of God and
despises the death of Christ, whatsoever he protests with his mouth to the
contrary.

The third Chapter.
Verse. 1. O foolish Galathians.
PAVLE here shows his Apostolical care and fervent zeal which he bears to
the church: so that in disputing and confuting he intermixeth sometimes gentle
exhortations, and sometimes he sharply chideth, according to his own rule
given to Timothy. Preach (says he) the word: be instant in season and out of
season: 2. Timot. 4.5.
Improve, rebuke, exhort. 2. Timot. 4. Here the simple reader happily may be
deceived, if he be not circumspect, Paul's order in teaching.
to think that Paul in teaching keeps no order at all. And surely after the
manner of the Rhetoricians he observes none: but as concerning the spirit he
uses a goodly order.

Now, after that he has sufficiently proved, and with two strong arguments
confirmed this article, that Christian righteousness comes not by keeping of
the law, but by faith in Christ, and withal has confuted the doctrine of the
false Apostles: in the mids of this discourse he turns his talk to the
Galathians, O ye foolish Galathians.
and reproves them, saying: O ye foolish Galathians. etc. As if he should say:
Alas, from whence are ye fallen, O ye miserable Galathians? I have most
carefully and diligently taught you the truth of the Gospel, and ye also have
received the same of me with fervent zeal and great diligence. How then
comes it to pass, that ye are so suddenly fallen away from it? who has
bewitched you?

Paul offends not in chiding the Galathians so sharply.
He rebukes the Galathians very sharply (as it seems) when he calls them
fools, bewitched, and disobedient to the truth. Now, whether he did this of
zeal or compassion, I will not here contend: both may be true. A carnal man
would interpret this to be a reuiling rather then a godly reprehension. Did
Paul then give an evil example, or was he spiteful against the churches of
Galatia because he called them foolish and bewitched? No, not so. For with a
Christian zeal it is lawful for an Apostle, pastor, or preacher sharply to
reprove the people committed to his charge: The chiding of parents toward
their children.
and such reprouings are both fatherly and godly. So parents, of a fatherly and
motherly affection, do sharply reprove and rebuke their children: which they
would not bear if an other should do it. The Scholemaster sometimes is angry
with his scholar: he rebukes him and beats him with rods: all which he
takes in good part and would not bear it at the hands of his equal. The
magistrate likewise is angry: he reproves and punishes such as are under his
charge. And this discipline is not only good, but also very necessary: Anger
sometimes a necessary virtue.
without the which nothing can be well done. Wherefore unless the magistrate,
the minister, the father and mother be angry and use to reprove or rebuke when
case requires, he is unprofitable, and never shall discharge his office
rightly.

Wherefore sharp chidings and bitter words are as necessary in every kind of
life, as any other virtue else. Yet notwithstanding this anger must be so
tempered, that it proceed not of any envy or malice, but only of a fatherly
affection and Christian zeal: that is to say, it ought not to be childish or
womanlike, seking revenge: but only for the correcting of the fault: As the
father corrects not his child with desire to revenge, but only that the
child thereby may be the better. Just anger is called in the scripture zeal or
jealousy.
And these kinds of anger are good, and are called in the scripture ielousies
or zeales. For in chastising my brother, my child, my scholar or subject in
this sort, I seek not his destruction, but his profit and welfare.

It may be then that Paul here rebukes the Galathians, either of a very zeal
(not to destroy them, but by this means to reduce them into the way again and
to amend them): or else of pity and compassion, as it were by way of complaint,
for that it greueth him that the Galathians should be so miserably seduced. As
if he should say: I am sorry and ashamed to hear of this your miserable case,
your wretched doings, etc. In like manner do we also reprove the miserable: not
that we tread them down, or vpbraide them with their misery, but as having
compassion on them and seeking their amendment. This I say, lest any man should
cavil that Paul railed upon the churches, contrary to the rule of the Gospel.

In like manner Christ rebukes the phariseis, calling them serpents, Math. 13
33. The sharp rebukings of the holy Ghost.
the generation of vipers, the children of the devil. But these are the
rebukings of the holy Ghost. They are fatherly and motherly, and as the
chidings of a faithful friend: As it is said also in the proverbs: Better are
the wounds of a friend then the kisses of an enemy. Proverb. 27.6.
Thus one and the self same rebuke, if it come out of the mouth of a father,
may be a great benefit: but if it proceed out of the mouth of our equal or
enemy, it is a spiteful reproach. When two men do both one thing, in the one
it is commendable, and in the other it is clean contrary. When Christ and
Paul do reprove, it is done with singular virtue and commendation: but when a
private man shall do the like, in him it is a great vice. Therefore one and
the self same word in the mouth of Paul is a great virtue and a singular
benefit: but in the mouth of an other it is a shameful reproach.

Here is a great vehemency to be noted in this word Galathians. For he calls
them not brethren, as else where he is wont to do: The natural vice of the
Galathians.
but he calls them by the name of their country. And it should seem that it
was the natural vice of that nation to be foolish: like as it was the fault of
the Cretenses to be liars. As if he should say: As ye are called, even so are
ye in deed and so ye continue, that is to say, foolish Galathians: and this ye
prove even now in this business of the Gospel (wherein notwithstanding ye ought
to have showed your selves most wise), but ye continue still in your old nature
and show your selves no changelings. Thus Paul by way of correction puts
them in mind of their corrupt nature.

Moreover, we are here admonished, that according to the flesh there are yet
certain natural vices remaining even in Christian churches. The remnants of
natural vices remain in the Godly.
Grace makes not such a chaung in the faithful, that by and by they become
altogether new creatures and perfect in all things: but there remain yet
certain dregs of their old and natural corruption. As if a man that is
naturally inclined to anger be converted to Christ, although he be mollified by
grace (the holy Ghost so framing his heart, yt he is now become more meek and
gentile) yet this natural vice is not utterly quenched in his flesh. Likewise,
such as are by nature stubborn and stout hearted men, Ebr. 12.
although they be converted to the faith, yet notwithstanding they can not
utterly forsake this stubbernes. Hereof it comes that the holy scriptures,
which do contain all one truth, of diverse spirits are diversely handled. The
scripture being one and the self same truth, is diversely handled of sundry men
One in teaching is mild and gentle: an other more rough and rigorous. Thus the
spirit of god being powered into diverse vessels, does not quench at once the
vices of nature: but by little and little during this life, he purges that sin
which is rooted, not only in the Galathians, but also in all men of all
nations.

Albeit then that the Galathians were lightened and did believe, and had now
received the holy Ghost by the preaching of faith, notwithstanding this remnant
of vice (this foolishnes I mean) and the original corruption which afterward
did easily burst out in to the flame of false doctrine, Grace by little and
little cleanses those that be godly, from their old sins.
remained in them still. Wherefore let no man trust so much in himself, to
think that when he has received grace, he is thoroughly purged from his old
vices. In deed many things are purged in us, and principally the head of the
Serpent, that is to say, infidelity and ignorance of God is cut of and
bruised, but the slime and the relikes of sin remain still in us. Let no man
therefore presume so much of himself, that when he has once received faith, he
can by and by be thoroughly changed into a new man: Nay, he shall keep somewhat
of his old vices still hanging upon him, though he be never so good and perfect
a Christian. For we are not yet dead, but we still live in the flesh: which,
Galat. 5.17. Romans 7.13.14.
because it is not yet pure, continually lusts against the spirit. Gal. 1.
Romans 7. I am fleshly (says Paul) sold under sin. I see an other law in my
members rebelling against the law of my mind. Wherefore the natural vices
that were in us before we received faith, do still remain in us after that we
have received faith: There is none so pure and unspotted, that he may be called
a Puritan but Christ. 1. Pet. 2.22. Esaias. 53.9. 1. John. 3.2.
saving that now they are subdued to the spirit, which has the upper hand,
to keep them under that they rule not: and yet not without great conflict.
This glory is due to Christ alone, and this title he bears, that he is pure
and without blemish. 1. Pet. 2. Who did no sin, neither was there any guile
found in his mouth.

Verse. 1. Who has bewitched you, that ye should not believe the truth?
Here have we an other commendation of this goodly righteousness of the law and
of our selves, namely, A goodly commendation of the righteousness of the law.
that it makes us to despise the truth: that it bewitcheth us in such sort,
that we obey not the truth, but rebel against it.

Of the bodily and spiritual witchcraft.
Paul calls the Galathians foolish and bewitched, comparing them to
children, to whom witchcraft does much harm. As though he should say: It
happens to you as it does to children, whom witches, sorcerers, and inchaunters
are wont to charm by their enchauntments, and by the illusion of the devil.
Afterward in the.5. chapter he reherseth sorcerie among the works of the
flesh, which is a kind of witchcraft, whereby he plainly testifies that such
witchcrafte and sorcerie there is, and that it may be done. Moreover, That
vvitchcraft and sorcerie are the works of the devil.
it can not be denied but that the devil lives, yea and reigns throughout
ye whole world. Witchcraft and sorcerie therefore are the works of ye devil:
whereby he does not only hurt men, but also, by the permission of God, he
sometimes destroys them. Furthermore, we are all subject to the Devil both
in body and goods: and we be strangers in this world, whereof he is the Prince
and God. Therefore the bread which we eat, the drink which we drink, the
garments which we wear, yea the air and whatsoever we live by in this flesh,
is under his dominion.

But he does not only bewitch men after this gross manner, Satan bevvitcheth
men spiritually.
but also after a more subtle sort and much more dangerous: wherein he is a
marvelous cunning workman. And hereof it comes that Paul applies the
charming and bewitching of the senses to the bewitching of the spirit. The
blindness of those that are bewitched.
For by this spiritual witchcraft that old serpent bewitcheth not men's
senses, but their minds with false and wicked opinions: which opinions they
that are so bewitched do take to be true and right godly. Briefly so great is
the malice of this sorcerer the devil, and desire to hurt, that not only he
deceaueth those secure and proud spirits with his inchauntments, but even those
also which are professors of true Christianity, and well affected in religion:
yea, as touching my self, to say the truth, Luthers confl^ctes with Satan.
he sometimes assaileth me so mightily, and oppresses me with such heavy
cogitations, yt he utterly shadoweth my Savior Christ from me, and in a manner
takes him clean out of my sight. To be brief, there is none of us al which
is not oftentimes bewitched with false persuasions: that is to say, which does
not fear, trust, or rejoice where he ought not, or does not sometimes think
otherwise of God, of Christ, of faith, of his vocation, of the Christian state
etc. then he should do.

Let us therefore learn to know ye subtle sleights of this Sorcerer, lest if
he find us sleping in security, he deceive us by his enchauntments. True it
is, that by his sorcerie he can do no hurt to our ministry: 1. Peter. 5.8.
yet is he with us in spirit. Day and night he raungeth up and down, and
seeks how he may devour every one of us alone, and unless he find us sobre
and armed with spiritual weapons, that is to say, with the word of God and
faith, he will devour us.

This is the cause yt he oftentimes stirs up new battails against us. The
profit that comes to the godly by the tentation of Satan.
And in deed it is very profitable for us yt he thus assaileth us, and by his
subtle trains exercises us: For by this means he confirms our doctrine, he
stirs up and increases faith in us. In deed we have been many times cast
down, and yet still are cast down in this conflict, but we perish not: for
Christ has always triumphed and does triumph thorough us. Wherefore we
conceive assured hope, yt by Jesus Christ we shall obtain the victory against
ye devil. And this hope brings forth in us sure consolation, so yt in the
mids of our tentations we take courage and say: Behold, Satan has heretofore
tempted us, and by his false illusio^s has provoked us to unbelief, to ye
contempt of God, despair etc: yet has not he prevailed, neither shall he
prevail hereafter. He is greater that is in us, 1. John. 4.4.
then he that is in the world. Christ is stronger: who has, and does overcome
that strong one in us, and shall overcome him for ever. Notwithstanding, the
devil sometimes ouercometh us in the flesh, that we may have experience of the
power of a stronger against that strong one, 2. Cor. 12.9.
and may say with Paul: When I am weak, then am I strong.

Satan continually bevvitcheth me^.
Let no man think then that the Galathians only were bewitched of the Devil:
but let every man think that he himself might have been, and yet may be
bewitched by him. There is none of us so strong that he is able to resist him,
and specially if he attempt to do it by his own strength. Job. 1.^.
Job was an upright and a just man, fearing God, and there was none like
unto him upon the earth. But what power had he against the devil when God
withdrewe his hand? Did not this holy man horribly fall? Therefore this
enchaunter was not only mighty in the Galathians: but he goes about busily
always to deceive, if not all men, Io. ^.44.
yet as many as he can with his illusions and false persuasions: For he is a
liar, and the father of lies. And by this his subtle practice he has
bewitched (as I have said) these frantike spirits, reigning in them and
making them so obstinate and hard hearted, that no Anuil can be so hard.

Verse. 1. Who has bewitched you?
Here Paul excuses the Galathians, and lays the fault upon the false
Apostles. As though he should say: I see that ye are not fallen thorough
wilfulnes or malice: The false Apostles bevvitchers of men.
but the Devil has sent the enchaunting false Apostles his children amongst
you, and they do so bewitch you in teaching you that ye are justified by the
law, that now ye think otherwise of Christ then ye did before when ye heard
the Gospel preached by me. But we labor both by preaching and writing unto
you, to vncharme that sorcery wherewith the false Apostles have bewitched you,
and to set at liberty those which are snared therewith.

So we also at this day do labor by the word of God against those
fantastical opinions of the Anabaptists, that we may set at liberty those
that are entangled therewith, and reduce them to the pure doctrine of faith,
and there hold them. And this our labor is not altogether in vain. For we
have called back many whom they had bewitched, and have delivered them out of
their snares. Notwithstanding such there are as will not suffer themselves to
be taught, especially the chief Sorcerers and authors of this witchery. They
will hear no reason, nor admit the scripture: yea they abuse and corrupt the
scripture, and avoid such places as are alleged against them, with their false
gloses and deuilish dreams clean contrary to the scripture: which is a
manifest sign that they are bewitched of the devil. Wherefore they are
nothing amended by our admonitions, but are much more hardened and more
obstinate then they were before. And surely I could never have believed, but
that I have good experience thereof at this day, that the power of the devil is
so great, that he is able to make falshod so like to the truth. Moreover
(which is yet much more horrible) when he goes about to ouerwhelme sorrowful
consciences with over much heaviness, he can so cunningly and so lively change
himself into the likeness of Christ, that it is impossible for the poor
tempted and afflicted soul to perceive it, whereby many simple and ignorant
persons are deceived and driven down to desperation, and some also destroy
themselves. For they are so bewitched of the devil that they believe this to be
a most certain truth, that they are tempted and accused, not of the devil,
but of Christ himself.

The example of Doctor Kraus.
Such a like thing of late happened to that miserable man Doctor Kraus of Hal,
which said: I have denied Christ, and therefore he stands: now before his
father and accuses me. He being blinded with the illusion of the devil, had so
strongly conceived in his mind this imagination, that by no exhortation, no
consolation, no promises of God he could be brought from it, whereupon he
despaired and so miserably destroyed himself. The devils definition of a false
Christ.
This was a mere lie, a bewitching of the devil, and a fantastical definition
of a wrong Christ whom, the scripture knows not. For the scripture sets
forth Christ not as a Judge, a temptour or accuser: but a reconciler, a
mediator, a comforter and a throne of grace.

But the poor man deluded by the devil, could not then see this, and therefore
against al scripture he thinks this to be an undoubted truth: Christ accuses
thee before his father: he stands not for thee, but against thee: therefore
thou art damned. And this tentation is not of man, but of the devil, which
that enchaunter most strongly imprinteth in the heart of the tempted. But unto
us which are lead and taught by an other spirit, it is a manifest and a cursed
lie, and a plain bewitching of the devil. But unto those that are thus
bewitched, it is so certain a truth, that none can be more certain.

Seeing then that the devil is able to print in our hearts so manifest a lie,
The Godly must diligently vvatch.
that we would swear a thousand times it were an undoubted truth, we must not
be proud, but walk in fear and humility, calling upon the Lord Jesus, that
we be not lead into tentation. Worldly and secure men, VVorldly and secure men,
are soon bewitched.
which after they have once or twice heard the Gospel preached by and by
imagine that they have received abundance of gods spirit, do fall at length
in like manner, because they fear not God nor render thanks unto him: but
persuade themselves that they are able, not only to hold and to maintain the
doctrine of true religion, but also to stand against the devil in any assault
or conflicte, be it never were so grievous. Such are meet instruments for the
Devil to bewitch, and to throw down to desperation.

On the other side, say not thou: I am perfect, I can not fall: but humble thy
self, and fear, lest if thou stand to day, to morrow thou be overthrown. I
my self, although I be a Doctor of divinity, and have now preached Christ
and fought against the Devil in his false teachers a great while, do find by
experience notwithstanding what a do I have to hold fast and not to lose
Christ. For I can not shake of Satan as I desire: neither can I so apprehend
Christ as the scriptures set him forth: but oftentimes the Devil sets
before mine eyes a false Christ. But thanks be to God who keeps us in the
word, in faith, and in prayer, that we may walk before him in humility and
fear, and not presume of our own wisdom, righteousness, and strength, but
trust in the power of Christ, who is strong when we are weak, and by us weak
and feeble creatures he always overcomes and triumphs. To whom be glory
for ever.

This bewitching and sorcerie then is nothing else but a plain illusion of the
Devil, VVitchcraft what it is.
printing in the heart a false opinion of Christ and against Christ, and he
that is deluded with this opinion is bewitched. They therefore that have this
opinion, Who are bewitched.
that they are justified by the works of the law or traditions of men, are
bewitched: for this opinion is against faith and against Christ. Paul uses
this word bevvitching, in contempt of the false Apostles, which so vehemently
urged the doctrine of the law and works. As if he should say: what a deuelish
bewitching is this? For as the senses are perverted by bodily witchcrafte, so
are the minds of men also deluded by this spiritual with craft.

Verse. 1. That ye should not obey the truth?
The Galathians at the first did gladly hear and obey the truth. Therefore
where he says: Who has bewitched you? he shows that they were bewitched
by these false apostles, and were fallen away from that truth which they before
did obey. But this seems yet a more bitter and vehement kind of speech, when
he says that they do not believe the truth. For he signifies by these
words that they are bewitched, and that he would deliver them from this
witcherie, and yet they will not acknowledge nor receive this benefit. For it
is certain that he did not reduce all from the error of the false Apostles
unto the truth, but that many of them remained yet still bewitched. Therefore he
uses these sharp and vehement words: Who has bewitched you? As if he
would say: Ye are so deluded and bewitched, that now ye can not obey the
truth. I fear lest many of you are utterly lost, and so fallen away, that ye
will never return again to the truth.

An other goodly commendation of the righteousness of the law.
Here have ye yet an other goodly commendation of the law and man's own
righteousness, that it so bewitcheth men, that they can not obey the truth.
Hereof the Apostles and the fathers of the primitive Church did oftentimes make
mention. 1. John. 5.16.
There is a sin unto death, for which I say thou should not pray 1. John.
5. And again: It is impossible that they which were once lightened, Hebr.
6.4.5.6.
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made pertakers of the holy
ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the
world to come, if they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance.
etc. Heb. 6. These words sound at the first as if some Nouatian had spoken
them. The error of the Nonations.
But the Apostles were constrained to speak after this manner because of the
Heretics: And yet notwithstanding they did not hereby deny, but that they
which were fallen might return again to the fellowship of the faithful.
After the same manner must we also speak at this day, because of the authors
and masters of errors and sects, that such shall never return to the
truth. Notwithstanding some there are which do return: but such as are not
greatly bewitched or strongly deluded. Who return not to the truth.
But the captains and the authors of this sorcerie do never return. For to
them we may well attribute this title which Paul here gives unto them, that
they can not hear nor abide the truth, but study rather how they may resist
it.

Verse. 1. To whom Jesus Christ before was described in your sight.
It was bitterly spoken where he said before, that they were so bewitched that
they could not obey the truth: But it is more bitterly said when he adds that
Christ was so lively described before them, that they might handle him with
their hands, and yet they would not obey the truth. Thus he conuinceth them
even by their own experience. As though he would say: Ye are so bewitched and
deluded with the deuillish opinions of the false apostles, that now ye will not
obey the truth. And whereas I have with great travel and diligence set forth
Christ plainly before your eyes, yet does this profit you nothing at al.

In these words he has respect to the former arguments, whereby he proved,
that to those that will be justified by the law, Christ is but the minister
of sin: that such do reject the grace of God: and that to them Christ died
in vain. Which arguments he had before more vehemently prosecuted, and more
largely amplified in their presence: as if a painter had purtred Christ Jesus
before their eyes. Now being absent he puts them in mind of the same
things, saying: To whom Jesus Christ was described in your sight. As if he
said: There is no painter that with his colors can so lively set out Christ
unto you, as I have painted him out by my preaching: and yet notwithstanding ye
still remain most miserably bewitched.

Verse. 1. And was among you crucified.
What did I then paint out? Even Christ him self. How was that done? In this
sort, that he is crucified in you or among you. The Apos^^o uses bitter and
rough words.
He uses here very rough and sharp words. Before he said that they sought
righteousness by the law, rejected the grace of God, and that to them Christ
died in vain. Now he adds moreover yt they crucify Christ, who before lived
and reigned in them. As if he should say: Ye have now not only rejected the
grace of God, not only to you Christ died in vain, but also he is most
shamefully crucified among you. After the same manner he speaks. Heb. 6. Heb.
6.^.
Crucifying to them selves again the son of God, and making a mock of him.
etc.

If a man do but hear the name of a Monk, of his shaven croune, of his cowle,
of his rule, it should make him to tremble (how much so ever the Papists do
adore these abominations, and brag that they are perfect religion and
holiness, as I and others did judge of them before God revealed his Gospel unto
us: for we were brought up in the traditions of men, which darkened Christ and
made him utterly unprofitable unto us) when he hears Paul say, as here he
does, that even they which seek to be justified by the law of God, be not
only deniers and murderers of Christ, but also they do most wickedly
crucify him again. Now, They that seek to be justified by the law,
crucify Christ.
if they be crucifiers of Christ which seek to be justified by the
righteousness of the law of God and the works thereof, what are they (I pray you)
which seek salvation and eternal life by the dregs and filthy dunge of
man's righteousness, and by the doctrine of Devils?

But who could ever believe or think that it was so horrible and so
abominable a sin to be made a religious man (for so they call the^) namely
to be made a Massing priest, a Monk, a Friar, a Nun? Doutles no man. Yea
they them selves say moreover that Monkerie is a new baptism. The Papists are
crucifiers of the son of God.
Can there be any thing more horrible then that the kingdom of the Papists is
the kingdom of such as spitefully spitte in the face of Christ the son of
God, and crucify him again? For in deed they crucify him a fresh (who was
once crucified and rose again) both in them selves, in the church, and in the
hearts of the faithful: for with their spiteful reproaches, rebukes, sclau^ders
and injuries they spit upon him, and with their wicked opinions they wound him
and thrust him through, that in them he may die most miserably: and in the
stead of him they set up a glorious witchcraft, whereby men are so miserably
charmed and deluded, that they ca^ not know Christ to be their iustifier, their
reconciler and Savior, but a minister of sin, their accuser, their judge and
their destroyer, which must be pacified no otherwise then by our works and
merits.

And out of this opinion did afterward spring the most pestilent and
pernicious doctrine that is in the whole Papacy, which is this: If thou will
serve God, thou must merit forgeuenes of sins and everlasting life, and must
also help others to attain salvation: Thou must enter into a Monastery, vow
obedience, chastity, poverty etc. Monks and Friars, The Monks dreamed that
they were only in the state and life of perfection.
and the rest of that religious rabble being puffed up with this opinion of
their own holiness, dreamed that they only were in the life and state of
perfection, and that other Christians led but a common life, for they did no
undue works, or more then they were bound to do, that is, they did not vow
and keep chastity, poverty, obedience etc. they were but only baptized and
kept the ten commandments: But as for them selves, besides that which was
common as well to them as to other Christians, they kept also the works of
Works of superogation they call such works as they do of their own good
will, more then they are bound to do.
supererogation, and the counsels of Christ: wherefore they hoped to have merit
and a place in heaven amongs the principal Saints, far above the common
sort of Christians.

The illusio^ of the Devil.
This was undoubtedly an horrible illusion of the devil, whereby he has
bewitched almost the whole world. And every man, the more holy he would seem
to be, the more he is snared with this witcherie, that is to say, with that
pestilent persuasion of his own righteousness. And this was the cause that we
could not know that Jesus Christ was our Mediator and Savior: but we did
think that he was a severe judge, which should be pacified by our own works:
In the time of popery we were so bewitched, that it was impossible to
acknovvledge Christ.

Daniel. 9.2^. Superstitious Monks and such other, by streitnes of life, and
afflicting their own bodies, sought righteousness and remission of sins.


which was nothing else but most horribly to blaspheme Christ, and as Paul
said before, to reject the grace of God, to make the death of Christ of none
effect, and not only to kill him, but also most shamefully to crucify him
again. And this is the right meaning of that which Christ alleges out of
Daniell: that abomination stands in the holy place. Wherefore every monk and
religious person, and every Iusticiarie seeking remission of sins and
righteousness by his own works or by his afflictions, is a crucifier of Christ
now reigning and living, although not in the proper person of Christ, yet in
his own heart and in the hearts of others. And whosoever do enter into
Monasteries to the end, that by the keeping of their rule and order they may be
justified, do enter into the dens of thieves and such as crucify Christ
again.

Wherefore Paul uses in this place very rigorous and bitter words, to the
end that he may fear and call back the Galathians from the doctrine of the
false Apostles. As if he should say: Consider well what ye have done. Ye have
crucified Christ again (and this I do so plainly show and paint out before
your eyes, that ye may see it, yea and touch it with your hands) because ye
seek to be justified by the law. But if righteousness come by the law, then
is Christ a minister of sin, and his death altogether in vain. If this be
true, then must it needs follow that Christ is crucified again in you.

And it is not without cause that he adds this clause, in you, In you, or
amongst you. Romans 6.9.
or among you. For Christ is no more crucified, or dies any more in his own
person (as is said in the sixte chapter to the Romans): but he dies in us
when we rejecting true doctrine, grace, faith, free remission of sins, seek
to be justified by our own works, To seek righteousness by the law.
or else by ye works commanded in the law. Here Christ is crucified in us
again. Now, this false and wicked persuasion, to seek righteousness by the law
and works, is nothing else (as I have before more amply declared) but the
illusion of the Devil, wherewith men are so bewitched, that in no wise they can
acknowledge the benefit of Christ: yea in all their life they can do nothing
else but, not only deny the Lord who has bought them and in whose name they
are baptized, but also crucify him again in them selves. Who so ever then
has a fear of God and a true heart to Christ and his religion, let him fly
quickly out of this Babylon, and let him tremble at the very name of the
Papacy. The abomination of the papacy horrible.
For the impiety and abomination thereof is so horrible, yt no man is able to
express it with words, neither ca^ it be otherwise seen then with spiritual eyes
only.

These two arguments Paul prosecuteth, and drives into the heads of the
Galathians very diligently: First, that they are so bewitched of the devil,
that they obey not the truth most clearly set forth before their eyes:
Secondly, that they crucify Christ again in them selves. These seem to be
simple and plain words, and without any high eloquence, but in very deed they
are so mighty, that they exceed all the eloquence of man. It can not therefore
be comprehended, but only in spirit, The commendations of the righteousness of
the law, and of our own righteousness.
how great an impiety it is to seek to be justified by the righteousness of ye
law or by man's own righteousness. For, as Paul says here, it is nothing else
but to be witched of the devil, to be disobedient to the truth, and to
crucify Christ again. Are not these goodly commendations of the righteousness
of the law and man's own righteousness?

The Apostle therefore is here kindled with great zeal, and with bitter words
he pursues and condemns the presumption of our own righteousness rising upon
the observation of the law of God, and charge it with this impiety, that it
crucifieth again the son of God. Seeing then it is so dangerous a thing, it
can not be beaten down enough or condemned as it should be: For thereof ensues
such a fall as is no less then the fall of Lucifer, The fall of Lucifer.
and such a loss as can never be recovered, and therefore he uses so sharp
and rigorous words against it, that he spares not the very law of God: against
the which he so bitterly inueieth, that it seems he would utterly reject and
condemn it. And this does he being constrained by great necessity: for
otherwise he could not withstand the false Apostles, nor defend the
righteousness of faith against them. Albeit then that the law be holy, just, and
good, yet must it put on as it were the visour of an hipocrite, if he seek to
be justified by works. Now he presses them with an argument whereof they
themselves had good experience, and which they could not deny.

Verse. 2. This only would I learn of you: Received ye the spirit by the
works of the law, or by the hearing of faith preached?
He speaks these words with a certain indignation and contempt of the false
Apostles. An argument drawn from the Galathia^s own experience.
If I had nothing else against you but even your own experience (says he) yet
have I enough. As if he should say: Go to now, answer me I pray you, which
am your scholar (for ye are so suddenly become doctors that ye are now my
masters and teachers): Received ye the holy ghost by the works of the law,
or by the preaching of the gospel? With this argument he so conuinceth them
that they have nothing to reply again. For their own experience is
altogether against them: to wit, that they had received the holy ghost, not by
the works of the law, but by the preaching of ye gospel.

Here again I admonish you that Paul speaks not only of the ceremonial
law, but of the whole law. Paul speaks of the whole law.
For he groundeth his argument upon a sufficient division. If he should speak
but only of the ceremonial law, it were no sufficient division. It is
therefore a double horned argument, standinge upon two parts, whereof the one
must needs be true and the other false: That is, either ye have received the
holy Ghost by the law, or by the hearing of faith. If it be by the law, then
is it not by the preaching of faith. If it be by ye preaching of faith, then is
it not by the law. There is no mean betwixt these two. For all that is not the
holy Ghost or the preaching of faith, is the law. Here are we in the matter of
justification. But to come to justification, Two ways to justification,
there is no other way but either the voice of the Gospel or the voice of the
law. Wherefore the law is here taken generally, as wholly separate from the
Gospel. But it is not only the ceremonial law that is separate from the
Gospel, but also the moral law or the ten commandments: therefore Paul
speaks here of the whole law.

His argument therefore is grounded upon a sufficient distinction, after this
sort. Tell me (says he): The holy ghost is received by hearing the word of
faith and not by the law.
Received ye the holy ghost by the works of the law, or by the preaching of
the Gospel? Answer me to this. Ye can not say that this was done by the law.
For so long as ye were under the law and did the works thereof, ye never
received the holy ghost. In deed ye taught and heard the law of Moses every
Sabbath: but it has not been heard or seen that ever the holy ghost was given
to any, either teacher or learner, through the preaching of the law. Moreover,
ye have not only taught and heard the law, but also ye have labored with all
your power to perform the same by your works, whereby ye should most of all
have received the holy ghost if he had been given by the law, Neither the
teachers nor hearers, nor yet the doers of the law, are justified by the
law.
seeing ye were not only teachers and learners, but also doers of the law: and
yet ye cannot show me that this was done at any time. But as soon as ye
hearing of faith or the gospel came unto you, by and by ye received the holy
Ghost by the only hearing of faith, before ye had done any work or showed any
fruit of the gospel. For as Luke witnesses in the Acts, Acts 10 44. Acts.
11.15. Acts. 15.8.9. Acts. 19.5.6.
at the only preaching of Peter and Paul the holy ghost came upon those
which heard the word, through whom also they received diverse gifts, so
that they spoke with nevve tongues.

It is manifest therefore that by the only preaching of faith ye received ye
holy ghost before ye did any good work, or brought forth any fruits of the
gospel. The law brings not the holy ghost.
On the other side, the accomplishing of the law never brought the holy ghost:
much less could the only hearing of the law do it. Therefore not only the
hearing of the law, but that affection and zeal also whereby ye go about to
perform the law by your works, is utterly unprofitable. Wherefore, although
a man attempt to do all things: that is to say, although he have a zeal of
God, and with all endeavor go about to be saved by the law, and exercise him
self day and night in the righteousness thereof, notwithstanding he does but
labor and consume himself in vain. For they that are ignorant of the
righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.
and seek to establish their own righteousness (as Paul says in an other
place) are not subject to the righteousness of God. Romans 11.7.
Again: Israel which follovved the law of righteousness, attained not to the
law of righteousness. etc. Now, Paul speaks here of the manifestation of
the holy ghost in the primative church. Math. 3.16. The appeari^g of the holy
ghost.
For the holy ghost came down in a manifest likeness upon those that did
believe, and by this sign did plainly witness that he was there present at the
preaching of the Apostles: Also that they which heard the word of faith
preached by the Apostles, were accepted as righteous before God: for else the
holy Ghost would not have come down upon them.

The argument of that book which contains the Acts of the Apostles.
We must therefore diligently consider the force of this argument, which is so
often repeated in the Acts. Which book is written to confirm and establish
this argument: For it teaches nothing else but that the holy Ghost is not
given by the law, but by the hearing of the gospel. For when Peter preached,
the holy ghost forthwith fell upon all those that heard him, and in one day
three thousand which were present at the preaching of Peter, believed and
received the holy ghost. Act. 2. Acts. 2.41.
So Cornelius received the holy ghost, not by his alms which he gave: but when
Peter had opened his mouth and was yet in speaking, the holy Ghost fell upon
all them which with Cornelius heard the word. Acts. 10.44.45
Act. 10. These are manifest arguments, experiences, and divine works, which
can not deceive us.

Acts. 15.5.6.7.
And Luke writes of Paul in the 15. of the Acts, that where he had preached
the gospel together with Barnabas among the Gentiles, and was returned to
Jerusalem, he set him self against the Phariseis and disciples of the Apostles
which urged circumcision and the keeping of the law as necessary to salvation:
whose mouths he so stopped (says Luke) in showing what things he and Barnabas
had done amongst the Gentiles that the whole church was amazed at the hearing
thereof, especially when they heard that God had wrought so many and so great
miracles and wonders by them among the Gentiles: and when they which bare a
zeal to the law did greatly wonder how it could be yt the uncircumcised
Gentiles, not doing the law nor the works thereof, nor having the righteousness
of the law, should notwithstanding attain to this grace, to be justified and
receive the holy Ghost as well as the Jews that were circumcised: here Paul
and Barnabas did allege nothing else but manifest experience: wherewith they
were so confounded that they had nothing to reply again. Paulus Sergius the
lieutenaunt.
By this means Paulus Sergius the Lieutenaunt, and all those cities, regions,
kingedomes and countries where the Apostles had preached, by the only
preaching of faith did believe, without the law and the works thereof.

In the whole book then of the Acts there is nothing else handled in effect,
but yt it behooves as well Jews as Gentiles, The Jews and Gentiles are
justified by faith only.
as well righteous as unrighteous to be justified by faith alone in Christ
Jesus, without the law and the works thereof. The which thing does appear as
well by the preaching of Peter, of Paul, of Stephen, of Philip and the other
Apostles, as also by the examples of the Gentiles and Jews. For as God gave
the holy ghost to the Gentiles which lived without the law, by the preaching of
the Gospel, so did he give the same to the Jews: yet not by the law nor by
the ceremonies and sacrifices commanded in ye law, but by the only preaching
of faith. Now, if the law had been able to justify, and the righteousness of the
law had been necessary to salvation, then doubtless the holy ghost had not been
given to the Gentiles which kept not the law. But experience it self does
plainly witness that the holy Ghost was given unto them without the law: and
this did the Apostles, both Peter, Paul, Barnabas, and others see: therefore
the law does not justify, but faith only in Christ, which the Gospel sets
forth.

These things are diligently to be marked because of the adversaries, who do
not consider what is handled in the Acts of the Apostles. I my self in times
past also read this book when in deed I understood in it nothing at all.
Therefore when thou hear or read in the Acts of the Apostles, or
wheresoever it be in the scriptures, this word Gentiles thou must there think
that it is not to be understand literally of the common nature of the Gentiles,
but it carries with it a spiritual meaning, and is to be taken, not for those
which are under the law, as were the Jews (as before is said in the second
chapter: We by nature Jews etc.) but for those which are without the law.
Wherefore to say yt the Gentiles are justified by faith, The Gentiles justified
by faith.
is nothing else, but that they which observe not the law nor do the works
thereof, which are not circumcised, which sacrifice not, etc. are justified and
receive the holy Ghost. By what means? Not by the law and the works thereof
(for they have no law): but freely and without any other means saving only
the hearing of the Gospel.

So Cornelius and his friends whom he had called to his house, do nothing,
neither look they upon any works going before, and yet as many as are
present, receive the holy Ghost. No man speaks but Peter: they sitting by do
nothing: they think not of the law, much less do they keep it: they
sacrifice not: they care not for the receiving of circumcision, but only are
bent to hear that which Peter speaks. He by his preaching brought the holy
Ghost into their hearts as it were visibly: For they spoke with tongues and
glorified God.

But some man may here cavil and say: who knows whether it were the holy
ghost or no? Well, let him cauil. Sure it is that the holy Ghost so bearing
witness does not lie, but hereby shows that he accepts the Gentiles for
righteous, and justifies them by no other means then by the only voice of
the Gospel or hearing of faith in Christ preached. We may see also in the
Acts how greatly the Jews marueiled at this new and strange thing. For the
faithful which were of the Circumcision and came with Peter to Caesarea seeing
the gift of the holy Ghost to be poured out also upon the Gentiles in the
house of Cornelius, Acts. 11.3.
were amazed. Also they that were at Jerusalem complained of Peter for that he
went into men uncircumcised and did eat with them: but when they heard the
matter declared by Peter in order as it was done touching Cornelius, they
marueiled, and glorified God saying: Then has God also given salvation to the
Gentiles. Verse. 18.


This report and fame then, that God has given salvation also to the Gentiles,
was not only at the first intolerable, but also a great offense even to the
believing Jews: which they could not easily shake of: for they had this
prerogative above all other nations, that they were the people of God: the
adoption, the glory, the worship, etc. belonged to them. Romans 9. Moreover, they
did exercise them selves in the righteousness of the law: they labored all the
day long: The murmuring of the Jews against the Gentiles.
they bare the burden and heat of the day. Moreover, they had the promises for
keeping of the law: therefore they could not but murmr against the Gentiles
and say: Behold the Gentiles come but even now, and have not suffered any heat
or borne any burden: Mat. 20.
notwithstanding they have the same righteousness and holy Ghost without labor,
which we by labor, and by the heat and burden of the day could not obtain.
They have labored in deed, but that was but one hour, and by this labor
they are more refreshed then weried. Wherefore then has God tormented us with
the law, if it avail nothing to the obtaining of righteousness? He now
prefers the Gentiles before us, which have been so long burdened with the
yoke of the law. For we which are the people of God, have been vexed all the
day long: but they which are not the people of God, neither have any law nor
have done any good at all, are made equal with us.

And hereupon the Council of the Apostles, The Council of the Apostles.
through great necessity, was assembled at Jerusalem to satisfy and pacify
the Jews, who though they believed in Christ, yet was this opinion
notwithstanding deeply rooted in their hearts, that the law of Moses ought to
be kept. There Peter upon his own experience, Act. 11.17.
set him self against them saying: If god have given the same grace unto ye
Gentiles, which he has given unto us that have believed in the Lord Jesus
Christ, who am I that I should forbid God? Again: God who knovveth their
hearts, Acts. 15. Acts. 15.8.9.1^.
bare them witness in giving unto them the holy Ghost, even as he did unto
us. And he put no difference between us and them, purifiing their hearts by
faith. 1. Cor. 1.^.
Now therefore why tempt ye God to lay a yoke on the disciples necks which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? etc. With these words Peter
at once overthrows the whole law. As if he would say: We will not keep the
law: for we are not able to keep it: but we believe through the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ to be saved as they do. So Peter here is altogether
occupied in this matter, that God has given to the Gentiles the self same
grace that he has given to the Jews. As though he would say: When I preached
to Cornelius, I learned by mine own experience, that the holy Ghost was given
without the law, That the holy Ghost is given by the only hearing of faith.
to the Gentiles by the only hearing of faith. Therefore in no case are they to
be burdened with the law. To conclude, since it is certain that neither we nor
our fathers were ever able to fulfill the law, it behooves you also to reject
this opinion, that righteousness and salvation comes by the law. And this did
the believing Jews by little and little: but the wicked which by this preaching
were offended, at the length were altogether hardened.

The commendation of that Book which contains the Acts of the Apostles.
So in the Acts ye shall find both expositions, and experience, and the
preachings of the Apostles, and also examples for the confirmation of this
matter against this obstinate opinion touching the righteousness of the law. And
therefore we ought the more to love and the more diligently to read this book,
because therein are contained most substantial testimonies, whereby our minds
may be comforted and confirmed against the Papists our Jews, The Papists are
our Jews which molest us no less, the^ the Jews did Paul.
whose abominations and colored hypocrisy we resist and condemn by our
doctrine, that we may set forth the benefits and glory of Christ. Who, though
they have no substantial matter to aledge against us (whereas the Jews might
have laid against the Apostles yt they had received the law and all these
ceremonies from God) yet notwithstanding they are no less stubborn in
defending their wicked traditions and abominations, then the Jews were in
mainteining their law which they had received from God, standing principally
upon this ground, that they are called to the place of Bishops: that the power
and authority of governing the Churches is committed unto them. This they do
to the end that they may bring us into bondage, and that they may wrest from
us this article, that we are justified, not by faith formed and adorned with
charity (as they say) but by faith alone. But we set before them the book of
the Acts, that they may read it and consider the examples contained therein.
The argument of the book co^teining the Acts of the Apostles.
There shall they find this to be the sum and argument of that book: that
we are justified by faith only in Christ without works, and that the holy
Ghost is given by the only hearing of faith at the preaching of the Gospel,
and not at the preaching or work of the law.

Wherefore thus teach we: O man, although thou fast, give alms, honor thy
parents, obey the magistrate. etc: yet art thou not justified thereby. This
voice of the law, honor thy parents, or any other else, either heard or
fulfilled, does not justify. What then? To hear ye voice of the spouse, to
hear the word of faith: this word of hearing does justify. Wherefore? Because
it brings the holy ghost which justifies and makes righteous.

Hereby may we see, The difference between the law and the Gospel.
what is the difference between the law and the Gospel. The law never brings
the holy Ghost, but only teaches what we ought to do: therefore it justifies
not. But the Gospel brings the holy ghost, because it teaches what we ought
to receive. Therefore the law and the Gospel are two contrary doctrines. To
ground righteousness therefore in the law, is nothing else but to fight against
the Gospel. For Moses with his law is a severe exactor, requiring of us that
we should work and that we should give: briefly, To exact. To give freely
it exacteth of us. Contrariwise, the Gospel gives freely and requires of us
nothing else but to hold out our hands and to take that which is offered. Now,
to exact and to give, to take and to offer are clean contrary and can not
stand together. For that which is given, I take: but that which I give I do not
take, but I offer it unto an other. Therefore if the Gospel be a gift, it
requires nothing. Contrariwise, the law gives nothing, but it requires and
streitly exacteth of us, yea even impossible things.

Of Cornelius in the 10. of the Acts.
Here our adversaries set against us the example of Cornelius. Cornelius (say
they) was (as Luke witnesses) a good man, just, and fearing God, which gave
alms to the people, and prayed to God continually: therefore of Congruence he
did merit the forgeuenes of sins, and the sending of the holy Ghost. I
answer: Acts. 10.^8.
Cornelius was a Gentile, and this cannot the adversaries deny: For the words
which Peter alleges in the 10. chapter of the Acts, do plainly witness the
same. Ye know (says he) that it is unlawful for a man that is a Jew, to
accompany with one of an other nation: but God has shevved me that I should
not call any man polluted or unclean. He was therefore a Gentile, and not
circumcised, not keeping the law, Cornelius (...) Gentile is justified by faith
yea not once thinking of it, because it pertained nothing unto him. And yet
notwithstanding he was justified and received the holy Ghost. And this argument
(as I said) is handled throughout the whole book of the Acts: to wit, that
the law avails nothing to righteousness.

Let this suffice then for defense of the article of justification, that
Cornelius was a Gentile, not circumcised, not keeping the law: therefore was he
not justified by the law, but by the hearing of faith. God therefore
justifies without the law, and so consequently the law avails nothing to
righteousness. The law helps not to righteousness.
For otherwise God would have given the holy Ghost only to the Jews which had
the law and kept it, and not to the Gentiles which had not the law, and much
less did accomplish it. But God wrought clean contrary: For the holy Ghost
was given to them that kept not the law: wherefore righteousness comes not by
the law. By this means the objection of the adversaries which do not
understand the true mean of justification, is answered.

Here again the adversaries do object against us, and say: Be it so that
Cornelius was a Gentile and did not receive the holy Ghost by the law, yet
notwtstanding forasmuch as the text says plainly: that he was a just man,
fearing God, giving alms etc. it might seem yt by these works he deserved to
have the holy ghost afterward given unto him. I answer, that Cornelius was a
just and a holy man in the old testament because of his faith in Christ which
was to come, The fathers in the old testament were holy etc.
as all ye fathers, prophets, godly kings, were righteous and did receive
secretly ye holy ghost thorough faith in Christ to come. But these popish
Sophisters put no difference between faith in Christ to come and in Christ
which is already come. Faith in Christ already come, and in Christ to come.
Wherefore if Cornelius had died before Christ was reueiled, yet had he not been
damned, because he had the faith of the fathers, which were saved by faith
only in Christ to come, Acts. 15.11. He remained then always a Gentile,
uncircumcised and without the law, and yet notwithstanding he worshipped the
self same God whom the fathers worshipped by faith in the Messiah does
signify Christ the Savior.
Messiah to come. But now, because ye Messiah was already come, necessary it
was that it should be showed unto him by the Apostle Peter, that he was not now
to be looked for, but that he was already come.

And this article as concerning faith in Christ to be revealed (that I may
touch this also by the way) is very necessary to be known. For seeing that
Christ is now reueiled, we ca^ not be saved by faith in Christ to come, but we
must believe that he is already come, has fulfilled all things, and abolished
ye law. Therefore necessary it was also that Cornelius should be brought to an
other belief, not that Christ was yet to come, as he did believe before: but
that he was already come. So faith gives place to faith: Romans 1.17.
From faith to faith. Romans 1.

Work of congruence or merit before grace.
The popish Scholemen therefore are deceived, when they say for the maintenance
of their opus congruum, or merit before grace, that Cornelius by the natural
and moral works of reason attained grace and forgeuenes of the holy Ghost. For
to be a just man and fearing God, are the properties, not of a Gentile or of a
natural man, but of a spiritual man, who has faith already. For if he should
not believe in God and fear God, he could not hope to obtain any thing of him
by his prayer. The first commendation therefore that Luke gives unto Cornelius
is this: that he is a righteous man and fearing God: then afterward he
commends him for his works and alms deeds. This our adversaries do not
consider, but they lay hold only upon this sentence, and it they maintain with
toth and nail: that he gave alms unto the poor: For that seems to make for
the establishing of their merit of congruence or desert going before grace.
But first of all the person or the tree must be commended, and then the works
and the fruit. The person first to be considered and then the work.
Cornelius is a good tree, for he is righteous and fears God: therefore he
brings forth good fruit, he gives alms, he calls upon God, and these
fruits please God because of his faith. Wherefore the angel commends
Cornelius for his faith in Christ which was yet to come, and brings him from
that faith to an other faith in Christ which is already come, when he says:
Call for Simon whose surname is Peter: Acts 10.1.6.
he shall tell thee what thou ought to do, etc. Like as then Cornelius was
without the law before Christ was reueiled: even so after Christ was reueiled,
he received neither the law nor circumcision. And as he kept not the law
before: so did he not keep it afterward. This argument therefore concludes
strongly: Cornelius was justified without the law, therefore the law justifies
not.

Naaman the Syrian
Likewise Naaman the Syrian was (no doubt) a good and a godly man, and had a
religious and a reverent opinion of God. And although he was a Gentile and
belonged not to the kingdom of Moses, which the^ flourished: yet
notwithstanding his flesh was cleansed, and the God of Israel was reueiled unto
him, and he received the holy Ghost. For thus he says: 2. Reg. 5.14.15.16.
Now I know assuredly that there is no other God in all the world but in
Israel. He does nothing at all, he keeps not the law, he is not circumcised:
but only he prays that so much of that earth might be given unto him, as two
mules should be able to carry away. Moreover, it appears that faith was not
idle in him. For so he speaks to the Prophet Heliseus: Thy servant will
henceforth neither offer burnt sacrifice, nor offering unto any other God
saving the Lord. But in this thing the Lord be merciful unto thy servant,
that when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and
leans on my hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon: when I do
bovv down (I say) in the house of Rimmon, the Lord be He feleth his
conscience vvounded in being present at idol service and therefore desires God
to forgive (...), left others by his example might fall to idolatry: For as
for his own part he confesses that he will never serve any but the true
God.
merciful to thy servant in this point. To whom the prophet says, Go in
peace. So was he justified. The Jew hearing this, freateth for anger, and
says: What? should the Gentile be justified without the keeping of the law?
Should he be compared with us which are circumcised?

The Gentiles justified without the law, even when the law and policy of Moses
was yet in force.
Therefore God, long before, when the kingdom of Moses was yet standing and
flourishing, did show that he justifies men without the law, as in deed he
justified many kings in Egypt and in Babylon: also Job and many other nations
of the East. Moreover, Niniuie a great City was justified and received the
promise of God, Job. Ninevites.
that it should not be destroyed, but should be preserved. By what means? Not
because it heard and fulfilled the law, but because it believed the word of God
which the prophet Jonas preached. Jonas. 3.5.
For so says the prophet: And the Ninevites believed God, and proclaimed a
fast, and put on sackecloth: that is: they repented. Our adversaries do
craftily skippe over these words: They believed, and yet the effect of
altogether rests therein. Thou read not in Jonas: And the Ninevites
received the law of Moses, were circumcised, offered up sacrifice, fulfilled
the works of the law, but believing the word, they repented in sackecloth and
ashes.

This was done before Christ was reueiled, when as yet that faith reigned which
believed in Christ that was to come. If then the Gentiles were justified
without the law, and received secretly the holy Ghost when the policy of the
law was yet in force, why now should the law be required as necessary for ye
obtaining of righteousness, which by the coming of Christ is already abolished?
This is therefore a sure and a strong argument grounded upon the experience of
the Galathians: Whether received ye the holy ghost by the works of the law,
Galat. 3.2.
or by the hearing of faith preached? For they were compelled to grant, that
they heard nothing of ye holy ghost before the preaching of Paul, The
conscience witnesses that the holy Ghost is not given by the law, but by the
hearing of faith.
but when he preached the Gospel, then received they the holy Ghost.

So we also at this day, convicted by the testimony of our own conscience, are
constrained to confess, yt the holy ghost is not given by ye law but by the
hearing of faith. For many heretofore in Popery have gone about with great
labor and study, to keep the law, the decrees of the fathers, and the
traditions of the Pope: and some with painful and continual exercises in
watching, fasting, and praying etc. did so wear and consume their bodies that
they were able to sustain no labor: whereby notwithstanding they gained
nothing else but that they miserably afflicted and tormented them selves. They
could never attain to this, to have a quiet conscience and peace in Christ,
but continually they doubted of Gods good will toward them. But now, since the
Gospel teaches that the law and works justify not, but faith alone in Jesus
Christ, there follows a most certain knowledge and understanding, a most
joyful conscience and true judgment of every kind of life, and of all things
else whatsoever. The believing man may now easily judge that the Papacy with all
the orders and traditions thereof is wicked: which before he could not do. The
blindness of the Popes kingdom.
For so great blindenes raingned in the world, that we thought those works
which men had devised, not only without the will of God, but also contrary to
his commandment, to be much better then those, which the magistrate, the
houshoulder, the child, the servant did at the commandment of God.

Doubtless we ought to have learned by the word of God, that the religious
orders of the Papists (which only they call holy) are wicked, since there is
no commandment of God at al, or testimony in the holy scriptures approving
the same. The orders and kinds of life that are appointed of God.
Contrariwise other orders of life which have the word and warrant of God, are
holy and ordained of God. But we were then wrapped in such horrible darkness,
that we could not truly judge of any thing. But now at the appearing of the
clear light of the Gospel, all kinds of life in the world are under our
judgment, which is most certain and infallible. The state of servants
allowed before God.
We may boldly pronounce out of the word of God, that the condition of
servants, which before the world is most vile, is far more acceptable unto
God then all the religious orders of the Papists. For by his word he
commends, approves, and sets forth the state of servants, and so does
he not, the orders of Monks, Friars, and such other. Therefore this argument
grounded upon experience ought to stand in much force with us also. For
although diverse men in popery wrought sundry and diverse works both great and
painful, yet could they never be sure what was the will of God toward them,
but they were always in doubt: they could never attain to the knowledge of
God, of themselves, of their calling, nor felt the testimony of the spirit in
their hearts. The certainty of true beleuers.
But now that the truth of the Gospel appears, they are fully instructed by
the only hearing of faith, in all these things.

It is not without cause that I do so largely entreat of these matters. For
it seems to man's reason but a light and a small matter to purchase the holy
ghost by the only hearing of faith, and that nothing else is required of us but
that we, setting a part all our works, should give our selves only to the
hearing of the Gospel. By what means the holy ghost is given unto us.
Man's heart does not understand nor believe that so great a price, namely the
holy Ghost, is given by the only hearing of faith: but reasons after this
sort: Forgeuenes of sins, deliverance from death, the giving of the holy
Ghost, of righteousness and everlasting life, are great things: therefore if
thou will obtain these inestimable benefits, thou must perform some other
great and weighty matter. The disputation of man's reason.
This opinion the devil does well like and approve, and also increases the
same in the heart. Therefore when reason hears this: Thou can do nothing
for the obtaining of sins, but must only hear the word of God, by and by it
cries out and says: Fie, thou make too small a count of ye remission of
sins etc. So the inestimable greatness of the gift is the cause that we can
not believe it: and because this incomparable treasure is freely offered,
therefore it is despised.

But this must we learn, that forgeuenes of sins, Christ, and the holy Ghost
are freely given unto us at the only hearing of faith preached,
notwithstanding our horrible sins and demerits. And we must not wey, how
great the thing is that is given, and how unworthy we are of it (for so should
the greatness of the gift and our unworthiness terrefie us): but we must think
that it pleases God freely to give unto us this unspeakable gift: unto us (I
say) which are unworthy, as Christ in Luke says: Luke. 12.32.
Fear not little flock: for it is your fathers pleasure to give unto you:
(Lo, to give unto you, says he) a kingdom. To whom the kingdom of heaven
is given.
To whom? To you unworthy, which are his little flock. If I then be little and
the thing great (nay rather of all things the greatest) which God has given
unto me, I must thus think, that he also is great and only great, which
gives it. If he offer it and will give it, I consider not mine own sin and
unworthiness, but his fatherly good will toward me which is the geuer, and I
receive the greatness of the gift with joy and gladness, and am thankful for so
inestimable a gift given freely unto me, to me (I say) unworthy, by the
hearing of faith.

Here again foolish reason is offended and reproves us saying: Where ye teach
men to do nothing at all for the obtaining of so great and unspeakable a
gift, What the adversaries do object against us.
but to hear the word of God, this seems to tend to the great contempt of
grace and to make men secure, idle and dissolute, so that they slack their
hands and do no good at all. Therefore it is not good to preach this doctrine,
for it is not true: but men must be urged to labor and to exercise themselves
unto righteousness, and then shall they obtain this gift. The objection of the
Pelagians against Christians.
This self same thing the Pelagians in times past objected against the
Christians. But hear what Paul says in this place: Ye have received the holy
Ghost: not by your own labor and travel, not by the works of the law, but
by the hearing of faith. Briefly, hear what Christ himself says, and what
he answers to Martha, being very careful and hardly bearing, that her
sister Marie, sitting at the feet of Jesus and hearing his word, should leave
her to minister alone. Martha Martha (says he) thou carest and art troubled
about many things, but one thing is needful. Luke. 11.45.4^.
Marie has chosen the good part which shall not be taken from her. A man
therefore is made a Christian, A man is made a Christian by hearing the doctrine
of faith.
not by working but by hearing. Wherefore he that will exercise himself to
righteousness, let him first exercise himself in hearing the gospel. Now, when
he has heard and received the Gospel, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God.
let him give thanks to God with a joyful and a glad heart, and afterward
let him exercise him self in those good works which are commanded in the
law, so that the law and works may follow the hearing of faith. So may he
quietly walk in the light which is Christ, and boldly choose and do works,
not hypocritical, but good works in deed, such as he knows to please God
and to be commanded of him, and contemn all those hypocritical shadows of
freewill works.

Our adversaries think that faith whereby we receive the holy Ghost, is but a
light matter: but how high and hard a matter it is I my self do find by
experience, and so do all they which with me do earnestly embrace the same.
It is soon said that by the only hearing of faith, the holy Ghost is
received: but it is not so easily heard, laid hold on, believed and retained,
as it is said. Wherefore if thou hear of me that Christ is that Lamb of God
sacrificed for thy sins, see also that thou hear it effectually. Paul
purposely calls it the hearing of faith, and not the word of faith (although
there be small difference): that is, such a word as thou hearing do believe,
so that the word be not only my voice, but may be heard of thee, and may
enter into thy heart, and be believed of thee: then is it truly and in deed
the hearing of faith, through the which thou receauest the holy Ghost: which
after thou have once received, thou shall also mortify thy flesh.

The faithful do find by their own experience how gladly they would hold
and embrace the word when they hear it, with a full faith, and abandon this
opinion of the law and of their own righteousness: The conflict of the flesh
against the spirit in the godly.
but they feel in their flesh a mighty resistaunce against the spirit. For
reason and the flesh will needs work together. This saying: Ye must be
circumcised and keep the law, can not be utterly rooted out of our minds,
but it sticks fast in the hearts of all ye faithful. There is therefore in
the faithful a continual conflict between the hearing of faith and the works
of the law. For the conscience always murmureth and thinks, that this is
too easy a way, that by the only hearing of the word, To hear the word of
God.
righteousness, the holy ghost and life everlasting is promised unto us. But
come once to an earnest trial thereof, and then tell me how easy a thing it is
to hear the word of faith. In deed he which gives is great: moreover he
gives great things willingly and freely, and vpbraideth no man therewith: but
thy capacity is hard, and faith weak, still striving against thee, so that
thou art not able to receive this gift. But let thy conscience murmr against
thee never so much, and let this [Must] come never so often into thy mind, yet
stand fast and hold out until thou overcome this [Must]. So, as faith
increases by little and little, that opinion of the righteousness of the law
will diminish. But this can not be done without great conflict.

Verse. 3. Are ye so foolish, that after ye have begone in the spirit, ye
would now finish or be made perfect by the flesh?
This argument being concluded, how that the holy ghost comes not by the
works of the law, but through the preaching of faith: he begins here to
exhort the Galathians, and to terrify them from a double danger and
incommoditie. The first is: Are ye so foolish that after ye have begone in the
spirit, ye would now end in the flesh? The other follows: Have ye suffered
so great things in vain? As if he said: To begin in the spirit.
Ye began in the spirit: that is, your religion was excellently well begone.
As also a little after he says: Ye ran well, etc. But what have ye gotten
thereby? Forsooth ye will now end in the flesh, yea rather ye are ended in the
flesh.

Paul here sets the spirit against the flesh. He calls not the flesh (as
before I have said) lust, beastly passions, or sensual appetites: for he
entreats not here of lust or of other fleshly desires: but of forgeuenes of
sins, of justifying the conscience, of obteining righteousness before God, of
deliverance from the law, sin, and death: and yet notwithstanding he says
here, that they, forsaking the spirit, do now end in the flesh. What flesh
signifies in this place.
Flesh therefore is here taken for the very righteousness and wisdom of the
flesh and the judgment of reason, which goes about to be made righteous by
the law. Whatsoever then is best and most excellent in man (as the wisdom of
reason, yea, and ye righteousness of the law it self) the same here Paul
calls flesh.

And this place must be well weyed and considered, because of the slanderous
and cauilling Papists, which wrest the same against us, saying that we in
Popery began in the spirit, but now, having married wives, we end in the
flesh. As though a single life, or not to have a wife were a spiritual life:
and as though it nothing hindered their spiritual life, if a man not contented
with one whore, have many. They are mad men, not understanding what the
spirit, or what the flesh is. The spirit is whatsoever is done in us through
the spirit: The flesh, The spirit. The flesh.
whatsoever is done in us according to the flesh without the spirit. Wherefore
all the duties of a Christian man, as to love his wife, to bring up his
children, to govern his family, and such like, What the papists call
vvorldly and carnal.
which unto them are worldly and carnal, are the fruits of the spirit. These
blind buzzardes can not discern the things, which are the good creatures of
God, from vices.

Here also is to be noted, that the Apostle says, the Galathians did begin in
the spirit. He should here have added actiuely: Nunc carne consummatis? that
now ye end in the flesh? But he does not so: but says passiuely, carne
consummamini: that ye end, yea, or rather are ended in the flesh? The
righteousness of the law which Paul here calls the flesh, is so far of from
justifying, that they which after the receiving of the holy ghost through the
hearing of faith, fall back again unto it, are ended in it, that is to say,
are utterly destroyed. Therefore who so ever teach that the law ought to be
fulfilled to this end, that men might be justified thereby, whiles they go
about to quiet their consciences, they hurt them, and whiles they would
justify them, they condemn them.

Paul evermore by the way has a glaunce at these false apostles, for they
still urged the law, saying: Faith only in Christ takes not away sin,
pacifieth not the wrath of God, justifies not: Therefore if ye will obtain
these benefits, ye must not only believe in Christ: but therewith ye must also
keep the law, be circumcised, keep the feasts, sacrifices. etc. Thus doing
ye shall be free from sin, from the wrath of God, from everlasting death: yea
rather (says Paul) by the self same things ye establish unrighteousness, ye
provoke ye wrath of God, ye add sin to sin, ye quench the spirit, ye fall
away from grace, and utterly reject the same, and ye together with your
disciples do end in ye flesh. This is the first danger, from ye which he
terrifieth the Galathians, lest if they seek to be justified by the law, they
lose the spirit, and forgo their good beginnings for a wretched end.

Verse. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain?
The other danger and incommoditie is this: Have ye suffered so many things in
vain? As though he would say: Consider not only how well ye began, and how
miserably ye have forsaken your good beginnings, and your course well begone:
moreover, that not only ye have lost the first fruits of the spirit, being
fallen again into the ministry of sin and death, and into a doleful and a
miserable bondage of the law: but consider this also, that ye have suffered
much for the Gospels sake, and for the name of Christ: to wit, the spoiling
of your goods, railings and reproaches, dangers both of bodies and lives. etc.
All things were in a happy course and great towardnes with you. Ye taught
purely, ye lived holily, and ye endured many evils constantly for the name of
Christ. But now all is lost, as well doctrine as faith, as well doing as
suffering, as well the spirit as the fruits thereof.

Hereby it appears sufficiently what inconvenience the righteousness of the
law and man's own righteousness brings: What inconveniences ma^s own
righteousness, or the righteousness of the law do bring.
to wit, that they which trust in it, do lose at once unspeakable
benefits. Now, what a miserable thing is it, so suddenly to lose such
inestimable glory and assurance of conscience toward God? also to endure so
many great and grievous afflictions, as loss of goods, wife, children, body,
and life, and yet notwithstanding to sustain all these things in vain? And
out of these two places, much matter may be gathered to set forth and amplify
at large the goodly commendation of the law and man's own righteousness, if a
man would stand upon every parcel by it self, and declare what spirit it was
wherewith they began: what, how great, and how many the afflictions were which
they endured for Christ's sake. But no eloquence can sufficiently set forth
these matters. For they are inestimable things whereof Paul here entreats: to
wit the glory of God, victory over the world, the flesh and the devil,
righteousness and everlasting life: and on the other side, sin, desperation,
eternal death, and hell. And yet notwithstanding in a moment we lose all these
incomparable gifts, and procure unto our selves these horrible and endless
miseries, and al by false teachers, when they lead us away from the truth of
ye gospel unto false doctrine. And this not only they do easily bring to
pass, but also under the show of great holiness.

Verse. 4. If notvvithstanding it be in vain.
This he adds as a correction: whereby he mitigateth the reprehension that
goes before, which was somewhat sharp. And this he does as an Apostle, lest
he should terrify the Galathians too much. Although he chide them, yet
notwithstanding he always does it in such sort, that he pours in sweet
oil withal, lest he should drive them to desperation.

He says therefore: If notvvithstanding it be in vain. As if he would say: yet
I do not take away all hope from you: but if ye would so end in the flesh,
that is to say, follow the righteousness of the law and forsake the spirit, as
ye have begone: then know ye, that all your glory and affiaunce which ye have
in God, is in vain, and all your afflictions are unprofitable. In deed I must
needs speak somewhat more roughly unto you in this matter: I must be more
fervent in the defense thereof, and more sharp in chiding of you, especially
the matter being so weighty, and constraining me thereunto, left ye should
think it to be but a trifle to cast away the doctrine of Paul, and receive an
other. Notwithstanding, I will not utterly discourage you, so that ye repent
and amend. For sickely and scabbed children may not be cast away, but must be
helped and seen to more carefully then they which are in health. So that Paul
here like a cunning Phisician, lays all the fault in a manner, upon the false
Apostles, the authors and only cause of this deadly disease. Contrariwise he
entreats the Galathians very gently, to the end that by this his mildnes he
might heal them, and restore them again. We therefore by the example of Paul,
ought in like manner to reprehend the weak, and so to heal and remove their
disease, that in the mean time we leave not of to cherish and comfort them,
lest if we handle them too sharply, they fall into desperation.

Verse. 5. He therefore that ministers to you the spirit, and works
miracles among you, does he it through the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith preached?
Paul makes often rehearsal of the argument grounded upon experience.
This argument grounded upon ye experience of the Galathians does so well like
the Apostle, that after he has rebuked and terrified them, setting before them
a double danger and incommoditie, he now repeteth the same again, and that
with a more large amplification, saying: He which ministers etc, That is to
say: Ye have not only received ye spirit by the hearing of faith, but
whatsoever ye have either known or done, ye have it by the hearing of faith.
As though he would say: It was not enough that God gave you once the spirit:
but the same God also has enriched you with the gifts of the spirit, and
increased the same in you, to the end that ye having once received the
spirit, it might always grow and be more and more effectual in you. Hereby
it is plain, that the Galathians had wrought miracles, or at ye least had
showed such fruits of faith as the true Disciples of the Gospel are wont to
bring forth. For the Apostle elsewhere says, That the kingdom of God is not in
word, The kingdom of God consists not in words, but in power. 1. Cor. 4.
Ver. 20.
but in power. Now, this power is not only to be able to speak of ye kingdom
of God: but also in very deed to show that God through his spirit is
effectual in us. So, before in ye second chapter he says of him self: He that
was effectual in Peter among the Jews, was also effectual in me: he that
was mighty by Peter in the Apostleship over the Circumcision, Chap. 2.8.
was also mighty by me toward the Gentiles.

When a preacher then so preaches that the word is not destitute of his fruit,
but effectual in the hearts of the hearers, that is to say: when faith, hope,
love and patience do follow, then God gives his spirit and works miracles
in the hearers. In like manner Paul says here, that God has given his
spirit to the Galathians, and has wrought miracles among them. As though he
would say: God has not only brought to pass through my preaching, that ye
should believe: but also that ye should live holily, bring forth many fruits of
faith, and suffer many afflictions. Also by the same power of the holy Ghost,
of adulterers, of wrathful, impacient, and covetous persons, and of very
enemies, ye are become liberal, chaste, gentle, pacient, and lovers of your
neighbors. Whereupon afterward he gives testimony of them in the fourth
chapter, Chap. 4.14.15.
that they received him as an Angel of God, yea rather as Christ Jesus: and
that they loved him so vehemently that they were ready to have plucked out
their own eyes for him.

Now, to love thy neighbor so heartily, that thou art ready to bestow thy
money, thy goods, thine eyes, and all that thou have for his salvation: and
moreover to suffer patiently all adversities and afflictions, these (no doubt)
are the effects and fruits of the spirit, and these (says he) you received
and enjoyed before these false teachers came among you. But ye received them
not by the law, but of God, who so ministered unto you, and daily increased in
you his holy spirit, that the gospel had a most happy course amongste you in
teaching, believing, working and suffering. Now, seeing ye know these things
(being convicted even by the testimony of your own consciences), how comes
it to pass that ye show not forth the same fruits that ye did before: that
is, that ye teach not truly, that ye believe not faithfully, that ye live not
holily, that ye work not rightly, and that ye suffer not patiently? Finally,
who has so corrupted you, that ye bear not so loving affection toward me, as
ye did before? that ye receive not Paul now as an Angel of God, nor as Christ
Jesus? that ye will not pluck out your eyes to give them unto me? How comes
it to pass (I say) that this fervent zeal of yours waxes so cold toward
me, and that ye now prefer before me the false apostles which do so
miserably seduce you?

In like manner it happens unto us at this day. When we first preached the
Gospel, there were very many that favored our doctrine, and had a good and a
reverent opinion of us: and after the preaching thereof, followed the operations
and effects of faith. But what came then? A sort of light and brainsicke heads
sprang up, and by and by destroyed all that we had in long time and with much
travail planted before, and also made us so odious unto them which before
loved us dearly, and thankfully received our doctrine, that now they hate
nothing more then our name. The works of the Devil.
But the Devil is the aucthor of this mischief, working in his members
contrary signs, which wholly fight against the operations of the holy Ghost.
Therefore, says the Apostle, your experience (O ye Galathians) ought to teach
you, that these great and excellent miracles proceeded not of the works of the
law. For as ye had them not before the hearing of faith preached: so have ye
them not now, although the false apostles reign in the midst of you.

Therefore we also may say to them at this day which vaunt them selves to be
gospellers, and to be freed from the tyranny of the Pope: have ye overcome the
tyranny of the Pope, and obtained liberty in Christ through the Anabaptists
and such other fanaticall spirits, or through us which have preached faith in
Jesus Christ? Here if they will confess the truth, they must needs say: no
doubt, it was by the preaching of faith. What happy success the gospel had
when it was first preached.
And true it is, that in the beginning of our preaching, the doctrine of faith
had a most happy course, and down fell the Popes pardones, purgatory, vows,
Masses, and such like abominations, which drue with them the ruin of al
Popery. No man could justly condemn us: for our doctrine was pure, raising up
and comforting many poor consciences, which had been long oppressed with men's
traditions under the Papacy: which was a plain tyranny, a racking and
crucifying of consciences. Many therefore gave thanks unto God, that through
the Gospel (which by the grace of God we the^ first preached) they were so
mightily delivered out of these snares, The Popedom a very slaughterhouse of
consciences.
and this slaughterhouse of consciences. But when these new fond heads sprang
up (who went about by all means to work our discredit) then began our
doctrine to be evil thought of: for it was commonly bruted abroad, that the
professors thereof disagreed among themselves. Whereat many being greatly
offended, fell quite from the truth, putting the Papists in comfort, yt we
together with our doctrine, should shortly come to naught, and by this means
they should recover their former dignity and authority again.

Wherefore, like as the false apostles vehemently contended yt the Galathians
now justified by faith in Christ ought to be circumcised and to keep the law of
Moses, if they would be delivered from their sins and from the wrath of God,
and obtain the holy Ghost: and yet notwtstanding by the self same means they
burdened them the more with sins (for sin is not taken away by the law, The
Anabaptists the authors of tumultes and seditions, hindered much the course of
the gospel.
neither is the holy ghost given through it, but only it works wrath and
drives men into great terrors): so at this day these rash heads, which
thought to provide for the safety of ye catholic Church, and at once to drive
down all Popery, have done no good, but much hurt to the Church: they have
not overthrown the Papacy, but have more established it.

The Anabaptists enemies to the article of justification.
But if they had (as they began) with a common consent together with us taught
and diligently urged the article of justification: that is to say, that we are
justified neither by the righteousness of the law, nor by our own
righteousness, but by only faith in Jesus Christ: doutles this one article by
little and little (as it began) had overthrown the whole Papacy, with all her
brotherhodes, pardons, religious orders, relikes, ceremonies, invocation of
Saints, purgatory, Masses, This may rightly be applied to Munster,
Knipperdoli^g, and such outrageous Anabaptists (of whom Sleidan makes
mention) who before times had much hindered the course of the gospel.
watchings, vows, and infinite other like abominations. But they, leaving of
the preaching of faith and true Christian righteousness, have gone an other way
to work, to the great hinderaunce both of sound doctrine and of the Churches.
Therefore it is happened to them much like as is said in the common Dutch
proverb: They have driven away the fishes which the net was about to
enclose, whiles they went about to catch them with their hands.

Verse. 6. As Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness.
Hitherto Paul groundeth his argument upon ye experience of the Galathians,
and with this argument he presses them vehemently. Ye (says he) have believed,
and believing have done miracles, and have showed many notable signs: and
moreover ye have suffered many afflictions, al which things are the effects and
operations, not of the law, but of ye holy ghost. This the Galathians were
constrained to confess. For they could not deny these things, which were
before their eyes and subject to their senses: and therefore this argument
grounded upon their own experience is very strong.

Now he adds the example of Abraham, Genes. 15.6.
and rehearses the testimony of ye scripture. The first is out of Genesis:
Abraham believed God etc. This place the Apostle here mightily prosecuteth, as
also he does in his epistle to the Romans. Romans 4.2.3.
If Abraham (says he) was made righteous by the works of the law, he has
righteousness and rejoicing, but not before God, but before men: For before God
he has sin and wrath. Now, he was justified before God, not because he did
work, but because he did believe. For the scripture says: Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed to him for righteousness. This place does Paul there
notably set out and amplify, as it is most worthy. Abraham (says he) was not
vveake in the faith, Romans 4.19.20.21. etc.
neither considered he his own body being dead, when he was almost an 100.
year old: neither that Sara was past child bearing. Thorough unbelief he
doubted not of the promise of God, but was made strong in the faith, and gave
glory to God, being surely persuaded that whatsoever God had promised, he was
able to perform: wherefore it was imputed unto him for righteousness. And this
is written, not only for him, that it was counted unto him for righteousness,
but for us also. etc.

Paul by these words, Abraham believed, makes the cheifest worship, the
cheifest duty, the cheifest obedience and the cheifest sacrifice, of faith in
God. Let him yt is a Rethorician, amplify this place, and he shall see that
faith is an almighty thing, and that the power thereof is inestimable and
infinite. The power of faith infinite.
For it gives glory unto God, which is the highest service that can be given
unto him. Now, to give glory unto God, To give glory to God.
is to believe in him, to count him true, wise, righteous, merciful, almighty,
briefly to acknowledge him to be the author and geuer of all goodness. Faith
gives glory to God.
This reason does not, but faith. That is it which makes us divine people, and
(as a man would say) it is the creator of a certain divinity, not in the
substance of God, but in us. For without faith God loses in us his glory,
wisdom, righteousness, truth, and mercy. To conclude: There no majesty or
divinity remains unto God, where faith is not. And the cheifest thing that
God requires of man is, that he give unto him his glory and his divinity:
that is to say, that he take him not for an idol, but for God: who regards
him, hears him, shows mercy unto him, and helps him. This being done,
then has God his full and perfect divinity, that is, he has whatsoever a
faithful heart can attribute unto him. To be able therefore to give that glory
unto God, it is the wisdom of wisdoms, the righteousness of righteousnesses,
the religion of religions, and sacrifice of sacrifices. Hereby we may perceive,
what an high and excellent righteousness faith is, and so by the contrary, what
an horrible and grievous sin infidelity is.

Whosoever then believes the word of God as Abraham did, is righteous before
God, Righteous before God.
because he has faith, which gives glory unto God: that is, he gives to God
that which is due to him. For faith says thus: What God says, if ye set
faith aside, and harken unto reason.
I believe thee (O God) when thou speak. And what says God? Impossible
things, lies, foolish, weak, absurd, abominable, heretical, and deuillish
things, if ye believe reason. For what is more absurd, foolish and impossible,
then when God says to Abraham, that he should have a son of the harren and
dead body of his wife Sara?

The judgment of reason, touching the articles of faith.
So, if we will follow the judgment of reason, God sets forth absurd and
impossible things when he sets out unto us the Articles of the Christian
faith. In deed it seems to reason an absurd and a foolish thing, that in
the Lords supper is offered unto us the body and blood of Christ, that baptism
is the Lauer of the new birth and of the renewing of the holy Ghost, that the
dead shall rise in the last day, that Christ the son of God was conceived and
carried in the womb of the virgin Marie, that he was borne, that he suffered
the most reprochefull death of the cross, that he was raised up again, that
he now sits at the right hand of God the father, and that he has power
both in heaven and in earth. The Gospel is the word of the cross. 1. Cor.
1.18.2^.
For this cause Paul calls the Gospel of Christ crucified, the word of
the cross and foolish preaching, which to the Jews was offensive, and to the
Gentiles foolish doctrine etc. Reason therefore does not understand, that to
hear the word of God and to believe it, The chief worship of God.
is the cheifest service that God requires of us: but it thinks that those
things which it chooses and does of a good intent (as they call it) and of
her own devotion, please God. Therefore when God speaks, reason judges his
word to be heresy, and the word of the Devil, for it seems absurd and
foolish.

But faith kills reason, Faith ^layeth reason.
and slaieth that beast which the whole world and all creatures cannot kill. So
Abraham killed it by faith in the word of God, by which word seed was
promised him of Sara who was barren and now past child bearing. Unto this word
reason yielded not straight way in Abraham, but doubtless it fought against
faith in him, iudgeing it to be an absurd, a foolish, and impossible thing yt
that Sara, who was now not only. 90. years of age, but also was barren by
nature, should bring forth a son. The wrestling of faith with reason in
Abraham.
Thus faith (no doubt) wrestled with reason in Abraham, but herein faith got
the victory, killed and sacrificed reason, that most cruel and pestilent
ennemie of God. So all the godly entering with Abraham into the darkness of
faith, do kill reason, saying: Reason, thou art foolish, thou do not savor
those things which belong unto God: therefore speak not against me, but hold
thy peace: judge not, but hear the word of God and believe it. So the godly by
faith kill such a beast as is greater then the whole world, and thereby do
offer to God a most acceptable sacrifice and service.

And in comparison of this sacrifice of the faithful, The sacrifice of
Christians.
all the religions of all nations, and all the works of all Monks and
meritemongers are nothing at all. For by this sacrifice, first (as I said) they
kill reason, a great and mighty ennemie of God. Reason Gods enemy.
For reason despises God, denies his wisdom, righteousness, power, truth,
mercy, majesty, and divinity. Moreover, by the same sacrifice they yield
glory unto God: that is, they believe him to be righteous, good, faithful,
true. etc: they believe that he can do all things, that all his words are
holy, The commendation of faith
true, lively, and effectual etc. which is a most acceptable obedience unto
God. Therefore there can be no greater or more holy religion in the world, nor
more acceptable service unto God, then faith is.

Contrariwise, the Iusticiaries, and such as seek righteousness by their own
works, lacking Faith, in deed do many things. They fast, they pray, they
watch, they lay crosses upon themselves. The unfaithful give not glory to God.
But because they think to appease the wrath of God and deserve grace by these
things, they give no glory to God: that is, they do not judge him to be
merciful, true, and keeping promise. etc. but to be an angry judge, which
must be pacified with works, and by this means they despise God, they make
him as a lier in all his promises, they deny Christ and all his benefits: to
conclude, they thrust God out of his seat and set them selves in his place.
For, they rejecting and despising the word of God, do choose unto them selves
such worship and works as God has not commanded. They imagine that God
has a pleasure therein, and they hope to receive a reward of him for the same.
Therefore they kill not reason, that mighty enemy of God, but quicken it: and
they take from God his majesty and his divinity, and attribute the same unto
their own works. Wherefore only faith gives glory to God, as Paul
witnesses of Abraham. Abraham (says he) was made strong in the faith, Romans
4.20.21.22
and gave glory to God, being fully assured, that whatsoever God had promised,
he was able to perform, and therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.

Christian righteousness consists in. Faith of the heart and Gods imputation.
It is not without cause that he adds this sentence out of the fiftene
Chapter of Genesis: And it was imputed unto him for righteousness. For
christian righteousness consists in two things, that is to say, in faith of
the heart, and in Gods imputation. Faith is in deed a Formal is that which
gives perfection to the substance whereunto it is joined.
formal righteousness, and yet this righteousness is not enough: for after faith
there remain yet certain remnaunts of sin in our flesh. This sacrifice of
faith began in Abraham, but at last it was finished in his death: And therefore
the other part of righteousness must needs be added also to finish the same in
us: that is to say, Gods imputation. For faith gives not enough to God,
because it is imperfecte, yea rather our faith is but a little spark of faith,
which begins only to render unto God his true divinity. The remnants of
sin in the godly. Romans 8.23.
We have received the first fruits of the spirit, but not yet the tenthes.
Besides this, reason is not utterly killed in this life: which may appear by
our concupiscence, wrath, impatience, and other fruits of the flesh, and of
infidelity yet remaining in us. Yea, the holiest that live, have not yet a
full and continual joy in God, but have their sundry passions, sometimes
sad, sometimes mirry, as the scriptures witness of the Prophets and Apostles.
But such faults are not laid to their charge because of their faith in
Christ, for otherwise no flesh should be saved. We conclude therefore upon
these words: It was imputed to him for righteousness, that righteousness in
deed begins through faith, and by the same we have the first fruits of the
spirit: but because faith is weak, it is not made perfect without Gods
imputation. Wherefore faith begins righteousness, but imputation makes it
perfect unto the day of Christ.

The popish Sophisters and Scholemen dispute also of imputation, when they
speak of the good acceptance of the work: The blindness of the Scholemen.
but besides and clean contrary to the scripture, for they wrest it only to
works. They do not consider the uncleanness and inward poison lurking in the
heart, as incredulity, doubting, God accepts our works (say the Papists)
not of duty, but of Congruence, that is, because it is meet that God should
revvard them.
despising and hating of God, which most pernicious and perelous beasts are
the fountain and cause of all mischief. They consider no more but outward and
gross faults and unrighteousness, which are little rivers proceeding and
issuing out of those fountains. Therefore they attribute acceptance to
works: that is to say, that God does accept our works, not of duty, but of
congruence. Contrariwise we, excluding all works, do go to the very head of
this beast which is called reason, Man's reason.
which is the fountain and headespring of all mischiefs. For reason fears
not God, it loves not God, it trusts not in God, but proudely contemns
him. It is not moved either with his threateninges or his promises. It is not
delighted with his words or works: but it murmureth against him, it is angry
with him, judges and hates him: to be short, it is an enemy to God, not
giving him his glory. Romans 8.7.
This pestilent beast (reason I say) being once slain, all outward and gross
vices should be nothing.

Wherefore we must first and before all things go about by faith, to kill
infidelity, Reason must be killed by faith.
the contempt and hatred of God, murmuring against his judgment and his wrath,
and against all his words and works: for then do we kill reason, which can
be killed by none other means but by faith, which in believing God gives unto
him his glory, notwithstanding that he speaks those things which seem both
foolish, absurd, and impossible to reason: notwithstanding also, that God
sets forth him self otherwise then reason is able either to judge or
conceive, that is to say, after this manner: I will account thee and pronounce
thee to be righteous, not for the keeping of the law, not for thy works and
thy merits, but for thy faith in Jesus Christ mine only begotten Son, who
was borne, suffered, was crucified, and died for thy sins: and that sin
which remains in thee, I will not impute unto thee. If reason then be not
killed, and al kinds of religion and service of God under heaven that are
invented by men to get righteousness before God, be not condemned, the
righteousness of faith can take no place.

When reason hears this, by and by it is offended: it rages, and utters
all her malice against God, saying: Are then my good works nothing? Have I
then labored and borne the burden and heat of the day in vain? Math. 20.12.
Hereof rise those vprours of nations, Psalm. 2.2.
of Kings and Princes, against the Lord and against his Christ. For the world
neither will nor can suffer that his wisdom, righteousness, religions and
worshippings should be reproved and condemned. The Pope with all his Popish
rablement, will not seem to err, much less will he suffer himself to be
condemned.

The definition of the Christian faith.
Therefore let them which be studious of the word of God, learn out of this
saying: Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness, to
set forth truly and rightly this true Christian righteousness after this
manner: that it is a faith and confidence in the Son of God, or rather a
confidence of the heart in God through Jesus Christ. And let them add this
clause as a difference: Which Faith and confidence is accounted righteousness
for Christ's sake. For these two things (as I said before) work Christian
righteousness: namely, Faith in the heart, which is a gift of God, and rightly
believes in Christ: and also, that God accepts this imperfecte Faith, for
perfect righteousness for Christ's sake, in whom I have begun to believe. because
of this faith in Christ, God sees not my doubting of his good will toward me,
my distrust, my heaviness of spirit, and other sins which are yet in me. For
as long as I live in the flesh, sin is verily in me. But because I am covered
under ye shadow of Christ's wings, as is the chicken under the winge of the
hen, and dwell without all fear under that most ample and large heaven of
the forgeuenes of sins, which is spread over me, God covers and pardons
the remnant of sin in me: that is to say, because of that faith wherewith I
began to lay hold upon Christ, he accepts my imperfect righteousness even for
perfect righteousness, and counts my sin for no sin, which notwithstanding
is sin in deed.

So we shroud our selves under the covering of Christ's flesh, who is our
cloudy pillar for the day, and our fire by the night, lest God should see our
sin. And although we see it, and for the same do feel the terrors of
conscience, yet flying unto Christ our Mediator and reconciler (through whom
we are made perfect), we are sure and safe: For as all things are in him, so
through him we have all things, who also does supply whatsoever is wanting in
us. When we believe this, God winketh at all our sins and the remnantes
thereof which are yet sticking in our flesh, and will have them so covered as
though they were no sins. Because (says he) thou beleuest in my son,
although thou have many sins, notwithstanding they must be forgeuen thee,
until thou be clean delivered from them by death.

Let Christians learn with all diligence to understand this article of
Christian righteousness. And to this end let them read Paul, The divinity of
Paul.
and read him again both often and with great diligence, and let them
compare ye first with the last, yea let them compare Paul wholly and fully with
himself: then shall they find it to be true, Christian righteousness
consists in two things.
that Christian righteousness consists in these two things, faith which gives
glory unto God, and Gods imputation. For faith is weak (as I have said) and
therefore Gods imputation must needs be joined wtall, that is to say, that God
will not lay to our charge the remnant of sin, that he will not punish it,
nor condemn us for it: but that he will cover it and will freely forgive it, as
though it were nothing at all: not for our sake, neither for our worthiness and
works, but for Jesus Christ's sake in whom we believe.

Thus a Christian man is both righteous and a sinner, A Christian i^ a
righteous man and a sinner.
holy and profane, an enemy of God and yet a child of God. These contraries
no Sophister will admit, for they know not the true manner of justification.
And this was the cause why they would have men to work well so long until they
should feel no sin at all in the^: and thereby they gave occasion to many,
which, striving with all their endeavor to be perfectly righteous, and yet not
able to attain thereunto, to become stark mad: And an infinite number also
of those which were the authors of this wicked opinion, at the point of death
were driven into desperation. Which thing had happened unto me also, if Christ
had not mercifully looked upon me and helped me out of this error.

How they that feel sin ought to be comforted.
On the otherside, we teach and comfort the afflicted sinner after this manner:
Brother, it is not possible for thee to become so righteous in this life, that
thou should feel no sin at all, that thy body should be clear like the
Sun, without spotte or blemish: but thou have as yet wrinkles and spots, and
yet art thou holy notwithstanding. But thou will say: How can I be holy when I
have and feel sin in me? I answer: in that thou do feel and
acknowledge thy sin, it is a good toke^, give thanks unto God, and despair
not. It is one step to health, when the sick man does acknowledge and
confess his disease. But how shall I be delivered from sin? Run to Christ
the Physician, which heals them that are broken in heart and saves sinners.
Follow not the judgment of reason, which tells thee that he is angry with
sinners: but kill reason and believe in Christ. If thou believe, thou art
righteous, because thou geuest glory unto God, that he is almighty, merciful,
true etc: the^ do thou justify and praise God. To be brief, thou yeldest
unto him his divinity and al things else. The sin which remains in thee is
not laid to thy charge, but is pardoned for Christ's sake in whom thou beleuest,
who is perfectly just: whose righteousness is thy righteousness, and thy sin is
his sin.

Christians be Priests.
Here we see that every Christian is an high Priest, for first he offers up
and kills his own reason, and the wisdom of the flesh. Then he gives
glory to God, that he is righteous, true, patient, pitiful, The daily
sacrifice of the new testament.
and merciful.. And this is that daily sacrifice of the new testament which
must be offered evening and morning. The evening sacrifice is to kill reason.
The morning sacrifice is to glorify God. Thus a Christian daily and
continually is occupied in this double sacrifice and in the exercise thereof.
And no man is able to set forth sufficiently the excellency and dignity of
this Christian sacrifice.

Christian righteousness.
This is therefore a strange and a wonderful definition of Christian
righteousness, that it is the imputation of God for righteousness or unto
righteousness because of our faith in Christ or for Christ's sake. When the
popish Scholemen hear this definition, they laugh at it. For they imagine that
righteousness is a certain quality powered into the soul, and afterward spread
into all the parts of man. They can not put away the vain imaginations of
reason, which teaches that a right judgment, and a good will or a good intent
is true righteousness. This unspeakable gift therefore excels all reason,
that god does account and acknowledge him for righteous without works, which
embraces his son by faith alone, who was sent into the world, was borne,
suffered, and was crucified for us.

This matter, as touching ye words, is easy (to wit, that righteousness is not
essentially in us, but without us in the grace of God only and in his
imputation: and that there is no essential substance of righteousness in us
besides that weak faith or first fruits of faith, whereby we have begone to
apprehend Christ, and yet sin in yt mean time remains verily in us): but
in very deed it is no such small or light matter, but earnest and of weighty
importance. For Christ which was given for us, and whom we apprehend by faith,
has done no small thing for us, neither has he dalied with us, but (as Paul
said before): Galat. 2.2^.
He has loved us and given him self in very deed for us: Galat. 3.13.
He was made accursed for us etc. And this is no vain speculation, that
Christ was delivered for my sins, and was made accursed for me, that I might
be delivered from everlasting death. A child is borne unto us, a Son is given
unto us.

Esaias. 9.6. We are reputed righteous by faith in Christ this Son and this
gift given unto us.


Therefore to apprehend that Son by faith, and with the heart to believe in
him, given unto us and for us of God, causes that God does account that faith,
although it be imperfect, for perfect righteousness.

And we are altogether in an other world far from reason, where we dispute
not, what we ought to do, or with what works we may deserve grace, and
forgeuenes of sins: but we are here in a matter of high and heavenly
divinity, where we do hear this Gospel or glad tidings, that Christ died
for us, and that we believing this, are counted righteous though sins
notwtsta^ding do remain in us, and yt horrible sins. So our Savior Christ
also defines ye righteousness of faith. The father (says he) loves you.
Wherefore does he love you? Not because ye were Phariseis, The righteousness of
faith out of the xv. chapter of S. John's Gospel.
unreprovable in the righteousness of the law, circumcised, or because ye did
good works, and fasted etc: but because I have chosen you out of the world, and
ye have done nothing, but yt ye have loved me and believed, that I came out from
the father. This object [I] being sent from the father into the world, pleased
you. And because you have apprehended and embraced this object, Christ is
called our object because the eye of our faith is directed unto him.
therefore the father loves you, and therefore ye please him. And yet
notwithstanding in an other place he calls them evil, and commands them to
ask forgeuenes of their sins. These two things are quite contrary: to wit,
that a Christian is righteous and beloved of God, and yet notwithstanding he is
a sinner. For God cannot deny his own nature, that is, he must needs hate
sin and sinners: and this he does of necessity: for otherwise he should be
unrighteous and love sin. How then can these two Contrary sayings.
contradictories stand together? I am a sinner and most worthy of Gods wrath
and indignation, and yet the father loves me? Here nothing comes between,
but only Christ the mediator. The father (says he) does not therefore love
you because ye are worthy of love, John. 16.27. John. 17.8.
but because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from him.

Thus a Christian man abides in true humility, feeling sin in him
effectually, and confessing himself to be worthy of wrath, the judgment of
God, and everlasting death for the same, that he may be humbled in this life:
And yet notwithstanding he continues still in his holy pride, in the which he
turns unto Christ, and in him he lifts up him self against this feeling of
Gods wrath and judgment, and believes that, not only the remnants of sin are
not imputed unto him, but that also he is loved of the father, not for his own
sake, but for Christ's sake whom the father loves.

Hereby now we may see, how faith justifies without works, and yet
notwithstanding, how imputation of righteousness is also necessary. Sins do
remain in us, which God utterly hates. Therefore it is necessary that we
should have imputation of righteousness, which we obtain through Christ and for
Christ's sake, The imputation of righteousness.
who is given unto us and received of us by faith. In the mean time as long as
we live here, we are carried and norished in the bosom of mercy and long
sufferance of God, until the body of sin be abolished, and we raised up as
new creatures in that great day. Then shall there be new heavens and a new
earth, in which righteousness shall dwell. In the mean while under this heaven
sin and wicked men do dwell, Romans 7.23.
and the godly also have sin dwelling in them. For this cause Paul Romans 7.
co^plaineth of sin which remains in the Saints: Romans 8.1.
yet notwithstanding he says afterward in the 8. Things contrary in Christ
are made to agree.
chapter: that there is no damnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Now,
how shall these things so contrary and repugnant be reconciled together: that
sin in us is no sin? that he which is damnable shall not be condemned? that
he which is rejected shall not be rejected? that he which is worthy of the
wrath of God and everlasting damnation, shall not be punished? 1. Tim. 2.5.
Romans 8.1.
The only reconciler hereof is the mediator between God and man, even the man
Jesus Christ, as Paul says: There is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus.

Verse. 7. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of Abraham.
This is the general argument and whole disputation of Paul against the
Jews, To. 4.11.12. etc. Romans 9.6.7.8.
that they which believe are the children of Abraham, and not they which are
borne of his flesh and his blood. The disputation of Paul against the Jews.
This disputation Paul vehemently prosecuteth in this place, and in the 4. and
9. chapit. to the Romans For this was the greatest confidence and glory of the
Jews: We are the seed and children of Abraham. He was circumcised and kept
the law: therefore if we will be the true children of Abraham, we must follow
our father. etc. It was (no doubt) an excellent glory and great dignity, to be
the seed of Abraham. For no man could deny but that God spoke to the seed
and of the seed of Abraham. But this prerogative nothing profited ye
unbelieving Jews. The bosting of the Jews.
By reason whereof Paul, especially in this place, mightily strives against
this argument, and wresteth from the Jews this strong affiance in them selves.
And this could he, as the elect vessel of Christ, Acts. 9.15.
do above all other. For if we at the beginning should have disputed with the
Jews without Paul, peradventure we should have prevailed very little against
them.

So then Paul reasons against the Jews which stood so proudly upon this
opinion, that they were the children of Abraham, saying: We are the seed of
Abraham. Well, what then? By what means Abraham was justified.
Abraham was circumcised and kept the law: we do the same. All this I grant.
What? will ye therefore look to be justified and saved? No not so. But let us
come to the Patriarch Abraham himself, and let us see by what means he was
justified and saved. Doutles, Genes. 12.1.2.3. etc. Genes. 17.24. Genes.
22.2.3. Genes. 15.6. Romans 4.18.19. James. 2.2. Galat. 3.6.
not for his excellent virtues and holy works: not because he forsook his
country, kindred, and fathers house: not because he was circumcised, and
observed the law: not because he was about to offer up in sacrifice at the
commandment of God, his son Isacke in whom he had the promise of
posterity: but because he believed. Therefore he was not justified by any other
means then by faith alone. If ye then will be justified by the law, much more
ought Abraham your father to be justified by the law. But Abraham could not
otherwise be justified, nor receive forgeuenes of sins and the holy Ghost
then by faith alone. Since this is true by the testimony of the scripture, why
stand ye so much upon circumcision and the law, contending that ye have
righteousness and salvation thereby, when as your father Abraham him self, even
your headspring, of whom ye do so much glory, was justified and saved without
these by faith alone? What can be brought against this argument?

Paul therefore concludes with this sentence: They which are of faith, are
the children of Abraham, that corporal birth or carnal seed makes not the
children of Abraham before God. That the carnal begetting does not make us the
acceptable children of Abraham. John. 8.39.
As though he would say: There is none before God accounted as the child of
this Abraham (who is the servant of God, whom God has chosen and made
righteous by faith) through carnal generation: but he must have such children
given him before God, as he was a father. But he was a father of faith, and was
justified, and pleased God, not because he could beget children after the
flesh, not because he had circumcision and the law, but because he believed in
God. Therefore he that will be a child of the believing Abraham, must also him
self believe, or else he is not a child of the elect, The believing Abraham,
and the begetting Abraham.
acceptable, and justified Abraham, but only of the begetting Abraham, which
is nothing else but a man conceived, borne, and wrapped in sin, without ye
forgeuenes of sins, without faith, What manner of ones the carnal children of
Abraham are. John. 8.38.39.
without the holy ghost, as an other man is, and therefore condemned. Such also
are the children carnally begotten of him, having nothing in them like unto
their father but flesh and blood, sin and death: therefore these are also
damned. This glorious boasting then: We are the seed of Abraham, is to no
purpose.

Romans 9.11. The first example of Ismael and Isaac.
This argument Paul sets out plainly in the.9. to the Romans by two
examples of the holy scripture. The first is of Ismaell and Isaac, which were
both the seed and natural children of Abraham, and yet notwithstanding
Ismaell, (which was begotten of Abraham as Isaac was, Genes. 21.1^. Romans 9.7.
Heb. 11.17. The second example of Esau and Jacob. Genes. 25.^3. Romans 9.12.
Ma^^c. 1.2.
yea and should also have been the first begotten, if carnal generation had
any prorogatiue, or could have made children to Abraham) is shut out, and yet
the scripture says: In Isaac shall thy seed be called. The second is of Esau
and Jacob, who when they were as yet in their mothers womb, and had done
neither good nor evil, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger. I have
loved Jacob and Esau have I hated. Therefore it is plain, that they which are
of faith are the children of Abraham.

But some will here obiecte (as the Jews do, The word Faith signifies in
the Hebrew tongue truth. Genes. 15 4.5.6. Rom 4.13. Romans 4.3.
and certain unskillful persons at this day which will seem to know much) and
say, that this word faith in the Hebrew signifies truth, and therefore we do
wrongly allege it in this matter: and moreover, that this place out of
Genesis. 15. speaks of a corporal thing, namely of the promise of
posterity, and therefore is not well applied of Paul to faith in Christ, but
ought simply to be understand of the faith of Abraham, whereby he believed
according to the promise of God, that he should have seed. And hereby they
would prove that the arguments and allegations of Paul do conclude nothing.
In like manner they may cavil also, that the place which Paul a little after
alleges out of Habacuc speaks of faith concerning the accomplishing of the
whole vision, and not of faith only in Christ, Habac. 1.4.
for the which Paul alleges it. Likewise they may wrest all the.11. chapter
to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.
which speaks of faith and the examples of faith. By these things such
vaineglorious and arrogant spirits do hunt for praise, and seek to be
counted wise and learned, where they least of all deserve it. But because of
the simple and ignorant we will briefly answer to their cauillations.

To the first I answer thus, that faith is nothing else but the truth of the
heart: that is to say, a true and a right opinion of the heart as touching
God. Now, faith only thinks and judges rightly of God, Faith.
and not reason. And then a man thinks rightly of God, Faith thi^keth aright
of God, and not reason.
when he believes his word. But when he will measure God without the word, and
believe him according to the wisdom of reason, he has no right opinion of God
in his heart and therefore he ca^ not think or judge of him as he should do.
As for example: when a Monk imagines that his Cowle, his shaven croune and
his vows do please God, and that grace and everlasting life is given unto him
for the same, Truth and faith signify both one thing.
he has no true opinion of God, but false and full of impiety. Truth therefore
is faith it self, which judges rightly of God, namely that God regards not
our works and righteousness, because we are unclean: but that he will have
mercy upon us, look upon us, accept us, justify us and save us, John. 5.24.
John. 11.25.26. Heb. 9.11. Heb. 10.
if we believe in his Son whom he has sent to be a sacrifice for ye sins of
the whole world. This is a true opinion of God, and in very deed nothing else
but faith it self. I can not comprehend nor be fully assured by reason, that I
am received into gods favor for Christ's sake: but I hear this to be
pronounced by the Gospel, and I lay hold upon it by faith.

To the second cauillation I answer, that Paul does rightly allege the
place out of the.15. of Genesis, applying it to faith in Christ. For with faith
always must be joined a certain assurance of Gods mercy. That Paul does
rightly allege that place out of the.15. of Genesis, and to his purpose.
Now, this assurance comprehends a faithful trust of remission of sins for
Christ's sake. For it is impossible that the conscience should look for any
thing at Gods hand, except first it be assured, that God is merciful unto it
for Christ's sake. Therefore all the promises are to be referred to that first
promise concerning Christ: The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents
head. Genes. 3.15. All the promises are to be referred to the first promise.
So did all the Prophets both understand it and teach it. By this we see that
the faith of our fathers in the old Testament, and ours now in the new is
all one, although they differ as touching their outward obiectes. Which thing
Peter witnesses in the Acts when he says: which neither we nor our fathers
were able to bear. Acts. 15.10.11.
But we believe through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to be saved even as
they did. And Paul says: Our fathers did all drink of that spiritual rock
that followed them, 1. Cor. 15.4.
which rock was Christ. And Christ himself says: Abraham rejoiced to see
my day, John. 8.56.
and he savve it and was glad. Notwithstanding, the faith of the fathers was
grounded in Christ which was to come, as ours is now in Christ which is now
revealed. Abraham in his time was made righteous through faith in Christ to
come, but if he lived at this day, he should be made righteous by faith in
Christ now already revealed and present: Acts. 10.1.2.3.
Like as I said before of Cornelius, who at the first believed in Christ to
come, but being instructed by Peter, he believed that Christ was already come.
Therefore the diversity of times neither changes faith, nor the holy Ghost,
nor the gifts thereof. For there has been, is, and ever shall be one will, one
meaning and understanding concerning Christ, The faith of the fathers and of us
both one.
as well in the ancient fathers as in the faithful which are at this day and
shall come hereafter. So we also have as well Christ to come and believe in him,
as the fathers of the old Testament had. Coloss. 1.18. Revel. 1. 1. These.
4.15.16. Math. 24.
For we look for him to come again in the last day with glory to judge both
the quick and the dead, whom now we believe to be come already for our
salvation. Therefore this allegation of Paul offends none but those blind
and ignorant cauillers.

That, the place of Genesis may well be applied to faith in christ.
Paul therefore (as I have said) rightly alleges that place out of Genesis of
faith in Christ, when he speaks of the faith of Abraham. For all the promises
past, were contained in Christ to come. Therefore as well Abraham and the other
fathers, as also we are made righteous by faith in Christ: They by faith in him
to come, we by faith in him now present. For we entreat now of the nature and
manner of justification, which is all one both in them and us concerning Christ
to come and being come. It is enough therefore that Paul shows, that the law
justifies not, but only faith, whether it be in Christ to come, or in Christ
already come.

At this day also Christ to some is present, to other some he is to come. To al
beleuers he is present: To unbelievers he is not yet come, neither does he
profit them any thing at all: but if they hear the Gospel and believe that he
is present unto them, he justifies and saves them.

Verse. 7. Ye know therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of Abraham.
As if he would say: Ye know by this example of Abraham and by the plain
testimony of the scripture, that they are the children of Abraham which are of
faith, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, without any respect either unto the
law, or unto works, or to the carnal generation of the fathers. For not by the
law, but by the righteousness of faith the promise was made unto Abraham,
Abraham a father both of Jews and the Gentiles. Genes. 17.4. Romans 4.17.
that he should be heir of the world: that is to say, that in his seed all
the nations of the earth should be blessed, and that he should be called the
father of nations. And lest the Jews should falsely interpret this word
Nations, applying it unto themselves alone, the scripture preuenteth this and
says not only, a father of nations: but a father of many nations have I made
thee. Therefore Abraham is not only the father of the Jews, but also of the
Gentiles.

Hereby we may plainly see that the children of Abraham are not the children of
the flesh, but the children of faith, as Paul Romans 4. The children of Abraham
after the flesh, are not Abraham's children, but such as walk in the steps
of faith. Romans 4.11. Genes. 17.4. Romans 4.17. A begetting Abraham, and a
believing Abraham.
declares: who is the father of us all (as it is written: I have made thee a
father of many nations) even before God whom he did believe: So that Paul
makes two Abraham's, a begetting Abraham, and a believing Abraham. Abraham has
children and is a father of many nations. Where? before God, where he believes:
not before the world where he begets. For in the world he is the child of
Adam, a sinner, or (which is more) a worker of the righteousness of the law,
living after the rule of reason, that is, after the manner of men: but this
pertains nothing to the believing Abraham.

This example then of the believing Abraham comprehends also the holy
scripture which says that we are counted righteous by faith. This argument
therefore is strong and mighty two manner of ways, both for the example of
Abraham, and also for ye authority of ye scripture.

Verse. 8. For the scripture foreseing that God would justify the Gentiles
through faith.
The vain bragging of the Jews.
These things do pertain to the former argument. As if he should say: Ye Jews
do glory in the law above measure: ye highly commend Moses because God spoke
unto him in ye bush etc: As the Jews do proudly brag against us, (as I have
my self at sundry times heard) saying: ye Christians have Apostles, ye have a
Pope and ye have Bishops: but we Jews have Patriarchs, Prophets, yea we have
God him self, who spoke unto us in the bush, in Sinai where he gave unto us
the law, and in the temple etc. Such a glory and such an excellent testimony
allege ye for your selves against us, if ye can. To this answers Paul the
Apostle of the Gentiles: This your proud bragging and boasting is to no
purpose. For the scripture prevented it, and foresaw long before the law, yt
the Gentiles should not be justified by the law, but by the blessing of
Abraham's seed, which was promised unto him (as Paul says afterward).430.
years before the law was given. Now the law being given so many years after,
could not empech or abolish this promise of the blessing made unto Abraham, but
it has continued firm and shall continue for ever. What can the Jews
answer to this?

An argument grounded upon the certainty of time. Genes. 15.6. Genes. 22.16.
This argument grounded upon ye certainty of time, is very strong. The promise
of blessing is given unto Abraham.430. years before ye people of Israel
received the law. For it is said to Abraham: Because thou have believed God and
have given glory unto him, therefore thou shall be a father of many nations.
There Abraham by the promise of God is appointed a father of many nations, Romans
4.20.
and the inheritance of the world for his posterity and issue after him, is
given unto him before the law was published. Why do ye then brag, O ye
Galathians, yt ye obtain forgeuenes of sins, and are become children, and
do receive the inheritance through the law, which followed a long time, that
is to say.430. years after the promise.

Thus the false Apostles did advance the law and the glory thereof above
measure: but the promise made unto Abraham.430. years before the law was
given, they neglected and despised, and would in no wise know that Abraham (of
whom they gloried notwithstanding as the father of their whole nation) being
yet uncircumcised, and living so many ages before the law, was made righteous
by no other means then by faith only, as the scripture most plainly
witnesses: Genes. 15.6. Romans 4.18.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. Afterward,
when he was now accounted righteous because of his faith, the scripture makes
mention of circumcision in the.17. of Genesis, where it says: Genes. 17.1^.
This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you etc. With this
argument Paul mightily conuinceth the false Apostles, Abraham was justified
before Circumcision and.430. years before the law.
and shows plainly that Abraham was justified by faith only, both without
and before circumcision, and also.430. years before the law. This self same
argument he handles in the fourth chapter to the Romans: to wit, that
righteousness was imputed to Abraham before Circumcision, Romans 4.10.11.12.
and that he was righteous being yet uncircumcised: much more then was he
righteous before the law.

Therefore (says Paul) the scripture did well provide against this your
glorious bragging of the righteousness of the law and works. When? before
Circumcision and before the law. Galat. 3.8.
For the law was given 430. years after the promise, whereas Abraham was not
only justified without the law and before the law, but also dead and buried:
and his righteousness without the law did not only flourish until the law,
but also shall flourish even to the end of the world. If then the father of the
whole Jewish nation was made righteous without the law and before the law,
much more are the children made righteous by the same means that their father
was. Therefore righteousness comes by faith only, and not by the law.

Verse. 8. Preached the Gospel before unto Abraham saying: Genes. 15.6. Romans 4
3.
in thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed.
The Jews do not only lightly pass over, but also do deride and with their
wicked gloses do corrupt these excellent and notable sentences: Abraham
believed God etc. The Jews corrupt the scriptures.
I have appointed thee a father etc, and such like, which highly commend faith
and contain promises of spiritual things. For they are blind and hard
hearted, and therefore they see not that these places do entreat of faith
toward God, and of righteousness before God. With like malice also they dallye
out this notable place of the spiritual blessing: Genes. 12.13. Acts. 3.23.
In thee all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. For (say they) to bless
signifies nothing else but to praise, What the Jews call blessing.
to pray for prosperity, and to be glorious in the sight of the world. After
this manner they say, that the Jew which is borne of the seed of Abraham, is
blessed: and the proselyte or stranger which worshipeth the God of the Jews
and joins himself unto them, is also blessed. Therefore they think that
Blessing is nothing else but praise and glory in this world, that is to say,
that a man may glory and vaunte that he is of the stock and family of
Abraham. But this is to corrupt and pervert the sentences of the scriptures,
and not to expound them. By these words: Abraham believed, Paul defines and
sets before our eyes a spiritual Abraham, faithful, righteous, and having
the promise of God: an Abraham (I say) which is not in error, and in the old
flesh: which is not borne of Adam, but of the holy Ghost. And of this Abraham
renewed by faith and regenerate by the holy Ghost, speaks the scripture, and
pronounces of him, that he should be a father of many nations: Also, that all
the Gentiles should be given unto him for an inheritance, when it says: In
thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

The scripture then attributes no righteousness, but unto the believing Abraham:
and it speaks of such an Abraham, as he is accounted before God. Therefore
such sentences of the scripture do set forth unto us a new Abraham, A new
Abraham.
which is separate from the carnal marriage and bed, and from the carnal
generation, and is taken for such a one as he is before God, that is to say,
believing and justified through faith, and to whom now God makes this promise
because of his faith: Thou shall be a father of many nations. Again: In thee
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed And this is ye meaning of Paul
where he shows how the scripture preuenteth the vain presumption and proud
bragges of the Jews as touching the law. For the inheritance of the Gentiles
was given unto Abraham, not by the law and circumcision, but long before the
same, by the only righteousness of faith.

Therefore, whereas the Jews will be counted and called blessed because they are
the children and seed of Abraham, it is nothing else but a vain glorious
brag. It is (no doubt) a great prerogative and glory before the w^^ld to be
borne of Abraham's seed, as Paul shows. It is a great glory to be borne of
Abraham's sede.
Romans 9: but not so before God. Wherefore the Jews do wickedly pervert this
place concerning the Blessing, in applying it only to a carnal Blessing, and
do great injury to the scripture which speaks most manifestly of the
spiritual Blessing before God, and neither can nor ought otherwise to be
understand. This is then the true meaning of this place: In thee shall be
blessed. In which thee? The exposition of these words: In thee shall be blessed.
In thee Abraham believing, or in thy faith, or thy seed which is to come:
that is to say, in Christ in whom thou beleuest, all the nations of the earth
(I say) shall be blessed: that is, all the nations shall be thy blessed children,
even like as thou art blessed, as it is written: So shall thy seed be. Genes.
15.5.


Hereof it follows that the Blessing and Faith of Abraham is the same that
ours is: that Abraham's Christ is our Christ: Abraham's faith and out all one,
Io. 3.5 6.
that Christ died as well for the sins of Abraham as for us. Abraham which
savve my day and rejoiced. Io. 8. Therefore all sound but one thing. We may
not suffer this word Blessing to be corrupted. The Jews look but through a
veil into the scripture, We must mark diligently what is set out to us in
the promises of the law
and therefore they understand not what or whereof the promise is which was
made to the fathers: Which we notwtstanding ought to consider above all things.
So shall we see that God speaks to Abraham the Patriarch, not of the law nor
of things to be done, but of things to be believed: that is to say, that God
speaks unto him of promises which are apprehended by faith. Now, what does
Abraham? He believes those promises. And what does God to that believing
Abraham? He imputes faith unto him for righteousness, and adds further many
more promises, as: Genes. 15.^. Genes. 17 4. Genes. 15.5.
I am thy defender. In thee shall all nations be blessed. Thou shall be a
father of many nations. So shall thy seed be. These are invincible arguments,
against the which nothing can be said, if the places of the holy scripture be
thoroughly considered.

Verse. 9. So then they which are of faith, are blessed with faithful
Abraham.
All the weight and force lies in these words: with faithful Abraham. For
he puts a plain difference between Abraham and Abraham, of one and the
self same person making two. As if he said: A vvorking Abraham and a believing
Abraham.
There is a working Abraham and there is a believing Abraham. With the working
Abraham we have nothing to do. For if he be justified by works, he has to
rejoice, but not with God. Let the Jews glory as much as they will of that
begetting Abraham, which is a worker, Romans 4.3.
is circumcised, and keeps the law: but we glory of the faithful Abraham,
of whom the scripture says, that he received the Blessing of righteousness
through his faith, not only for himself, but also for all those which believe
like as he believed: And so the world was promised to Abraham, because he
believed. Therefore all the world is blessed. that is to say, receaueth
imputation of righteousness, if it believe as Abraham did.

Wherefore the Blessing is nothing else but the promise of the Gospel. And, that
all nations are blessed, is as much to say, as all nations shall hear the
Blessing, That all nations are blessed.
that is, the promise of God shall be preached and published by the Gospel
among all nations. And out of this place the Prophets have drawn many
prophesies by a spiritual understanding. Psalm. 2.8.
As Psalm. 2: Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession. And again, Psalm.
19.3.
Psalm. 19: Their voice has gone through all the earth. Briefly, all the
prophesies of ye kingdom of Christ and of ye publishing of the Gospel
throughout all the world, have sprung out of this place: In thee shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. The Prophets diligently vvaied those promises
that were made unto the fathers.
Wherefore, to say that the nations are blessed, is nothing else, but that
righteousness is freely given unto them, or that they are counted righteous
before God, not through the law, but by the hearing of faith: For Abraham was
not justified, by any other means, then by hearing the word of promise, of
blessing, and of grace. Therefore, like as Abraham obtained imputation of
righteousness by the hearing of faith: even so did all the Gentiles obtain and
yet do obtain the same. For the same word that was first declared unto
Abraham, was also afterward published to all the Gentiles.

Hereby then we see that to bless signifies nothing else, but (as I said
before) to preach and teach the word of the Gospel, to confess Christ, and
to spread abroad the knowledge of him among all the Gentiles. And this is the
office of the Priesthod and continual sacrifice of the Church in the new
testament, The office of the priesthod of the church of Christ.
which distributeth this Blessing by preaching and by ministering of the
sacraments, by comforting the broken hearted, by distributing the word of
grace, which Abraham had and which was also his Blessing: which when he
believed, he received ye Blessing. Our blessing is spiritual and not corporal,
as the Jews dream.
So we also believing the same, are blessed. And this blessing is a great
glory, not before the world, but before God. For we have heard that our sins
are forgeuen us, and that we are accepted of God, that God is our father, and
that we are his children, with whom he will not be angry, but will deliver us
from sin, from death and all evils, and will give unto us righteousness, life
and eternal salvation. Of this Blessing (as I have said) do the Prophets
preach in every place, who did not so coldly consider those promises made unto
the fathers as the wicked Jews did, and as the popish Scholemen and Sectaries
do at this day, The diligence of the Prophets. Hoseas. 13.14.
but did read them and way them with great diligence, and also drew out of
those promises whatsoever they prophesied of Christ or his kingedome. So the
prophecy of Hoseas. 13. chapter: I will redeem them from the power of the
grave: I will deliver them from death: O death I will be thy death: O grave I
will be thy destruction, and such like places of the other Prophets did all
spring out of these promises, in which God promised to the fathers the brusing
of the serpents head and the blessing of all nations. Genes. 3.


Moreover, if the nations be blessed, that is to say, if they be accounted
righteous before God, it follows yt they are free from sin and death, and
are made pertakers of righteousness, salvation, and everlasting life, not for
their works, but for their faith in Christ. Therefore that place of Genesis
the.12. chapter: Genes. 12.^.
In thee shall all the nations be blessed, speaks not of the blessing of the
mouth, but of such a blessing as belongs to the imputation of righteousness,
which is available before God, and redemeth from the curse of sin, and from
all those evils that do accumpany sin. Now, The Blessing is received only
by faith
this Blessing is received only by faith. For the text says plainly: Abraham
Believed and it was accounted unto him for righteousness. Wherefore it is a
mere spiritual Blessing, and there is no Blessing in deed but this: which
although it be cursed in the world (as in deed it is) yet is it available
before God. This is therefore a mighty place, that they which are of faith are
become partakers of this promise of the Blessing made unto the believing
Abraham. And by this means Paul preuenteth the cauillation of the Jews,
which brag of a begetting and a working Abraham and just before men, and not
of a believing Abraham.

Now, like as the Jews do glory only of a working Abraham, even so the Pope
sets out only a working Christ, The Pope sets Christ forth as an example
and not as a gift, Io. 13.1^.
or rather an example of Christ. He that will live godly (says he) must walk
as Christ has walked, according to his own saying in the.13. of John: I have
given you an example, that you should do even as I have done to you. We deny
not but that the faithful ought to follow the example of Christ, and to work
well: but we say that they are not justified thereby before God. And Paul does
not here reason what we ought to do, but by what means we are made righteous.
In this matter we must set nothing else before our eyes, but Jesus Christ
dyinge for our sins, and risinge again for our righteousness, and him must we
apprehende by faith, In the matter of justification we must look upon Christ
as a gift and not as an example.
as a gift and not as an example. This reason understands not, and therefore
as the Jews follow a working and not a believing Abraham, even so the Papists
and all that seek righteousness by works do behold and apprehend, not a
justifying, but a working Christ, and by this means they swerve from Christ,
from righteousness and salvation. And like as the Jews which were saved, ought
to follow the believing Abraham: so we also, if we will be delivered from our
sins and be saved, must take hold of the justifying and saving Christ, whom
Abraham him self also by faith did apprehend and through him was blessed.

It was in deed a great glory that Abraham received circumcision at the
commandment of God, that he was endued with excellent virtues, that he obeyed
God in all things: as it is also a great praise and felicity to follow the
example of Christ working, to love thy neighbor, to do good to them that hurt
thee, to pray for thine enemies, patiently to bear the ingratitude of those
which render evil for good: but all this avails nothing to righteousness
before God. The excellent deeds and virtues of Abraham were not the cause that
he was counted righteous before God: So likewise the imitation and following of
the example of Christ does not make us righteous before God. For, to make us
righteous before God, there is a far more excellent price required, which is
neither the righteousness of man, nor yet of the law. Here we must needs have
Christ to bless us and save us: like as Abraham had him to be his blesser and
Savior. How? Not by works, but by faith. Wherefore, as the believing Abraham is
a thing far differing from ye working Abraham: so is Christ blessing and
redeming a thing far differing from Christ working or giving example. And
Paul here speaks of Christ redeming and Abraham believing, and not of Christ
giving example, or of Abraham working. Therefore he adds purposely and that
with great vehemency: They which are of faith are blessed with faithful
Abraham. Galat 3.9.


Wherefore we must separate the believing and the working Abraham as far
asunder, as there is distance betwixt heaven and earth. A man believing in
Christ is altogether a divine man, the child of God, the inheritour of the
world, a conqueror of sin, death, the world and the Devil: therefore he can
not be praised and magnified enough. Let us not suffer this faithful Abraham
to lie hid in his grave, as he is hid from the Jews: but let us highly extol
and magnify him, and let us fill both heaven and earth with his name: so that
in respect of this faithful Abraham, we see nothing at al in the working
Abraham. For when we speak of this faithful Abraham, we are in heaven. But
afterward, doing those things which the working Abraham did, which were
carnal and earthly, and not divine and heavenly (but in as much as they were
given unto him of God) we are among men in earth. The believing Abraham
therefore fills both heaven and earth. So every Christian through his faith
fills heaven and earth, so that besides it he ought to behold nothing.

Now, Paul of this word, [shalbe blessed] gathers a contrary argument. For
the scripture is full of oppositions or contrary relations. And it is a great
point of cunning, to mark well these kinds of speech in the scriptures, and by
them to expound the sentences thereof: as here this word blessing by and by
infers the contrary: that is to say, malediction. All nations through faith
are blessed: therefore with out faith all are accursed.
For when the scripture says that all nations are blessed in faith or with
faithful Abraham, it follows necessarily, that all, as well Jews as Gentiles
are accursed without faith, or without this believing Abraham. For ye promise of
Blessing was given to Abraham, that in him all nations should be blessed. There
is no Blessing then to be looked for, but only in the promise made unto
Abraham, now published by the Gospel throughout the whole world. Therefore
whatsoever is without that Blessing, is accursed. And this Paul shows plainly
when he says:

Verse. 10. For as many as are of the works of the law are accursed.
Here ye see that the Curse is as it were a floude swallowing up whatsoever is
without Abraham: that is to say, without faith and the promise of the Blessing
of Abraham. Now, if the law it self given by Moses at the commandment of
God, makes them subject to the Curse which are under it, much more shall the
laws and traditions devised by man's brain do the same. He therefore that
will avoid the Curse, must lay hold upon the promise of Blessing, or upon the
faith of Abraham, or else shall he abide under the Curse. Upon this place
therefore [shalbe blessed in thee] it follows, yt all nations, whether they
were before Abraham, in his time, or after him, are accursed and shall remain
under the Curse for ever, unless they be blessed in ye faith of Abraham, unto
whom the promise of Blessing was given to be published by his seed throughout
the whole world.

To know these things it is very necessary, for they help greatly to comfort
troubled and afflicted consciences: The righteousness of faith and civil
righteousness.
moreover they teach us to separate the righteousness of Faith from the
righteousness of the flesh or civil righteousness. For we must note that Paul
here is in hand, not with a matter of policy, but with a matter divine and
spiritual before God, lest any mad brain should cavil, and say that he
curses and condemns politic laws and Magistrates. Here all the Sophisters
and popish Scholemen are dumme and can say nothing. Therefore the readers must
be admonished that in this place there is nothing handled as touching civil
laws, Civil laws and ordinances are good, and of God.
or touching manners and matters political (which are the ordinances of God
and good things, and the scripture elsewhere approves and commends the
same), but of a spiritual righteousness, by which we are justified before God,
and are called the children of God in the kingdom of heaven. To be brief,
there is nothing handled here concerning the bodily life, but concerding
everlasting life, where no blessing is to be hoped for, or righteousness to be
sought either through the law, or traditions, or whatsoever can be named in
this life, besides the promise of Abraham's Blessing. Let civil laws and
ordinances abide in their right place and order: let the magistrate make good
and notable laws, yet notwithstanding they deliver no man from the Curse of
Gods law. The kingdom of Babylon ordained of God, and by him committed unto
Kings, had excellent laws, and all nations were commanded to obey them:
notwithstanding this obedience of the laws did not save it from the Curse of
the law of God. In like manner we obey the laws of Princes and magistrates,
but we are not thereby made righteous before God: For here we are in an other
matter.

It is not without cause that I do so earnestly urge this distinction. The
righteousness of faith and civil righteousness are easily confounded.
For it is very necessary to know it. Albeit there are very few that do
mark it and understand it in deed. Again, the confounding and mingling
together of the heavenly and civil righteousness, is very easy. In the civil
righteousness we must have regard to laws and works, but in the spiritual,
divine and heavenly righteousness, we must utterly reject all laws and works,
and set the only promise and Blessing before our eyes, which lays before us
Christ the geuer of this Blessing and of grace, and our only Savior. So that
this spiritual righteousness, secluding the law and all works, looks only
unto the grace and blessing which is given by Christ, as it was promised to
Abraham and of him believed.

Hereby we may plainly see, that this argument is invincible. For if we must
hope to receive this blessing by Christ alone, then it must needs follow of
the contrary that it is not received by the law. For the blessing was given to
faithful Abraham before the law and without the law. Now, like as Abraham
believed in Christ to come, the geuer of the Blessing: so and by the same faith,
we believe in Christ being come, and so are we now justified by faith, as
Abraham was then iustied by faith. They therefore which are under the law are
not blessed, but do remain under the Curse.

This the Pope and his proud Prelates neither do nor can believe, neither can
they abide this doctrine. Yet must we not hold our peace, but must confess
the truth and say, that the Papacy is accursed: yea all the laws and civil
ordinances of the Emperor are accursed: For according to Paul, whatsoever is
without the promise and faith of Abraham, is accursed. When our adversaries
hear this, by and by they pervert and sclau^der our words, How the
adversaries sclauder and wrest our words.
as though we taught that the Magistrates should not be honored, but that we
raise up seditions against ye Emperor, that we condemn all laws, that we
overthrow and destroy commonweals etc. But they do us great wrong. For we
put a difference between the corporal and the spiritual Blessing, and we say
that the Emperor is blessed with a corporal blessing. For to have a kingdom,
laws, and civil ordinances, to have a wife, children, house and lands is a
blessing. For all these things are the good creatures and gifts of God. The
corporal blessing delivers us not from sins.
But we are not delivered from the everlasting Curse by this corporal
blessing, which is but temporal and must have an end. Therefore we condemn
not laws, neither do we stir up sedition against the Emperor: but we teach
that he must be obeyed, that he must be feared, reverenced and honored, but
yet ciuily. But when we speak of the blessing after the manner of Divines,
then we say boldly with Paul, that all things which are without the faith
and promise of Abraham, are accursed and abide under that heavenly and
everlasting Curse. For there we must look for an other life after this, and an
other Blessing after this corporal Blessing.

To conclude, Corporal things are the good creatures of God.
we say that all corporal things are the good creatures of God. Therefore (as
I have said) to have wife, children, goods, to have politic laws and orders,
are the good blessings of God in their place: that is to say, they are
temporal blessings belonging to this life. But these blessings the
Iusticiaries and Lawworkers of all ages, as the Jews, Papists and Sectaries,
and such like, do confound and mingle together. For they put no difference
between corporal and spiritual blessings. Therefore they say: We have a
law, and this law is good, holy, and righteous: therefore we are justified
through it. The law of sin, wrath, and death.
Who denies but that the law is good, holy, and righteous? And yet is it also
the law of malediction, of sin, of wrath, and of death. Therefore we make
here a distinction between the corporal and spiritual Blessing, and say,
that God has a double Blessing: one corporal for this life, Corporal
blessings are to be sundred from spiritual blessings.
and an other spiritual for the everlasting life. Therefore to have riches,
children and such like, we say it is a blessing, but in his degree, that is to
say, in this life present. But as touching life everlasting, it is not enough
to have corporal blessings: for the very wicked do therein abound most of
all. It is not sufficient that we have civil righteousness or the righteousness
of the law: for therein also the wicked do specially flourish. These things
God distributeth in the world freely, and bestows them both upon the good and
bad, like as he suffers the Sun to rise both upon the good and the evil,
God bestows his gifts both upon the good and evil. Romans 1.20.
and sends rain upon the righteous and unrighteous: for he is liberal unto
all. And to him it is a small matter to put all creatures under the feet of
the wicked. The Creature is subject to vanity, not of his own will. Romans 8.
They therefore which have but only these corporal blessings, are not the
children of God, blessed before God spiritually, as was Abraham: but they are
under the Curse, as Paul here says: Whosoever is under the works of the
law, is under the Curse.

Paul might have said by a general proposition: Whatsoever is without faith,
is under the Curse. He says not so, but he takes that which besides faith is
the best, the greatest, and most excellent among all corporal blessings of the
world: to wit, the law of God. That law (says he) in deed is holy and
given of God: notwithstanding it does nothing else but make all men subject to
the Curse and keep them under the same. The effects of the law.
Now, if the law of God do make men subject to the Curse, much more do the
inferior laws and blessings. And that it may be plainly understand what Paul
calls it to be under the Curse, he declares by this testimony of the
scripture, saying:

Deuteronomy. 27.2^.
Verse. 10. For it is vvrytten: Cursed is every man that continues not in all
things which are vvrytten in the book of the law, to do them.
Paul goes about to prove by this testimony taken out of the 27. of
Deuteronomie, that all men which are under the law or under the works of the
law, are accursed, or under the Curse: that is to say, under sin, the wrath
of God, and everlasting death. For he speaks not (as I have said before) of a
corporal, but of a spiritual Curse, which must needs be the Curse of
everlasting death and hell fire. And this is a wonderful manner of proving. For
Paul proves this affirmative sentence which he boroweth out of Moses:
Whosoever are of the works of the law are under the Curse: by this
negative: Cursed is every one that abides not in all things etc. Now these two
sentences of Paul and Moises seem clean contrary. Paul says: whosoever
shall do the works of the law, is accursed. Moses says: who so ever shall
not do the works of the law, are accursed. How shall these two sayings be
reconciled together? or else, (which is more) how shall the one be proved by
the other? In deed no man can well understand this place, unless he also know
and understand the article of justification.

Paul (no dout) being among the Galathians, had before more largely entreated
of this matter: for else they could not have understand it, seeing he does here
but touch it by the way. But because they had heard him declare the same unto
them before, they being now again put in mind thereof, do call it to
remembrance. And these two sentences are not repugnant, but do very well
agree. We also do teach in like manner: That the hearers of the law are not
righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Romans 2.
Romans 2.13. James. 1.2^.
And contrariwise: They that are of the works of the law, are under the
Curse. For the article of justification teaches, that whatsoever is without
the faith of Abraham, is accursed. Romans 8 4. Sentences in the scriptures
sometime seem to be contrary.
And yet notwithstanding the righteousness of the law must be fulfilled in us.
Romans 8. To a man that is ignorant of the doctrine of Faith, these two
sentences seem to be quite contrary.

Wherefore, above all things, we must mark well whereupon Paul entreats in
this place, wherabout he goes, and how he looks into Moses. He is here (as
before I have often said) in a spiritual matter, separated from policy and
from all laws, and he looks into Moises with other eyes, then ye hypocrites
and false apostles do, and expounds the law spiritually. To do the law.

Two manner of doers of the law.


Wherefore the whole effect of the matter consists in this word [to doe].
Now, to do the law, is not only to do it outwardly, but to do it truly
and perfectly. There be two sorts then of doers of the law: The first are they
which are of the works of the law, against whom Paul strives throughout all
this Epistle. The other sort are they which are of Faith, of whom we will
speak hereafter. Now, to be of the law or of the works of the law, and to
be of Faith, are quite contrary, yea even as contrary as God and the Devil,
sin and righteousness, death and life. For they are of the law which would be
made righteous by the law. To be of the law.

To be of faith.


They are of faith, which do assuredly trust that they are made righteous
through only mercy for Christ's sake. He which says that righteousness is of
faith, curses and condemns the righteousness of works. Contrariwise, he
which says that righteousness is of the law, curses and condemns the
righteousness of faith: Therefore they are altogether contrary the one to the
other.

To do the law.
He that considers this, shall easily understand, that to perform the law,
is not to do that which is commanded in the law in outward show only (as the
hypocrites imagine) but in spirit: that is to say, truly and perfectly. A
fulfiller of the law after the Papists opinion.
But where shall we find him that will so accomplish the law? Let us see him
and we will praise him. Here our adversaries have their answer ready, saying:
The doers of the law, shall be justified. Romans 2. Very well. But let us first
define who be these doers of the law. These be the works preparatorie, as the
Papists call them, which go before justification as the efficient cause thereof.
They call him a doer of the law, which does the works of the law, and so by
those works going before, is made righteous. This is not to do the law
according to Paul: for (as I have said) to be of the works of the law, and to
be of faith are contrary things. Therefore to seek to be justified by the
works of the law, is to deny the righteousness of faith. Wherefore these
Iusticiaries and Lawworkers when they do the law, even in so doing deny the
righteousness of Faith, and sin against the first, the second, and third
commaunment, The wickedness and error of meritmongers.
yea even against the whole law. For God commands that we should worship
him in Faith, and in the fear of his name. These, on the contrary make
righteousness of works without faith and against faith: therefore in that they
do the law, they do clean contrary to the law, and sin most deadly. For
they deny the righteousness of God, his mercy and his promises: they deny Christ
withal his benefits, Romans 10.2.
and in their heart they stablish, not the righteousness of the law (which they
understand not, and much less do it): but a mere fantasy and Idol of the
law. Therefore we must needs say, that not only in doing of the law they
perform it not, but also they sin, and deny the divine Majesty in all his
promises. And to this end the law was not given.

Wherefore, they not understanding the law, abuse the law, and as Paul
says: Romans 10.3.
They being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to stablish
their own righteousness, have not submitted them selves to the righteousness of
God. Romans 10. For they are blind, and know not how they ought to judge of
faith and of the promises, and therefore without all understanding they rush
into the Scripture, taking hold but of one part thereof: to wit, the law, and
this they imagine that they are able to fulfill by works. But this is a very
dream, a bewytching and illusion of the heart: and that righteousness of the
law, which they think they do fulfill, is nothing else in very deed, but
Idolatry and blasphemy against God. Therefore it can not be but they must
needs abide under the Curse.

It is impossible therefore that we should do the law in such forte as they
imagine, much less yt we should be justified thereby. This thing first the law
it self specifieth, which has a clean contrary effect: The effect of the
law.
For it increases sin, it works wrath, it accuses, it terrifieth and
condemns. How then should it justify? Moreover, the promise also shows ye
very same thing. For it was said unto Abraham: In thee shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed. Genes. 17.
There is no blessing therefore but in the promise of Abraham: and if thou be
without that promise, thou art under the Curse. If thou be under the Curse,
thou fulfillest not the law, because thou art under sin, the Devil, and
everlasting death: all which do assuredly follow the Curse. To conclude. If
righteousness should come by the law, then should the promise of God be in
vain, and in vain should he pour out his blessing in so great abundance.
Therefore when God saw that we could not fulfill the law, he provided for
this long before the law, and promised the Blessing to Abraham, saying: In
thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And so has he testified
that all the nations should be blessed, not by the law, but through the
promise made unto Abraham. They therefore that lay hold on the law, and seek
to be justified thereby, despising the promise, are accursed.

Wherefore [to doe] is first of all, to believe, and so through faith to
perform the law. We must first receive the holy Ghost, To fulfill the law.
wherewith we being lightened and made new creatures, begin to do the law,
that is to say, to love God and our neighbor. But the holy Ghost is not
received through the law (for they which are under der ye law, as Paul says,
are under the Curse): Gala^. ^.
but by the hearing of faith, that is to say, through ye promise. We must be
blessed only with Abraham in the promise made unto him, How the law is to be
done.
and in his faith. Therefore before all things, we must hear and receive the
promise, which sets out Christ, and offers him to all beleuers: and when
they have taken hold upon him by faith, then the holy Ghost is given unto them
for his sake. Then do they love God and their neighbor, then do they good
works and carry the cross patiently. This is to do the law truly and in
deed: otherwise the law remains always undone. Wherefore, if thou will
define truly and plainly what it is to do the law, it is nothing else, but to
believe in Jesus Christ, and when the holy Ghost is received through faith in
Christ, to work those things which are commanded in the law: and otherwise
we are not able to perform the law. For the scripture says, that there is no
blessing without the promise, To do the law.
no not in the law. It is impossible therefore to perform the law without the
promise, for the Blessing must needs go wtall, which is the preaching and
publishing of Christ, who was promised to Abraham, that the world should be
blessed through him: otherwise, we shall never perform the law.

This word, Doer of the law, without the promise of the Gospel is a fained
term
There is not one therefore to be found in all the world, unto whom this title,
to be called a doer of the law, appertains without the promise of the
Gospel. Wherefore this word [doer of the law] is a fained term, which no man
understands unless he be without and above the law in the Blessing and faith
of Abraham. So that the true doer of the law is he, A doer of the law.
who receiving ye holy Ghost through faith in Christ, begins to love God and
to do good unto his neighbor. So yt this word [to do the lavv] must comprehend
faith also which makes the tree: and when the tree is made, then follow the
fruits. The tree must be first, and then the fruit. For the apples make not the
tree, but the tree makes the apples. So faith first makes the person, which
afterward brings forth works. Therefore to do the law without faith, is to
make the apples of wood and earth without the tree: which is not to make
apples, but mere fantasies. In divine matters the doer is framed through faith
before there be any deeds.
Contrariwise, if the tree be made, that is to say, the person or doer, which
is made through faith in Christ, works will follow. For the doer must needs be
before the things which are done, and not the things which are done before the
doer.

The doer then is not so called of the things that are done, but of the things
that are to be done. The godly are not made righteous by doing righteous things.
For Christians are not made righteous in doing righteous things, but being
now made righteous by faith in Christ, they do righteous things. In politic
matters it comes so to pass, that the doer or worker is made of the things
which are wrought, as a man in playing the carpenter becomes a carpenter: but
in divine matters the workers are not made of the works going before, but the
persons made and framed already by faith which is in Christ, are now become
doers and workers. Of such speaks Paul when he says: The doers of the law
shall be justified, that is, Romans 2.13.
shall be counted righteous.

Yea, The doctrine of the Scholemen or Sophistes.
the very Sophisters and popish Scholemen are compelled to confess, and so
they teach also, that a moral work outwardly done, if it be not done with a
pure heart, a good will, and true intent, it is but hypocrisy. And hereof
comes the proverb among the Germans: Such a cowle covers many a knave.
For the vilest and the wickedst knave in the world may counterfeit the same
works that a godly man works by faith. Judas did the same works that the
other Apostles did. What fault was there in the works of Judas, seeing he did
the self same works that the other Apostles did? Here mark what the
Sophister answers out of his moral Philosophy. Although he did the self
same works (says he) which the other Apostles did, notwithstanding, because
the person was reprobate, and the judgment of reason perverse, therefore his
works were hypocritical and not true, as were the works of the other
Apostles, how like soever they seemed to be in outward show. Wherefore they
them selves are constrained to grant that in politic and external matters
works do not justify unless there be joined withal an upright heart, will,
and judgment. In policy the work is not judged to be good, except it be
done with a good will much more in Divinity.
How much more are they compelled to confess the same in spiritual matters,
where, before all things, there must be a knowledge of God and faith which may
purify the heart? They walk therefore in works and in the righteousness of
the law, as Judas did in the works of the Apostles: not understanding what they
say or what they affirm. And although Paul says plainly every where that
the law justifies not, The effects of the law.
but causes wrath, utters sin, reueileth the indignation and judgment of
God, and threateneth everlasting death: yet notwithstanding reading these
things they see them not, much less do they understand them. Therefore they
deserve not to be called hypocrites, but visours and shadows of disguised
hypocrites, most miserably bewitched in that they dream that they are made
righteous by the works of the law. Wherefore (as I have said) this word
[Doer of the lavv] as they define it, is an imagined term, a very monster, and
no where to be found.

Wherefore, when Paul proves this place: Whosoever are are of the works of
the law are under the curse, Galath. 3.
by this sentence of Moises: Cursed is every one that abides not in all that
is vvrytten in this book: he proves not one contrary by an other, as at the
first sight it may appear, but he proves it rightly and in true order. For
Moises means and teaches the self same thing that Paul does, when he
says: Cursed is every one which shall not do all etc. But no man does
them: therefore whosoever are of the works of the law keep not the law. If
they keep it not, they are under the curse. But seeing there be two sorts of
men that are doers of the law (as before I have said,) true doers and
hypocrites, the true doers must be separated from the hypocrites. The true
doers of the law are they which through Faith are the good tree before the
fruit, doers and workers before the works. Of these speaks Moises also: and
except they be such, they are under the Curse. But the hypocrites are not of
this sort: for they have this opinion, that they will obtain righteousness
through their works, and thereby make the person just and acceptable. For thus
they think: We that are sinners and unrighteous, will be made righteous. How
shall that be? By good works. Therefore they do even like as a foolish
builder which goes about of the rouffe to make the foundation: of the fruits
to make the tree. For when they seek to be justified by works, of the
works they would make the worker, which is directly against Moises, which
makes such a worker subject to the curse as well as Paul does. Therefore
whiles they go about to do the law, they not only do it not, but also
deny (as I have said) the first commandment, The wickedness and error of
hypocrites.
the promises of God, the promised Blessing of Abraham: they renounce Faith,
and they go about to make them selves blessed by their own works: that is to
say, to make them selves righteous, to deliver them selves from sin and
death, to overcome the Devil, and by violence to lay hold upon the kingdom
of heaven. And this is plainly to renounce God, and to set them selves in the
place of God. For all these are the works of the divine Majesty alone, and
not of any creature either in heaven or in earth.

Hereupon Paul was able easily to foreshewe out of the first commandment,
the abominations that were to come, which Antichrist should bring into the
Church. For all they which teach that any other worship is necessary to
salvation, The worship of the first commandment.
then that which God requires of us by the first commandment, which is the
fear of God, Faith and the love of God, are plain Antichrists and set them
selves in the place of God. That such should come, Christ him self foretold,
when he says in the xxiiii. Chapter of Matthew: Many shall come in my name,
saying: I am Christ. Math. 24.5.
So we also at this day may boldly and easily pronounce, that who soever
seeks righteousness by works without faith, The godly judge al things.
denies God and makes him self God. For thus he thinks: If I do this
work, I shall be righteous, I shall be a conqueror of sin, death, the
Devil, the wrath of God, and of hell, and shall obtain life everlasting. And
what is this else (I pray you) but to challenge that work unto him self which
does belong to God alone, and to show in deed that he him self is God?
Therefore it is an easy matter for us to prophecy, and most certainly to
Judge of all those which are without faith, that they are not only Idolaters,
but very Idols, which deny God and set them selves in the place of God. Upon
the same ground Peter also prophecieth when he says: 2. Pet. 2.1.^.
There shall be amongst you false teachers, which privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, and shall deny the Lord etc. and make merchandise of the
people.

And in the old testament all the prophesies against Idolatry sprang out of
the first commandment. For all the wicked kings and Prophets, with all the
unfaithful people, did nothing else but that which the Pope and all hypocrites
always do. They, contemning the first commandment and worship appointed of
God, and despising the promise of Abraham's seed, even that seed in whom all
nations should be blessed and sanctified, ordained a wicked worship clean
contrary to the word of God, and said: With this worship will we serve God
and set out his praise, Exodus 32.4. The two golden calves of Jeroboam. 1.
Kings. 12.28.
which has brought us out of the land of Egypt. So Jeroboam made two golden
calves and said: Behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the
land of Egypt. This he said of the true God which had redeemed Israel, and
yet both he and all the people were Idolaters: For they worshipped God contrary
to the first commandment. They only regarded the work: which being done,
they counted them selves righteous before God. And what was this else, but to
deny God him self, whom they confessed with their mouth and said that he had
brought them out of the land of Egypt. Paul speaks of such Idolaters when
he says: Romans ^.
They confess that they know God, but in their deeds they deny him.

Wherefore all hypocrites and idolaters go about to do those works which do
properly pertain to the divine majesty, and do belong to Christ only and
alone. Hypocrites go about to do that thing which belongs only to Christ.
In deed they say not in plain words, I am God, I am Christ: and yet in very
deed they proudly challenge unto themselves the Divinity and office of Christ,
and therefore it is as much in effect as if they said: I am Christ, I am a
Savior, not only of my self, The doctrine of the Monks.
but also of others. This the Monks have not only taught, but also have made
the whole world to believe: to wit, that they are able, not only to make them
selves righteous through their hypocritical holiness, The Pope chalengeth a
Divinity or Divine power as well as god himself.
but also others unto whom they communicate the same: whereas notwithstanding
it is the proper and only office of Christ to justify the sinner. The Pope in
like manner, by publishing and spreading his divinity throughout the whole
world, has denied and utterly buried the office and Divinity of Christ.

The use of the doctrine of faith,
It is expedient that these things should be well taught and well weyed, for
thereby we may learn to judge of the whole Christian doctrine, and ye life of
man: also to confirm men's consciences: to understand all prophesies and all
the holy scriptures, and rightly to judge of all other things. He that knows
all these things rightly, may certainly judge that the Pope is Antichrist, The
Pope is Antichrist.
because he teaches a far other manner of worship then the first table
sets out. He may perfectly know and understand, what it is to deny God, to
deny Christ, and what Christ means when he says: Math. 24.5.
Many shall come in my name, saying, 2. These. 2.4. Math. 24.15. Mar. 13.14.
Luc. 22.20. Dan. 9.27.
I am Christ: What it is to be against God, and to be lifted up above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped: What it signifies that Antichrist
sits in the temple of God, shevving himself as God: What it is to see the
abomination of desolation standing in the holy place etc.

What a mischeuous thing hypocrisy is.
Now, hereof spring all these mischiefs, that this cursed hypocrisy will not
be made righteous by the divine Blessing, nor created a new of God the
creator. It will in no wise be a patient, or suffer any thing to be wrought in
her: but will needs be altogether an agent, and work those things which she
should suffer God to work in her and receive of him. Therefore she makes her
self a creator and a iustifier through her own works, Every meritemo^ger is
both the matter and the work, or the work and the vvorkeman.
despising the Blessing promised and given to Abraham and to his believing
Children: So that every hypocrite is both the matter and the work (although
this be against Philosophy, for one and the self same thing can not work
upon it self): the matter because he is a sinner: the worker, because he
puts on a cowle, or chooses some other work through which he hops to
deserve grace, and to save him self and others: therefore he is both the
creature and the creator. Wherefore no man can express with words, how
execrable and horrible it is, to seek righteousness in the law or by works,
without the Blessing. For it is the Abomination standing in the holy place,
which denies God, and sets up the creature in the place of the creator.

The Doers therefore of the law are not the hypocrites, doing the law outwardly:
but the true believers, who receiving the holy ghost, The true doers of the
law.
do fulfill the law, that is to say, they love God and their neighbor. So
that a true Doer of the law is to be understand, not in respect of the works
which he works: but in respect of the person regenerate now by Faith. For
according to the Gospel, they that are made righteous do righteous things, but
according to Philosophy it is not so: but contrariwise they that do righteous
things are made righteous. Therefore we being justified by Faith do good works,
through which (as it is said.2. Pet. 1.) our calling and election is confirmed,
2. Pet. 1.1^.
and from day to day is made more sure. But because we have but only the first
fruits of the spirit, and have not as yet the tenthes, and ye remnaunts of
sin do still remain in us: therefore we do not the law perfectly. The
godly do not the law perfectly.
But this imperfection is not imputed unto us which do believe in Christ, who
was promised to Abraham, and has blessed us. For we are nourished and tenderly
cherished in the mean season for Christ's sake, in the lap of Gods long
sufferance. We are that wounded man, which fell into the hands of thieves,
Luc. 10.30.31.32.33. etc.
whose wounds the Samaritan bound up, pouring in oil and wine, and
afterward laying him upon his beast, he brought him into the Inn, and made
provision for him, and departing, commended him to the host, saying: Take care
of him. And thus we in the mean time are cherished as it were in an Inn,
until the Lord put to his hand the second time (as Esaias says) that he may
deliver us.

Wherefore the sentence of Moises: Cursed is every one that abides not in all
the things that are written in this book, is not contrary to Paul, who
pronounces all them to be accursed which are of the works of the law. What
a Doer of the law Moises requires. Exodus 34.7.8.9. Psalm. 143.2.
For Moises requires such a Doer as may do the law perfectly. But where shall
we have him? No where. For Moises himself confesses that he is not such a
one: for he says, Exodus 34. That none is innocent before God. And David says:
Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is righteous in
thy thy sight. Romans 5.^^.
And Paul says: For what I would, that do I not: but what I hate, that
do I. Wherefore Moises together with Paul does necessarily drive us to
Christ, through whom we be made Doers of the law, and are not accounted
guilty of any transgression. How so? First by forgeuenes of sins and
imputation of righteousness, because of our Faith in Christ. Secondly by the
gift of God and the holy Ghost, which brings forth a new life and new
motions in us, so that we may also do the law effectually. Now, that which
is not done, is pardoned for Christ's sake. That we are made Doers of the
law through Christ.
And moreover, what sin so ever is left in us, is not imputed. So Moises
agrees with Paul, and means the self same thing that he does, when he
says: Cursed is every one that abides not. etc. For he says that they do
not the law, because they would make them selves righteous by works, and
concludes with Paul that they are under the Curse. Therefore Moises requires
true Doers of the law which are of Faith, even as Paul condemns those which
are not true doers of ye law, that is to say, which are not of faith. Herein
is no repugnance, that Moises spoke negatiuely and Paul affirmatively, so that
ye define rightly what is meant by this word Do. So, both sentences are true,
to wit, that all are accursed which abide not in all that is vvrytten in
this book: And, that all they are accursed, which are of the works of the
law.

An Answer to those arguments which the adversaries allege against the
doctrine and righteousness of Faith.
Seeing this place offers unto us occasion, we must say something as touching
the arguments which our adversaries do object against the doctrine of Faith,
The proposition.
which is: That we are made righteous by Faith alone. There are many places
both in the old Testament and in the new as concerning works and rewards
of works, Places of the law and work.
which our adversaries do allege, and think them selves able thereby utterly
to overthrow the doctrine of Faith which we teach and maintain. Therefore we
must be well furnished and armed, that we may be able not only to instruct our
brethren, but also to answer the objections of our adversaries.

The Schoolmen and all such as understand not the Article of Justification,
do know no other righteousness then the civil righteousness and the
righteousness of the law, The righteousness of the law was also known to the
heathen.
which after a sort the Gentiles also do know. Therefore they borrow certain
words out of the law and moral Philosophy, as [to Do, to Worke], and such
like, and they apply the same unto spiritual matters: wherein they deal most
peruersly and wickedly. We must take good heed that we make a difference
between Christian Divinity and humane Philosophy. The Schoolmen them selves
grant and teach, that in ye order of nature, Being goes before Working, for
naturally the tree is before ye fruit. Again, they grant yt a work morally
wrought, is not good except there be first a right judgment of reason, and a
good will or a good intent. So then they will have a right judgment of reason,
and a good intent to go before the work, that is to say, they make the person
morally righteous before the work. Contrariwise in Divinity and in spiritual
matters, where they ought most of all so to do, such dull and senseles asses
they are that they pervert and turn all quite contrary, placing the work
before right reason and the good intent.

Wherefore, this word Doing is one thing in nature, To do naturally, morally,
and spiritually.
an other in moral Philosophy, and an other in Divinity. In nature ye tree
must be first, and then the fruit. In moral Philosophy Doing requires a good
intent and sound reason to work well, to go before: Moral Philosophy.
and here all the Philosophers stay and go no further. Therefore ye Divines say,
yt moral Philosophy has not God for ye object, and final cause. For
Aristotle, a Sadduce, or a man of any civil honesty, calls this a right
reason, and a good intent, if he seek the public commodity of ye common
wealth, and the quietness and honesty thereof. A Philosopher or Lawworker
asce^deth no higher. He thinks not through right reason and a good intent to
obtain remission of sins and everlasting life, as ye Sophister or ye Monk
does. Therefore the heathen Philosopher is much better the^ such an hypocrite.
For he abides wtin his limits, having only consideration of the honesty and
tranquillity of the common wealth, not mingling heavenly and earthly things
together. Contrariwise yt Sophister imagines that God regards his good
intent and works. Therefore he mingleth earthly and heavenly things together,
and polluteth the name of God. And this imagination, he learneth out of moral
Philosophy, saving that he abuses it much worse then the Heathen man does.

We therefore yt be Christians, The popish Schoolmen think a right judgment
of reason, and a good intent without faith to be sufficient to commend the
work.
must rise up higher then nature and Philophie with this word Doing, so yt now it
must be made altogether new, joined with a right judgment of reason, and a good
will or good intent, not morally, but divinely: which is, yt I know and believe
by the word of the gospel, that God has sent his son into ye world to
redeem us from sin and death. Here Doing is a new thing unknown to reason,
to Philosophers, to Lawworkers, and unto al men: For it is a wisedo^ hidden in
a mystery. Therefore in Divinity ye work necessarily requires faith goi^g
before.

How we must answer unto our adversaries, urging these terms of Doing
and vvorking.
Therefore, when our adversaries do allege against us the sentences of the
Scripture touching the law and works, where mention is made of Working and
Doing, thou must answer them, yt they are terms pertaining to Divinity, and
not to natural or moral things. If they be applied to natural or moral
things, they must be taken in their own signification. But if they be applied
to matters of Divinity, they must include such a right reason and good will,
as is incomprehe^sible to man's reason. Wherefore Doing in divinity must be
always understand of a faithful Doing. To do in divinity, what it is.
So yt this faithful Doing is altogether as it were a new kingdom, separate
from the natural or moral Doing. Therefore, when we that are Divines speak
of Doing, we must needs speak of that faithful Doing: for in Divinity we
have no other right reason, and good will or intent, besides Faith.

Heb. 11.^2. Sa. 17.34.35.36 A rule to be observed as touching those places
which speak of works.
This rule is well observed in the.11. chap. to the Hebrews. There are recited
diverse and many works of the Saints out of the holy Scripture. As of David
who killed a Lion and a Bear, and slew Goliath. There the Sophister or
Schooleman, that foolish Ass, looks upon nothing else but the outward
appearaunce of the work, as does the Ox upon a new gate. But this work of
David must be so looked into, that first thou do consider what manner of person
David was, before he did this work: Then thou shall see that he was such a
person, whose heart trusted in the Lord God of Israel, as the text has
plainly. 1. Sam. 17.37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the pavve of the Lion, and out of the pavve
of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistian. 45.
Moreover: Thou come to me with a svvorde, and with a spear, and with a
shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the
host of Israel, upon whom thou have railed this day. 46.
This day shall the Lord close thee in my hand, and I shall smite thee, and
take thine head from thee. etc: Because the Lord saves not with svvord nor
spear (for the battle is the Lords) and he will give you into our hands.
47.
The work of David is a faithful work.
You see then that he was a righteous man, accepted of God, strong and
constante in Faith before he did this work. This Doing of David therefore, is
not a natural or moral Doing, but a faithful Doing.

Genes. 5.24. Heb. 11.4. The sacrifice of Abell and Caine. Gens. 4.3.4.5.
So it is said of Abell in the same Epistle: that through Faith he offered up a
better sacrifice unto God then Caine. If ye Schooleme^ fall into this place as
it is read in Genesis (where it is simply set out, how yt both Caine and Abell
offered up their gifts, and yt the Lord had respect unto Abell and his offerings)
by and by they take hold of these words. They offered their oblations unto the
Lord. The Lord had respect to the offerings of Abell, and cry out, saying:
Here ye see that God had respect to offerings: therefore works do justify. So
that these filthy swine do think that righteousness is but a moral thing,
only beholding the visour or outward show of the work, and not the heart of
him that does the work: The visour of the work is not to be regarded, but the
heart of the worker i^ to be considered.
whereas notwithstanding even in Philosophy they are constrained, not to look
upon the bare work, but the good will of the worker. But here they stand
altogether upon these words: They offered up gifts: The Lord had respect unto
Habel and to his offerings, and see not that the text says plainly in Genesis,
that the Lord had respect first to the person of Habel, which pleased the Lord
because of his Faith, and afterward to his offerings. Therefore in Divinity we
speak of faithful works, sacrifices, oblations and gifts, that is to say,
which are offered up and done in Faith, Hebr. 11. Verse. 4. Verse 5. Verse. ^.
as the Epistle to the Hebrews declares, saying: Through Faith Habel offered
up a better sacrifice: Through Faith Enoch was taken away: Through Faith
Abraham obeyed God, etc. We have here then a rule set forth in the.11. to the
Hebrews, A rule.
how we should simply answer to the arguments objected of the adversaries as
touching the law and works, that is to say: this or that man did this or ye
work in Faith. And by this means thou geuest a solution to all their
arguments, and so stoppest their mouths, that they can have nothing to reply
again.

Hereby it appears manifestly that in Divinity and divine matters, the work
is nothing worth without Faith, The work is nothing vvorth without faith
Hebr. 11.6.
but thou must needs have Faith before thou begin to work. For without Faith
it is impossible to please God: but he that will come unto God, must believe.
Therefore in the Epistle to the Hebrews it is said that the sacrifice of Habel
was better then the sacrifice of Caine, because he believed: Heb. 4.
Therefore the work or the sacrifice of Habel was Faithful. Abels sacrifice
was faithful and Caines unfaithful.
Contrariwise in Caine, because he was wicked and an hypocrite, there was no
Faith or trust of Gods grace and favor, but mere presumption of his own
righteousness, and therefore his work, whereby he went about to please God, was
hypocritical and unfaithful. Wherefore the adversaries them selves are
compelled to grant that in all the works of the Saints, Faith is
presupposed, for the which their works do please God, and are accepted of
him. Therefore in Divinity there is a new Doing, clean contrary to the moral
Doing.

Moreover, we are wont also to distinguish Faith after this sort, The scripture
some time speaks of faith without works, and some time of faith with
works.
that Faith is sometime taken without the work, sometime with the work. For
like as an artificer speaks diversely of the matter whereupon he works, and
likewise a Gardener of the tree being either barren or fruitful: even so the
holy Ghost speaks diversely of Faith in the Scripture: sometime of an absolute
Faith: sometime of a compound, or (as a man would say) an incarnate Faith.
Now, an absolute Faith is this, when the Scripture speaks absolutely of
justification or of the justified, as is to be seen in the Epistles to the
Romans and to the Galathians. But when the Scripture speaks of rewards and
works, then it speaks of the compounde or incarnate faith. We will rehearse
some examples of this Faith: As, Faith which works by love. Galat. 5.6.
Do this, and thou shall live. If thou vvilt enter into life, keep the
commandments. He that shall do these, shall live in them. Decline from
evil, and do that which is good. In these and such like places (as there are
many like in the holy Scriptures) where mention is made of Doing, Do this and
thou shall live.
the Scripture always speaks of Faithful Doing. As when it says: Do this
and thou shall live, it means thus: See first that thou be faithful, that
thou have These terms the Papists use, and set them in the place of faith.
a right reason and a good will, that is to say, Faith in Christ: when thou
have this Faith,, work on a Gods blessing.

What marvel is it then, if rewards be promised to this incarnate Faith: that
is to say, to the working faith, as was the faith of Abel, or to faithful
works? And why should not ye holy Scripture thus speak diversely of faith, The
scripture sometime speaks of one nature in Christ, sometime of both.
when it speaks diverse ways of Christ as he is God and man: that is to say,
sometime of his whole person, sometime of his two natures a part, either of
his divine or of his human nature? If it speak of the natures apart, it
speaks of Christ absolutely: but if it speak of ye divine nature united in
one person to the human nature, then it speaks of Christ compound and
incarnate. There is a common rule among the Schoolmen of the communication of
the proprieties, A rule of the communication of the proprieties, called
commanicatio Idiomatum. Luc. 2.10.
when the proprieties belonging to the divinity of Christ, are attributed to
ye humanity: which we may see every where in the Scriptures. As Luke. 2. the
Angel calls ye infant borne of the virgin Marie, the Savior of men, and the
universal Lord both of the Angels and men. And chap. 1. Luc. 1.22.
the Son of God. Herevpo^ I may truly say, that that infant which lay in the
mau^ger, and in ye lap of the virgin, created heaven and earth, and yt he is
Lord of the Angels. Here I speak in deed of a man: but man in this proposition
is a new word, and (as the Scholemen them selves do grant) it is referred to
ye divinity, The man Christ created all things.
yt is to say: This god which is made man, has created al things. Creation is
attributed only to the divinity of Christ: for ye humanity does not create,
and yet notwtsta^ding it is very well said, man created, because ye divinity,
which only creates, is incarnate with the humanity, and therefore the
humanity together with the divinity, is partaker of the same proprieties.
Wherefore it is well and godly said: This man Jesus Christ brought Israel out of
Egypt, stroke Pharao, and wrought all ye wonders from ye beginning of ye world.

Therefore when the Scripture says: If thou vvilt enter into life etc.
If thou vvilt enter into life keep the commaundeme^ts of God: Do this and
thou shall live. etc. First we must see of what manner of keeping and Doing he
speaks. For in these and such like places (as I have said) he speaks of a
compound faith, and not of a naked and simple faith. And the meaning of this
place: Do this and thou shall live, is this. Thou shall live because of this
faithful Doing, or this Doing shall give unto thee life, because of thy faith
alone. After this manner justification is attributed to faith alone, as
creation is to the divinity. And yet notwithstanding as it is truly said:
Jesus the son of Marie created all things, so also justification is
attributed to the incarnate faith, or to the faithful Doing. Therefore we must
in no wise think with the Sophisters and Hypocrites, that works do
absolutely justify, and that rewards are promised to moral works, but to
faithful works only.

Let us therefore suffer the holy Ghost to speak as he does in the Scriptures,
either of naked, simple, and absolute faith, Faith simple, Faith compound.
or of compound and incarnate faith. All things which are attributed to works
do properly belong unto faith. For works must not be looked upon morally, but
faithfully and with a spiritual eye. Faith is the divinity of works, and is
so spread throughout the works of the faithful, as is the divinity
throughout the humanity of Christ. Faith therefore (if I may so say) is Fac
totum is that which is all in all, and does all alone.
Fac totu^ in faithful works. Abraham is called faithful, because faith is
spread throughout the whole person of Abraham, so that beholding him working, I
see nothing of the carnal Abraham or of the working Abraham, but of the
believing Abraham.

Wherefore when thou read in the Scriptures, of the Fathers, The places of
works mentioned in the scriptures must be expounded as the Epistle to the
Hebrews expounds them. Ebr. 11.33. Verse. 35.
Prophets and Kings, how they wrought righteousness, raised up the dead,
overcame kingdoms, thou must remember that these and such like sayings are to
be expounded as the Epistle to the Hebrews expounds them, that is: By faith
they wrought righteousness, by faith they raised up the dead, by faith they
subdued Kings and kingedomes. So that faith incorporateth the work and gives
it his perfection. And this the adversaries, if they be well in their wits,
can not deny, neither have they any thing to say or obiecte against it. In
deed they can cry out that the scripture speaks oftentimes of doing and
walking. And we always answer them again, yt it speaks also of faithful
Doing. For first reason must be lightened by faith, before it can work. Now,
when it has a true opinion and knowledge of God, then is the work incarnate
and incorporate into it: so that what soever is attributed to faith, is
afterward attributed to works also, but yet because of faith only and alone.

The difference between moral doing and spiritual doing.
Wherefore in reading of the Scriptures we must learn to put a difference between
the true and the hypocritical, the moral and the spiritual Doing of the law.
So shall we be able to declare the true meaning of all those places which seem
to maintain the righteousness of works. Now, the true Doing of the law is a
faithful and a spiritual Doing, which he has not that seeks righteousness
by works. Therefore every Doer of the law and every holy moral worker is
accursed. For he walks in the presumption of his own righteousness against
God, whiles he will be justified by man's free will and reason, and so in doing of
the law he does it not. And this, according to Paul, is to be under ye works
of the law, that is to say, that hypocrites do the law, and yet in doing it,
Hypocrites do many things, but without faith.
they do it not: for they understand this word Doing according to the literal
sense of ye law, which in true Christian divinity is nothing worth. In deed
they work many things, but in ye presumption of their own righteousness, and
without the knowledge of God and faith, as ye Pharise did Luke. 18. and as
Paul did before his conversion: therefore they are blind and miserably err,
and so remain under the Curse.

Wherefore again I admonish you, that such sentences as the adversaries do
allege out of the scriptures concerning works and rewards thereof, must be
spiritually expounded. As if they allege this sentence out of Daniel.4. Dan.
4.2^.
chap. Redeem thy sins by alms deeds, thou must not here expound these
words after the moral sense, but after the meaning of the Gospel. So shall
thou see that this word Redeem signifies no moral but a spiritual Doing, that
is to say, it comprehe^deth faith. For in the Scriptures the work (as I have
said) requires also a good will and right judgment of reason to go before,
not moral as they would have it, but divine and spiritual, which is faith.
The Papists learn their divinity out of Aristotle an heathen Philosopher.
By this means thou shall be able to stop the mouths of these peuish
Sophisters. For they them selves are compelled to grant, and so they teach
also out of Aristotle, that every good work proceeds out of man's choice or
free will. If this be true in Philosophy, much more must this good will and
right judgment of reason guided by faith, go before the work in Divinity
and divine matters. And this do all words of the imperative mode, that is,
all such words as are commau^ding, signify in the Scriptures: and all such
words also as teach the law, as the Epistle to the Hebrews does plainly
declare: By Faith Abel offered. etc.

Now, A general au^svver to all the arguments of the adversaries.
admit the case that this solution is not sufficient (although it be in deed
most sure and certain): yet notwithstanding let this be the argument of all
arguments, and the principal mirror of Christians to behold, against all the
tentations and objections, not only of the adversaries, but also of the Devil
him self: The argument of all arguments most strong and mighty, to hold fall
the head Christ.
namely to apprehend and to hold fast the head, which is Christ. Moreover,
admit that the Sophisters being more crafty and subtle then I, should so
snare and entangle me with their arguments, which they bring for the
maintenance of works against Faith, that I should know no way how to wind
my self out (which notwithstanding is impossible for them to do), yet will I
rather give reverence and credit to Christ alone, then be persuaded with all the
places they are able to allege for ye establishing of ye righteousness of works
against the docrine of Faith.

Wherefore, they must be simply and plainly answered after this manner: Here is
Christ, there are the testimonies of the Scripture touching the law and works.
Now, Christ is the Lord of the Scripture and of all works. He also is Lord of
heaven, the earth, the Saboth, the temple, righteousness, life, wrath, sin,
death, and generally of all things whatsoever. Galat. ^.3. Christ was made a
curse for us.
And Paul his Apostle shows that he was made sin and became accursed for
me. I hear then that I could by no other means be delivered from my sin,
my death and my malediction, but by his death and bloudsheeding. Wherefore I
conclude that it properly appertained to Christ him self to overcome my sin,
death, and malediction in his own body, and not to the works of the law or
mine own works. And hereunto reason is constrained to agree, and say: that
Christ is not the work of the law, or my work: Circumcision is not the
death of Christ.
that his blood and death is not circumcision, the observation of the
ceremonies of the law, and much less a Monks cowle, a shaven crown,
abstinence, vows, and such like. Wherefore if he be the price of my
redemption, if he be made sin and malediction that he might justify me and
bless me: I care not if thou bring a thousand places of the Scripture for the
righteousness of works against the righteousness of Faith, and cry out never so
much that the Scripture is against me. I have the author and Lord of the
scripture with me, on whose side I will rather stand, then believe all the
rablemente of Lawworkers and meritemongers. Albeit it is impossible yt the
Scripture should be against this doctrine, unless it be among the senseles and
indurate hypocrites: but among the godly and such as have understanding, it
gives witness for Jesus Christ his Lord. See therefore how thou can
reconcile the Scripture which thou say is against my doctrine. As for me, I
will stick to the author of the Scripture.

Therefore if any man thinks himself not well able to reconcile such places
of the Scripture or answer unto the same sufficiently, A plain and simple
aunsvvere to the places of scripture concerning works.
and yet notwithstanding is constrained to hear the objections and
cauillations of the adversaries, let him answer simply and plainly after
this sort: Thou set against me the servant, that is to say, the
scripture, and that not wholly, neither yet the principal part thereof, but
only certain places as touching works. This servant I leave unto thee. But
I come with the Lord himself, who is above the Scripture, and is made unto me
the merit and price of righteousness and everlasting life. On him I lay hold,
him I stick to, No Iusticiary seking righteousness by the law and works can
wrest this solution from the faithful.
and leave works unto thee: which notwithstanding thou never did. This
solution neither the Devil nor any Iusticiary can ever wrest from thee or
overthrow. Moreover thou art in safety before God: For thy heart abides
fixed in the object, which is called Christ: who being nailed to the cross and
accursed, not for him self but for us (as the text says) was made a curse
for us. Hold fast this, and lay it against all the sentences of the law and
works whatsoever, and say: do thou hear this Satan? Here must he needs
give place, for he knows that Christ is his Lord and master.

Habaeue. 2.4. Romans 1.17. E^r. 10.38.
Verse. 11. And that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it
is evident: For the just shall live by faith.
This is an other argument grounded upon the testimony of the Prophet
Habacucke. And it is a sentence of great weight and authority, which Paul
sets against all the sentences that speak of the law and works. As if he
should say: what need we any long disputation? Here I bring forth a most
plain testimony of the Prophet, against the which no man can cavil: The
just man shall live by faith. If he live by faith, then he lives not by the
law: For the law is not of faith. And here Paul excludes works and the
law, as things contrary to faith.

The Sophisters (as they are always ready to corrupt ye scriptures) do wrest
and pervert this place after this manner. How the Sophisters corrupt this
place: The just does live by faith.
The just man does live by faith: that is to wirte (say they) by a faith which
is effectual or working, or formed and made perfect with charity: but if it
be a faith not formed with charity, then does it not justify. This gloss they
them selves have forged, and by the same they do injury to the words of the
Prophet. If they did call this formed or furnished faith, ye true faith which
the Gospel teaches, this their gloss should nothing at all offend me, for
then faith should not be separated from charity, but from the vain opinion of
faith: The difference between a true and a false faith.
As we also put a difference between a counterfeit faith and a true faith. The
counterfeit faith is that which hears of God, of Christ and of all the
mysteries of his incarnation and our redemption: which also apprehends and
bears away those things which it hears, yea and can talk goodly thereof,
and yet there remains nothing else in the heart but a naked opinion and a
sound of the Gospel: which how far of it is from true faith, hereby it may
appear, in that it neither renueth nor changes the heart: it makes not a
new man, but leaves him in the vanity of his former opinion and conversation:
and this is a very pernicious faith. The moral philosopher is much better,
then the hypocrite having such a faith.

Wherefore, if they would make a distinction between their formed faith and a
false or counterfeit faith (as I have said) their distinction should not offend
me. But they speak of faith in such sort, that they make charity the form
and perfection of faith. This is to prefer charity before faith, and to
attribute righteousness, not to faith, but to charity: wherefore when they do
not attribute righteousness to faith, but only for charities sake, they
attribute to faith nothing at al.

But the holy Ghost which gives to all men both mouth and tongue, knows how
to speak. He could have said, The formed faith of the Scholemen.
(as the Sophisters do wickedly imagine): The righteous man shall live by
faith formed and beautified or made perfect by charity. But this he omitteth
of purpose, and says plainly: The righteous man lives by faith. Let these
doltish Sophisters go therefore, with this their wicked and pestilent gloss. We
will still hold and extol this faith, which God himself has called faith,
that is to say, True faith before God.
a true and a certain faith which doubts not of God, nor of the divine
promises, nor of the forgeuenes of sins through Christ, that we may dwell sure
and safe in this our object Christ: and may keep still before our eyes the
passion and blood of the Mediator and all his benefits. Faith only takes
hold of Christ.
Now, faith alone which ^^ieth hold upon Christ, is the only mean that we
suffer not these benefits to be taken out of our sight or wrested from us by
any means. Therefore, rejecting this pestilent gloss, we must understand this
place of faith only. And this Paul himself declares when he disputes
against faith formed with charity after this sort.

Verse. 12: And the law is not of faith.
The Scholemen say: The righteous man does live if his faith be formed and
adorned with charity. But contrariwise, Paul says: The law is not of faith.
The law teaches love.
But what is the law? Is it not also a commandment touching charity? yea the
law commands nothing else but charity, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37. Mar. 12.29.
Exodus 20.6. Mat. 22.40.
as we may see by the text it self: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy soul etc. Again: shevving mercy unto thousands that love him and
keep his commandments. Also: In these two commandments consist the law
and the Prophets. If the law then that commands charity be contrary to
Faith, it must needs follow, that charity is not of faith. So Paul plainly
confuteth that gloss which the Sophisters have forged touching their formed
faith, and speaks only of faith as it is separate from the law. Now the law
being separate and set aparte, charity is also set aparte, with all that
belongs to the law, and faith only is left which justifies and quickneth
to everlasting life.

Paul therefore reasons here out of a plain testimony of the Prophet: that
there is none which obtains justification and life before God, The believing
man obtains righteousness and everlasting life with out the law and
charity.
but the believing man, who obtains righteousness and everlasting life without
the law and without charity, by faith alone. The reason is, because the law is
not of faith: that is, the law is not faith, or any thing belonging to faith,
for it believes not: neither are the works of the law faith, nor yet of faith:
therefore faith is a thing much differing from the law, like as the promise is a
thing much differing from the law. For the promise is not apprehended by
working, but by believing. Yea there is as great a difference between the
promise and the law, and consequently between faith and works, as there is
distaunce between heaven and earth.

It is impossible therefore that faith should be of the law. For faith only
rests in the promise, it only apprehends and knows God, and stands
only in receiving good things of God. The promise and the law, faith and
works, are separate the one from the other.
Contrariwise the law and works consist in exacting, in doing, and in giving
unto God. As Abell offering his sacrifice, gives unto God, but he believing,
receaueth of God. Paul therefore concludes mightily out of that place of
Habacuck, that the righteous man lives by faith alone. For the law in no wise
belongs unto faith, because the law is not the promise. But faith rests
only upon the promise. The law.
Wherefore as there is a difference between the law and the promise: so is
there also between works and faith. Faith.
And therefore that gloss of the Scholemen is wicked and false, which joins
the law with faith, yea rather it que^cheth faith and sets the law in the
place of faith. And here note that Paul always speaks of such as would do
the law morally, and not according to the Gospel. But whatsoever is said of
good works according to the meaning of the Gospel, the same is attributed to
faith alone.

Verse. 12. But the man that shall do those things shall live in them.
I take this clause to be spoken by way of derision. And yet I deny not but
that it may be also expounded morally: to wit, They that do the law morally.
that they which do the law ciuilly and externally, that is, without faith,
shall live in it: that is to wit, they shall not be punished, but shall have
corporal rewards through it. But I understand this place generally, as I do
that saying of Christ: Do this and thou shall live: so that a man may take it
to be spoken in manner of a taunt or derision. Now, Paul here goes about to
show what is the very true righteousness of the law and of the Gospel. The
righteousness of the law. Galat. 3.1^.
The righteousness of the law is to fulfill the law according to that saying: He
that shall do those things shall live in them. The righteousness of faith is to
believe according to that saying: The righteous man does live by faith. The
righteousness of faith. Verse 11.
The law therefore requires that we should yield somewhat unto God. But faith
requires no works of us, or that we should give any thing unto God, but that
we believing the promise of God, should receive of him. Therefore ye office of
the law in his highest perfection is to work, The office of the law, and the
office of faith.
as the office of faith is to assent unto the promises. For faith is the faith
of the promise, and the work is the work of the law. Paul therefore stands
upon this word Doing: and that he may plainly show what is the confidence of
the law and what is the confidence of works, he compares the one with the
other, the promise with the law, and faith with works. He says that of the
law there comes nothing else but only Doing: but faith is a clean contrary
thing, namely that which receaueth and holds the promise.

Fie upon these Sophisters therefore with their cursed gloss, and with their
blind distinction of faith formed and unformed. Fides formata, Fides informis,
Fides acquisita, and such other, are cursed and monstrous terms devised by the
Papists.
For these new forged terms, faith formed, faith unformed, faith gotten by
man's industry, and such like, are very monsters of the Devil, invented to no
other end but to deface and destroy the true Christian doctrine and faith, to
blaspheme and to tread down Christ, and to establishe the righteousness of
works. In deed works must follow faith, but faith must not be works, or
works faith, but the limits and kingedomes both of the law or works, and of
faith must be rightly distinguished the one from the other.

When we believe therefore, then do we live simply by faith in Christ, who is
without sin, who is also our couerture, our propitiation and remission of
sins. The office of the law.
Contrariwise, when we do the law, we work in deed, but we have not
righteousness nor life. For the office of the law is not to make righteous and
to give life, but to show forth sin, and to destroy. In deed the law says:
He that shall do these things shall live in them. Where is he that does the
law.
But where is he which does the law: that is, which loves God with all his
heart, and his neighbor as himself? Therefore no man does the law, and
although he go about to do it never so much: yet in doing it he does it not:
therefore he abides under the Curse. The office of faith.
But faith works not, but believes in Christ the Iustifier. Therefore a man
lives not because of his doing, but because of his believing. But a faithful
man performs the law, and that which he does not, is forgeuen him through
the remission of sins for Christ's sake, and that which is remaining, is not
imputed unto him.

Romans 10.^.
Paul therefore in this place and in the tenth chapter to the Romans
compares the righteousness of the law and of faith together, where he says:
He that shall do those things shall live in them. As though he would say: It
were indeed a goodly matter if we could accomplish the law: but because no man
does it, we must fly unto Christ, who is the end of the law to
righteousness to every one that believes. Romans 10.4. Christ the end of the law.
Galat. 4.4 5. The Godly do the law.
He was made under the law that he might redeem us that were under the
law. Believing in him we receive the holy Ghost, and we begin to do the law:
and that which we do not, is not imputed unto us because of our faith in
Christ. But in the life to come we shall no more have need of faith. For then
we shall not see darkely through a glass (as we now do) but we shall see face
to face: 1. Cor. 11.11.
that is to say, When faith has an ond^.
there shall be a most glorious brightness of the eternal Majesty, in which we
shall see God even as he is. There shall be a true and a perfect knowledge and
love of God, a perfect light of reason and a good will: not such a moral and
philosophical will as the popish Scholemen dream of, but an heavenly, divine
and eternal will. Here in the mean time, in spirit by faith, we look for
the hope of righteousness. Contrariwise they that seek forgeuenes of sins by
the law, and not by Christ, do never perform the law, but abide under the
Curse.

Paul therefore calls them only righteous, Who they are that Paul calls
righteous.
which are justified through the promise, or through faith in the promise,
without the law. Wherefore, they that are of the works of the law, and will
seem to do the law, do it not. To do the law.
For the Apostle simply concludes that all they which are of the works of the
law, are under the Curse, under the which they should not be, if they
fulfilled the law. In deed it is true, that a man doing the works of the
law, shall live in them: that is, shall be blessed: but such a one can not be
found. Now, seeing there is a double use of the law, A double use of the
law.
the one politic and the other sptrituall, he that will understand this
sentence ciuilly, may do it after this sort: He that shall do those things
shall live in them: that is, if a man obey the magistrate outwardly and in the
politic government, he shall avoid punishment and death: For the civil
magistrate has no power over him. This is the politic use of the law, which
serves to bridle those that are rude and intractable. But Paul here speaks
not of this use, but entreats of this place like a Divine: therefore there is
a condition necessarily included. As if he said: If men could keep the law,
they should be happy. But where are they? They are not therefore Doers of the
law, except they be first made righteous before and without the law through
faith.

Wherefore, when Paul curses and condemns those that are of the works of
the law, he speaks not of such as are justified through faith, The
imagination of Jerome, understanding Paul as though he spoke of the law but
morally, and as it is separate from faith.
but of such as go about to be justified by works without faith in Christ.
This I say lest any man should follow the fond imagination of Jerome, who being
deceived by Origene, understood nothing at all in Paul, but only considered
of him as a mere civil Lawyer. Hereupon he reasons after this manner: The
holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Kings were circumcised and offered sacrifice:
therefore they observed the law. But it were a wicked thing to say, that they
are under the Curse: therefore all they that are of the works of the law are not
under the Curse. Thus he fights against Paul without all judgment, making
no difference between the true doers of the law justified by faith, and those
workers which seek to be justified by the law without faith.

But Paul speaks here nothing at all against those that are justified by
faith, and are true doers of the law in deed, for they are not of the works
of the law: but against those which, not only do not keep the law, but also
sin against the same. For the law commands that we should fear, love, and
worship God with a true faith. This they do not, A picture of al Hypocrites.
but choose out new kinds of worship and works which were never commanded of
God, by which God is not pacified, but more provoked to anger, Mat 15.9.
according to that saying: They worship me in vain with the commandments
of men. Therefore they are full of impiety, rebels against God, and
idolaters, sinning grievously against the first commandment above all the
rest. Moreover, they have also wicked concupiscence and other great passions.
Briefly there is no good thing in them, but that outwardly they would seem to
be righteous, and would have men to think that they do the law.

So we also which are made righteous by faith, as were the Patriarchs,
Prophets and all the Saints, are not of the works of the law as concerning
the matter of justification. But in that we are in the flesh, and have as yet
the remnauntes of sin in us, we are under the law, and yet not under the
Curse, because the remnaunts of sin are not imputed unto us for Christ's sake
in whom we believe. For the flesh is an enemy unto God, and that concupiscence
which yet remains in us, not only fulfilleth not the law, but also sins
against the same, rebelling against us and leading us captive into bondage.
Romans 7. Now, if the law be not fulfilled in the Saints, Romans 7.23. Remnauntes
of sin in the Saints, and in the elect of God.
but that many things are done in them contrary to the law, if evil
concupiscence and the remnauntes of sin are yet remaining in them, which do
so hinder them that they can not fear and love God, they can not call upon God
with assured trust, they can not praise God and reverence his word as they
should do: much more is this true in a man which is not yet justified by faith,
but is an enemy unto God, and with all his heart despises and hates the
word and work of God. Ye see then that Paul speaks here of such as will
fulfill the law and be justified thereby, although they have not yet received
faith, and not of the fathers and Saints (as Jerome imagines) which are
justified by faith already.

Verse. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the the Curse of the law, when he
was made a Curse for us. (For it is written: Deut^^. ^1.^5.
Cursed is every one that hangs on tree.)
Here again Jerome and the Schoolmen which follow him, are much troubled,
and miserably rack this most comfortable place, seeking to remove this
ignominy and reproach from Christ, that he should be called a Curse or
execration. They shift of this sentence after this manner: that Paul spoke not
here in good earnest. And therefore they most wickedly affirm that the
Scripture in Paul agrees not with it self. And this they prove after this
manner: The sentence (say they) of Moses which Paul here alleges, speaks
not of Christ. Moreover this general clause [vvho so euer] which Paul has,
is not added in Moses. Again Paul omitteth this word [of God] which is in
Moses. To conclude, it is evident enough, that Moses speaks of a thief or a
malefactor, which by his evil deeds has deserved ye gallows, as the
Scripture plainly witnesses in the 21. chapter of Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 3^.^5.
Therefore they ask this question how this sentence may be applied to Christ,
that he is accursed of God and hanged upon a tree, seeing that he is no
malefactor or thief, but righteous and holy? This may peradventure move the
simple and ignorant, who think that the Sophisters or Scholemen speak these
things not only wittely, but religiously also, and by this means do maintain
the honor and glory of Christ, warning all Christians to beware that they
think not so wickedly of Christ yt he should be made a Curse, etc. Therefore
let us see what the meaning and purpose of Paul is.

Paul here did well fortify his words, and spoke very advisedly and to the
purpose. But here again we must make a distinction, Christ bearing the curse
not for himself.
as the words of Paul do plainly show. For he says not, that Christ was
made a Curse for him self, but for us. Therefore all the weight of the matter
stands in this word, For us. What this word for us imports.
For Christ is innocent as concerning his own person, and therefore he ought
not to have been hanged upon a tree: but because, according to the law of
Moses, every thief and malefactor ought to be hanged, therefore Christ also
according to the law ought to be hanged, for he sustained the person of a
sinner and of a thief, not of one, but of all sinners and thieves. For we are
sinners and thieves, and therefore guilty of death and everlasting damnation.
Christ took upon him the person of a transgressour and therefore must be
hanged. Esaias. 53.12.
But Christ took all our sins upon him, and for them died upon the cross:
therefore it behooved that he should become a transgressour, and (as Esaias the
Prophet says chapter.53.) to be reckened and accounted among transgressors
and trespassers.

And this (no doubt) all the Prophets did foresee in spirit, that Christ
should become the greatest transgressour, Christ the greatest sinner of all
others, because he bare the sins of the whole world.
murderer, adulterer, thief, rebel and blasphemer that ever was or could be
in all the world. For he being made a sacrifice for the sins of the whole
world, is not now an innocent person and without sins, is not now the
Son of God borne of the virgin Marie: but a sinner, which has and carries
the sin of Paul, which was a blasphemer, oppressor and persecuter: of Peter
which denied Christ: of David which was an adulterer, Esaias. 53.5. Mat. 8 17. 1.
Pet. 2.^^.
a murderer, and caused the Gentiles to blaspheme the name of the Lord: and
briefly, which has and bears all the sins of all men in his body, not
that he him self committed them, Christ took our sins upon him.
but for that he received them being committed or done of us, and laid them
upon his own body that he might make satisfaction for them with his own
blood. Therefore this general sentence of Moses comprehends him also
(albeit in his own person he was innocente) because it found him amongst
sinners and transgressors: Like as the magistrate takes him for a thief and
punishes him whom he finds among other thieves and transgressors, though
he never committed any thing worthy of death. Now, Christ was not only
found among sinners, but of his own accord and by the will of his father he
would also be a companion of sinners, taking upon him the flesh and blood of
those which were sinners, thieves, and plunged in all kinds of sin. When the
law therefore found him among thieves, it condemned and killed him as a
thief.

What incommodities follow of the doctrine of the Scholeme^.
The Sophisters and Scholemen do spoil us of this knowledge of Christ and
most heavenly comfort (namely that Christ was made a Curse, to the end he
might deliver us from the Curse of the law) when they separate him from sins
and sinners, and only set him out unto us as an example to be followed. By
this means they make Christ, Christ must be vvrapped as well in our sins,
as in our flesh and blood.
not only unprofitable unto us, but also a Judge and a Tyraunte, which is
angry with our sins and condemns sinners. But we must as well wrappe Christ
and know him to be wrapped in our sins, in our malediction, in our death,
and in all our evils, as he is wrapped in our flesh and in our blood.

But some man will say: It is very obsurde and sclaunderous, An objection, that
Christ ought not to be called a Curse.
to call the Son of God a cursed sinner. I answer: If thou will deny him
to be a sinner and to be accursed, deny also that he was crucified and died.
For it is no less absurd to say, that the Son of God (as our faith
confesses and believes), was crucified and suffered the pains of sin and
death, then to say that he is a sinner and accursed. But if it be not absurd
to confess and believe, that Christ was crucified between two thieves, then is
it not absurd to say also that he was accursed and of all sinners the
greatest. These words of Paul are not spoken in vain: Christ is made a Curse
and become sin for us. 2. Cor. 5.^.
Christ was made a Curse for us. God made Christ which knevve no sin, to
become sin for us, that we in him might be made the righteousness of God. 2.
Cor. 5.

After the same manner John the Baptist calls him The Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world. Io. 1.29. Christ the Lamb of God 1.
Pet. 2.22.
He verily is innocente, because he is the unspotted and undefiled Lamb of
God. But because he bears the sins of the world, his innocence is charged
with the sins and gilte of the whole world. Whatsoever sins, I, thou, and
we all have done or shall do hereafter, they are Christ's own sins as
verily as if he him self had done them. To be brief, our sin must needs
become Christ's own sin, Our sin must become Christ's own sin.
or else we shall perish for ever. This true knowledge of Christ, which Paul
and the Prophets have most plainly deliuerede unto us, the wicked Scholemen
and Sophisters have darkened and defaced.

Esaias in the.53. chapter speaks thus of Christ: Esaias 53.6.
God (says he) laid the iniquity of us all upon him. We must not make these
words less then they are, but leave them in their own proper signification.
For God dallieth not in the words of the Prophet, but speaks earnestly, and
of great love: to wit, that Christ this Lamb of God should bear the sins
of us all. But what is it to bear? The Sophisters answer, to be punished.
Weary well. But wherefore is Christ punished? It is not because he has sin and
bears sin? Now, that Christ has sin, the holy Ghost witnesses in the
40. Psalm: Psalm. 40.1^.
My sins have taken such hold of me, that I am not able to look up, yea
they are more in number then the hears of my head. In this psalm and
certain others the holy Ghost speaks in the person of Christ, and in plain
words wittenesseth, that he had sins. For this testimony is not the voice
of an innocent Christ, but of a suffering Christ, which took upon him to bear
the person of all sinners, and therefore was made guilty of the sins of the
whole world.

Wherefore Christ was not only crucified and died, but sin also (through the
divine love) was laid upon him. When sin was laid upon him, then comes the
law and says: every sinner must dye. Therefore, O Christ, if thou will
answer, become guilty, and suffer punishment for sinners, thou must also
bear sin and malediction. Paul therefore does very well allege this
general sentence out of Moses as concerning Christ: Every one that hangs
upon the tree is the accursed of God: but Christ has hanged upon the tree,
therefore Christ is the accursed of God.

A singular consolation of the faithful.
And this is a singular consolation for all Christians, so to cloth Christ with
our sins, and to wrappe him in my sins, thy sins, and in the sins of
the whole world, and so to He alludeth to the brazen Serpent.
behold him bearing all our iniquities. For the beholdinge of him after this
manner, shall easily vanquish all the fantastical opinions of the Papists
concerning the justification of works. For they do imagine (as I have said)
a certain faith formed and adorned with charity. By this (say they) sins
are taken away and me^ are justified before God. The faith of the Papists
formed and made perfect with charity.
And what is this else (I pray you) but to vnwrappe Christ, and to strip him
quite out of our sins, to make him innocente and to charge and ouerwhelme our
selves with our own sins, and to look upon them, not in Christ, but in our
selves. Yea, what is this else but to take Christ clean away, and to make him
utterly unprofitable unto us? Our sins are taken away by Christ alone.
For if it be so that we put away sin by the works of the law and charity,
then Christ takes them not away. For if he be the Lamb of God ordained from
the beginning to take away the sins of the world: and moreover if he be so
wrapped in our sins, that he be became accursed for us, it must needs
follow that we can not be justified by works. For God has laid our sins,
not upon us, but upon his Son Christ, that he bearing the punishment thereof,
might be our peace, and that by his stripes we might be healed. Therefore they
can not be taken away by us. To this all the Scripture bears witness: and we
also do confess the same in the Articles of the Christian belief, when we
say: I believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God, which suffered, was crucified
and died for us.

Hereby it appears that the doctrine of the Gospel, which of all other is
most sweet and full of singular consolations, speaks nothing of our works or
of the works of the law, Of what points the doctrine of the Gospel
encreateth.
but of the inestimable mercy and love of God toward us most wretched and
miserable sinners: to wit, that our most merciful father seeing us to be
oppressed and overwhelmed with the curse of the law and so to be holden under
the same that we could never be delivered by our own strength out of it, he
sent his only son into the world and laid upon him all the sins of all
men, saying: Be thou Peter that denier: Paul that persecuter, blasphemer, and
cruel oppressor: David that adulterer: that sinner which did eat the apple in
Paradise: that thief hanginge upon the cross: and briefly, be thou the
person which has committed the sins of all men: See therefore that thou pay
and satisfy for them. Here now comes the law and says: I find him a sinner,
The law has accused and killed Christ.
and that such a one as has taken upon himself the sins of all men, and I
see no sins else but in him: therefore let him die upon the cross: and so he
sets upon him and kills him. By this means the whole world is purged and
cleansed from all sins, and so delivered from death and all evils. Now, sin
being vanquished and death abolished by this one man, God would see nothing else
in ye whole world if it did believe, but a mere clensing and righteousness. And
if any remnaunts of sin should remain, yet for ye great glory yt is in
Christ, God would wink at them and not behold the^.

Thus we must magnify the article of Christian righteousness against the
righteousness of the law and works: The article of justification.
albeit no eloquence is able sufficiently to set forth the inestimable greatness
thereof. Wherefore the argument that Paul handles in this place, of al other is
most mighty against all the righteousness of the law. For it contains this
invincible This opposition, called Antithesis, is a comparing and matching of
two contraties together.
opposition which can not be denied: that is, if the sins of the whole world
be in that one man Jesus Christ, then are they not in the world. But if they be
not in him, then are they yet in the world. Also, if Christ be made guilty of
all the sins which we all have committed, the^ are we loosed from all sins,
but not by our selves, nor by our own works or merits, but by him. But if he
be innocent and bear not our sins, then do we bear them, and in them we
shall die and be damned. 1. Cor. 15.57.
But thanks be to God who has given us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

But now let us see by what means these two things so contrary and so
repugnant may be reconciled together in this one person Christ. A marvelous
com^ate between sin and righteousness in Christ.
Not only my sins and thine, but also the sins of the whole world, either
past, present, or to come, do take hold upon him, and go about to condemn
him, as also they do in deed condemn him. But because in the self same
person, which is the highest, ye greatest and ye only sinner, there is also an
everlasting and invincible righteousness: therefore these two do encounter
together, the highest, ye greatest and ye only sin, and the highest, ye
greatest and ye only righteousness. Here one of them must needs be overcome
and give place to the other, seeing they fight together with so great force and
power. The sin therefore of the whole world comes upon righteousness with all
maine and might. In this combat what is done? Righteousness is everlasting,
immortal and invincible. Righteousness.
Sin also is a most mighty and cruel Tyranne, ruling and reigning over the
whole world, subduing and bringing all men into bondage. To conclude, sin is
a strong and a mighty God, which deuoureth all mankind, Sin.
learned, unlearned, holy, mighty and wise men. This Tyranne (I say) flies
upon Christ, and will needs swallow him up, as he does all other. But he sees
not that he is a person of invincible and everlasting righteousness. Therefore
in this combat sin must needs be vanquished and killed, Righteousness the
conqueror of sin.
and righteousness must overcome, live, and reign. So in Christ all sin is
vanquished, killed and buried, and righteousness remains a conqueror and
reigns for ever.

In like manner, death, which is an omnipotent Queen and Emperesse of the
whole world, killing Kings, Princes, and generally all men, The combat
between life and death.
does mightily encounter with life, thinking utterly to overcome it and to
swallow it up: and yt it goes about, it brings to pass in deed. But
because life was immortal, therefore when it was overcome, yet did it overcome
and get the victory, vanquishing and killing death.

Death therefore through Christ is vanquished and abolished throughout the whole
world, The conquered life the vanquisher of death.
so that now it is but a painted death, which losing his stinge, can no more
hurt those yt believe in Christ, who is become ye death of death, as Hoseas ye
prophet says: O death I vvil be thy death.

Hoseas. 13.34.
So the Curse, which is the wrath of God upon the whole world, has the like
conflict with the Blessing: that is to say, with grace and the eternal mercy
of God in Christ. The conflict of the curse with the blessing.
The Curse therefore fights against the Blessing, and would condemn it and
bring it to naught: but it can not so do. For the Blessing is divine and
everlasting, Christ the ouercommer of the Curse.
and therefore the Curse must needs give place. For if the blessing in Christ
could be overcome, then should God himself also be overcome. But this is
impossible: therefore Christ the power of God, righteousness, Blessing, grace
and life, ouercometh and destroieth these monsters, sin, death and the Curse,
without war or weapons, in his own body, and in himself, as Paul deliteth
to speak: Colos. 2.15.
Spoiling (says he) all principalities and powers, and triumphing over them
in himself, so that they can not any more hurt those that do believe.

And this circumsta^ce, In him self, In him self.
makes that combat much more wonderful and glorious. For it shows that it
was necessary, that these inestimable things should be accomplished in that one
only person Christ (to wit, that the Curse, sin and death should be
destroyed and the Blessing, righteousness and life should succeed in their
place), and that so ye whole creature through this one person should be renewed.
Sin and death abolished to all beleuers.
Therefore if thou look upon this person Christ, thou shall see sin, death,
ye wrath of God, hell, the Devil and all evils vanquished and mortified in
him. Forasmuch then as Christ reigns by his grace in the hearts of the
faithful, there is no sin, no death, no curse: but where Christ is not
known, there all these things do still remain. Therefore all they which
believe not, do lack this inestimable benefit and glorious victory. Io. 5.40
For this (as S. John says) is our victory that ouercometh the world, even
our faith.

This is the principal Article of all Christian doctrine, which the popish
Scholemen have altogether darkened. They that deny the article of the Diuiniti
of Christ deny also the article of redemption.
And here ye see how necessary a thing it is to believe and to confess the
Article of the Divinity of Christ: which when Arrius denied, he must needs
also deny the Article of our redemption. For to overcome the sin of ye world,
death, the Curse and ye wrath of God in himself, is not the work of any
creature, but of the divine power. Therefore he which in him self should
overcome these, must needs be truly and naturally God. For against this
mighty power of sin, death and the curse (which of it self reigns
throughout the world and in the whole creature) it was necessary to set a more
high and mighty power. But besides the sovereign and divine power, no such
power can be found. Wherefore, to abolish sin, to destroy death, to take away
the curse in himself: and again, to give righteousness, to bring life to
light, and to give the Blessing, are the works of the divine power only and
alone. Now because the Scripture does attribute all these to Christ, therefore
he in him self is life, righteousness and Blessing, which is naturally and
substantially God. Wherefore they that deny the Divinity of Christ, They
become Turks and Gentiles which deny the Divinity of Christ.
do lose all Christianity and become altogether Gentiles and Turks. We must
learn therefore diligently the Article of justification (as I often admonish
you). For all the other Articles of our faith are comprehended in it: and if
that remain sound, then are all the rest sound. Wherefore when we teach that
men are justified by Christ, that Christ is the conqueror of sin, Christ God
by nature.
death and the everlasting Curse: we witness therewithal that he is naturally
and substantially God.

The blindness and wickedness of the Papists.
Hereby we may plainly se how horrible the wickedness and blindness of the
Papists was, which taught that these cruel and mighty Tirauntes, sin,
death and the Curse (which swallowe up all mankind) must be vanquished, not by
the righteousness of the law of God (which, although it be just, good, and holy,
can do nothing but bring men under the Curse): but by the righteousness of
man's own works, as by fasting, pilgrimages, masses, vows, and such other
like paltrie. But (I pray you) was there ever any found that being furnished
with this armor, overcame sin, death and the Devil? Paul in the.6. The
harness of Christians* set out, Ephesians. 6.
chapter to the Ephesians describes a far other manner of armor, which we
must use against these most cruel and raging beasts. Therefore in that these
blind buzzardes and leaders of the blind, have set us naked and without armor
before these invincible and most mighty Tyrauntes, they have not only
delivered us unto them to be devoured, but also have made us ten times greater
and more wicked sinners then either thieves, whores or murderers. For it
belongs only to the divine power to destroy sin and to abolish death, The
work of God, to abolish death and to give life.
to create righteousness and to give life. They have attributed this divine
power to our own works saying: If thou shall do this work or that, thou
shall overcome sin, death and the wrath of God: And by this means they set
us in Gods place, making us in very deed (if I may so say) even naturally God
himself. And herein the Papists, under the name of Christ, have showed them
selves to be seven fold more wicked Idolaters, then ever were the Gentiles.
For it happens to them, 2. Pet. 2.^1.
as it does to the Sow, which after she is washed, walloweth her self again
in the mire. And as Christ says: After they are fallen away from faith an evil
spirit enters again into the house, Luke. 11.26.
out of yt which he was driven, and takes unto him seven worse spirits then
him self, and there dwells. And then the later end of that man is worse
then the beginning.

What manner of doctrine the doctrine of the Gospel i^.
Let us therefore receive this most sweet doctrine and full of comfort with
thanks giving, and with an assured Faith, which teaches that Christ being
made a Curse for us (that is, a sinner subject to the wrath of God) did put
upon him our person, and laid our sins upon his own shoulders, saying: I
have committed the sins which all men have committed. Therefore he was made a
Curse in deed according to the law, not for him self, but as ( Paul says)
for us. For unless he had taken upon himself my sins and thine, and the
sins of the whole world, the law had had no right over him, which condemns
none but sinners only, and holds them under the Curse. Christ took our
sins of his own accord, and therefore it behooved him to be made a Curse for
them.
Wherefore he could neither have been made a Curse nor die, since the only cause
of the Curse and of Death is sin, from the which he was free. But because he
had taken upon him our sins, not by constraint, but of his own good will, it
behooved him to bear the punishment and wrath of God: not for his own person
(which was just and invincible, and therefore could be found in no wise guilty)
but for our person.

So making a happy change with us, he took upon him our sinful person,
and gave unto us his innocente and victorious person. Wherewith we being now
clothed, are freed from the Curse of the law: for Christ was willingly made a
Curse for us, saying: As touching mine own person, I am blessed, and need
nothing. But I will put of mine own person, and will put upon me your person
and your apparel: that is, your humane nature, Philip. 2.7.
and will walk in the same among you, and will suffer Death to deliver you
from Death. Now, he thus bearing the sin of the whole world in our person,
was taken, suffered, was crucified and put to death, and became a Curse for us.
But because he was a person divine and everlasting, it was impossible that
death should hold him. Wherefore he rose again the third day from death, and
now lives for ever: and there is neither sin, nor death, nor our shape
found in him any more, but mere righteousness, life and everlasting blessedness.

This image and this myrrour we must have continually before us, and behold
the same with a steadfast eye of Faith. He that does so, has this innocence
and victory of Christ, although he be never so great a sinner. By Faith only
therefore we are made righteous, Faith only lays hold upon the victory of
Christ.
for Faith lays hold upon this innocence and this victory of Christ. Look
then how much thou beleuest this, so much thou do enjoy it. If thou believe
sin, death, and the Curse to be abolished, they are abolished. For Christ
has vanquished and taken away these in him self, and will have us to believe,
that like as in his own person there is now no appearaunce of a sinner nor
token of death, even so is there none in ours, seeing he has performed all
things for us.

Wherefore, if sin vex thee and death terrify thee, think that it is (as it
is in deed) but an imagination, and a false illusion of ye Devil. For in very
deed there is now no Sin, no Curse, no Death, no Devil any more, for Christ
has vanquished and abolished all these things. Therefore the victory of
Christ is most certain, and there is no defect in the thing it self, since it
is most true, but in our incredulity: for it is a hard matter to reason to
believe these inestimable good things and unspeakable riches. Moreover, the
Devil also with his vain spirits cease not to assail us. The Devil and
heretics lie in vvait to deceive the Godly.
The Devil with his fiery darts, his ministers with their wicked and false
Doctrine go about to wrest from us and utterly to deface this doctrine. And
specially for this Article, which we do so diligently teach, we sustain the
hatred and cruel persecution of the Devil and of the world. For Satan
feels the power and fruit of this Article.

And that there is in deed no more sin, death, or malediction, since Christ
now reigns: we confess daily in the Creed of the Apostles: I believe that
there is an holy Church. I believe that there is an holy Church.
Which is in deed nothing else, but as if we should say: I believe that there
is no sin, no malediction, no death in the Church of God. For they which do
believe in Christ, are no sinners, are not guilty of death, but are holy and
righteous, lords over sin and death, and living for ever. But Faith only
sees this: for we say, I believe an holy Church. But if thou believe reason and
thine own eyes, thou will judge clean contrary. For thou see many things in
the Godly which offend thee. The weakness of the godly.
Thou see them sometime to fall into sin, and to be weak in Faith, to be
subject unto wrath, envy, and such other evil affections: therefore the
Church is not holy. I deny the consequence. If I look upon mine own person,
or the person of my brother, it shall never be holy. But if I behold Christ,
who has sanctified and cleansed his Church, then is it altogether holy: for he
has taken away the sins of the whole world.

Therefore, where sins are seen and felt, there are they in deed no sins.
For according to Paul's Divinity, there is no sin, no death, no maledictio^
any more in the world, but in Christ, who is the Lamb of God yt has taken
away ye sins of the world: who is made a Curse that he might deliver us from
the Curse. Contrariwise, according to Philosophy and reason, sin, death, and
the Curse, are no where else but in the world, in the flesh, or in sinners.
For, a Sophistical Divine can speak no otherwise of sin, What the
Sophisters think of Christ.
then does the Heathen Philosopher. Like as (says he) the color sticks in
the wall, even so does sin in the world, in the flesh, or in the conscience:
therefore it is to be purged by contrary operations, to wit, by charity. But
true Divinity teaches that there is no sin in the world any more: for
Christ upon whom the Father has cast the sins of the whole world, has
vanquished and killed the same in his own body. Esaias. 5^. To the beleuers,
sin and death are aboli^hed.
He once dying for sin and raised up again, dies now no more. Therefore
whersoeuer is a true faith in Christ, there sin is abolished, dead, and
buried in deed. But where no Faith in Christ is, there sin does still
remain. The remnants of sin dead in the saints.
And albeit the remnaunts of sin be as yet in the Saints because they believe
not perfectly, yet are they dead in that they are not imputed unto them because
of their Faith in Christ.

This is therefore a strong and a mighty argument which Paul here prosecuteth
against the righteousness of works. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse,
therefore not the law.
It is not the law nor works that do deliver us from the everlasting Curse,
but Christ alone. See therefore good Christian reader I beseech thee, that
thou distinguish Christ from the law, and diligently mark how Paul speaks,
and what he says. All (says he) which do not fulfill the law, are necessarily
under the Curse. But no man fulfilleth the law: therefore all men are under the
Curse. He adds moreover an other proposition: By nature we are all under the
Curse, but Christ has redeemed all that believe in him.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the law, being made a Curse for us:
It follows then that the law and works do not redeem us from the Curse,
but do bring us rather under the Curse. Charity therefore, (which, as the
Schoolmen say, gives form and perfection unto Faith) has not only not
redeemed us from the Curse, but rather it wrappeth us more and more in the Curse.

This text then is plain, yt all men, yea the Apostles, Prophets, and
Patriarks had remained under the Curse, if Christ had not set him self against
sin, death, the Curse of the law, the wrath and judgment of God, and
overcome them in his own body: for no power of flesh and blood could overcome
these huge and hideous Monsters. But now, Christ is not the law or the work of
the law, but a divine and humane person, which took upon him sin, the
condemnation of the law and death, not for him self, but for us. Wherefore all
the weight and force hereof consists in this word, For us.

We must not the^ imagine Christ to be innocent and as a private person (as do
the Schoolmen, and almost all the Fathers have done) which is holy and
righteous for him self only. All men, yea the most holy, remain under the
Curse, without Christ.
True it is in deed that Christ is a person most pure and unspotted: but thou
must not stay there: for thou have not yet Christ, although thou know him to
be God and man: but then thou have him in deed, when thou beleeuest that this
most pure and innocent person is freely given unto thee of the Father to be thy
high Priest and Sauiouer, How Christ is truly known.
yea rather thy servant, that he putting off his innocentie and holiness, and
taking thy sinful person upon him, might bear thy sin, thy death, and thy
Curse, and might be made a sacrifice and a Curse for thee, that by this means
he might deliver thee from the Curse of the law.

Ye see then with what an Apostolic spirit Paul handles this argument of
the Blessing and of the Curse, whilst he not only makes Christ subject to ye
Curse, but says also that he is made a Curse. So in the. 2. Corrin. 5. he
calls him Sin, when he says: He has made him to be Sin for us, which
knevv no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. 2.
Cor. 5.25.
And although these sentences may be well expounded after this manner: Christ is
made a Curse, that is to say, a sacrifice for the Curse: and Sin, yt is, a
sacrifice for sin, Christ is made a Curse and sin for us.
yet in my judgment it is better to keep the proper signification of the
words, because there is a greater force and vehemency therein. For when a
sinner comes to the knowledge of him self in deed, he feels not only that
he is miserable, but misery it self: not only that he is a sinner and is
accursed, but even sin and malediction it self. For it is in deed a great
matter to bear sin, the wrath of God, malediction and death. Wherefore that
man which has a true feeling of these things (as Christ did truly and
effectually feel them for all ma^kinde) is made even sin, death, and
malediction it self.

Paul therefore handles this place with a true Apostolical spirit. There is
neither Sophister, nor Lawyer, nor Jew, nor Anabaptist, nor any other that
speaks as he does. For who durst allege this place out of Moises: Accursed
is every one that hangs on tree, and apply it unto Christ? Like as Paul
then applied this sentence to Christ, even so may we apply unto Christ, not
only that whole. 27. chap. of Deuteronomie, but also may gather all ye Curses
of Moises law together, and expound the same of Christ. For as Christ is
innocent in this general law, touching his own person, so is he also in all
the rest. All the curses of the law be laid upon Christ.
And as he is guilty in this general law in that he is made a Curse for us,
and is hanged upon the cross as a wicked man, a blasphemer, a murderer and a
traitor: even so is he also guilty in all others. For all the Curses of the
law are heaped together and laid upon him, and therefore he did bear and
suffer them in his own body for us. He was therefore not only accursed, but
was also made a Curse for us.

This is rightly and after a true Apostolical manner to interpret the
Scriptures. For a man is not able to speak after this manner without the holy
Ghost: that is to say, to comprehend the whole law in this one saying: Christ
is made a Curse for us, and lay the same altogether upon Christ: This is a
most sure argument taken out of the whole law.
and contrariwise to comprehend all the promises of the Scripture, and say,
that they are all at once fulfilled in Christ. Wherefore this is in deed an
Apostolic and invincible argument, not taken out of one place of the law, but
out of the whole law: which Paul also uses as a sure ground.

Here we may see with what diligence Paul read the holy Scriptures, and how
exactly he wayed every word of this place: Paul diligently vvayeth this
sentence of Genesis: In thy seed. etc.
In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. First, out of this
word Blessing. etc. he gathers this argument: If blessing shall be given
unto all nations, then are all nations under the Curse, yea the Jews also, who
have the law. And he alleges a testimony of the Scripture, whereby he
proves that all the Jews which are under the law, are under the Curse: For
Cursed is every one which abides not in all the things that are written in
this book.

Moreover, he diligently wayeth this clause: All nations. All nations.
Out of the which he gathers thus: that the Blessing belongs not only to
the Jews, but also to all the nations of the whole world. Seeing then it
belongs to all nations, it is impossible that it should be obtained through
the law of Moises, The Jews attained not to righteousness through the law.
Romans 10.
for as much as there was no nation yt had the law, but only the Jews. And
although they had the law, yet were they so far of from obtaining the
Blessing through it, that the more they endeavored to accomplish it, the more
they were subject to the Curse of the law. Wherefore there must needs be an
other righteousness which must be far more excellent then the righteousness of
the law, through which, not only the Jews, but also all nations through out
the whole world, must obtain the Blessing.

Finally, these words: In thy Seed, In thy seed.
he expounds after this manner, that a certain man should issue out of the
seed of Abraham, that is to say, Christ, through whom the Blessing should come
afterward upon all nations. Christ became accursed, that he might bless all
nations.
Seeing therefore it was Christ that should bless all nations, it was he also
that should take away ye Curse from them. But he could not take it away by the
law, for by the law it is more and more increased. What did he then? He joined
himself to the company of ye accursed, taking unto him their flesh and their
blood, and so set him self for a Mediator between God and men, saying: How the
nations were delivered from the Curse. In one person Christ joins God and
man together.
Although I be flesh and blood, and now dwell among the accursed, yet
notwithstanding I am that Blessed one through whom all men must be blessed. So
in one person he joined God and man together, and being united unto us which
were accursed, he was made a Curse for us, and hid his Blessing in our sin,
in our death, and in our Curse, which condemned him and put him to death. But
because he was the Son of God, he could not be holden of them, Hypocrites
are offended at the doctrine of the gospel.
but overcame them, led them captive and triumphed over them: and whatsoever
did hang upon flesh, which for our sake he took upon him, he carried it with
him. Wherefore all they that cleave unto this flesh, are blessed and delivered
from the Curse, that is, from sin, and everlasting death.

They that understand not this benefit of Christ (whereof the gospel specially
entreats) and know not an other righteousness besides the righteousness of the
law, when they hear that the works of the law are not necessary to
salvation, but that men do obtain the same by only hearing and believing that
Christ the Son of God has taken upon him our flesh and joined him self to
the accursed, to the end that all nations might be blessed, they (I say) are
offended: for of all this they understand nothing, or else they understand it
carnally. For their minds are occupied with other cogitations and fantastical
imaginatio^s: therefore these things seem unto them strange matters. Yea even
unto us which have received the first fruits of the spirit, it is impossible
to understand these things perfectly: for they mightily fight against reason.

To conclude, all evils should have overwhelmed us, as they shall ouerwhelme
the wicked for ever. But Christ being made for us a tra^sgressor of all laws,
guilty of all our malediction, our sins, and al our evils, comes as
Mediator between, embracing us wicked and damnable sinners. He took upon him
and bare all our evils, which should have oppressed and tormented us for ever:
and these cast him down for a while, and ran over his head like water, as
the Prophet in the person of Christ complains when he says: Thy indignation
sore presses me, Psa. 88.15.16.
and thou have vexed me with all thy storms. Again: Thine indignations have
gone over me, and thy terrors have troubled me. By this means we being
delivered from these everlasting terrors and anguish through Christ, shall
enjoy an everlasting and inestimable peace and felicity, so that we believe
this.

These are the reverend mysteries and secrets, which Moises also somewhat
parkly in some places did for eshew: The true mysteries. The Fathers of the old
Testament rejoiced more of the benefit of Christ then we do.
which also the Prophets and Apostles did know, and did deliver to their
posterity. Of which thing to come, the Saints of the old Testament rejoiced
more, then we do for the same already exhibited unto us. In deed we do
acknowledge yt this knowledge of Christ and of the righteousness of faith, is an
inestimable treasure: but we conceive not thereby such a full joy of spirit, as
the Prophets and Apostles did. Hereof it comes, that they (and specially
Paul) so plentifully set forth and so diligently taught the Article of
Justification. For this is the proper office of an Apostle, The proper office
of Apostles.
to set forth the glory and benefit of Christ, and thereby to raise up and to
comfort troubled and afflicted consciences.

Verse. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through
Christ Jesus.
Paul has always this place before his eyes: In thy seed etc. For ye
Blessing promised unto Abraham, could not come upon ye Gentiles, The blessing
given unto the Gentiles by Christ.
but only by Christ the seed of Abraham: and that by this means: to wit,
yt it behooved him to be made a Curse, yt this promise made unto Abraham: In thy
seed shall all nations be blessed, might so be fulfilled. Therefore by no other
means could this be done yt is here promised, but that Jesus Christ must
needs become a Curse, and join him self to those that were accursed, that so
he might take away the Curse from them, and through his Blessing might bring
unto them righteousness and life. And here mark (as I have also forewarned you)
that this word Blessing is not in vain, as the Jews dream, The word
Blessing.
who expound it to be but a salutation by word of mouth or by writing. But
Paul entreats here of sin and righteousness, of death and life before God.
He speaks therefore of inestimable and incomprehensible things, when he
says: that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ.

Ye see moreover what merits we bring, Our desert vvherby we obtain the
Blessing.
and by what means we obtain this Blessing. This is ye merit of Congruence
and worthiness, these are the works preparatiue whereby we obtain this
righteousness, yt Christ Jesus was made a Curse for us. For we are ignorant of
God, enemies of God, dead in sin, and accursed: and what is our desert then?
What can he deserve yt is accursed, ignorant of God, dead in sins, and
subject to the wrath and judgment of God? When the Pope exco^municateth a man,
whatsoever he does, is counted accursed. How much more then may we say, yt he
is accursed before God (as all we are before we know Christ) which does nothing
else but cursed things? The way how to escape the Curse.
Wherefore there is no other way to avoid ye Curse, but to believe, and with
assured confidence to say: Thou Christ art my sin and my Curse, or rather I
am thy sin, thy Curse, thy death, thy wrath of God, thy hell: and
contrariwise, thou art my righteousness, my Blessing, my life, my grace of God,
and my heaven. For the text says plainly: Christ is made a Curse for us.
Therefore we are the cause that he was made a Curse: nay rather we are his
Curse.

This is an excellent place, and full of spiritual consolation, and albeit it
satisfy not ye blind and hard hearted Jews, yet it satisfies us that are
baptized, and have received this doctrine, and concludes most mightily, yt we
are blessed through the Curse, the sin, and the death of Christ, yt is to
say, we are justified and quickened unto life. So long as sin, death and ye
Curse do abide in us, sin terrifieth, death kills, and the Curse condemns
us. But when these are translated and laid upon Christ's back, Our sins are
cast upon Christ and his righteousness is given unto us.
then are these evils made his own, and his good things are made ours. Let us
therefore learn in all tentations to translate sin, death, the Curse and all
evils which oppress us, from our selves unto Christ, and again, from him unto
our selves, righteousness, mercy, life and blessing. For he bears all our
evils upon him. God the father cast the iniquities of us all, The mercy of God
toward sinners unspeakable.
as Esaias the Prophet says, upon him: And he has taken them upon him
willingly, for he was not guilty. But this he did, that he might fulfill the
will of his father, by the which we are made holy for ever.

This is that infinite and unmeasurable mercy of God, which Paul would gladly
amplify with all eloquence and plenty of words, The greatness of Gods mercy
is so exceeding, that it can scant be believed.
but the slender capacity of man's heart can not comprehend, and much less
utter, that unsearchable deapth and burning zeal of Gods love toward us. And
verily the inestimable greatness of Gods mercy, not only engenders an hardness
to believe, but also incredulity it self. For I do not only hear that
almighty God the creator and maker of all things is good and merciful, but
also that the same high sovereign Majesty was so careful for me a damnable
sinner, a child of wrath and of everlasting death, that he spared not his own
dear Son, but delivered him to a most opprobrious and shameful death, that
he ha^ging between two thieves, might be made a Curse and sin for me a cursed
sinner, Of what things the Gospel entreats.
that I might be made blessed: that is to say, the child and heir of God. Who
can sufficiently praise and magnify this exceeding great goodness of God? Not
all the Angels in heaven. Therefore the doctrine of the Gospel the book of
God, speaks of far other matters then any book of policy or philosophy,
yea or ye book of Moses himself: to wit, of the unspeakable and most divine
gifts of God, which far pass the capacity and understanding both of men
and Angels.

Verse. 14. That we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith.
This is a phrase of the Hebrews: The promise of the spirit: The promise of
the spirit.
that is to say, the spirit promised. Now, the spirit is freedom from ye law,
sin, death, the Curse, hell, and from the wrath and judgment of God. Here is
no merit or worthiness of ours, but a free promise and a gift given through
the Seed of Abraham, The nature of Faith.
that we may be free from all evils, and obtain all good things whatsoever.
And this liberty and gift of the spirit, we receive not by any other merits
then by Faith alone. For that only takes hold of the promise of God, as
Paul plainly says in this place: that we might receive the promise of the
spirit, Verse. 14.
not by works, but by Faith.

This is in deed a sweet and a true Apostolic doctrine, What manner of
doctrine the Apostolical doctrine is.
which shows yt those things are fulfilled for us, and now given to us, which
many Prophets and Kings desired to see and to hear. And such like places as
this one is, were gathered together out of diverse sayings of the Prophets,
which forsaw long before in spirit, yt all things should be changed,
repaired, and governed by this man Christ. Therefore the Jews having the law
of God, did notwithstanding besides that law, look for Christ. None of the
Prophets or governors of the people of God, did make any new law, but Elias,
Samuel, David, and all the other Prophets did abide under ye law of Moses: they
did not appoint any new tables, or a new kingdom and priesthode: The change of
things reserrued to Christ alone.
for that new change of the kingly priesthood of the law and ye worship, was
referred and kept to him only of whom Moises had prophesied long before: The
Lord thy God shall raise up a Prophet unto thee of thine own nation, and from
among thy brethren: Him shall thou hear. As if he should say: Thou shall hear
him only, and none besides him.

This the Fathers well understood, for none could teach greater and higher
points then Moises him self, who made excellent laws of high and great
matters, as are the ten commaundeme^ts, especially the first commandment: I
am the Lord thy God: Exodus ^0.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart etc. This law concerning the love of God, does comprehend the
very Angels also. Therefore it is the headspring of all divine wisdom. The
first commandment the spring of all the wisdoms of God.
And yet was it necessary notwithstanding, that an other teacher should come,
that is to say, Christ, which should bring and teach an other thing far
passing these excellent laws: to wit, grace and remission of sins. This is
therefore a mighty text. For in this short sentence: That we might receive the
promise of the spirit by faith, Paul pours out at once what so ever he was
able to say. Therefore when he can go no further (for he could not utter any
greater or more excellent thing), he breaks of, and here he stays.

Verse. 15. Brethern, I speak according to man: Though it be but a man's
covenant when it is confirmed, yet no man does abrogate it, or adds any
thing thereto.
After this principal and invincible argument Paul adds an other grounded
upon ye similitude of a man's Testament: which seems to be very weak, and such
as the Apostle ought not to use for the confirmation of a matter of so great
importance. For in high and weighty matters, Human things must be confirmed
by divine things,, and not contrariwise divine things by human things.
we ought to confirm earthly things by divine things, and not divine and
heavenly things by earthly and worldly things. And in deed it is true ye these
arguments of all other are most weak, when we go about to prove and confirm
heavenly matters with earthly and corruptible things as Scotus is wont to do. A
man (says he) is able to love God above all things, for he loves him self
above all things: therefore much more is he able to love God above all things.
For a good thing the greater it is, the more it is to be loved. And hereof he
infers that a man is able, ex puris naturalibus: that is to say, even of his
own pure natural strength, easily to fulfill that high commandment: Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. etc. For (says he) a man is
able to love ye least good thing above all things: yea he sets at naught his
life (of all other things most dear unto him) for a little vile money: Therefore
he can much more do it for Gods cause.

Ye have oftentimes heard of me, yt civil ordinances are of God: for God has
ordained them and allows them, as he does ye Sun, the Moon, and other
creatures. Therefore an argument taken of the ordinance or of the creatures of
God, is good, so yt we use the same rightly. An argument taken from Gods
creatures holds.
So the Prophets have very often used similitudes and comparisons taken of
creatures, calling Christ the Sun, the Church the Moon, the preachers and
teachers of the word the Stars. Also there are many similitudes in the
Prophets, of trees, thorns, flowers, and fruits of the earth. The often use of
similitudes in the holy scriptures.
The new Testament likewise is full of such similitudes. Therefore where Gods
ordinance is in the creature, there may an argument be well borrowed and applied
to divine and heavenly things.

So our Savior Christ in Mat. 7. argues from earthly things to heavenly
things, Math. 7.11.
when he says: If ye then which are evil ca^ give to your children good
gifts, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to
them that ask him? Likewise Paul: We must obey men: therefore much more must
we obey God. Jeremy also in the 53. chap: The Rhecabites obeyed their Father:
Rom 13. Ierems. 3^.16.
how much more ought ye to have obeyed me? Now these things are appointed of
God, and are his ordinances, that Fathers should give unto their children,
When arguing from huma^ne things is of force.
and that children should obey their parents. Therefore such manner of arguments
are good when they are grounded upon ye ordinance of God. But if they be taken
from men's corrupt affections, they are naught. When it is not of force.
Such is the argument of Scotus: I love the lesser good thing, therefore I love
the greater more. I deny the consequence. For my loving is not Gods ordinance,
but a deuillish corruption. In deed it should be so, that I loving my self or
an other creature, should much more love God the creator: but it is not so.
Our love is corrupted.
For the love wherewith I love my self, is corrupt and against God.

This I say lest any man should cavil yt an argument taken of corruptible
things, and applied to divine and spiritual matters, is nothing worth. For
this argument (as I have said) is strong enough, so that we ground the same
upon the ordinance of God, as we see in this argument which we have in hand.
For ye civil law which is an ordinance of God, The testament of a man is not
changed.
says yt it is not lawful to break or to change the testament of a man. Yea
it commands that the last will or testament of a man be straightly kept: For
that it is one of the holiest and most laudable customs yt are among men. Now
therefore upon this custom of man's Testament Paul argues after this manner:
How comes it to pass that man is obeyed and not God? Political and civil
ordinances, as concerning Testaments and other things, are diligently kept.
There nothing is changed, nothing is added or taken away. Gods Testament is
changed.
But the Testament of God is changed: that is to say, his promise concerning
the spiritual Blessing, that is, concerning heavenly and everlasting things,
which the whole world ought not only to receive with great zeal and
affection: but also ought most religiously to reverence and honor. This
persuadeth vehemently, when we so argue from the examples and laws of men.
Therefore he says: I speak after the manner of men: that is to say, I bring
unto you a similitude taken of the custom and manner of men. As if he should
say: A Testament or last will is confirmed by the death of him that makes it.
The testaments of men and such other corruptible things are streitly executed,
and that which the law commands is diligently observed and kept. For when a
man makes his last will, bequeathing his lands and goods to his heirs and
thereupon dies, this last will is confirmed and ratified by the death of the
Testator, so yt nothing may now be either added to it, or taken from it,
according to all law and equity. Now, if a ma^s will be kept with so great
fibelity, yt nothing is added to it or taken from it after his death: The
Testament of God ought to be kept with greater fidelity then man's Testament.
how much more ought the last Will of God to be faithfully kept, which he
promised and gave unto Abraham and his seed after him? For when Christ died,
then was it confirmed in him, and after his death the writing of his last
Testament was opened: that is to say, ye promised Blessing of Abraham was
preached among all nations dispersed throughout the whole world. This was yt
last Will and Testament of God the great Testatour confirmed by the death of
Christ: The Testament o^ last Will of God.
therefore no man ought to change it or to add any thing to it, as they that
teach the law and man's traditions do. For they say, unless thou be
circumcised, keep the law do, many works, and suffer many things, thou can
not be saved. This is not the last Will or Testament of God. For he said not
unto Abraham: if thou do this or that, thou shall obtain the Blessing: or
they yt be circumcised and keep the law shall obtain the same: but he says,
In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. As if he should
say: I of mere mercy do promise unto thee, ye Christ shall come of thy
seed, who shall bring the Blessing upon all nations oppressed with sin and
death: that is to say, which shall deliver the nations from the everlasting
Curse: to wit, from sin and death, receaui^g this promise by faith: In thy
seed etc Wherefore, even as the false Apostles were in time past, so are all
the Papists and Iusticiaries at this day peruerters and destroyers, Who are
the destroyers of Gods Testament.
not of man's Testament (because they are forbidden by ye law): but of Gods
Testament, whom they fear nothing at all, although he be a consuming fire. The
nature of hypocrites.
For such is ye nature of all hypocrites, that they will observe man's law
exactely: but the laws of God they do despise, and most wickedly transgress.
But the time shall come when they shall bear an horrible judgment, and shall
feel what it is to contemn and peruerte the Testament of God. This argument
then grounded upon the ordinance of God, is strong enough.

Verse. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says
not: And to the Seeds, as speaking of many: but and to thy Seed, as of one
which is Christ.
Here by a new name he calls the promises of God made unto Abraham
concerning Christ that should bring the Blessinge unto all nations, Paul
calls the promise a Testament.
a Testament. And in deed the promise is nothing else but a Testament, not
yet revealed, but sealed up. Now, a Testament is not a law, but a donation
or free gift. For heirs look not for laws, exactions, or any burdens to be
laid upon them by the Testament, but they look for the inheritance confirmed
thereby.

First of all therefore he expounds the words: Afterward he applies the
similitude, and stands upon this word Seed. There were no laws given unto
Abraham (says he), but a Testament was made and delivered unto him: that is to
say, the promises were pronounced unto him as touching the spiritual Blessing:
therefore somewhat was promised and given unto him. The Testament of man is a
shadovve of Gods Testament.
If then the Testament of a man be kept, why should not rather the Testament
of God be kept? whereof the Testament of man is but a shadow? Again, if we
will keep the signs, why do we not rather keep the things which they
signify?

Now, the promises are made unto him, not in all the Jews, or in many Seeds,
but in one Seed, which is Christ. The Jews will not receive this
interpretation of Paul: For they say, that the singular number is here put for
the plural, one for many. But we gladly receive this meaning and
interpretation of Paul, who oftentimes repeteth this word Seed, and
expounds this Seed to be Christ: Christ the Seed promised to Abraham.
and this he does with a true Apostolical spirit. Let the Jews deny it as
much as they will: we notwithstanding have arguments strong enough, which
Paul has before rehearsed, which also confirm this thing, and they can not
deny them. Hitherto, as touching the similitude of Gods ordinance, that is to
say: of man's Testament. Now he expounds and amplifieth the same.

Verse. 17. And this I say, that the law which was. 430. years after, can
not disanull the couenaunte that was confirmed before of God in respect of
Christ, that it should make the promise of none effect.
Here the Jews might object, An objection of the Jews.
that God was not only content to give promises to Abraham, but also after.
430. years he made the law. God therefore mistrusting his own promises, as
insufficient to justify, added thereto a better thing: that is to say, the
law, to the end that when the same, as a better successor, was come, not the
idle but the doers of the law might be made righteous thereby. The law
therefore which followed the promise, did abrogate the promise. Such euasions
and starting holes the Jews seek out.

To this cauillation Paul answers very well and to the purpose, and
strongly confu^eth the same. Paul confuteth the objection of the Jews.
The law (says he) was given 430. years after the promise was made: In thy
Seed etc. and it could not make the promise void and unprofitable. For the
promise is the Testament of God, confirmed by God himself in Christ so many
years before the law. Now, that which God once has promised and confirmed, he
calls not back again, but it remains ratified and sure for ever.

Why the law is added to the promise.
Why then was the law added? In deed it was delivered so many ages after to the
posterity of Abraham, not to ye end he might through it obtain the Blessing
(for it is the office of the law to bring me^ under the Curse, and not to
bless): but that there might be in the world a certain people, which might
have the word and testimony of Christ, out of the which, Christ also according
to the flesh, might be borne: And that men being kept and shut up under the
law, might sigh and groan for their deliverance through ye Seed of Abraham,
which is Christ: which only should and could bless, that is to say, deliver
all nations from sin and everlasting death. Moreover, the ceremonies
commanded in the law, did foreshadowe Christ. Wherefore the promise was not
abolished either by the law, or by the ceremonies of the law: but rather by the
same, as by certain seals, it was for a time confirmed, until the letters
themselves or the writing of the Testament (to wit, The letters he calls the
written will or Testament.
the promise) might be opened and by the preaching of the Gospel might be
spread abroad among all nations.

The promise is confirmed by the law: therefore not abolished.
But let us suffer the law and the promise to encounter together, and then shall
we see which of them is the stronger: that is to say, whether the promise be
able to abolish the law, or the law the promise. If the law abolish the
promise, then it follows, that we by our works make God a lier and his
promise of none effect. For if the law do justify us and deliver us from
sin and death, and consequently our works and our own strength performing
the law, then the promise made to Abraham is utterly void and unprofitable,
and so consequently God is a lier and a dissembler. What discommoditie should
follow if the law should abolish the promise.
For when he which promises will not perform his promise, but makes it of
none effect, what does he else but show himself to be a lier and a dissembler?
But it is impossible that the law should make God a lier, or that our works
should make the promise void, nay rather it must needs be firm and stable for
ever (for God promises not in vain) although we were able to keep and fulfill
the law. And let us admit that all men were as holy as Angels, so that they
should not need the promise (which notwithstanding is impossible): yet must we
think that the same promise abides most sure and certain: or else God should
be found a lier, which either has promised in vain, or else will not or can
not perform his promises. Therefore, like as the promise was before the law,
so is it far more excellent then the law.

And God did excellently well in that he gave the promise so long before the
law. Which he did of purpose and to this end, The law does not abrogate the
promise, but Faith laying hold upon the promise, does abrogate the law.
that it should not be said, that righteousness was given through the law, and
not through the promise. For if he would that we should have been justified by
the law, then would he have given the law. 430. years before the promise, or
else together with the promise. But now at the first he speaks not a word
as concerning the law, but at the length after 430. years he gives the law.
In the mean while, all that time he speaks only of his promises. Therefore
the Blessing and free gift of righteousness came before the law through the
promise: The promise therefore is far more excellent then the law. And so the
law does not abolish the promise, but Faith in the promise (whereby the
beleuers even before Christ's time were saved) which is now published by the
Gospel throughout the whole world, destroys the law, so that it can not
increase sin any more, terrify sinners, or bring them into desperation,
laying hold upon the promise through Faith.

And in this also lies a certain vehemency specially to be noted, that he
expressly sets down the number of.430. years. As if he would say:
Consider with your selves how long it was between the promise given, and the
law. It is plain that Abraham received the promise a long time before the
law. For the law was given to the people of Israel.430. years after. And
this is an invincible argument gathered and grounded upon a certain time. And
he speaks not here of the law in general, but only of the written law.
The written law.
As if he would say: God could not then have regard to the Ceremonies and
works of the law, and give righteousness to the obseruers thereof. For as yet
the law was not given, which commands ceremonies, requires works, and
promises life to those that observe them, saying: The man that shall do these
things, shall live in them. And although it promise such things, yet it
follows not therefore that we obtain these promises: For it says plainly:
The man that shall do these things, etc. Now, it is certain that no man can do
them. Moreover, Paul says that the law can not abolish the promise:
therefore that promise made unto Abraham.430. years before the law, remains
firm and constant. And that the matter may be better understand, I will
declare the same by a similitude. A Similitude.
If a rich man, not constrained, but of his own good will, should adopte one
to be his son, whom he knows not, and to whom he owes nothing, and should
appoint him to be the heir of all his lands and goods, and certain years
after that he has bestowed this benefit upon him, he should lay upon him a
law to do this or that: he ca^ not now say that he has deserved this benefit
by his own works, seeing that many years before, he asking nothing, had
received the same freely and of mere favor: So, God could not respect our
works and deserts going before righteousness: for the promise and the gift of
the holy Ghost was.430. years before the law.

Hereby it appears that Abraham obtained not righteousness before God through
the law. Abraham was not made righteous by the law, for when he lived,
there was no law.
For there was yet no law. If there were yet no law, then was there neither
work nor merit. What then? Nothing else but the mere promise. This promise
Abraham believed, and it was counted to him for righteousness. By the self same
means then that the father obtained this promise, the children do also
obtain it and hold it. So say we also at this day: Our sins were purged by
the death of Christ above a thousand and five hundredth years ago, when there
were yet no religious Orders, no Canon or rule of Penance, no merits of
congruence and worthiness. We can not now therefore begin to abolish the same by
our own works and merits.

What manner of arguments Paul uses.
Thus Paul gathers arguments of similitudes, of a certain time, and of
persons, so sure and strong on every side that no man can deny them. Let us
therefore arm and fortify our consciences with such like arguments: For it
helps us excedingly, to have them always ready in tentations. For they lead
us from the law and works, to the promise and to faith: from wrath to grace:
from sin to righteousness, and from death to life. Therefore these two things
(as I do often repeat): to wit, the law and the promise must be diligently
distinguished. For in time, The law and the promise must be distinguished.
in place, and in person, and generally in all other circumstances they are
separate as far asunder as heaven and earth, the beginning of the world and
the later end. In deed they are near neighbors, for they are joined
together in one man or in one soul: but in the inward affection and as
touching their office, they ought to be separate far asonder: so that the
law may have dominion over the flesh, and the promise may sweetly and
comfortably reign in the conscience. When thou have thus appointed unto them
both their own proper place, then thou walk safely between them both in the
heaven of the promise, and in the earth of the law. Both the law and the
promise must have their own proper places appointed unto them.
In spirit thou walk in the Paradise of grace and peace: In the flesh thou
walk in the earth of works and of the cross. And now the troubles which
the flesh is compelled to bear, shall not be hard unto thee, because of the
sweetenes of the promise, which comfort and rejoices the heart excedingly.
But now, if thou confound and mingle these two together, What incommodities
follow of the mingling of the law and the promise together.
and place the law in the conscience, and the promise of liberty in the
flesh, then thou make a confusion, (such as was in Popery): so that thou
shall not know what the law, what the promise, what sin, or what
righteousness is.

Wherefore if thou will divide the word of truth aright, thou must put a great
difference between the promise and the law as touching the inward affections
and whole practice of life. The promise must not be confounded with the law.
It is not for naught that Paul prosecuteth this argument so diligently. For
he foresawe in spirit that this mischief should creep into the Church, that
the word of God should be confounded: that is to say, that the promise should
be mingled with the law, and so the promise should be utterly lost. For when
the promise is mingled with the law, it is now made nothing else but the very
law. Therefore accustom thy self to separate the promise and the law
asunder, even in respect of time, that when the law comes and accuses thy
conscience, thou may say: Lady law, thou come not in season, for thou
come to soon. Tarry yet until.430. years be expired, and when they are past,
then come and spare not. But if thou come then, yet shall thou come to late.
For then has the promise prevented thee.430. years: to the which I assent and
sweetly repose my self in the same. Therefore I have nothing to do with
thee: I hear thee not. For now I live with the believing Abraham: or rather
since Christ is now revealed and given unto me, I live in him: who is my
righteousness, who also has abolished thee, O law. And thus let Christ be
always before thine eyes, as a certain Summarie of all arguments for the
defense of Faith, against the righteousness of the flesh, against the law, and
against all works and merits what so ever.

Hitherto I have rehearsed almost all, but specially the principal arguments
which the Apostle Paul handles in this Epistle for the confirmation of this
Doctrine of Justification. Among which, The argument touching the promise.
the argument as touching the promise made unto Abraham and to the other
Fathers, is the waightiest and of greatest efficacy: which Paul does chiefly
prosecute both here and in the Epistle to the Romans: the words whereof he
diligently wayeth: and moreover entreats both of the times and persons. Also
he stands upon this word Seed, applying the same unto Christ. Finally, he
declares by the contrary what the law works: The office of the law.
namely that it holds men under the Curse. And thus he fortifieth the Article
of Christian righteousness with strong and mighty arguments. On the other side, he
overthrows the arguments of the false apostles which they used in defense of
the righteousness of the law, and he turns them upon their own heads: That
is to say, whereas they contended that righteousness and life is obtained by the
law, Paul shows that they work nothing but malediction and death in us. Ye
contend (says he) that the law is necessary to salvation. Have ye not read,
that it says: He that shall do these things shall live in them? Galat. 3.1^.
Galat. 3.10.
Now, who is he that does perform or accomplish them? No man living. Therefore,
as many as are of the works of the law are under the Curse. 1. Cor. 15.56.
And again, in another place: The sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the law. Now follows the conclusion of all these arguments.

Verse. 18. For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more by the
promise. etc.
Verse. 14.
So he says in the.4. to the Romans: For if they which be of the law be
heirs, then is Faith but vain, and the promise of none effect. And it can not
otherwise be: for this distinction is plain, that the law is a thing far
differing from the promise. A difference between the law, and the promise.
Yea natural reason, although it be never so blind, is compelled to confess,
that it is one thing to promise, and an other thing to require: one thing to
give, and an other thing to take. To promise and to require are distinct things.
The law does require and exact of us our works: the promise of the Seed
does offer unto us the spiritual and everlasting benefits of God, and that
freely for Christ's sake. Therefore we obtain the inheritance or Blessing
through the promise, and not through the law. For the promise says: In thy
seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed. The inheritance is given by
the promise, and not by the law.
Therefore he that has the law, has not enough, because he has not yet the
Blessing, without the which he is compelled to abide under the Curse. The law
therefore can not justify because the Blessing is not joined unto it. Moreover,
if the inheritance were of the law, then should God be found a lier, and ye
promise should be in vain. Again, if the law could obtain the Blessing, why
did God then make this promise: In thy Seed? etc. Why did he not rather say:
Do this and thou shall receive the Blessing? or else by keeping of the law,
thou may deserve everlasting life. This argument is grounded upon contraries:
The inheritance is given by the promise: therefore not by the law.

Verse. 18. But God gave it unto Abraham by promise.
It can not be denied, but that God before the law was, gave unto Abraham the
inheritance or Blessing by the promise: that is to say, remission of sins,
righteousness, salvation, and everlasting life, What the Blessing is, which is
given us through Christ.
yt we should be sons and heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Christ. For
it is plainly said in Genesis: In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. There
the Blessing is given freely without respect of ye law or works. For God gave ye
inheritance before Moises was borne, or before any man had yet once thought of
the law. Why vau^t ye then that righteousness comes by the law, seeing that
righteousness, life, and salvation was given to your father Abraham without the
law, yea before there was any law? He that is not moved with these things, is
blind and obstinate. But this argument of the promise I have before handled
more largely, and therefore I will now but touch it by the way.

Hitherto we have heard the principal part of this Epistle. Now the Apostle
goes about to show the use and office of the law, adding certain similitudes
of the Scholemaster, and of the li^le Heir: Also the allegory of the two
sons of Abraham, Isaacke and Ismael etc. Last of all he sets forth
certain precepts concerning manners.

Verse. 19. Wherefore then serves the law?
When we teach yt a man is justified without the law and works, then does this
question necessarily follow: If ye law do not justify, why then was it given?
Also: Why does God charge us and burden us with the law, if it do not
justify? What is the cause that we are so hardly exercised and vexed with it, if
they which work but one hour are made equal with us, which have borne the heat
and burden of the day? When as that grace is once published unto us which the
Gospel sets out, The murmuring of the Jews against the doctrine of Paul,
for the stablishi^g of faith. Math. 21.31.
by and by arises this great murmuring: without the which the Gospel can not
be preached. The Jews had this opinion, that if they kept the law, they
should be justified thereby. Therefore when they heard that the Gospel was
preached concerning Christ, who came into the world to save, not the righteous,
but sinners, and that they should go before them into the kingdom of God, they
were wonderfully offended, complaining that they had borne the heavy yoke of
the law so many years with great labor and toil, and that they were
miserably vexed and oppressed with the tyranny of the law, without any profit,
yea rather to their great hurt: Again, that the Gentiles who were Idolaters,
obtained grace without any labor or travel. The murmuring of the Papists
against the gospel.
So do our Papists murmur at this day, saying: What has it profited us that
we have lived in a Cloister twenty, thirty, or forty years: that we have
vowed chastity, poverty, obedience: that we have said so many Psalters, and
so many Canonical Hours, and so many Masses: that we have so punished our
bodies with fasting, prayers, chastisements. etc. if a husband, a wife, a
Prince, a governor, a master, a scholar: if an hireling or a drudge bearing
sackes, if a wench sweeping the house shall not only be made equal with us,
but also be accepted as better and more worthy before God then we?

This is therefore an hard question, wherewith reason is stricken dumme, and can
not answer, but is greatly offended with it. Reason after a sort
understands the righteousness of the law, The judgment of reason, concerning
the doctrine of the Gospel, which teaches that the law was given for
transgressio^s. Galat. 3.19. Romans 2.14. Romans 6.1. Romans 3.8.
which also it teaches and urges, and imagines that the doers of it are
righteous: but it understands not the office and end of the law. Therefore
when it hears this sentence of Paul, which is strange and unknown to the
world: That the law was given for transgressions, thus it judges: Paul
abolisheth the law, for he says, that we are not justified through it: Yea he
is a blasphemer against God which gave the law, when he says: that the law
was given for transgressions. Let us live therefore as Gentiles which have no
law. Yea, let us sin and abide in sin, that grace may abound: Also, let
us do evil, that good may come thereof. This happened to the Apostle Paul:
and the self same happens at this day unto us. For when the common people
hear out of the Gospel, that righteousness comes by the mere grace of God
through Faith only, without the law and without works, they gather by and by
of it, as did the Jews in times past: If the law do not justify, then let
us work nothing: and surely they perform this excellently well.

What should we then do? This impiety does in deed very much vex us, but we
can not remedy it. For when Christ preaches, he must needs hear, Christ is
judged to be a blasphemer, and a seditious person.
that he was a blasphemer and a seditious person: that is to say, that through
his doctrine he deceived men, and made them rebels against Caesar. The self
same thing happened to Paul and all the rest of the Apostles. And what marvel
is it if the world in like manner accuse us at this day? Let it accuse us, let
it sclaunder us, let it persecute us and spare not: yet must not we therefore
hold our peace, but speak freely, to the end that afflicted consciences may
be delivered out of the snares of the Devil. And we must not regard the
foolish and ungodly people in that they do abuse our doctrine: for whether they
have a law or no law, they can not be reformed. But we must consider how
afflicted consciences may be comforted, that they pearish not with the
multitude. If we should dissemble and hold our peace, pore afflicted
consciences should have no consolation, which are so entangled and snared with
men's laws and traditions, that they can wind them selves out by no means.

As Paul therefore seeing some to set themselves against his doctrine, and
others some to seek the liberty of the flesh and thereby to be made worse,
comforted him self after this sort, that he was an Apostle of Jesus Christ
sent to preach the Faith of Gods elect, and yt he must suffer all things for
the elects sake, All things are to be done for the elects sake
to the end yt they also might obtain salvation: even so we at this day do al
things for the elects sake, whom we know to be edified and comforted through
our doctrine. But as for ye dogs and swine (of whom the one sort does
persecute our doctrine, Dogs. Hogs.
and the other sort does tread under foot yt liberty which we have in Christ
Jesus) I am so offended with them, that in all my life for their sakes I would
not utter so much as one word: but I would rather wish that these hogs,
together with our adversaries the dogs, were yet still subject to the Popes
tyranny, rather then that the holy name of God should be so blasphemed and
evil spoken of through them.

Therefore, albeit not only the foolish and ignorant people, but they also
which seem in their own conceits to be very wise, do argue after this sort:
If ye law do not justify, then is it in vain and unprofitable, The law
justifies not, therefore it is unprofitable, is a naughty consequence.
yet is it not therefore true. For like as this consequence is nothing worth:
Money does not justify or make a man righteous, therefore it is unprofitable:
the eyes do not justify, therefore they must be plucked out: the hands make not
a man righteous therefore they must be cut of: so is this naught also: The law
does not justify, therefore it is unprofitable: for we must attribute unto
every thing his proper effect and use. We do not therefore destroy and
condemn the law because we say yt it does not justify: but we answer
otherwise to this question: To what end then serves the law? then our
adversaries do, who do wickedly and peruersely counterfeit an office and use
of ye law which belongs not unto it.

Against this abuse and forged office of the law we dispute and answer with
Paul, that the law does not justify. But in so saying, we affirm not that
the law is unprofitable, as they do by and by gather: If the law do not
justify (say they) then is it given in vain. No not so. For it has his
proper office and use, The proper office and use of the law.
but not that which the adversaries do imagine, namely, to make me^ righteous:
but it accuses, terrifieth, and condemns them. We say with Paul that the
law is good, if a man do rightly use it: When the law is good.
that is to say, if he use the law as the law. If I give unto the law his
proper definition, and keep it within the compass of his office and use, it
is an excellent thing: But if I translate it to an other use, and attribute
that unto it which I should not, then do I not only pervert the law, but also
the whole Scripture.

Therefore Paul fights here against those pestilent hypocrites, who could not
abide this sentence: The law was added for transgressions. For they think
that the office of the law is to justify. And this is the general opinion of
man's reason among the Sophisters, Al men do naturally judge that the law does
justify.
and throughout the whole world, that righteousness is gotten through the works
of the law. And reason will by no means suffer this pernicious opinion to be
wrested from it, because it understands not the righteousness of Faith. Hereof
it comes that the Papists both foolishly and wickedly do say: The Church has
the law of God, the traditions of the Fathers, the decrees of Councels: If it
live after them, it is holy. Reason is ignorant of the righteousness of faith.
No man shall persuade these men, that when they keep these things, they please
not God, but provoke his wrath. To conclude, they that trust in their own
righteousness, think to pacify the wrath of God by their wilworship and
voluntary religion. Therefore this opinion of the righteousness of the law is
the sink of all evils, and the sin of sins of the whole world. The opinion
of the righteousness of the law most pernicious.
For gross sins and vices may be known and so amended, or else repressed by
the punishment of the Magistrate. But this sin, to wit, man's opinion
concerning his own righteousness, will not only not be counted sin, but also
will be esteemed for an high religion and righteousness. This pestilent sin
therefore is the most high and sovereign power of the Devil over the whole
world, What the great sovereignty of the Devil is throughout the whole
world.
the very head of the Serpent, and the snare whereby the Devil entangleth and
holds all men captive. For naturally all men have this opinion, that they are
made righteous by keeping of the law. Paul therefore, to the end he might
show the true office and use of the law, and might root out of men's hearts
that false opinion concerning the righteousness thereof, answers to this
objection: Wherefore then serves the law if it justify not? after this sort:
It was not given to make men righteous (says he) but,

Verse. 19. It was added because of transgressions.
As things are diverse and distinct: As all things are distinct, so are the uses
of things.
so the uses thereof are diverse and distinct: Therefore they may not be
confounded. For if they be, there must needs be a confusion of the things
also. A woman may not wear a man's apparel, nor a man a woman's attire. Let a
man do the works that belong to a man, and a woman the works that belong to a
woman. Let every man do that, which his vocation and office requires. Let
Pastors and Preachers teach the word of God purely. Let Magistrates govern
their subjects, and let subjects obey their Magistrates. Let every thing serve
in his due place and order. Every creature serves in his order and place.
Let the Sun shine by day, the Moon and the Stars by night: let the sea
give fishes, the earth grain, the woods wild beasts and trees. etc. In like
manner let not the law usurp the office and use of an other: that is to say,
of Justification: but let it leave this only to grace, to the promise, and to
Faith. What is then the office of the law? Transgression, or else (as he says
in another place), The law entered in, that sin should abound. The office of
the law. Romans 5.20
A goodly office forsooth. The law (says he) was added for transgressions:
that is to say, it was added besides and after the promise, until Christ the
Seed should come unto whom it was promised.

Of the double use of the law.
Here ye must understand that there is a double use of the law. The use of
politic laws.
One is Civil: For God has ordained Civil laws, yea all laws to punish
transgressions. Every law then is given to restrain sin. An objection.
If it restrain sin, then it makes men righteous. No, nothing less. For in
that I do not kill, I do not commit adultery, I do not steal, All laws
are given to bridle transgressions.
or in that I abstain from other sins, I do it not willingly or for the
love of virtue, but I fear the prison, the sword, and the hangman. These do
bridle and restrain me that I sin not, as bonds and chains restrain a
Lion or a Bear, that he tear and devour not every thing that he meets.
Therefore the restraining from sin is not righteousness, but rather a
signification of unrighteousness. For as a mad or a wild beast is bound lest
he should destroy every thing that he meets: even so the law does bridle a
mad and furious man, that he sin not after his own lust. This restrainte
shows plainly enough yt they which have need of ye law (as al they have
which are without Christ) are not righteous, but rather wicked and mad men,
whom it is necessary by ye bonds and prison of ye law so to bridle yt they
sin not. Therefore ye law justifies not.

The first use then of the law is, to bridle the wicked. For the Devil reigns
throughout the whole world, The power of the Devil.
and enforces men to all kinds of horrible wickedness. Therefore God has
ordained Magistrates, parents, God has ordained Magistrates, parents, laws,
etc. that sins might be brideled.
Ministers, laws, bonds, and all civil ordinances, that if they can do no
more, yet at ye least they may bind the Devils hands, yt he rage not in his
bondslaues after his own lust. Like as therefore they that are possessed, in
whom the Devil mightily reigns, are kept in bonds and chains lest they
should hurt other: even so in the world, which is possessed of the Devil and
carried headlong into all kinds of wickedness, the Magistrate is present with
his bonds and chains: yt is to say, with his laws, binding his hands and
feet that he run not headlong into all mischief. And if he suffer not him
self to be brideled after this sort, then he loses his head. This civil
restrainte is very necessary and appointed of God, as well for public peace, as
also for the preservation of all things, but specially lest the course of the
Gospel should be hindered by the tumultes and seditions of wicked, outrageous
and proud me^. But Paul entreats not here of this civil use and office of
the law. It is in deed very necessary, but it justifies not. For as a
possessed or mad man is not therefore free from the snares of the Devil or
well in his mind, because he has his hands and his feet bound and can do no
hurt: even so the world, although it be brideled by the law from outward
wickedness and mischief, yet is it not therefore righteous, but still
continues wicked: yea this restrainte shows plainly that the world is
wicked and outrageous, stirred up and enforced to all wickedness by his Prince
the Devil: for otherwise it need not to be brideled by laws that it should
not sin.

The spiritual use of the law
An other use of the law is divine and spiritual, which is (as Paul says) to
increase transgressions: that is to say, to reveal unto a man his sin, his
blindness, his misery, his impiety, ignorance, hatred and contempt of God,
death, hell, the judgment and deserved wrath of God. Of this use the Apostle
entreats notably in the. 7. to the Romans. This is altogether unknown to
hypocrites, The spiritual use of the law unknown to reason.
to the popish Sophisters and Scholediuines, and to all that walk in the
opinion of the righteousness of the law, or of their own righteousness. But to
the end that God might bridle and beat down this monster and this mad
beast (I mean the presumption of man's own righteousness and religion) which
naturally makes me^ proud, and puffs them up in such sort, that they
think them selves thereby to please God highly: it behooved him to send some
Hercules was a mighty Champion, which stevve the great monster Hydra (as the
Poets feign) which had a hundred necks with serpe^ts heads.
Hercules which might set upon this monster with all force and courage to
overthrow him, and utterly to destroy him: that is to say, he was constrained
to give a law in Mount Sina, with so great Majesty and with so terrible a
show, that the whole multitude was astonished. Exodus 19. and 20.

This, as it is the proper and the principal use of the law: so is it very
profitable and also most necessary. For if any be not a murderer, an
adulterer, a thief, and outwardly refrain from sin, as the Pharisey did
which is mentioned in the Gospel, he would swear (because he is possessed
with the Devil) that he is righteous, and therefore he conceaueth an opinion
of righteousness, and presumes of his good works and merits. Such a one God
can not otherwise mollify and humble, that he may acknowledge his misery and
damnation, Hypocrites are feated and humbled by the law.
but by the law. For that is the hammer of death, the thundering of hell, and
lightning of Gods wrath, that beats to powder the obstinate and senseles
hypocrites. Wherefore this is the proper and true use of the law, by
lightning, by tempest and by the sound of the trumpe (as in the Mount Sina) to
terrify, and by thundering to beat down and rent in pieces this beast which
is called the opinion of righteousness. Ierem. 13.^^. The opinion of
righteousness how pernicious it is.
Therefore says God by Jeremy his Prophet: My word is a hammer breaking
rocks. For as long as the opinion of righteousness abides in man, so long
there abides also in him incomprehensible pride, presumption, security,
hatred of God, contempt of grace and mercy, ignorance of the promises, and of
Christ. The preaching of free remission of sins through Christ, can not
enter in to the heart of such a one, neither can he feel any taste or savor
thereof. For that mighty rock and adamant wall: to wit, the opinion of
righteousness, wherewith the heart is environed, does resist it.

As therefore the opinion of righteousness is a great and an horrible monster, a
rebellious, obstinate, and stiffenecked beast: The opinion of righteousness an
horrible monster.
so for the destroying and overthrowing thereof, God has need of a mighty
hammer, that is to say, the law: which then is in his proper use and office
when it accuses and discovers sin after this sort: Behold, thou have
transgressed all the commandments of God. etc: and so it strikes a terror
into the conscience, so that it feels God to be offended and angry in deed,
and it self to be guilty of eternal death. Here the pore afflicted sinner
feels the intolerable burden of the law, and is beaten down even to
desperation, so that now being oppressed with great anguish and terror, he
desires death, or else seeks to destroy him self. The proper office of the
law.
Wherefore the law is that hammer, that fire, that mighty strong wind, and
that terrible earthquake renting the mountains, and breaking the rocks, that
is to say, the proud and obstinate hypocrites. Elias, 3. Reg. 19.11.12.13.
not being able to abide these terrors of the law, which by these things are
signified, covered his head with his mantell. Notwithstanding when that tempest
ceased, of which he was a beholder, there came a soft and a gracious wind, in
the which the Lord was. But it behooved that the tempest of fire, of wind, and
the earthquake should pass, before the Lord should reveal him self in that
gracious wind.

This terrible show and majesty wherein God gave his law in Mount Sina, did
represent the use of the law. There was in the people of Israel which came out
of Egypt, a singular holiness. They gloried and said: Exodus 19.20.
We are the people of God: we vvil do all those things which the Lord our
God has commanded. Moreover, Moises did sanctify the people, and badde them
wash their garments, refrain from their wives, and prepare them selves against
the third day. There was not one of them but he was full of holine^^^ The third
day Moises brings the people out of their tents to t^ t^^ ^^rtaine into the
sight of the Lord, that they might hear his voice. W^^ ^^owed then? When the
children of Israel did see the horrible show of the Mount smoking and burning,
The children of Israel could not abide the voice of God speaking out of the
fire.
the black clouds and the lightnings flashing up and down in this horrible
darkness, and heard the sound of the trumpet blowing long, and waxing louder and
louder: and moreover when they heard the thundrings and lightnings, they were
afraid, and standing a far of, Exodus 20.19. Deuteronomy. 5.24.18.16.
they say unto Moises: We will do all things willingly, so that the Lord
speak not unto us, lest that we die, and this great fire consume us. Teach
thou us and we will hearken unto thee. I pray you, what did their purifying,
their holiness, their white garments, and refraining from their wives profit
them? Nothing at all. There was not one of them that could abide this presence
of the Lord in his Majesty and glory: but all being amazed and shaken with
terror, fled back as if they had been driven by the Devil. D^uter. 4.24.
For God is a co^suming fire: The law has still the same office, that it had
when it was given in Mount Sina.
in whose sight no flesh is able to stand.

The law of God therefore has properly and peculiarly that office which it had
then in Mount Sina, when it was first given, and was first heard of them that
were washed, righteous, purified and chaste: and yet notwithstanding it brought
that holy people into such a knowledge of their own misery, that they were
thrown down even to death and desperation. No purity nor holiness could then
help them: but there was in them such a feeling of their own uncleanness,
unworthiness and sin, and of the judgment and wrath of God, that they fled from
the sight of the Lord, and could not abide to hear his voice. What flesh was
there ever (said they) that heard the voice of the living God speaking out of
the mids of the fire, and yet lived? The Jews were afraid at the voice of
the law. Deuteronomy. 5.26. Deuteronomy. 4.24.
This day have we seen that God talks with man, and yet he lives. They
speak now far otherwise then they did a little before when they said: We are
the holy people of God, whom the Lord has chosen for his own peculiar people
before all the nations upon yt earth. We will do all things which the Lord
has spoken. The same happens to hypocrites, and such as put righteousness in
works, that happened to the Jews standing at Mount Sina
So it happens at length to all Iusticiaries, who being drunken with the opinion
of their own righteousness, do think when they are out of tentation, that
they are beloved of God, and yt God regards their vows, their fastings,
their prayers, and their wilworks, and yt for the same he must give unto them a
singular crown in heaven. But when that thundering, lightning, fire, and that
hammer which breaks in pieces the rocks, that is to say, the law of God,
comes suddenly upon them, revealing unto them their sin, the wrath and
judgment of God: then the self same thing happens unto them which happened to
the Jews standing at the foot of Mount Sina.

Here I admonish all such as fear God, and specially such as shall become
teachers of others hereafter, that they diligently learn out of Paul to
understand the true and proper use of the law: which (I fear) after our time
will be trodden under foot, and utterly abolished by the enemies of the truth.
For even now whiles we are yet living, and employ all our diligence to set
forth the office and use both of the law and the Gospel, notwtstanding there
be very few, Very fevve understand the proper use of the law.
yea even among those which will be counted Christians, and make a profession
of the Gospel with us, that understand these things rightly, and as they should
do. What think ye then shall come to pass when we are dead and gone? I speak
nothing of the Anabaptists, of the new Arrians, and such other vain spirits,
who are no less ignorant of these matters, then are the Papists, although they
talk never so much to the contrary. For they are revolted from the pure
doctrine of the Gospel, to laws and traditions, and therefore they teach not
Christ. They brag and they swear that they seek nothing else but the glory
of Christ and the salvation of their brethern, and that they teach the word of
God purely: but in very deed they corrupt it and wrest it to an other sense,
so that they make it too sound according to their own imagination. Therefore,
under the name of Christ, they teach nothing else but their own dreams, and
under the name of the gospel, ceremonies and laws. They are like therefore
unto themselves, and so they still continue: that is to say, Monks, workers of
the law, and teachers of ceremonies, saving that they devise new names and
new works.

It is a matter of great importance to understand the proper use of the law.
It is not then a matter of small importance to understand rightly what the law
is, and what is the true use and office thereof. Now, for as much as we teach
these things both diligently and faithfully, we do thereby plainly testify yt
we reject not the law and works, as our adversaries do falsely accuse us: but
we do altogether stablish the law, and require the works thereof: and we say yt
the law is good and profitable, but in his own proper use: which is first to
bridle civil transgressio^s, and then to reueile and to increase spiritual
transgressions. Wherefore the law is also a light, The light of the law.
which shows and reueileth, not ye grace of God, not righteousness and life:
but sin, death, the wrath and judgment of God. For, as in the Mount Sina the
thundering, lightning, the thick and dark cloud, the hill smoking and flaming,
and all that terrible show did not rejoice nor quicken the children of Israel,
but terrified and astonished them, and showed how unable they were, with all
their purity and holiness, to abide the Majesty of God speaking to them out of
ye cloud: even so the law, The law in his true use terrefieth.
when it is in his true use, does nothing else but reveal sin, engender
wrath, accuse and terrify men, so that it brings them to the very brinke of
desperation. This is the proper use of the law, and here it has an end, and
it ought to go no further.

The light of the Gospel.
Contrariwise, the Gospel is a light which lightneth, quickneth, comfort and
raises up fearful consciences. For it shows yt God for Christ's sake is
merciful unto sinners, yea and to such as are most unworthy, if they believe yt
by his death they are delivered from the Curse, yt is to say, from sin and
everlasting death: and yt through his victory the Blessing is freely given
unto them: The proper use and office of the Gospel.
that is to say, grace, forgeuenes of sins, righteousness and everlasting
life. Thus, putting a difference between ye law and the Gospel, we give to them
both their own proper use and office. Of this difference between the law and
the gospel there is nothing to be found in the books of ye Monks, Canonists,
Scholemen, no nor in the books of the ancient fathers. Augustine did somewhat
understand this difference and showed it. Jerome and others knew it not.
Briefly, there was wonderful silence many years as touching this difference in
all Schools and Churches. And this thing brought men's consciences into great
danger. The doctrine of faith can not remain sound, unless the law be
rightly discerned from the Gospel.
For unless the gospel be plainly discerned from the law, the true Christian
doctrine can not be kept sound and vncorrupt. Contrariwise, if this difference
be well known, then is also the true mean of justification known, and then
is it an easy matter to discern faith from works, Christ from Moses and all
politic works. For all things without Christ are the ministers of death for
the punishment of the wicked. Therefore Paul answers to this question after
this manner:

Verse. 19. The law was added because of transgressions.
That is to say, that transgressions might be more increased, known, and
seen. And in deed so it comes to pass. For when sin is revealed to a man
through the law, death, the wrath and judgment of God, and hell: it is
impossible but that he should become impatient, but that he should murmr
against God, and despise his will. For he can not bear the judgment of God,
his own death and damnation: and yet notwithstanding he can not escape them.
Here he must needs fall into the hatred of God, and blasphemy against God.
Before, when he was out of tentation, he was a very holy man, he worshipped and
praised God, he bowed his knee before God and gave him thanks, as the Pharisey
did. Luke. 18.
Luke 18. But now when sin and death is revealed unto him, he wishes yt
there were no God. The law therefore of it self brings a special hatred of
God. And thus sin is not only revealed and known by the law, but also is
increased and stirred up by the law. Therefore Paul says. Romans 7. Sin, Romans
7.11.
that it might appear to be sin, wrought death in me by that which was
good, that sin might be out of measure sinful by the commandment. There
he entreats of this effect of the law very largely.

Paul answers therefore to this question: If the law do not justify, to
what end then serves it? Although (says he) it justify not, yet is it very
profitable and necessary. The law profitable two manner of ways.
For first it ciuily restrains such as are carnal, rebellious and obstinate.
Moreover it is as a glass that shows unto a man him self, that he is a
sinner, guilty of death, and worthy of Gods everlasting wrath and indignation.
To what profit serves this humbling, this brusing and beating down by this
hammer, the law I mean? To great profit: namely, The law a Minister to
grace.
that we may have an entrance unto grace. So then the law is a minister that
prepares the way unto grace. For God is the God of the humble, the miserable,
the afflicted, the oppressed and the desperate, and of all those that are
utterly brought to nothing: A singular comfort for all afflicted consciences.
and his nature is to exalt the humble, to feed the hungry, to give sight to
the blind, to comfort the miserable, the afflicted, the bruised and broken
hearted, to justify sinners, to quicken the dead, and to save the very
desperate and damned. For he is an almighty creator, making all things of
nothing. Now, that pernicious and pestilent opinion of man's own righteousness,
which will not be a sinner, unclean, miserable and damnable, but righteous and
holy, suffers not God to come to his own natural and proper work. Therefore
God must needs take this maule in hand, the law I mean, to drive down, to
beat in pieces, and to bring to nothing this beast, with her vain confidence,
wisdom, righteousness and power, yt she may so learn at the length by her own
misery and mischief, that she is utterly forlorn, lost, and damned. The
doctrine of the Gospel belongs to those which are thorovvly terrified with
the law. Esaias. 42.3. Math. 12.20.
Here now, when the conscience is thus terrified with the law, then comes the
doctrine of the Gospel and grace, which reiseth up and comfort the same
again, saying: Christ came in to the world, not to break the bruised reed,
nor to quench the smoking flax: but to preach the Gospel of glad tidings to
the poor: to heal the broken and contrite in heart: to preach forgeuenes of
sins to the captives etc.

But here lies all the difficulty of this matter, that when a man is
terrified and cast down, he may be able to raise up him self again, and say:
The time of the law, and the time of Grace.
Now I am bruised and afflicted enough: the time of the law has tormented and
vexed me sharply enough. Now is the time of grace, now is the time to hear
Christ: out of whose mouth proceed the words of grace and life. Now is the
time to see, not the smoking and burning Mount Sina: but the Mount Moria, where
is the throne, the temple, the Mercy seat of God, that is to say, Christ: who
is the king of righteousness and peace. There will I harken what the Lord
speaks unto me: who speaks nothing else but peace unto his people.

Nay, the foolishnes of man's heart is so great, that in this conflict of
conscience, when the law has done his office and exercised his true
ministry, Reason in the time of tentatation flies not to the doctrine of
grace, but to the doctrine of the law.
he does not only not lay hold upon the doctrine of grace, which promises
most assuredly the forgeuenes of sins for Christ's sake, but seeks and
procures to him self more laws to satisfy and quiet his conscience. If I
live (says he) I will amend my life: I will do this, I will do that. Here,
except thou do the quite contrary: that is to say, except thou send Moises
away with his law, to those that are secure, proud, and obstinate, and in these
terrors and anguish say hold upon Christ, who was crucified and died for
thy sins, look for no salvation.

So that law with his office does help by occasion to Justification, in that
it drives a man to the promise of grace, and makes the same sweet and
comfortable unto him. Wherefore we do not abrogate the law, but we show the
true office and use of the law: to wit, that it is a true and a profitable
minister, which drives a man to Christ. Therefore, after that the law has
humbled thee, terrified thee, and utterly beaten thee down, so that now thou
art at the very brinke of desperation, see that thou learn how to use the law
rightly. The law does not only show unto a man his sin, but also drives
him to Christ. Luke. 4.1^.
For the office and use of it is, not only to reveal sin and the wrath of
God, but also to drive men unto Christ. This use of the law the holy Ghost
only sets forth in the Gospel, where he witnesses that God is present
unto the afflicted and broken hearted. Wherefore if thou be bruised with this
hammer, use not this brusing peruersly, so that thou load thy self with more
laws, but hear Christ, saying: Come unto me all ye that labor, Math. 11.^8.
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. When the law so oppresses
thee that all things seem to be utterly desperate, and thereby drives thee
unto Christ, to seek help and succor at his hands, then is the law in his
true use, The perfect use of the law.
and through the Gospel it helps to justification. And this is the best and
most perfect use of the law.

Wherefore Paul here begins a fresh to entreat of the law, and defines
what it is, taking occasion of that which he said before: to wit, that the
law justifies not. For reason hearing this, by and by does thus infer: Then
God gave the law in vain. It was necessary therefore to seek how to define
the law aright, and to show what the law is, and how it ought to be
understand, that it be not taken more largely or more straightly then it should
be. There is no law (says he) that is of it self necessary to justification.
Therefore when we reason as touching righteousness, life, and everlasting
salvation, the law must be utterly removed out of our sight, as if it had
never been, or never should be, but as though it were nothing at all. For in
the matter of Justification no man can remove the law far enough out of his
sight, or behold the only promise of God sufficiently and as he should do.
Therefore I said before that the law and the promise must be separate far
asonder as touching the inward affections and the inward man, albeit in deed
they are nerely joined together.

Ver. 19. Until the seed came unto the which the promise was made.
Paul makes not the law perpetual, but he says that it was given and
added to the promises for transgressions: that is to say, to restrain them
ciuily, but specially to reveal and to increase them spiritually, and that not
continually, but for a time. Here it is necessary to know how long the power
and the tyra^nie of the law ought to endure, which discovers sin, shows
unto us what we are, and reuealeth the wrath of God. They whose hearts are
touched with an inward feeling of these matters, should suddenly perish if they
should not receive comfort. Therefore if the days of the law should not be
shortened, no man should be saved. A time therefore must be set, and bounds
limited to the law, beyond the which it may not reign. How long then ought ye
dominion of the law to endure? Until the Seed come: to wit, that Seed of
which it is written: How long the dominion of the law endures.
In thy Seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. The tyranny of
the law then must so long continue, until the fulness of time, and that Seed
of the Blessing come: Not to the end that ye law should bring this Seed or
give righteousness, but that it should ciuily restrain the rebellious and
obstinate, and shut the^ up as it were in a prison and then spiritually
should reprove them of sin, humble them and terrify them, and when they are
thus humbled and beaten down, it should co^straine them to rise up to that
blessed Seed.

We may understand the continuance of the law both according to the letter, The
law according to the letter, endured until Christ, and there ceased. Mat.
11.12.13.
and also spiritually. According to the letter thus: that the law continued
until the time of grace. The law and the Prophets (says Christ) prophesied
until John. From the time of John until this day, the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. In this time Christ was
baptized and began to preach. At what time also, after the letter, the law, and
all the ceremonies of Moises ceased.

Spiritually the law may be thus understand, that it ought not to reign in
the conscience any longer then to the appointed time of this blessed Seed.
How long the law must reign in the conscience.
When the law shows unto me my sin, terrifieth me and reuealeth the wrath
and judgment of God, so that I begin to tremble and to despair, there has
the law his bounds, his time and his end limited, so yt he now cease to
exercise his tyranny any more. For then he has done his office sufficiently,
he has revealed ye wrath of God, and terrified enough. Here we must say: Now
leave of law, thou have done enough: thou have terrified and tormented me
enough. All thy floudes have run over me, Psalm. 42.7. Psalm. 69.2. Psalm. 26.9.
Psalm. 6^.17.
and thy terrors have troubled me. Lord turn not away thy face in thy wrath
from thy servant: Rebuke me not I beseech thee, in thine anger. etc. When
these terrors and troubles come, then is the time and the hour of the Blessed
Seed come. Let the law then give place, which in deed is added to reveal
and to increase transgressions, and yet no longer, but until that blessed
Seed be come. When that is come, then let the law leave of to reveal sin
and to terrify any more: and let him deliver up his kingdom to an other: that
is to say, to the blessed Seed, which is Christ: who has gracious lips,
wherewith he accuses and terrifieth not, but speaks of far better things
then does the law, namely of grace, peace, forgeuenes of sins, victory over
sin, death, the Devil and damnation, gotten by his death and passion unto
all beleuers.

Paul therefore shows by these words: The continuance of the law, literally
and spiritually.
Until the Seed should come, unto whom the Blessing was promised, how long
the law should endure literally and spiritually. After the letter it ceased
after the blessed Seed came in to the world, taking upon him our flesh, giving
the holy Ghost, and writing a new law in our hearts. But the spiritual time
of the law does not end at once, but continues rooted in the conscience.
Therefore it is a hard matter for a man which is exercised with the spiritual
use of the law, to see the end of the law. For in these terrors and feeling
of sin the mind can not conceive this hope, that God is merciful, and that
he will forgive sins for Christ's sake: but it judges only that God is
angry with sinners, The terrors of the law are driven away by faith. Math.
18.20.
and that he accuses and condemns them. If faith come not here to raise up
again the pore afflicted conscience, or else (according to that saying of
Christ: where two or three are gathered together in my name etc.) there be
some faithful brother at hand that may comfort him by the word of God which
is so oppressed and beaten down by the law, desperation and death must needs
follow. Therefore it is a perilous thing for a man to be alone. Eccles. 4.10.
VVoe be to him that is alone (says the Preacher) for when he falls, he
has none to raise him up. Wherefore they that ordained that cursed Monkish and
solitary life, The solitary or Monkish life has hurt many.
gave occasion to many thousands to despair. If a man should separate him
self from the company of other for a day or two to be occupied in prayer (as
we read of Christ, that sometime he went a side alone into the Mount, and by
night continued in prayer) there were no danger therein. Math. 26.39. Luke.
23.41. John. 17.1.
But when they constrained men continually to live a solitary life, it was a
device of the Devil him self. For when a man is tempted and is alone, he is not
able to reise up him self, no not in the least tentation that can be.

Ver. 19. And it was ordained by Angels as ministers gave it to Moises by
the authority of Christ.
Angels in the hand of a Mediator.
This is a little digression from his purpose, which he neither declares, nor
finisheth: but only touches it by the way, and so proceeds. For he
retourneth incontinent to his purpose, when he says: what? is the law then
contrary to the promises of God? Now, this was the occasion of his digression.
He fell into this difference between the law and the Gospel: to wit, that
the law added to the promises, did differ from the gospel, not only in
respect of time, but also of the author and the principal cause thereof. For the
law was delivered by the Angels. Heb. 1.
Heb. 1: but the Gospel by the Lord him self. Wherefore the Gospel is far
more excellent then the law. For the law is the voice of the servants, The
law given by Angels, the Gospel by Christ.
but the Gospel is the voice of the Lord him self. Therefore to abase and to
diminish the authority of the law, and to exalt and magnify the Gospel, he
says that the law was a doctrine given to continue but for a small time (for
it endured but only until the fulness of the promise, The law was given to
endure but for a time: but the Gospel was given to endure for ever.
that is to say, until the blessed Seed came which fulfilled the promise):
but that the Gospel was for ever. For all the faithful have had always one and
the self same Gospel from the beginning of the world, and by that they were
saved. The law therefore is far inferior to the Gospel, because it was
ordained by the Angels which are but servants, and endured but for a short
time, whereas the Gospel was ordained by the Lord him self, to continue for
ever. Hebrews. 1. For it was promised before all worlds. Tit. 1.

Moreover, the word of the law was not ordained by the Angels being but
servants, but also by an other servant far inferior to the Angels, Christ
is not a Mediator according to the law, as Moises was.
namely by a man, that is (as here he says) by the hand of a Mediator, that
is to say, Moises. Now, Christ is not a servant, but the Lord him self. He
is not a Mediator between God and man according to the law as Moises was, but
he is a Mediator of a better Testament. The law therefore was ordained by
Angels as servants. For Moises and the people heard God speaking in the Mount
Sina: that is to say, they heard the angels speaking in the person of God.
Therefore Stephen in the seventh of the Acts says: Ye have received the law
by the ministry of the Angels, and ye have not regarded it. Exodus ^.^
Also the text in the third of Exodus shows plainly that the Angel appeared
unto Moises in a flame of fire, and spoke unto him from the midst of the bush.

Paul therefore signifies that Christ is a Mediaotur of a far better
Testament then Moises. Exodus 19.20.
And here he alludeth to that history in Moises concerning the giving of the
law, which says, that Moises led the people out of their tents to meet
with God, and that he placed them at the foot of the Mount Sina. There was an
heavy and an horrible sight. The whole Mount was on a flaming fire. When the
people saw this, they began to tremble: for they thought that they should have been suddenly destroyed in this fearful tempest. Because therefore they could
not abide the law sounding so horribly out of Mount Sina, (for that terrifying
voice of the law would have killed the people) they said unto Moises their
Mediator: Come thou hither and hear what the Lord says, and speak thou
unto us. Moises a Mediator.
And he answered: I my self (says he) was a Mediator, and one that stood
between God and you. etc. By these places it is plain enough that Moises was
appointed a Mediator between the people, and the law speaking.

Wherefore Paul by this history goes about to declare, that it is impossible
that righteousness should come by the law. As if he should say: how can the
law justify, seeing the whole people of Israel, being purified and
sanctified, yea and Moises him self the Mediator between God and the people,
were afraid and trembled at the voice of the law, as it is said in the
Epistle to the Hebrews? The law makes men afraid, therefore it justifies not.
Here was nothing but fear and trembling. But what righteousness and holiness is
this, not to be able to bear, yea not to be able or willing to hear the law,
but to fly from it, and so to hate it, that it is impossible to hate and
abhor any thing more in the whole world? as the history most plainly
testifies, that the people when they heard the law, did hate nothing more
then the law, and rather wished death, then to hear the law.

So, when sin is discovered, as it were by certain bright beams which the
law strikes into the heart, Nothing is more intolerable to man then the law,
there is nothing more odious and more intolerable to man, then ye law is. Here
he would rather chose death, the^ be co^straind to bear these terrors of ye law,
be it never so little a time: which is a most certain token that the law
justifies not. For if the law did justify, then (no dout) men would love it,
they would delight was raised up and comforted by the gracious and free mercy
of God. Therefore the law justifies not.

If the law should serve mine affections: that is to say, if it should approve
my hypocrisy, The law flattereth not reason, and therefore reason hates it.
my opinion and confidence of mine own righteousness: if it should say that
without the mercy of God and faith in Christ through the help of it alone (as
all the world naturally judges of the law) I might be justified before God:
and moreover, if it should say that God is pacified and overcome by works, and
is bound to reward the doers thereof, that so I having no need of God, might be
a God unto my self, and merit grace by my works, and setting my Savior
Christ apart, might save my self by mine own merits: If (I say) the law
should thus serve mine affections, then should it be sweet, delectable, and
pleasant in deed: So well can reason flatter it self. Notwtstanding this
should no longer continue, but until the law should come to his own proper use
and office: then should it appear that reason can not suffer those bright
beams of the law. There some Moises must needs come between as a Mediator,
and yet notwithstanding without any fruit, as I will declare hereafter.

2. Cor. 3.1^.
To this purpose serves that place in the.2. Cor. 3. chapt. concerning the
covered face of Moises, where Paul out of the history of Exodus 34. chap.
shows that the children of Israel, Exodus 34.30.
not only did not know, but also could not abide the true and spiritual use
of the law: First, The place of Paul expounded, as touching the covering of
Moises face. Verses. 30.33.34.35.
for that they could not look unto the end of the law (says Paul) because
of the veil which Moises put upon his face: Again, they could not look upon
the face of Moises being bare and uncovered, for the glory of his countenance.
For when Moises went about to talk with them, he covered his face with a
veil: without the which they could not bear his talk: that is, they could
not hear Moises him self their Mediator, unless he had set an other
Mediator between: that is to say, the veil. How then should they hear the
voice of God, or of an Angel, when they could not hear the voice of Moises
being but a man, yea and also their Mediator, except his face had been covered?
Faith in Christ drives away the terrors of the law.
Therefore, except the blessed Seed come to raise up and comfort him which
has heard the law, he perishes through desperation, in detesting of the
law, in hating and blaspheming of God, and daily more and more offends
against God. For this fear and confusion of conscience which the law
brings, the deeper it perceth and the longer it continues, the more it
increases hatred, and blasphemy against God.

This history therefore teaches what is the power of freewill. The power of
free will.
The people are stricken with fear, they tremble and they fly back. Where is
now freewill? where is now that good will, that good intent, that right
judgment of reason which the Papists do so much brag of? What avails
freewill here in these sanctified and holy men? It can say nothing: It blinds
their reason: it peruerteth their will: it receives not, it saluteth not, it
embraces not with joy the Lord coming with thundering, lightning, and fire in
to the Mount Sina. It can not hear the voice of the Lord: but contrariwise it
says: Let not the Lord speak unto us, lest we die. We see then what the
strength and power of freewil is in the children of Israel, who though they
were cleansed and sanctified, could not hear one syllable or letter of the law.
Therefore these high co^mendations which the Papists give to their freewill are
nothing else but mere toys and doting dreams.

Verse. 20. Now, a Mediator is not a Mediator of one But serves both for
the Jews and Gentiles, to join them to God.
.
Here he compares these two Mediators together, and that with a marvelous
brevity: yet so notwithstanding, that he satisfies the attentive reader, who,
because this word Mediator is general, by and by understands that Paul
speaks also of the Mediator generally, and not of Moises only. The word
Mediator includes two.
A Mediator (says he) is not a Mediator of one only: but this word
necessarily comprehends two: that is to say, him that is offended, and him
that is the offender: of whom, the one has need of intercession, and the
other needs none. Wherefore a Mediator is not of one, but of two, and of such
two as be at variaunce between them selves. So Moises by a general definition
is a Mediator, because he does the office of a Mediator between the law and
the people, who can not abide the true and spiritual use of the law. The law
therefore must have a new face, The law having put on a veil, makes us not
afraid.
and his voice must be changed: that is to say, the voice of the law must be
made spiritual, or the law must be made lively in the inward affection, and
must put on a visour or a veil, that it may now become more tolerable, so that
the people may be able to hear it by the voice of Moises.

Now, the law being thus covered, Because God speaks not now in his
Majesty as he did in the Mount, but by the voice of man, therefore men fear
him not, nor regard his law.
speaks no more in his Majesty, but by the mouth of Moises. After this manner
it does not his office any more: that is, it terrifieth not ye conscience. And
this is the cause that they do neither understand it, nor regard it: by
means whereof they become secure, negligent, and presumptuous hypocrites. And
yet notwithstanding the one of these two must needs be done: to wit, that
either the law must be without his use, and covered with a veil (but then, as
I have said, it makes hypocrites): or else it must be in his use without the
veil, The law in his true use kills.
and then it kills. For man's heart can not abide the law in his true use,
without the veil. It behooves thee therefore, if thou look to the end of the
law without the veil, either to lay hold on that blessed Seed by faith,
(that is to say) thou must look beyond the end of the law unto Christ, which
is the accomplishment of the law: which may say unto thee: The law has
terrified thee enough: Be of good comfort my son, thy sins are forgeuen
thee, (whereof I will speak more anon): or else surely thou must have Moses for
thy Mediator, with his veil.

For this cause Paul says: A mediator is not a Mediator of one. For it
could not be that Moises should be a Mediator of God alone: For God needs no
Mediator. And again, he is not a Mediator of the people only, The office of
a Mediator.
but he does the office of a Mediator between God and the people, which were
at discord with God. For it is the office of a Mediator to pacify the party
that is offended, and to reconcile unto him the party which is the offender.
Notwithstanding Moises is a Mediator in this sort, as I have said: which does
nothing else but change the voice of the law, and makes it tolerable, so
that the people may abide the hearing thereof: but gives no power to
accomplish the same. To conclude, he is a Mediator but only of the veil, and
therefore he gives no power to perform the law, but only in the veil. Moses
a Mediator of the veil.
Therefore his disciples, in that he is a Mediator of the veil, must always
be hypocrites.

But what (think ye) should have come to pass if that the law had been given
without Moises, either else before or after Moises, and that there had been no
Mediator, When we are terrified by the law, we have need of another manner
of Mediator then Moses.
and in the mean season the people should not have been suffered either to fly
away, or else to have had any Mediator? Here either the people being beaten
down with intolerable fear, should have perished forthwith, or if they should
have escaped, there must needs have come some other Mediator, which should
have set him self between the law and the people to this end, that both the
people might be preserved, and the law remain in his force and strength, and
also an atonement might be made between the law and the people. In deed
Moises comes in the mean season, and is made a Mediator: he puts on a
veil and covers his face: but he can not deliver men's consciences from the
anguish and terror which the law brings. Therefore, when a man, in the hour
of death or in the conflict of conscience feels the wrath and judgment of
God for sin which the law reuealeth and increases, here to keep him from
desperation, secluding Moises with his veil, he must have a Mediator which may
say unto him: Although thou be a sinner, yet shall thou remain, that is to
say: thou shall not die, although the law with his wrath and malediction do
still remain.

This Mediator is Jesus Christ, which changes not the voice of the law, nor
hides the same with a veil as Moises did, Christ hides not the law, but
takes it away, and therefore is a better Mediator then Moses.
nor leads me out of the sight of the law: but he sets him self against
the wrath of the law and takes it away, and satisfies the law in his own
body by himself. And by the Gospel he says unto me: In deed the law
threatens unto thee the wrath of God and eternal death: but be not afraid:
fly not away, but stand still. I supply and perform all things for thee: I
satisfy the law for thee. This is a Mediator which far excels Moises,
who sets him self between God being angry, and the sinner. The intercession
of Moses here profits nothing: he has done his office, and he with his veil
is now vanished away. Here the miserable sinner being utterly desperate, or a
man now approaching unto death, and God being offended and angry do encounter
together. Therefore there must come a far other Mediator then Moises, which
may satisfy the law, take away the wrath thereof, and may reconcile unto God
which is angry, that poor sinner, miserable and gilty of eternal death.

Of this Mediator Paul speaks briefly when he says: A Mediatoure is he
that stands between the offender and him that is offended.
A Mediator is not a Mediator of one. For this word Mediator properly
signifies such a one as does the office of a Mediator between the party that
is offended and the offender. We are the offenders: God with his law is he
which is offended. And the offense is such, God of his justice can not forgive
sin without satisfaction, which is done by Christ.
that God can not pardon it, neither can we satisfy for the same. Therefore
between God, who of him self is but one, and us, there is wonderful discord.
Moreover, God can not revoke his law, but he will have it observed and kept.
And we which have transgressed the law, can not fly from the presence of God.
Christ is the Mediator between God and sinners, which are quite contrary one
to the other. Col. 2.24.
Christ therefore has seth him self a Mediator between two which are quite
contrary and utterly separate asunder with an infinite and everlasting
separation, and has reconciled them together. And how has he done this? He
has put away (as Paul says in an other place) the ha^dvvriting which was
against us, which by ordinances (that is, by the law) was contrary unto us,
and he has taken it and fastened it to the Cross, and has spoiled
principalities and powers, and has made a shevve of them openly, and has
triumphed over them by him self. Therefore he is not a Mediator of one, but
of two, utterly disagreeing between them selves.

This is also a mighty place and of great efficacy to confute and confound
the righteousness of the law, and to teach us that in the matter of
Justification it ought to be utterly removed out of our sight. Also this word
[Mediatour] ministers sufficient matter to prove that the law justifies not:
for else what need should we have of a Mediator? Seeing then that man's nature
can not abide the hearing of the law, Man can not abide the hearing of the
law, therefore he can not keep the law
much less is it able to accomplish the law, or to agree with the law.

This doctrine (which I do so often repete and not without tediousnes do
still beat into your heads) is the true doctrine of the law, which every
Christian ought with all diligence to learn, The doctrine of the law.
that he may be able truly to define what the law is, what is the true use and
office, what are the limits, what is the power, the time and the end thereof.
For it has an effect quite contrary to the judgment of all men: which have
this pestilent and pernicious opinion naturally rooted in them, that the law
justifies. Therefore I fear lest this doctrine will be darkened and defaced
again, when we are dead. For the world must be replenished with horrible
darkness and errors before the latter day come.

The proper use of the law
He therefore that is able to understand this, let him understand it, that the
law in true Christian Divinity, and in his true and proper definition does not
justify: but has a clean contrary effect. For it shows and discovers
unto us our selves: it sets God before us in his anger: it reueileth Gods
wrath, it terrifieth us, and it does not only reueile sin, but also mightily
increases sin, so that where sin was before but little, now by the law
which brings the same to light, it becomes exceeding sinful: so that a man
now begins to hate the law and to fly from it, and with a perfect hatred to
abhor God the maker of the law. This is not to be justified by the law (and
that even reason it self is compelled to grant): but to commit a double sin
against the law. First, not only to have a will so disagreeing from the law
that thou can not hear it: but also to do contrary to that which it
commands: And secondly so to hate it that thou would wish it were
abolished together with God himself who is the author thereof and absolutely good.

The law is good and holy, and yet intolerable to man's nature.
Now, what greater blasphemy, what sin more horrible can be imagined then to
hate God? to abhor his law, and not to suffer the hearing thereof? which
notwithstanding is good and holy. For the history does plainly witness that the
people of Israel refused to hear that excellent law, those holy and most
gracious words (namely, I am the Lord thy God, Exodus 2.3. Deuteronomy. 4.40.
which brought thee out of the land of Egypt and out of the house of bondage.
Thou shall have none other Gods etc. Shevving mercy to thousands etc. Honor
thy father and thy mother that it may go well with thee, and that thy days
may be prolonged upon the earth etc.) and that they had need of a Mediator.
They could not abide this most excellent, perfect and divine wisdom: this most
gracious, sweet, and comfortable doctrine. Let not the Lord speak unto us
(say they) lest we die. Speak thou unto us etc. Doubtless it is a merueilous
thing that a man can not hear that which is his whole felicite, namely that
he has a God, The law contains profitable doctrine and yet a man can not
hear it.
yea and a merciful God which will show mercy unto him in many thousands of
generatio^s. etc. And moreover that he can not abide that which is his chief
safety, protection and defense, namely: Thou shall not kill: Thou shall not
commit adultery: Thou shall not steal: For by these words the Lord has
compassed and fortified the life of man, his wife, his children and his goods,
as it were with a wall against the force and violence of the wicked.

The law then can do nothing, saving that by his light it lightneth the
conscience that it may know sin, death, the judgment, the hatred and wrath
of God. Before the law come I am secure: I feel no sin: but when the law
comes, sin, death, and hell are reueiled unto me. This is not to be made
righteous, but guilty, and the enemy of God, to be condemned to death and hell
fire. The principal point then of the law in true Christian Divinity is, to
make men, not better but worse: that is to say, it shows unto them their
sin, that by the knowledge thereof they may be humbled, terrified, bruised and
broken, The law makes not men better but worse.
and by this means may be driven to seek comfort, and so to come to that
blessed Seed.

Verse. 20. But God is Constant and alvvaies like him self.
one.
God offends no person, and therefore needs no Mediator. But we offend God
and therefore we have need of a Mediator, not Moses, but Christ, which
speaks far better things for us etc. Hitherto he has continued in his
digression: Now he retourneth to his purpose.

Verse. 21. Is the law then against the promise of God?
Paul said before that the law justifies not. Shall we then take away the
law? No, not so. For it brings with it a certain commodity. What is that?
It brings men unto the knowledge of themselves: it discovers and increases
sin etc. Here now rises an other objection. If the law do nothing else but
make men worse in showing unto them their sin, then is it contrary to the
promises of God. For it seems that God is but only provoked to anger and
offended through the law, The judgment of the Jews and of all others as
touching the law
and therefore he regards not nor performs his promises. We Jews have
thought the contrary: to wit, that we are restrained and bridled by this
external discipline, to the end that God being provoked thereby, might haste^
the performing of his promise, and that by this discipline we might deserve the
promise.

Paul answers: It is nothing so. But contrariwise, if ye have regard to the
law, Reason can not abide to hear the good law of God.
the promise is rather hindered. For natural reason offends God which so
faithfully promises, whiles it will not hear his good and holy law. For it
says: Let not the Lord speak unto us etc. How can it be then that God should
perform his promise unto those, which, not only receive not his law and his
discipline, but also with a mortal hatred do shun it and fly from it? Here
therefore (as I said) rises this objection: Then ye law seems to hinder ye
promises of God. This objection Paul touches by ye way and briefly
au^swereth, saying:

Verse. 21. God forbid.
God makes not the promise because of our worthiness, but for his own
mercies sake.
Why so? First for that God does not make any promise unto us because of our
worthiness, our merits, our good works: but that he does, is of his mere
goodness and inestimable mercy in Christ. He says not to Abraham: All nations
shall be blessed in thee because thou have kept the law: but (as it is written in
the.24. chap. of Joshua) when he was yet uncircumcised, had no law, and was yet
an idolater, he said unto him: Go out of thine own land etc. I will be thy
protector etc. Also: In thy Seed shall all nations be blessed. Joshua. 24.2.3.
Genes. 12.1.2. The promises of God are absolute, and not made in respect of our
worthiness. The promises of God are not hindered because of our sins. 2. Pet.
3.9.
These are absolute and mere promises: which God freely gives unto Abraham,
without any condition or respect of works either going before or coming after.

This is specially against the Jews, which think that the promises of God are
hindered because of their sins. God (says Paul) does not slack his
promises because of our sins, or hasten the same for our righteousness and
merits: he regards neither the one nor the other. Wherefore, although we be
worse and more sinful, and brought into a greater contempt and hatred of
God by means of the laws, yet notwithstanding God is not moved thereby to
differ his promise. For his promise does not stand upon our worthiness, but
upon his only goodness and mercy. Therefore, where the Jews say: The Messiah
is not yet come, because our sins do hinder his coming, it is a detestable
lie. A Devilish dream of the Jews.
As though God should become unrighteous because of our sins, or made a lier
because we are liers. He abides always just and true: his truth therefore is
the only cause that he accomplisheth and performs his promise.

Moreover, although the law do reueile and increase sin, yet is it not
against the promises of God, yea rather it confirms the promises. The law
is not against the promises of God.
For as concerning his proper work and end, it humbles and prepares a man
(so that he use it rightly) to sigh and seek for mercy. For when sin is
reueiled to a man and so increased by the law, then he begins to perceive
the wickedness and hatred of man's heart against the law, and against God him
self the author of the law. Then he feels in deed that, not only he loves
not God, but also hates and blasphemeth God who is full of goodness and mercy,
and his law which is just and holy. Then is he constrained to confess that
there is no good thing in him. And thus, when he is thrown down and humbled
by the law, he acknowledges him self to be most miserable and damnable. When
the law therefore constrains a man so to acknowledge his own corruption, and
to confess his sin from the bottom of his heart, then has it done his
office truly, When the office and time of the law is accomplished
and his time is accomplished and ended. And now is the time of grace, that
the blessed Seed may come to raise up and to comfort him that is so cast
down and humbled by the law.

After this manner the law is not against the promises of God. For first the
promise hangs not upon the law, but upon the truth and mercy of God only and
alone. Secondly when the law is in his chief end and office, it humbles a
man, and in humbling him it makes him to sigh and groan, and to seek the hand
and aid of the Mediator, and makes his grace and his mercy exceeding sweet
and comfortable (as is said Psalm. 109. Thy mercy is svveete) and his gift
precious and inestimable. Psalm. 109.2^.
And by this means it prepares us and makes us apt to apprehende and to
receive Christ. For as the Poet says: Dulcia non meruit qui non gustauit
amara: that is,
He that has not tasted the things that are bitter,
Is not vvorthie to taste the things that are sweeter.


Hunger is the best Cook. The law makes troubled and afflicted souls to
thirst for Christ.
Therefore like as the dry earth does covet the rain, even so the law makes
troubled and afflicted souls to thirst after Christ. To such Christ
sauoureth sweetly: to them he is nothing else but joy, consolation and life.
And there begins Christ and his benefit rightly to be known.

This is then the principal use of the law: namely, when a man can so use it,
that it may humble him and make him to thirst after Christ. And in deed Christ
requires thirsty souls, whom he most lovingly and graciously allureth and
calls unto him when he says: Math. 11 28. Upon whom Christ bestows his
benefits.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will refresh you.
He deliteth therefore to water these dry grounds. He powers not his waters
upon fat and rank grounds, or such as are not dry and covet no water.
Math. 11.5.
His good things are inestimable, and therefore he gives them to none but unto
such as have need of them, and feeling the great need they have thereof, do
earnestly desire them. He preaches glad tidings to the poor: he gives drink
to the thirsty. If any thirst (says John) Let him come unto me etc. He
heals the broken hearted etc. that is, John. 7.37.38. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
he comfort those that are bruised and afflicted by the law. Therefore the
law is not against the promises of God.

Verse. 21. For if there had been a law given which brings life, surely
righteousness should have been by the law.
By these words Paul signifies that no law of it self is able to quicken
or give life, The law quickneth not but kills.
but only kills. Therefore such works as are done, not only according to the
laws and traditions of the Pope, but also according to ye very law of God, do
not justify a man before God, but make him a sinner: they do not pacify the
wrath of God, but they kindle it: they obtain not righteousness, but they
hinder it: they quicken not, but they terrify. Therefore, when he says: If a
law had been given which could have brought life etc. he teaches plainly that
the law of it self justifies not: but that it has a clean contrary effect.

Although these words of Paul be plain enough, yet are they obscure and
utterly unknown to the Papists. For if they did understand them in deed, they
would not so magnify their freewill, their own natural strength, the keeping
of the The Papists divide the gospel in to precepts and Counsels: to the
precepts men are bound (say they) but not to the Counsels.
Counsels, the works of supererogation etc. But left they should seem to be
manifestly wicked, and plain Infidels in denying the words of the Apostle of
Christ so impudently, they have this pestilent gloss always ready (whereby they
pervert the places of Paul concerning the law which reuealeth sin and
engenders wrath, that is to say the.x. commau^deme^ts) that Paul speaks
only of the ceremonial and not of the moral law. But Paul speaks plainly
when he says: If a law had been given. etc. and he excepteth no law.
Wherefore this gloss of the Papists is not worth a rush. For the laws of the
ceremonies were as well commanded of God, and as streitly kept as the moral
laws. The Jews also kept circumcision as precisely as they did the Sabbath
day. It is evident enough therefore that Paul speaks of the whole law.

These words of the Apostle are song and said in the Papacy and in all their
churches, and yet notwithstanding they both teach and live quite contrary. Paul
teaches that no law was given to bring life, but the Pope teaches quite
contrary.
Paul says simply that no law was given to quicken and to bring life: but
the Papists teach that many laws are given to bring life. Although they say
not this in plain words, yet in very deed such is their opinion, as their
Monkery does plainly witness, besides many laws and traditions of men, their
works and merits before grace and after, and innumerable wicked ceremonies
and false worshippings, which they have devised of their own heads, and those
only have they preached, treading the Gospel under their feet and assuredly
promising grace, remission of sins, and life everlasting to all such as
should keep and observe the same. This that I say ca^ not be denied: for their
books which are yet exta^t, give certain testimony thereof.

But contrariwise we affirm with Paul yt there is no law, whether it be man's
law or Gods law, yt gives life. Therefore we put as great a difference between
the law and righteousness, as is between life and death, between heaven and
hell. And the cause ye moves us so to affirm, is that plain and evident
place of Paul: where he says, yt the law is not given to justify, to give
life, and to save, but only to kill and to destroy, contrary to the opinion of
all men: The judgment of men naturally as touching the law.
for naturally they can judge no otherwise of ye law, but yt it is given to
work righteousness, and to give life and salvation.

This difference of the offices of the law and the gospel, keeps all Christian
doctrine in his true and proper use. Also it makes a faithful man judge over
all kinds of life, over the laws and decrees of all men, What profit comes
by knovving the difference between the law and the Gospel.
and over all doctrine whatsoever, and it gives them power to try all manner
of spirits. On the other side the Papists, because they confou^d and mingle
the law and the gospel together, ca^ teach no certainty touching faith, works,
ye states and conditions of life, nor of the difference of spirits.

Now therefore, after that Paul has prosecuted his confutations and arguments
sufficiently and in good order, he teaches, that ye law (if ye consider his
true and perfect use) is nothing else but as a certain Scholemaster to lead us
unto righteousness. For it hu^bleth men, The true and perfect use of the law.
and makes them apt to receive ye righteousness of Christ when it does his own
proper work and office, that is, when it makes them guilty, terrifieth and
brings them to the knowledge of sin, wrath, death and hell. For when it
has done this, the opinion of man's own righteousness and holiness vanishes
away, and Christ with his benefits begins to wax sweet unto him.
Wherefore the law is not against the promises of God, but rather confirms
them. True it is, that it does not accomplish the promise, nor bring
righteousness: notwithstanding it humbles us with his exercise and office, and
so makes us more thrifty, and more apt to receive the benefit of Christ.
Therefore (says he) if any law had been given which might have brought
righteousness, and through righteousness life (for no man can obtain life except
first he be righteous) then in deed righteousness should come by the law.
Moreover, if there were any state of life, any work, any religion, whereby a
man might obtain remission of sins, righteousness and life, then should these
things in deed justify and give life: but this is impossible: for,

Verse. 22. The scripture has concluded all men under sin.
Where? First in the promises them selves as touching Christ, as Genesis. 3.
The Seed of the woman shall break the head of the serpent. Genes. 3.15.
Genes. 22.
And Genesis. 22. In thy Seed etc. Whersoeuer then is any promise in the
scriptures made unto the fathers concerning Christ, there the Blessing is
promised, that is, righteousness, salvation, and eternal life. The scripture
shuts all under the Curse first by the promise.
Therefore by the contrary it is evident, that they which must receive the
Blessing are subject to the Curse, that is to say, sin and eternal death:
for else to what end was the Blessing promised?

Secondly, the Scripture shuts men under sin and under the Curse
especially by the law, because it is his peculiar office to reveal sin and
engender wrath, Secondly by the law.
as we have declared throughout this Epistle, but chiefly by this sentence of
Paul: Whosoever are of the works of the law are under the Curse: Galat.
3.10.
Also by that place which the Apostle alleged out of the.27. chapt. of Deuteronomy:
Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is every one that abides not in all the words of this law to do
them. etc. For these sentences in plain words do shut under sin and under
the Curse, not only those which sin manifestly against the law, Cursed is
every one that abides not in all things. etc.
or do not outwardly accomplish the law: but also those which are under the
law, and with all endeavor go about to perform the same: and such were the
Jews, as before I have said. Much more then does the same place of Paul shut
up under sin and under the Curse, all Monks, Friars, Heremites,
Carthusians and such like, with their professions, rules, and religions, to the
which they attributed such holiness, that when a man had once made a vow of his
profession, if he died by and by, they dreamed that he went straight to heaven.
But here ye hear plainly that the Scripture shuts all under sin.
Therefore neither the vow nor religion of the Carthusian, be it never so
angelical, is righteousness before God: for the Scripture has shut all under
sin, all are accursed and damned. Who pronounces this sentence? The
Scripture. And where? First by this promise: The Seed of the woman shall
bruise the Serpents head. In thee shall be blessed. The principal office of
the law.
etc. and such like places: Moreover, by the whole law, whereof the principal
office is to make men guilty of sin. Therefore no Monk, no Carthusian, no
Celestine bruseth the head of the Serpent, but they abide bruised and broken
under the Serpents head, that is, under the power of the Devil. These things
in Luthers time were counted so high a service to God, that scarce any man
would believe they could be so abominable.
Who will believe this?

Briefly, what so ever is without Christ and his promise, whether it be the
law of God or the law of man, the Ceremonial or the moral law, without all
exception, is shut under sin: For the Scripture shuts all under sin.
Now, he that says all, excepteth nothing. Therefore we conclude with Paul,
that the policies and laws of all nations, be they never so good and
necessary, with all ceremonies and religions without faith in Christ, are and
abide under sin, death and eternal damnation, except faith in Jesus Christ
go withal or rather before all, as follows in the text. Of this matter we
have spoken largely before.

Wherefore this is a true proposition: Only Faith justifies.
Only faith justifies without works (which notwithstanding our adversaries can
by no means abide): For Paul here strongly concludes that the law gives
not life, because it is not given to that end. If the law justify not, much
less do works justify.
If then the law do not justify and give life, much less do works
justify. For when Paul says that the law gives not life, his meaning is
that works also do not give life. For it is more to say, yt the law
quickens and gives life, then to say that works do quicken and give life.
If then the law it self being fulfilled (although it be impossible that it
should be accomplished) do not justify, much less do works justify. I
conclude therefore that faith only justifies and brings life without
works. Paul can not suffer this addition: faith joined with works justifies:
but he proceeds simply by the negative, Romans 3. and before in the second
chapter: Therefore by the works of the law (says he) shall no flesh be
justified. Romans 3.^^.
And again in this place: The law is not given to bring life.

Verse. 22. That the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to
them that believe.
He said before that the Scripture has shut all under sin. What, for
ever? No, but until the promise should be given. Now, the promise is the
inheritance it self, or the Blessing promised to Abraham: The promise given
to Abraham.
to wit, the deliverance from the law, sin, death and the Devil, and a
free giving of grace, righteousness, salvation and eternal life. This promise
(says he) is not obtained by any merit, by any law, or by any work, The
promise given to them that believe.
but it is given. To whom? To those that believe. In whom? In Jesus Christ, who
is the blessed Seed, which has redeemed all believers from the Curse, yt they
might receive the Blessing. These words be not obscure, but plain enough:
notwithstanding we must mark them diligently and way well the force and weight
thereof. For if all be shut under sin, it follows that all nations are
accursed and are destitute of the grace of God: Also that they are under the
wrath of God and the power of the Devil, and that no man can be delivered from
the^ by any other means then by faith in Jesus Christ. With these words
therefore Paul fights strongly against the fantastical opinions of the
Papists and all Iusticiaries touching the law and works, when he says: that
the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to all believers.

Now, how we should answer to those sentences which speak of works and
the reward thereof, I have sufficiently declared before. And the matter
requires not now yt we should speak any thing of works. The sentences
concerning works.
For we have not here taken in hand to entreat of works, but of
Justification: to wit, that it is not obtained by the law and works, since
all things are shut under sin and under the Curse: but by Faith in Christ.
The commendation of works out of the matter of Justification
When we are out of the matter of Justification, we can not sufficiently praise
and magnify those works which are commanded of God. For who can sufficiently
commend and set forth the profit and fruit of one only work, which a
Christian does through Faith and in Faith? In deed it is more precious then
heaven or earth. The whole world therefore is not able to give a worthy
recompense to such a good work. Yea the world has not the grace to magnify
the holy works of the faithful as they are worthy, and much less to reward
them: For it sees them not: or if it do, it esteems them not as good
works, but as most wicked and detestable crimes, and riddeth the world of
those which are the doers thereof, as most pestilent plagues to mankind.

So Christ the Savior of the world, for a recompense of his inco^prehensible
and inestimable benefits, How (...) and (...) st^^ vvarded (...) vvo^ld (...)
their benefit.
was put to ye most ignominious death of the cross. The Apostles also bringing
ye word of grace and eternal life into the world, were counted the ofscouring
and the outcastes of the whole world. This is the goodly reward which the world
gives for so great and unspeakable benefits. But works done without faith,
although they have never so goodly a show of holiness, are under ye Curse.
Wherefore, so far of it is yt the doers thereof should deserve grace,
righteousness and eternal life, yt rather they heap sin upon sin. Works
without faith. 2. These. 2.3.
After this manner the Pope, that child of perdition, and all that follow him,
do work. So work all meritemongers and heretics which are fallen from the
faith.

Verse. 23. But before Faith was the full revelation of things that were h^d
under the law.
faith came.
He proceeds in declaring the profit and necessity of ye law. He said
before ye the law was added for transgressions: Not yt it was the principal
purpose of God to make a law yt should bring death and damnation, as he says.
Romans 7. Was that which was good (says he) made death unto me? Romans 7.13.
God forbid For ye law is a word yt shows life and drives me^ unto it.
Therefore it is not only given as a minister of death, The use of the law.
but ye principal use and end thereof is to reueile death, yt so it might be
seen and known how horrible sin is. Notwtstanding it does not so reueile
death as though it tended to no other end but to kill and destroy. Why the
law reuealeth sin.
But to this end it reuealeth death, yt when men are terrified, cast down, and
humbled, they should fear God. And this does ye. 20. chap. of Erodus declare.
Fear not (says Moses) For God is come to prove you and that his fear may be
before you that ye sin not. The office therefore of ye law is to kill, Exodus
29.20.
and yet so, yt God may revive and quicke^ again. The law then is not given
only to kill: but because man is proud and dreameth yt he is wise, righteous and
holy, therefore it is necessary he should be humbled by the law, that so this
beast the opinion of righteousness I say, might be slain: for otherwise men
can not obtain life. God uses the effect of the law, that is to say, death,
to life. The opinion of a man's own righteousness, confidence and holiness, is
slain by the law.


Albeit then yt the law kills, yet God uses this effect of the law, this
death, I mean, to a good use, yt is to say, even to life. For God seeing yt
this universal plague of the whole world: to wit, ma^s opinion of his own
righteousness, his hypocrisy, and confidence in his own holiness could not be
beaten down by any other means, he would yt it should be slain by the law:
not for ever, but yt, when it is once slain, man might be raised up again
above and beyond the law, and there might hear this voice: Fear not: I have
not given the law, and killed thee by the law, to this end that thou
should abide in this death: but that thou should fear me, and live. For
the presuming of good works and righteousness stands not with the fear of
God: And where the fear of God is not, there ca^ be no thirsting for grace or
life. God must therefore have a strong hammer or a mighty maul, to break the
rocks, and a hot burning fire in the mids of heaven to overthrow the
mountains: that is to say, to destroy this furious and obstinate beast, (this
presumption I say) that when a man by this brusing and breaking is brought to
nothing, he should despair of his own strength, righteousness, and holiness,
and being thus thoroughly terrified, should thirst after mercy and remission of
sins.

Ver. 23. But before Faith came, we were under the law, shut up unto the
Faith which should afterward be revealed.
That is to say, before the time of the Gospel and grace came, the office of
the law was, that we should be shut up and kept under the same, as it were
in prison. This is a goodly and a fit similitude, showing the effect of the
law, and how righteous it makes men: therefore it is diligently to be weyed.
This similitude of the prison shows the effect of the law.
No thief, no murderer, no adulterer, or other malefactor loves the chains
and fetters, the dark and loathsome prison wherein he lies fast bound: but
rather, if he could, he would break and beat in to powder the prison, with
his irons and fetters. In deed whiles he is in prison he refraineth from doing
of evil: but not of a good will or for righteousness sake: but because the
prison restreineth him that he can not do it. And now being fast fettred he
hates not his theft and his murder: (yea he is sorry with all his heart that
he can not rob and steal, cut and slay) but he hates the prison, and if
he could escape, he would rob and kill as he did before.

The law shuts men under sin two ways, Ciuily and Spiritually.
Such is the force of the law and the righteousness that comes of the law,
What the righteousness of the law is.
compelling us to be outwardly good when it threatens death or any other
punishment to the transgressors thereof. Here we obey the law in deed, but
for fear of punishment: that is, unwillingly and with great indignation. But
what righteousness is this, when we abstain from doing evil for fear of
punishment? Wherefore, this righteousness of works is in deed nothing else, The
righteousness of works.
but to love sin and to hate righteousness, to detest God with his law, and
to love and reverence that which is most horrible and abominable? For look
how heartily the thief loves the prison and hates his theft: so gladly do
we obey the law in accomplishing that which it commands, and avoiding that
which it forbids.

Notwithstanding, this fruit and this profit the law brings, The profit
of the law.
although men's hearts remain never so wicked, that first outwardly and ciuily
after a sort it restrains thieves, murderers, and other malefactors. For if
they did not see and understand, that sin is punished in this life by
imprisonment, by the galowes, by the sword and such like, and after this life
with eternal damnation and hell fire: no Magistrate should be able to bridle
the fury and rage of men by any laws, bonds or chains. The Civil use of the
law.
But the threatenings of the law strike a terror in to the hearts of the
wicked, whereby they are brideled after a sort, that they run not headlong,
as otherwise they would do, into all kinds of wickedness. Notwithstanding they
would rather that there were no law, no punishment, no hell, and finally no
God. If God had not an hell, or did not punish the wicked, he should be loved
and praised of all men. But because he punishes the wicked, and all are
wicked: therefore in as much as they are shut under the law, they can do no
otherwise but mortally hate and blaspheme God.

Furthermore, the law shuts men under sin, The law a spiritual prison.
not only Ciuily, but also Spiritually: that is to say, the law is also a
spiritual prison, and a very hell. For when it reuealeth sin, threatens
death, and the eternal wrath of God, a man can not avoid it, nor find any
comfort. For it is not in the power of man to shake of these horrible terrors
which the law stirs up in the conscience, or any other anguish or
bitterness of spirit. The lamentatable complaints of the Saints. Psalm. 6.5.
Hereof come these lamentable complaints of the Saints, which are every where
in the Psalms: In hell who shall confess thee? etc. For then is a man shut
up in prison: out of the which he can not escape, nor sees how he may be
delivered out of these bonds, that is to say, these horrible terrors.

Thus the law is a prison both Ciuily and Spiritually. The law is a prison
both Ciuily and Spiritually.
For first it restreineth and shuts up the wicked, that they run not
headlong according to their own lust, into all kinds of mischief. Again, it
shows unto us spiritually our sin, terrifieth and humbles us, that when we
are so terrified and humbled, we may learn to know our own misery and
condemnation. And this is the true and the proper use of the law, so that it
be not perpetual. For this shutting and holding under the law, must endure no
longer, but until Faith come: and when Faith comes, then must this spiritual
prison have his end.

The law and the Gospel, as touching the inward affections, nearely joined
together.
Here again we see, that, although the law and the Gospel be separate far
asunder, yet as touching the inward affections, they are very nerely joined the
one to the other. This Paul shows when he says: We were kept under the
law, and shut up unto the Faith which should be revealed unto us.
Wherefore it is not enough that we are shut under the law: for if nothing
else should follow, we should be driven to desperatio^ and die in our sins.
The shutting up under the law, must not be continual.
But Paul adds moreover, that we are shut up and kept under a
Scholemaister (which is the law): not for ever, but to bring us unto Christ
who is the end of the law. Therefore this terrifying, this humbling and this
shutting up must not always continue: but only until Faith be revealed:
that is, it shall so long continue as shall be for our profit and our
salvation: So that when we are cast down and humbled by the law, then grace,
remission of sins, deliverance from the law, sin and death may become
sweet unto us: which are not obtained by works, but are received by Faith
alone.

He which in time of tentation can join these two things together so repugnant
and contrary: that is to say, which when he is thoroughly terrified and cast
down by the law, Who uses the law rightly.
does know that the end of the law, and the beginning of grace or of Faith
which is to be revealed, is now come, uses the law rightly. All the wicked
are utterly ignorant of this knowledge and this cunning. Caine knew it not
when he was shut up in the prison of the law: that is, he felt no terror,
Caine being shut up in the prison of the law, and abiding there, despaired.
Genes. 4.9.
although he had now killed his brother: but dissembled the matter craftily,
and thought that God was ignorant thereof. Am I my brothers keeper, says he?
But when he heard this word: What have thou done? Behold the voice of the
blood of thy brother cries unto me from the earth, he began to feel this
prison in deed. What did he then? He remained still shut up in prison. He
joined not the Gospel with the law, Verse. 13.
but said: My punishment is greater then I can bear. He only respected the
prison, not considering that his sin was revealed unto him to this end, that
he should fly unto God for mercy and pardon. Therefore he despaired and denied
God. He believed not that he was shut up to this end, that grace and Faith
might be revealed unto him: but only that he should still remain in the
prison of the law.

These words: to be kept under, and to be shut up, What these words
import, to be kept under the law.
are not vain and unprofitable, but true and of great importance. This
keeping under and this prison signifies the true and spiritual terrors,
whereby the conscience is so shut up, that in the wide world it can find no
place where it may be in safety. Yea as long as these terrors endure, the
conscience feels such anguish and sorrow, that it thinks heaven and earth,
yea if they were ten times more wide and large then they are, to be straiter
and narrower then a mouse hole. Here is a man utterly destitute of all
wisdom, strength, righteousness, counsel and succor. For the conscience is a
marvelous tender thing, Conscience.
and therefore when it is so shut up under the prison of the law, it sees
no way how to get out: and this streitnes seems daily so to increase, as
though it would never have an end. For then does it feel the wrath of God
which is infinite and inestimable, whose hand he can not escape, as the Psalm.
139. witnesses: Psalm. 139.7.
Whether shall I fly from thy presence? etc.

Like as therefore this worldly prison or shutting up is a bodily affliction,
What the prison is, Ciuily and Spiritually.
and he that is so shut up can have no use of his body: even so the
trouble and anguish of mind is a spiritual prison, and he that is shut up
in this prison can not enjoy the quietness of heart and peace of conscience. And
yet is it not so for ever (as reason judges when it feels this prison): but
until Faith be revealed. The sely conscience therefore must be raised up and
comforted after this sort: Brother, thou art in deed shut up: How the
pore Conscience is to be comforted, that is shut up under the law.
but persuade thy self that this is not done to the end that thou should
remain in this prison for ever. For it is written, that we are shut up
unto the Faith that shall be revealed. Thou art afflicted then in this prison,
not to thy destruction, but that thou may be refreshed by the blessed Seed.
Thou art killed by the law, The law kills, that we may again be
quickened and restored to life.
that through Christ thou maiste be quickened again and restored to life.
Despair not therefore, as Caine, Saul, and Judas did, who being thus shut
up, looked no further but to their dark prison, and there still remained:
therefore they despaired. But thou must take an other way in these terrors of
conscience then they did: that is, thou must know that it is well done, and
good for thee to be so shut up, confounded, and brought to nothing. Use
therefore this shutting up rightly and as thou should do: The shutting up
under the law must be rightly used.
that is, to the end that when the law has done his office, Faith may be
revealed. For God does not therefore afflict thee, that thou should still
remain in this affliction. He will not kill thee that thou should abide in
death. EZech. 33.11.
I will not the death (says he by ye Prophet) of a sinner. etc. But he will
afflict thee that so thou may be humbled, and know that thou have need of
mercy, and the benefit of Christ.

This holding in prison then under the law, must not always endure, but must
only continue to the coming or revealing of Faith: which this sweet verse of
the Psalm. 147. does teach us: The Lord deliteth in those that fear him:
Psalm. 147.11.
that is to say, which are in prison under the law. But by and by after he
adds: and in those that attend upon his mercy. Therefore we must join these
two things together, which are in deed as contrary the one to the other as may
be. The afflicted, and such as are in prison under the law, waiting for mercy
to be reveled, are dear unto God.
For what can be more contrary then to hate and abhor the wrath of God: and
again to trust in his goodness and mercy? The one is hell, the other is heaven,
and yet they must be nerely joined together in the heart. By speculation and
naked knowledge a man may easily join them together: but by experience and
inward practice so to do, of all things it is the hardest: which I my self
have often proved by mine own experience. Of this matter the Papists and
Sectaries know nothing at all. Therefore these words of Paul are to them
obscure and altogether unknown: And when the law reueileth unto them their
sin, accuses and terrifieth them, they can find no counsel, no rest, no
help or succor: but fall to desperation, as Caine and Saul did.

No man loves the law, because it is his prison.
Seeing the law therefore (as is said) is our tormentour and our prison,
certain it is that we can not love it, but hate it. He therefore that says he
loves the law, is a liar, and knows not what he says. A thief and a
robber should show him self to be stark mad that would love the prison,
the fetters and chains. Seeing the^ the law shuts us up and holds us in
prison, it can not be but we must needs be extreme enemies to the law. To
conclude, so well we love the law and the righteousness thereof, as a murderer
loves the dark prison, the streit bonds and irons. How then should the law
justify us?

Verse. 23. And shut up under the faith which should after be reueiled.
This Paul speaks in respect of the fulness of the time wherein Christ came.
But we must apply it, not only to that time, but also to the inward man. For
that which is done as an history and according to the time wherein Christ
came, abolishing the law and bringing liberty and eternal life to light, is
always done spiritually in every Christian: in whom is found continually,
somewhile the time of the law, and somewhile the time of grace. For the
Christian man has a body in whose members (as Paul says in an other place)
sin dwells and warreth. Now, I understand sin to be, How the scripture
defines sin.
not only the deed or the work, but also the root and the tree, together
with the fruits, as the Scripture uses to speak of sin. Which is yet not
only rooted in the baptized flesh of every Christian, but also is at deadly
war within it and holds it captive: if not to give consent unto it, or to
accomplish the work, yet does it force him mightily thereunto. For albeit a
Christian man do not fall into outward and gross sins, The tentation of the
godly.
as murder, adultery, theft, and such like: yet is he not free from
impatiencie, murmuring, hating and blaspheming of God: which sins to reason
and the carnal man, are altogether unknown. These sins constrain him, yea
sore against his will, to detest the law: The tentation of every age.
they compel him to fly from the presence of God, they compel him to hate
and blaspheme God. For as carnal lust is strong in a young man, in a man of
full age the desire and love of glory, and in an old man covetousness: even so
in a holy and a faithful man impatiencie, murmuring, hatred, and blasphemy
against God do mightily prevail. Examples hereof there are many in the
Psalms, in Job, in Jeremy, and throughout the whole Scripture. Paul
describes the spiritual warfare that is in the godly with very vehement and
apt words. The time of the law in the Godly.
Paul therefore describing and setting forth this spiritual warfare, uses
very behement words and fit for the purpose, as of fighting, rebelling,
holding, and leading captive. etc.

Both these times then (of the law and the Gospel I mean) are in a
Christian, as touching the affections and inward man. The time of the law is
when the law exercises me, tormenteth me with heaviness of heart, oppresses
me, brings me to the knowledge of sin, and increases the same. Here the
law is in his true use and perfect work: which a Christian oftentimes feels
as long as he lives. So there was given unto Paul a prick in the flesh, 2
Cor. 12.7.
(that is) the angel of Satan to buffet him. He would gladly have felt every
moment the joy of conscience, the This is the spiritual laughter which David
speaks of Psalm. 126. saying: Then shall our mouth be filled with laughter.
etc.
laughter of the heart, and the sweet taste of eternal life. Again, he would
gladly have been delivered from all trouble and anguish of spirit, and
therefore he desired that this tentation might be taken from him.
Notwithstanding this was not done, but the Lord said unto him: My grace is
sufficient for thee: For my power is made perfect through weakness. 1. Cor.
12.7.8.9.
This battle does every Christian feel. To speak of my self, there are
many hours in the which I chide and contend with God, and impatiently resist
him. The wrath and judgment of God displeases me: and again, my impaciencie,
my murmuring, and such like sins do displease him. And this is the time of
the law, under the which a Christian man continually lives as touching the
flesh. Galath. 5.17.
For the flesh lusts continually against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh: but in some more, and in some less.

The time of grace.
The time of grace is when the heart is raised up again by the promise of the
free mercy of God, and says: Why art thou heavy O my soul, Psalm. 4^.^.11.
and why do thou trouble me? Do thou see nothing but the law, sin,
terror, heaviness, desperation, death, hell and the Devil? Is there not also
grace, remission of sins, righteousness, consolation, joy, peace, life,
heaven, Christ and God? Trouble me no more, O my soul. What is the law, what
is sin, what are all evils in comparison of these things? Trust in God, who
has not spared his own dear son, but has given him to the death of the
cross for thy sins. This is then to be shut up under the law after the
flesh: not for ever, but till Christ be revealed. Therefore when thou art
beaten down, The true use of the law is to shut us up till Christ be
revealed.
tormented and afflicted by the law, then say: Lady law, Thou art not alone,
neither art thou all things: but besides thee there are yet other things much
greater and better then thou art, namely grace, faith, and blessing. This
grace, this faith and this blessing do not accuse me, terrify me, condemn
me: but they comfort me, they bid me trust in the Lord, and promise unto me
victory and salvation in Christ. There is no cause therefore why I should
despair.

He that is skillful in this art and this cunning, may in deed be called a
right Divine. Who is a right divine.
The fantastical spirits and their disciples at this day, which continually
brag of the spirit, do persuade them selves that they are very expert and
cunning herein. But I and such as I am have scarsely learned the first
principles thereof. It is learned in deed, but so long as the flesh and sin
do endure, it can never be perfectly learned, A godly man is partly under the
law, and partly under grace.
and as it should be. So then a Christian is divided into two times. In that he
is flesh, he is under the law: In that he is spirit he is under grace.
Concupiscence, covetousness, ambition and pride do always cleave to the flesh:
also ignorance, contempt of God, impatiencie, murmuring and grudging against
God, because he hinders and breaks of our counselles, our devises and
enterprises, and because he speedely punishes not such as are wicked,
rebellious, and contemptuous persons. etc. Such kind of sins are rooted in
the flesh of the Faithful. Wherefore if thou behold nothing but the flesh,
thou shall abide always under the time of the law. But these days must be
shortened, or else no flesh should be saved. The law must have his time
appointed wherein it must have his end. The time of the law therefore is not
perpetual, but has his end, Romans 5.6. Romans 6.9.10. The time of grace is
eternal.
which end is Jesus Christ. But the time of grace is eternal. For Christ
being once dead, dies no more. He is eternal: therefore the time of grace is
also eternal.

We may not lightly pass over such notable sentences as these which are in
Paul, as the Papists and Sectaries are wont to do. For they contain words
of life, which do wonderfully comfort and confirm afflicted consciences: And
they which know and understand them well, can judge of Faith: they can discern
a true fear from a false fear: Fear may no^ alvvayes continue, but fear
joined with Faith must be alvvayes in a Christian. How fear must be
vanquished.
they can judge of all inward affections of the heart, and discern all
spirits. The fear of God is an holy and a precious thing, but it must not
always continue. In deed it ought to be always in a Christian, because sin
is always in him: but it must not be alone: for then is it the fear of Caine,
Saul and Judas, that is to say, a servile and a desperate fear. A Christian
therefore must vanquish fear by Faith in the word of grace: he must turn away
his eyes from the time of the law, and look unto Christ and unto Faith which
is to be revealed. Here begins fear to be sweet unto us, and makes us to
delight in God. For if a man do only behold the law and sin, setting Faith
aside, he shall never be able to put away fear, but shall at length fall to
desperation.

Thus does Paul very well distinguish the time of the law and grace. Let us
also learn rightly to distinguish the time of them both, not in words, but in
the inward affections: which is a very hard matter. For albeit these two things
are separate far asunder, Fear and Faith are separated far asunder, and
yet are joined together in one heart.
yet are they most nerely joined together in one heart. Nothing is joined more
nerely together then fear and trust, then the law and the Gospel, then sin
and grace. For they are so united together, that the one is swalowed up of
the other. Wherefore there is no conjunction like unto this.

At this place: Wherefore then serves the law? Paul begins to dispute of
the law: also of the use and the abuse thereof, taking occasion of that which
before he had affirmed, A rehersall of those things vvherof he had spoken
before.
that the Faithful do obtain righteousness by grace only and by the promise,
and not by the law. Upon that disputation rose this question: Wherefore then
serves the law? For reason hearing that righteousness or the Blessing is
obtained by grace and by the promise, by and by infers: Then the law
profits nothing. Wherefore the doctrine of the law must be diligently
considered, that we may know what and how we ought to judge thereof, lest that
either we reject the same altogether, as the fantastical spirits do, (which in
the year a thousand five hundred twenty and five, Touching this sedition of
the rusticall people and the cause thereof, read Sleidane.

We must derogate nothing from the law that is due to it, nor attribute more
to it the^ is meet.


stirring up the rusticall people to sedition, said, that the liberty of
the Gospel gives freedom to all men from al manner of laws): or else lest we
should attribute the force of Justification to the law. For both sorts do
offend against the law: the one on the right hand, which will be justified by
the law, and the other on the left hand which will be clean delivered from
the law. We must therefore keep the high way, so that we neither reject the
law, nor attribute more unto it then we ought to do.

That which I have before so often repeted concerning both the uses of the
law, namely, the Civil and the Spiritual use, do sufficiently declare that
the law is not given for the righteous: but (as Paul says in an other
place) for the unrighteous and rebellious. Now, Two sorts of the unrighteous,
they which are to be justified, and they which are not to be justified.
of the unrighteous there are two sorts, that is to say, they which are to be
justified, and they which are not to be justified. They that are not to be
justified must be bridled by the Civil use of the law: for they must be bound
with the bonds of the law, as savage and untamed beasts are bound with
cords and chains. This use of the law has no end: and of this Paul here
speaks nothing. But they that are to be justified, are exercised with this
Spiritual use of the law for a time: for it does not always continue, as the
Civil use of the law does: but it looks to Faith which is to be revealed,
and when Christ comes it shall have his end. Hereby we may plainly see that
all the sentences wherein Paul entreats of the spiritual use of the law,
How such sentences must be understand vvherin Paul handles the spiritual
use of the law.
must be understand of those which are to be justified, and not of those which
are justified already. For they which are justified already, in as much as they
abide in Christ, are far above all law. The law then must be laid upon
those that are to be justified, that they may be shut up in the prison
thereof, until the righteousness of Faith come: Not that they obtain this
righteousness through the law (for that were not to use the law rightly, but
to abuse it): but that when they are cast down and humbled by the law, they
should fly unto Christ, Romans 10.4.
who is the end of the law to righteousness, to every one that believes.

Now, first they which abuse the law, Who are abusers of the law.
are all the Iusticiaries and hypocrites which dream that men are justified by
the law. For that use of the law does not exercise and drive a man to Faith
which is to be revealed, but it makes full, careless, and arrogant hypocrites,
swelling and presuming of the righteousness of the law, and hinders the
righteousness of Faith. Secondly, they abuse the law which will utterly exempt
a Christian man from the law, as the brainsicke Anabaptists went about to do:
which was the occasion that they raised up that sedition of the rusticall
people. He speaks of the pestilent Libertines that would have no fear of
God nor law, to bridle them from their sins. 1. Pet. 2.16.
Of this sort there are very many also at this day which profess the Gospel
with us: who being delivered from the tyranny of the Pope by the doctrine of
the Gospel, do dream that the Christian liberty is a dissolute and a
carnal liberty to do what so ever they list. These (as Peter says) have
the liberty of the spirit as a cloak of maliciousnes, through which the name
of God and the Gospel of Christ is sclaundered every where, and therefore they
shall once suffer worthy punishment for this their ungodliness. Thirdly, such
do also abuse the law, who feeling the terrors thereof, do not understand
that such terrors ought no longer to continue, but unto Christ. This abuse in
them is the cause that they fall to desperation: as in the hypocrites it is the
cause of arrogancy and presumption.

Contrariwise, The true use of the law can not be esteemed as it is worthy.
the true use of the law can never be esteemed and magnified as it is worthy:
namely, that when the conscience shut up under the law, despaireth not, but
being instructed by the wisdom of the holy Ghost concludes with it self
after this sort: I am in deed shut up as a prisoner under the law, but not
for ever: yea this shutting up shall turn to my great profit. How so?
Because that I being thus shut up, shall be driven to sigh and seek the hand
of an helper. etc. After this manner the law is as an enforcer, which by
compulsion brings the hungry unto Christ, The true office of the law.
that he may satisfy them with his good things. Wherefore the true office of
the law is to show unto us our sins, to make us guilty, to humble us, to
kill us, and to bring us down to hell, and finally to take from us all help,
all succor, all comfort: but yet altogether to this end, that we may be
justified, exalted, quickened to life, carried up into heaven, and obtain all
good things. Therefore it does not only kill, but it kills that we may live.

Verse. 24. Wherefore the law was our Scholemaster to bring v^ to Christ.
Here again he joins the law and the Gospel together, (which are separate
so far asunder) as touching the affections and inward man, when he says:
The law is a Scholemaster to Christ. This similitude also of the Scholemaster
is worthy to be noted. The similitude of the School master worthy to be noted.
Although a Scholemaster be very profitable and necessary to enstruct and to
bring up children, yet show me one child or scholar which loves his
master. We may easily conjecture what affection the Jews bare to their Moises,
and how zelously they performed that which he commanded. In deed such was
their love and obedience toward him, Exodus 17.4.
that every hour (as the Story testifies) they would with all their hearts
have stoned him to death. It is not possible therefore that the scholar should
love his master. The scholar can not love his master.
For how can he love him which keeps him in prison, that is to say, which
suffers him not to do that which gladly he would? And if he do any thing
against his commandment, by and by he is rebuked and chastised, yea and is
constrained moreover to kiss the rod when he is beaten. Is not this (I pray
you) a goodly righteousness and obedience of the scholar, that he obeys his
master so severely threatening and so sharply correcting him, and kisseth the
rod? But does he this with a good will? As soon as his master has turned his
back, he breaks the rod or casts it into the fire. And if he had any
power over his master, he would not suffer him self to be beaten of his
master: but rather he would beat him. And yet notwtstanding the scholemaster is
very necessary for the child to enstruct and to chastise him: otherwise the
child without this discipline, enstruction, and good education should be
utterly lost.

The scholemaster therefore is appointed for the child to teach him, to bring
him up, Why a Scholemaster is appointed for a child.
and to keep him as it were in prison. But to what end, or how long? Is it to
the end, that this streit and sharp dealing of the scholemaster should
always continue? or that the child should remain in continual bondage? Not
so, but only for a time, that this obedience, this prison and correction might
turn to the profit of the child, that in time he might be heir and Prince.
For it is not the fathers will, that his son should be always subject to the
scholemaster, and always beaten with rods: but that by this instruction and
discipline he may be made able and meet to be his fathers successor.

Even so the law (says Paul) is nothing else but a Scholemaster: not for
ever, but until it have brought us to Christ: The law is a Scholemaster to
Christ. Galat. 4.19. Galat. 4.2^. Galat. 4.^3.
as in other words he said also before. The law was given for
transgressions until the blessed Seed should come. Also, the scripture has
shut all under sin. etc. Again: we were kept under and shut up unto faith
which should after be revealed. Wherefore the law is not only a
Scholemaster, but it is a Scholemaster to bring us unto Christ. For what a
Scholemaster were he which would always torment and beat the child, What
Scholemasters there were in times past.
and teach him nothing at all? And yet such Scholemasters there were in time
past: when Schools were nothing else but a prison and a very hell, the
Scholemasters cruel tyrannes and very butchers. The children were always
beaten: they learned with continual pain and travel, and yet few of the^ came
to any proof. The law is not such a Scholemaster. For it does not only
terrify and torment (as the foolish Scholemaster beats his scholars and
teaches them nothing): but with his rods he drives us unto Christ: like as
a good Scholemaster enstructeth and exercises his scholars in reading and
writing, to the end they may come to the knowledge of good letters and other
profitable things, that afterward they may have a delight in doing of that,
which before when they were constrained thereunto, they did against their wills.

By this goodly similitude Paul shows what is the true use of the law,
namely, that it justifies not hypocrites, for they remain without Christ in
their presumption and security: And contrariwise yt it leaves not in death
and damnation those that are of a contrite heart (so that they use it as Paul
teaches): but drives them unto Christ. But they which in these terrors
continue still in their weakness, and do not apprehend Christ by faith, do fall
at length into desperatio^. Paul therefore in this allegory of the
Scholemaster, The true use of the law set out in the allegory of the
Scholemaster.
most lively expresses the true use of ye law. For like as ye Scholemaster
reproves his scholars, he greeueth them and makes the^ heavy, and yet not to
the end that this bondage should always continue, but that it should cease
when the children are well brought up and enstructed accordingly, and that
afterward without any co^straint of the Scholemaster they should cherefully
enjoy their liberty and their fathers goods: even so they which are vexed and
oppressed with the law, do know that these terrors and vexations shall not
always continue: but that thereby they are prepared to come unto Christ which
is to be revealed, and to receive the liberty of the spirit. etc.

Verse. 24. That we may be made righteous by Faith.
The law is not a Scholemaster to bring us unto an other lawgeuer which
requires good works, The law is not a Scholemaister to bring us to an other
lavvgeuer, but to Christ.
but unto Christ our Iustifier and Savior, that by Faith in him we might be
justified, and not by works. But when a man feels the force and strength of
the law, he does not understand nor believe this. Therefore he says: I have
lived wickedly: for I have transgressed all the commandments of God, and
therefore I am guilty of eternal death. If God would prolong my life certain
years, or at least certain months, I would amend my life, and live holily
hereafter. Of the true use of the law, to make an abuse.
Here, of the true use of the law he makes an abuse. Reason being overtaken
in these terrors and streites, is bold to promise unto God the fulfilling of
all the works of the whole law. And hereof came so many sects and swarms of
Monks and religious hypocrites, so many ceremonies, and so many works,
devised to deserve grace and remission of sins. And they which devised these
things, thought that the law was a Scholemaster to lead the^, not unto Christ,
but to a new law, or unto Christ as a lawgeuer, and not as one that has
abolished the law.

The true use of the law.
But the true use of the law is to teach me that I am brought to the knowledge
of my sin and humbled, that so I may come unto Christ and may be justified by
Faith. But Faith is neither law nor work, but an assured confidence which
apprehends Christ, who is the end of the law. Romans 10.4.
Romans 10. And how? Not that he has abolished the old law and given a new: or
that he is a judge which must be pacified by works, as the Papists have
taught: but he is the end of the law to all those that believe: that is to
say, every one that believes in him is righteous, and the law shall never
accuse him. The law then is good, holy, and just, so that a man use it as he
should do. Now, they that abuse the law, are first the hypocrites which
attribute unto the law a power to justify: and secondly they which do
despair, not knowing that the law is a Scholemaster to lead men unto Christ:
that is to say, that the law humbles them, not to their destruction, but to
their salvation: For God wounds that he may heal again: he kills that he
may quicken again.

Now, Paul (as before I have said) speaks of those that are to be justified,
and not of those which are justified already. Therefore when thou go about
to reason as concerning the law, thou must take the matter of the law, or
that whereupon the law works, namely the sinner and the wicked person, whom
the law justifies not, but sets sin before his eyes, casts him down,
and brings him to the knowledge of him self: it shows unto him hell, the
wrath and the judgment of God. This is in deed the proper office of the law.
The proper office of the law, and the use of the office thereof.
Then follows the use of this office: to wit, that the sinner may know that
the law does not reveal unto him his sin and thus humbles him, to the end
he should despair: but that by this accusing and brusing it may drive him unto
Christ the Savior and comforter. When this is done, he is no longer under the
Scholemaster. And this use is very necessary. For seeing the whole world is
overwhelmed with sin, it has need of this ministry of the law, that
sin may be revealed: Otherwise no man should ever attain to righteousness, as
before we have largely declared. But what works the law in them which are
already justified by Christ? Paul answers by these words: which are as it
were an addition to that which goes before.

Verse. 25. But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under the
Scholemaster.
That is to say: we are free from the law, from the prison, When Faith is
come, we are not any longer under the law.
and from our Scholemaster: for when Faith is revealed, the law terrifieth and
tormenteth us no more. Paul here speaks of Faith as it was preached and
published unto the world by Christ in a certain time before appointed. For
Christ taking upon him our flesh, came once into the world: he abolished the
law with all his effects, and delivered from eternal death all those which
receive his benefit by Faith. If therefore ye look unto Christ and that
which he has done, there is now no law. For he coming in the time appointed,
took away the law. Now, since the law is gone, we are not kept under the
tyranny thereof any more: but we live in joy and safety under Christ, who now
sweetly reigns in us by his spirit. Now, where the Lord reigns, there is
liberty. Wherefore, if we could perfectly apprehend Christ which has
abolished the law by his death, and has reconciled us unto his father, that
Scholemaster should have no power over us at all. But the law of the members
rebelling against the law of the mind, lets us that we can not perfectly
lay hold upon Christ. The lack therefore is not in Christ, but in us, which
have not yet put of this flesh, to the which sin continually cleaves as long
as we live. Wherefore, as touching our selves, we are partly free from the law,
and partly under the law. According to the spirit, we serve with Paul the
law of God: but according to the flesh the law of sin. Romans 7.

Hereof it follows, that as touching the conscience we are fully delivered
from the law, and therefore that Scholemaster must not rule in the conscience,
that is, he must not afflict the conscience with his terrors, threatenings and
captivity. And albeit it go about to vex and to trouble the conscience never
so much, yet is she not moved therwt. For she has Christ crucified before her
eyes, who has removed out of the conscience all the offices of the law:
putting out the handvvriting of ordinances that was against us, Colos^.
2.14.15.
etc. Coloss. 2. Therefore, even as a virgin knows no man: so the conscience
must not only be ignorant of the law, but also it must be utterly dead unto
the law, and the law likewise unto the conscience. By Faith in Christ we are
dead to the law.
This is not done by any works, or by the righteousness of ye law, but by faith
which apprehends and lays hold upon Christ. Notwtstanding sin cleaves
still in the flesh as touching the effect thereof, which oftentimes accuses
and troubles the conscience. So long then as the flesh does remain, so long
this Scholemaster the law does also remain, which many times terrifieth the
conscience, and makes it heavy by revealing of sin and threatening of death.
Yet is it raised up again by the daily coming of Christ: who as he came once
into the world at the time before appointed, to redeem us from the hard and
sharp servitude of our Scholemaster: even so he comes daily unto us
spiritually, Christ comes daily unto us spiritually.
to the end that we may increase in faith and in the knowledge of him, that
the conscience may apprehend him more fully and perfectly from day to day, and
that the law of the flesh and of sin, with the terror of death and all
evils that the law brings with it, may daily be diminished in us more and
more. As long then as we live in the flesh, which is not without sin, the
law oftentimes retourneth and does his office, in one more and in an other
less, as their Faith is strong or weak: and yet not to their destruction, but
to their salvation. For this is the exercise of the law in the Saints:
namely the continual mortification of the flesh, of reason, and of our own
strength, and the daily renewing of our inward man, 2 Cor. 4 1^.
as it is said in the.2. Cor. 4.

We receive then the first fruits of the spirit: the leven is hid in the
mass of the dough: A similitude of the leven.
but all the dough is not yet leuened: no it is yet but only begun to be
leuened. If I behold the leven, I see nothing else but pure leven. But if I
behold the whole mass, I see that it is not all pure leven: That is to say, If
I behold Christ, I am altogether pure and holy, knowing nothing at all of the
law: for Christ is my leven. Godly me^ are holy, and yet sinners.
But if I behold mine own flesh, I feel in my self covetousness, lust, anger,
pride and arrogancy: also the fear of death, heaviness, hatred, murmuring, and
impatiencie against God. The more these sins are in me, the more is Christ
absent from me: or if he be present, he is felt but a little. Here have we need
of a Scholemaster to exercise and vex this strong Ass the flesh, that by this
exercise sins may be diminished and a way prepared unto Christ. For as
Christ came once corporally at the time appointed, abolished the whole law,
vanquished sin, destroyed death and hell: The spiritual coming of Christ.
even so he comes spiritually without ceasing, and daily quenches and
kills these sins in us.

This I say that thou may be able to answer, if any shall thus obiecte:
Christ came into the world, and atonce took away all our sins, and cleansed
us by his blood: what need we then to hear the Gospel, or to receive the
Sacraments? True it is that in as much as thou beholdest Christ, How far
forth the law is abolished.
the law and sin are quite abolished. But Christ is not yet come unto thee:
or if he be come, yet notwithstanding there are remnauntes of sin in thee:
thou art not yet thoroughly leuened. For where concupiscence, heaviness of
spirit, and fear of death is, there is yet also the law and sin. Christ is
not yet thoroughly come: but when he comes in deed, he drives away fear and
heaviness, and brings peace and quietness of conscience. So far forth then as
I do apprehend Christ by Faith, so much is the law abolished unto me. But my
flesh, the world, and the Devil do hinder Faith in me, that it can not be
perfect. Right gladly I would that that little light of Faith which is in my
heart, were spread thoroughout all my body and all the members thereof: but it
is not done: it is not by and by spread, but only begins to be spread. In
the mean season this is our consolation, The consolation of the godly.
that we having the first fruits of the spirit, do now begin to be
leuened: But we shall be thoroughly leuened when this body of sin is
dissolved, and we shall rise new creatures wholly together with Christ.

Albeit then that Christ be one and the same yesterday, to day, Heb. 13.8.
and shall be for ever, and albeit that all the faithful which were before
Christ had the Gospel and Faith: yet notwithstanding Christ came once in the
time before determined. Faith also came once when the Apostles preached and
published the Gospel thoroughout the world. Moreover, Christ comes also
spiritually every day. Faith likewise comes daily by the word of the Gospel.
Now, when Faith is come, When Faith is come, the law geue^h place.
the Scholemaster is constrained to give place with his heavy and grenous
office. Christ comes also spiritually when we still more and more do know
and understand those things which by him are given unto us, 2. Pet. 3.11.
and increase in grace and in the knowledge of him. 2. Pet. 3.

Verse. 26. For ye are all the sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.
Paul an excellent teacher of Faith.
Paul, as a true and an excellent teacher of Faith, has always these words
in his mouth, By Faith, In Faith, Of Faith which is in Christ Jesus. He says
not: ye are the children of God because ye are circumcised, because ye have
heard the law and have done the works thereof (as the Jews do imagine, and
the false Apostles teach): but by Faith in Jesus Christ. The law then makes
us not the children of God, and much less men's traditions. It can not beget us
into a new nature or a new birth: but it sets before us that old birth
whereby we were borne to the kingdom of the Devil: And so it prepares us to a
new birth which is by Faith in Jesus Christ and not by the law, as Paul
plainly witnesses: For ye are all the children of God by Faith. etc. As if he
said: Albeit ye be tormented, humbled, and killed by the law, yet has not the
law made you righteous, or made you the children of God: this is the work of
Faith alone. What Faith? Faith in Christ. Faith therefore in Christ makes us
the children of God, and not the law. The same thing witnesses also John in
the.1. chap. He gave power to as many as believed in him, John. 1.1^.
to be the children of God. What tongue either of men or Angels can
sufficiently extol and magnify the great mercy of God toward us, that we
which are miserable sinners and by nature the children of wrath, should be
called to this grace and glory, John. 1.1^. Romans ^.16.17. Romans 9.26.
to be made the children and heirs of God, fellow heirs with the son of
God, and Lords over heaven and earth, and that by the only means of our
Faith which is in Christ Jesus?

Verse. 27. For all ye that are Baptism succedeth Circumcision, and so through
Christ both Jew and Gentile is saved. Romans 13.14. Galath. 5.16.
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.
To put on Christ is taken two manner of ways, according to the law, and
according to the gospel. According to the law, as it is said in the 13. chap.
to the Rom: Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ: that is, follow the example and
virtues of Christ. Do that which he did, and suffer that which he suffered.
And in the.1. Pet. 2. Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example that
we should follow his steps. 1. Pet. ^.21.
Now, we see in Christ a singular patience, an inestimable mildnes and love,
and a wonderful modesty in all things. This goodly apparel we must put on,
that is to say, follow these virtues.

But the putting on of Christ according to the Gospel, consists not in
imitation, but in a new birth and a new creation: that is to say, To put on
Christ according to the Gospel.
in putting on Christ's innocence, his righteousness, his wisdom, his power,
his saving health, his life and his spirit. We are clothed with the lether
coat of Adam, which is a mortal garment, and a garment of sin: that is to
say, we are all subject unto sin, all sold under sin. The lether coat of
Adam.
There is in us horrible blindness, ignorance, contempt and hatred of God:
moreover, evil concupiscence, uncleanness, covetousness. etc. This garment, that
is to say, How the old man must be put of. Ephesians. 4.22.23.14 Coloss. 1.19.20.21.
etc.
this corrupt and sinful nature we received from Adam: which Paul is wont
to call the old man. This old man must be put off with all his works. Ephesians.
4. Coloss. 1. that of the children of Adam we may be made the children of God.
This is not done by changing of a garment, or by any laws or works, but by a
new birth, and by the renewing of the inward man, which is done in Baptism,
as Paul says: All ye that are baptized, have put on Christ. Tit. 35.
Also: According to his mercy has he saved us by the washing of the nevve
birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3. Baptism is a sure sign of
our regeneration which is wrought by the holy ghost
For besides that they which are baptized, are regenerate and renewed by the
holy Ghost to a heavenly righteousness and to eternal life, there rises in
them also a new light and a new flame: there rise in them new and holy
affections, as the fear of God, true Faith and assured hope. etc. There
begins in them also a new will. And this is to put on Christ truly and
according to the Gospel.

Therefore the righteousness of the law or of our own works is not given unto
us in baptism: but Christ him self is our garment. In Baptism we put on
Christ.
Now, Christ is no law, no lawgeuer, no work: but a divine and an inestimable
gift, whom God has given unto us that he might be our iustifier, our Savior
and our redemer. Wherefore, to be apparelled with Christ according to the
Gospel, is not to be apparelled with the law nor with works: but with an
incomparable gift: that is to say, with remission of sins, righteousness,
peace, consolation, joy of spirit, salvation, life, and Christ him self.

This is diligently to be noted because of the vain and fantastical spirits,
which go about to deface the majesty of baptism, The Anabaptists deface the
majesty of baptism.
and speak wickedly of it. Paul contrariwise commends and sets it forth
with honorable titles, calling it the washing of the nevve birth: the
renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3. And here also he says, Tit. 3.^.
that all they which are baptized, have put on Christ. As if he said: Ye are
carried out of the law into a new birth which is wrought in baptism. Therefore
ye are not now any longer under the law, but ye are clothed with a new
garment: to wit, with the righteousness of Christ. Wherefore baptism is a
thing of great force and efficacy. Now, when we are apparelled with Christ, as
with the robe of righteousness and our salvation, then we must put on Christ
also as the apparel of imitation and example. These things I have handled more
largely in an other place, therefore I here briefly pass them over.

Verse. 28. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female: for ye are all as one man.
one in Christ Jesus.
Here might be added moreover many more names of persons and offices which are
ordained of God, as these: There is neither Magistrate nor subject, neither
teacher nor hearer, neither scholemaster nor scholar, neither master nor
servant, neither mistres nor maid etc: for in Christ Jesus all states, yea
even such as are ordained of God, are nothing. In deed the male, the female,
the bond, the free, the Jew, the Gentile, the Prince, the subject are the good
creatures of God: but in Christ, that is, in the matter of salvation they are
nothing, with all their wisdom, righteousness, religion, and power.

Wherefore, with these words: There is neither Jew. etc. Paul mightily
abolisheth the law. There is neither Jew nor Grecian. etc.
For here, that is, when a man is renewed by baptism, and has put on Christ,
there is neither Jew nor Grecian. etc. The Apostle speaks not here of the
Jew according to his nature and substance: but he calls him a Jew which is
the disciple of Moses, is subject to the law, is circumcised, and with all his
endeavor keeps the ceremonies commanded in the law. Where Christ is put on
(says he) there is neither Jew, Christ has taken away the law.
nor circumcision, nor ceremony of the law any more: for Christ has abolished
all the laws of Moses that ever were. The believing conscience knovveth no law.
Wherefore the conscience believing in Christ, must be so surely persuaded that
the law is abolished, with all his terrors and threatenings, that it should be
utterly ignorant whether there were ever any Moses, any law, or any Jew. For
Christ and Moses can in no wise agree. Moses came with the law, with many
works and with many ceremonies: but Christ came without any law, without any
exacting of works, giving grace and righteousness. etc. John. 1. For the law
was given by Moses, John. 1.17.
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

Moreover, when he says: Nor Grecian, The wisdoms and righteousness of the
Gentiles rejected.
he rejects also and condemns the wisdom and righteousness of the Gentiles.
For among the Gentiles there were many notable men, as Xenophon, Themistocles,
Marcus Fabius, Attilius Regulus, Cicero, Pomponius Atticus and many other,
which being endued with singular virtues, governed commonweals excellently,
and did many worthy acts for the preservation thereof: and yet all these were
nothing before God, with their wisdom, their power, their notable acts, their
excellent virtues, laws, The Gentiles in all ages had their laws, Religions
and Ceremonies.
religions and ceremonies. For we must not think that the Gentiles did
contemn all honesty and religion. Yea all nations of all ages dispersed
thoroughout the world had their laws, religions, and ceremonies, without the
which it is not possible that mankind should be governed. All righteousness
therefore concerning either the government of families, or commonweals, or
divine matters (as was the righteousness of the law) with all the obedience,
execution and holiness thereof, be it never so perfect, is nothing worth before
God. What then? The garment of Christ which we put on in baptism.

So, if the servant do his duty, obey his master, serve in his vocation
never so diligently and faithfully: if he that is at liberty be in authority
and govern the common wealth, or guide his own family honestly and with
praise: if the man do that pertains to the man in marying a wife, in
governing his family, in obeying the Magistrate, There is neither free nor
bond. etc.
in behauing him self decently toward all men: if the woman live chastely,
obey her husband, see well to her household, bring up her children godly (which
are in deed excellent gifts and holy works) yet are all these nothing in
comparison of that righteousness which is before God. To be brief, all the
laws, ceremonies, religions, righteousness and works in the whole world, yea
of the Jews themselves, which were the first that had the kingdom and
priesthode ordained and appointed of God, with their holy laws, religions,
ceremonies, and worshippings, all these (I say) take not away sin, deliver
not from death, nor purchase life.

Therefore your false Apostles do subtelly seduce you (O ye Galathians) when
they teach you that the law is necessary to salvation: and by this means they
spoil you of that excellent glory of your new birth and your adoption, and
call you back to your old birth and to the most miserable servitude of the
law, making you of the free children of God bond children of the law, In the
world there is a difference of persons, but not before God.
whiles they will have a difference of persons according to the law. In deed
there is a difference of persons in the law and in the world, and there it
ought to be: but not before God. All have sinned, and are destitute of the
glory of God. Romans 13.23.
Let the Jews therefore, the Gentiles, and the whole world keep silence in
the presence of God. God has in deed many ordinances, laws, degrees and
kinds of life, but all these help nothing to deserve grace, and to obtain
eternal life. So many as are justified therefore, are justified, not by the
observation of man's law or Gods law, but by Christ alone, who has abolished
all laws. The Gospel sets forth Christ unto us.
Him does the Gospel set forth unto us for a pacifier of Gods wrath by the
sheeding of his own blood, and a Savior: And without Faith in him, neither
shall the Jew be saved by the law, nor the Monk by his order, nor the Grecian
by his wisdom, nor the Magistrate or Master by his upright government, nor
the servant by his obedience.

Verse. 28. For ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
There is a difference and an inequality of persons in the world.
These are excellent words. In the world and according to the flesh there is a
great difference and inequality of persons: and the same must be diligently
observed. For if the woman would be the man, if the son would be the father,
the servant would be the master, the subject would be the magistrate, there
should be nothing else but a confusion of all states and of all things.
Contrariwise, in Christ there is no law, no difference of persons, there is
neither Jew nor Grecian, but all are one. Ephesians. 4.4.
For there is one body, one spirit, one hope of vocation: There is but one
Gospel, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, one Christ and
Lord of all. We have the same Christ, I, thou and all the Faithful, which
Peter, Paul, and all the Saints had. Here therefore the conscience knows
nothing of the law, but has Christ only before her eyes. Therefore Paul is
always wont to add this clause: In Christ Jesus.
In Christ Jesus. Who, if he be taken out of our sight, then comes terror.

The opinion of the School divines concerning Faith.
The Popish School divines do dream that Faith is a quality cleaving in the
heart, without Christ. This is a deuelish error. But Christ should be so set
forth, that thou should see nothing besides him, and should think that
nothing ca^ be more nere unto thee, or more presently within thy heart then he
is. For he sits not idly in heaven: but is present with us, working and
living in us, as he says before in the.2. chap. I live: Galath. ^.^0. Tit.
3.5. ^aith.
yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And here likewise: Ye have put on
Christ. Faith therefore is a certain steadfast beholding, which looks upon
nothing else but Christ the conqueror of sin and death, and the geuer of
righteousness, salvation and eternal life. This is the cause that Paul names
and sets forth Jesus Christ so often in his Epistles, yea almost in every
verse. Why Paul sets forth Christ so often in his Epistles.
But he sets him forth by the word: for otherwise he can not be comprehended
then by the word.

This was notably and lively represented by the brazen Serpent, which is a
figure of Christ. The brazen serpent a figure of Christ.
Moises commanded the Jews which were stong of Serpents in the desert, to do
nothing else but steadfastly behold the brazen Serpent, and not to turn away
their eyes. They that did so, Number. 21.6.7.^.
were healed only by that steadfast and constant beholding of the Serpent. But
contrariwise, they died which obeyed not the commandment of Moises, but
looked upon their wounds, and not upon the Serpent. So if I would find
comfort when my conscience is afflicted, or when I am at the point of death, I
must do nothing but apprehend Christ by Faith, and say: I believe in Jesus
Christ the son of God, who suffered, was crucified, and died for me, etc: in
whose wounds and in whose death I see my sin, and in his resurrection
victory over sin, death, and the Devil, also righteousness and eternal life.
Besides him I see nothing, I hear nothing. True Faith in Christ. Ephesians. 5.30.
Acts. 17.20.
This is true Faith concerning Christ and in Christ. Whereby we are made
members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. In him
therefore we live, we move, and we have our being. Christ and our Faith must
be thoroughly joined together.
Christ and our Faith must be thoroughly joined together. We must be in
heaven, and Christ must live and work in us. Now, he lives and works in
us, not by speculation and naked knowledge, but in deed and by a true and a
substantial presence.

Verse. 29. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs by
promise.
That is to say: If ye be believe and be baptized into Christ, if ye believe (I
say) that he is that promised Seed of Abraham which brought the Blessing to
all the Gentiles, The Gentiles that believe, are the Seed of Abraham.
then are ye the children of Abraham, not by nature, but by adoption. For the
Scripture attributes unto it, not only the children of the flesh, but also of
adoption and of the promise, and foresheweth that they shall receive the
inheritance, and the other shall be cast out of the house. So Paul in few
words translateth the whole glory of Libanus, that is to say, of the nation of
the Jews, unto the desert, that is, unto the Gentiles. And this place
comprehends a singular consolation: to wit, that the Gentiles are the
children of Abraham, and consequently the people of God. But they are the
children of Abraham, not by carnal generation, but by the promise. The kingdom
of heaven then, life, and the eternal inheritance belongs to the Gentiles.
And this the Scripture signified long before when it says: Genes. 17.5.
Genes. 22.18.
I have made thee a Father of many nations. Again: In thy Seed shall all
nations be blessed. Now therefore because we which are Gentiles do believe,
and by Faith do receive the Blessing promised to Abraham and exhibited by
Christ, therefore the Scripture calls us the children and heirs of Abraham,
The Gentiles are the children and heirs of Abraham, and the people of God.
not after the flesh, but after the promise. So that promise: In thy seed,
etc. belongs also to all the Gentiles, and according to this promise Christ
is become ours.

The promise made to the Jews, and not to the Gentiles. Psalm. 147.19.20
In deed the promise was made only to the Jews, and not to us that are
Gentiles. Psalm. 147. He shows his word unto Jacob. etc. He has not delte
so with every nation, etc. Notwithstanding, that which was promised comes
unto us by faith, by the which only we apprehende the promise of God. Albeit
then that the promise be not made unto us, yet is it made as touching us and
for us: for we are named in the promise: The Gentiles are named in the promise.
In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. For the promise shows plainly
that Abraham should be the father, not only of the Jewish nation, but of many
nations, and that he should be the heir, Romans 4.13.17.
not of one kingdom, but of all the world. Romans 4. So the glory of the whole
kingdom of Christ is translated unto us. Wherefore all laws are utterly
ablioshed in the heart and conscience of a christian: notwithstanding they
remain without still in the flesh. And hereof we have spoken largely before.

The fourth Chapter.
Verse. 1. This I say that the heir as long as he is a child, differs
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all:

Verse. 2. But is under tutours and governors, until the time appointed of
the Father.


YE see with what vehement affection Paul goes about to call back the
Galathians, The argument vvhervvith Paul fortifieth his matter.
and what strong arguments he uses in debating that matter, gathering
similitudes of experience, of the example of Abraham, of the testimonies of the
Scripture, and of the time: so that often times he seems to renew the whole
matter again. For before he had in a manner finished the disputation concerning
justification, concluding that a man is justified before God by faith only and
alone. But because he calls also to remembrance this political example of
the little heir, he brings the same also for the confirmation of his matter.
Thus trying every way, he lies in wait with a certain holy subtlety to take
the Galathia^s unawares. For the ignorant people are sooner persuaded with
similitudes and examples, then with deep and subtle disputations. They will
rather behold an Image well painted then a book well written. Paul therefore
now, after that he has brought the similitude of a man's testament, of the
prison, and of the scholemaister, uses also this similitude of an heir (which
is familiar and well known to al men) to move and to persuade them. And surely
it is a very profitable thing to be furnished with similitudes and examples:
which not only Paul, but also the Prophets, and Christ himself also did often
use.

Ye see (says he) that it is ordained by the civil laws, that an heir,
albeit he be the Lord of all his fathers goods, differs not from a
servant. In deed he has an assured hope of the inheritance: but before he
come to his years, his tutors hold him in subjection, like as the
Scholemaister does his scholar. A young heir differs nothing from a servant.
They commit not unto him the ordering of his own goods, but constrayne him
to serve, so that he is kept and maintained with his own goods like a
servant. Therefore so long as this bondage endures, that is, so long as he
is under tutors and governors, he differs nothing from a servant. And this
subjection and servitude is very profitable for him: for otherwise through
folly he would soon wast all his goods. This captivity endures not always,
but has a certain time limited and appointed by the father wherein it must
end.

Verse. 3. So also we as long as we were children, were in bondage under
the rudiments of the world.
In like manner when we were little children we were heirs, having the promise
of the inheritance to come, which should be given unto us by the seed of
Abraham, that is to say, by Christ, in whom all nations should be blessed. But
because the fulness of time was not yet come, Moises our tutour, gouerner and
schoolmaster came, holding us in captivity with our hands bound, so that we
could bear no rule, nor possess our inheritance. In the mean time
notwithstanding, like as an heir is nourished and maintained in hope of
liberty to come: even so Moises did nourish us with the hope of the promise to
be revealed in the time appointed: to wit, when Christ should come, who by
his coming should put an end to the time of the law, and begin the time of
grace.

The time of the law is finished.
Now the time of the law ends two manner of ways: First (as I said) by the
coming of Christ in the flesh at the time appointed of his father. But when
the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son, Galath. 4.4.5.
made of a woman and made under the law, that he might redeem them which
were under the law. etc. He entered into the holy sanctuary once through his
blood, Heb. 9.12.
and obtained eternal redemption for us. Moreover, the same Christ who came
once in the time appointed, The coming of Christ unto us in spirit. Heb.
10.14.
comes also unto us daily and hourly in spirit. In deed once with his own
blood he redeemed and sanctified all: but because we are not yet perfectly pure
(for the remnaunts of sin do yet clean in our flesh, Galath. 5.17.
which strives against the spirit) therefore daily he comes unto us
spiritually and continually more and more accomplisheth the appointed time of
his father, abrogating and abolishing the law.

So he came also in spirit to the fathers of the old Testament before he
appeared in flesh. They had Christ in spirit. They believed in Christ which
should be revealed, as we believe in Christ which is now revealed, and were
saved by him as we are, according to that saying: Heb. 13.^.
Jesus Christ is one yesterday, and to day, and shall be the same for ever.
Yesterday, before the time of his coming in the flesh. To day, when he was
revealed in the time before appointed. Now and for ever he is one and the same
Christ: for even by him only and alone all the faithful which either have been, be, or shall be, are delivered from the law, justified and saved.

In like manner we also (says he) when we were children, served under the
rudimentes of the world, that is to say: the law had dominion over us,
oppressed us and kept us in a streite bondage, as servant and captives. For
first it restrained carnal and rebellious persons that they should not run
headlong into all kinds of vice. For the law threatens punishment to
transgressors, The politic use of the law.
which if they feared not, there is no mischief which they would not commit:
And over those whom the law so bridleth, it rules and reigns. Again, it did
accuse us, terrify us, kill us, The spiritual use of the law
and condemn us spiritually and before God: and this was the principal
dominion that the law had over us. Therefore like as an heir is subject unto
his tutours, is beaten, and is compelled to obey their laws and diligently to
execute their commandments: even so men's consciences, before Christ come,
are oppressed with the sharp servitude of the law: that is to say, they are
accused, terrified, and condemned of the law. But this dominion, or rather
this tyranny of the law is not continual, but must only endure until the
time of grace. Wherefore the office of the law is to reprove and to increase
sins, but to righteousness: to kill, but to life, For the law is a
Schoolmaster unto Christ. Galath. 3.^.
Like as therefore the tutours do handle the heir being yet a child,
streitly and hardly, rule him and command him as a servant, and he again is
constrained to be subject unto them: even so the law accuses us, humbles us,
and brings us into bondage, that we may be the servants of sin, death,
and of the wrath of God, which is in deed a most miserable kind of bondage.
But as the power of the tutours, and the subjection and bondage of the little
heir is not continual, but only endures unto the time appointed of the
Father, which being ended, he needs not to be governed by his tutours, nor
remains under their subjection any more, but with liberty enjoys the
inheritance: even so the law has dominion over us, and we are constrained to
be servant and captives under his government, but not for ever. For this
clause which follows must be added: until the appointed time of the Father.
For Christ which was promised, came and redeemed us which were oppressed with
the tyranny of the law.

Contrariwise, To whom Christ comes, and to whom he comes not.
the coming of Christ profits not the careless hypocrites, the wicked
contemners of God, nor ye desperate which think that nothing else remains
but the terrors of the law which they the rudiments of the world. The
Emperors laws.
So the Emperors laws be rudiments of ye world: for they entreat of worldly
matters: that is to say, of things concerning this present life, as of goods,
possessions, enheritaunces, murders, adulteries, robberies, etc. Whereof
speaks also the second table of the commandments. The laws of the Pope.
As for the Popes Canon laws, and Decretals, which forbid marriage and meats,
those Paul in an other place calls the doctrines of Devils: 1. Timot. 4.^.
which are also rudiments of the world, but that they do most wickedly bind
men's consciences to the observation of outward things, contrary to the word of
God and faith.

The law of Moises gives only vvorldly things.
Wherefore the law of Moises gives nothing but worldly things, that is to say,
it does but only show ciuily and spiritually the evils that be in the world.
Notwithstanding, if it be in his true use, it drives the conscience by his
terrors to seek and thirst after the promise of God, By the comfort of the
holy Ghost we are delivered from the terrors of the law.
and to look unto Christ. But that thou may so do, thou have need of the
aid and assistance of the holy Ghost, which may say in thy heart: It is not
the will of God, that after the law has done his office in thee, thou
should only be terrified and killed: but that when thou art brought by the
law to the knowledge of thy misery and damnation, thou should not despair
but believe in Christ: who is the end of the law to righteousness, Romans 10.4.
to every one that believes. Here is no worldly thing done, but here all
worldly matters and all laws cease, and heavenly things begin now to appear.
Therefore so long as we be under the rudiments of the world: Romans 3.20. Romans
4.15.
that is to say, under the law, which gives not only righteousness and peace
of conscience, but reuealeth and increases sins and engenders wrath, we be
servant, thrall and subject to the law, although we have the promise of the
Blessing to come. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
In deed the law says: Thou shall love the Lord thy God: but that I may be
able so to do, or to apprehe^d Christ, this can not the law give.

Wherefore Paul abaseth the law.
I speak not this to the end that the law should be despised, neither does
Paul so mean, but it ought to be had in great estimation. But because Paul
is here in the matter of Justification, it was necessary that he should speak
of the law as of a thing very contemptible and odious. For Justification is a
far other manner of thing then the law is. When we feel the terrors of
conscience, the law must be abased, and the promise magnified.
We can not speak basely and contemptuously enough of the law when we are in
this matter. When the conscience therefore is in the conflict, then should she
think upon nothing, know nothing at all but Christ only and alone. Then
should she remove the law utterly out of her sight, and embrace nothing but
the promise concerning Christ. To say this, it is an easy matter: but in time
of tentation when the conscience wrestleth in the presence of God, to do it in
deed, of all things it is the hardest: to wit, that when the law accuses
thee, terrifieth thee, reuealeth unto thee thy sin, threatens to thee the
wrath of God and eternal death, yt then (I say) thou should have such
strength of faith in Christ as if there had never ben any law or any sin, but
only Christ, mere grace, and redemption: or that thou should then be able to
say: O law, I will not hear thee, for thou have a sta^mering and a slow
tongue: moreover, the fulness of time is now come, He alluded to the slow
tongue and stammering speech of Moses. Romans 4.18.
and therefore I am free, and will not suffer thy tyranny any longer. Here a
man may see how hard a matter it is to separate the law from grace: Again,
how divine and heavenly a thing it is to hope here eue^ against hope, and how
true this proposition of Paul is, that we are justified by Faith alone.

Learn here therefore, to speak of the law as conte^ptuously as thou can in
the matter of Justification, by the example of the Apostle, which calls the
law the rudiments of the world, pernicious traditions, What names Paul
gives to the law. 1 Cor. 15.56.
the strength of sin, the ministry of death. etc. For if thou suffer the
law to bear rule in thy conscience when thou stand before God wrestling
against sin and death, then is the law in deed nothing else but a sink of
all evils, heresies and blasphemies: for it does nothing but increase sin,
accuse and terrify the conscience, threaten death, and set forth God as an
angry judge, which rejects and condemns sinners. Here therefore, if thou be
wise, banish this stutting and stammering Moises far from thee, with his
law, and in any wise let not his terrors and threatenings move thee. Here let
him be utterly suspected unto thee as an heretic, as an excommunicate and
condemned person, worse then the Pope and the Devil him self, and therefore
not to be heard or obeyed in any case.

But out of the matter of Justification we ought with Paul to think
reverently of the law, to commend it highly, to call it holy, The commendation
of the law. Romans 7.12.14. The law is good, and the law is evil,
righteous, good, spiritual and divine. Out of the case of conscience we
should make a God of it, but in the case of conscience it is a very devil. For
in the least temptation that can be, it is not able to raise up and to
comfort the conscience: but it does clean contrary: it terrifieth, it,
oppresses it with heaviness, and plucketh it from the assurance of
righteousness, of life, and of all goodness. Herevppon Paul a little after,
calls it vveake and beggarly rudiments. Galat. 4.3.
Wherefore let us not suffer ye law in any case to bear rule in our
conscience, especially seeing it cost Christ so great a price to deliver the
conscience from the tyranny of the law. For he was made a Curse for us, that
he might deliver us from the Curse of the law. Let the godly learn therefore
that the law and Christ are two contrary things, The law and Christ are
two, which can not stand together. Esaias. 28.20.
whereof the one can not abide the other. For when Christ is present, the law
may in no case rule, but must depart out of the conscience, and leave the bed
(which is so streit that it can not hold two, as Esaias says) and give place
only to Christ. Let him only reign in righteousness, in peace, in joy and
life, that the conscience may sleep and repose it self joyfully in Christ
without any feeling of the law, sin, and death.

Paul here of purpose uses this figurative speech, Elements of the world:
Why Paul calls the law the elements of the world. 2. Cor. 3.6.7.9.
whereby (as I said) he does much abase and diminish the glory and authority
of the law, to stir us up. For he that reads Paul attentively, when he
hears that he calls the law the ministry of death, the letter that
kills, etc. by and by he thinks thus with him self: why does he give such
odious, and (as it appears to reason) blasphemous terms to the law, which
is a divine doctrine revealed from heaven? To this Paul answers, that the
law is both holy, Romans 7.12.14. 2. Cor. 3.6.7.9. The law is holy and
righteous, and yet is it the administration of death.
just, and good: and also the ministry of sin and death, but in diverse
respects. Before Christ it is holy: after Christ it is death. Therefore when
Christ is come, we ought to know nothing at all of the law, unless it be in
this respect, that it has power and dominion over the flesh, to bridle it and
to keep it under. Here is a conflict between the law and the flesh (to whom
the yoke of the law is hard and grievous) as long as we live.

Only Paul among all the Apostles, calls the law the rudiments of the
world, Galath. 3.5.9. 1. Cor. 15.56. 2. Cor. 3.6.
weak and beggarly elements, the strength of sin, the letter that kills,
etc. The other Apostles spoke not so of the law. Whosoever then will be a right
scholar in Christ's school, let him mark diligently this manner of speech used
of the Apostle. Paul's manner of speaking must be marked. Acts. 9.15.
Christ calls him an elect vessel, and therefore gave unto him an exquisite
utterance, and a singular kind of speech above all the rest of the Apostles,
that he as an elect vessel might faithfully lay the foundations of the article
of Justification, and clearly set forth the same.

Verse. 4. But after the fulness of time was come, God sent his son, made (or
borne) of a woman, made under the law, that he might redeem them which
were under the law.
That is to say, after that the time of the law was fulfilled, and that Christ
was revealed, and had delivered us from the law, and that the promise was
published among all nations. etc.

Mark here diligently how Paul defines Christ. The person and office of
Christ.
Christ (says he) is the son of God and of a woman, which for us sinners
was made under ye law, to redeem us that were under the law. In these words he
comprehends both the person of Christ and the office of Christ. His person
consists of his divine and humane nature. This he shows plainly when he
says: God sent his own son borne of a woman. Christ therefore is very
God and very man. His office he sets out in these words: Being made under
the law to redeame them that were under the law etc.

And it seems that Paul here, as it were in reproach, calls the virgin
Marie but only a woman: which thing was not well taken eue^ of some of the
ancient Doctors, who would that he should rather have called her a virgin,
then a woman. Why Paul calls the mother of Christ a woman, and not a
virgin.
But Paul entreats in this Epistle of ye most high and principal matter of
all, to wit, of the Gospel, of Faith, of Christian righteousness: Also, what the
person of Christ is, what is his office, what he has taken upon him and done
for our cause, and what benefits he has brought to us wretched sinners.
Wherefore ye excellency of so high and so wonderful a matter was ye cause yt
he had no regard to her virginity. It was enough for him to set forth and
preach ye inestimable mercy of God, which would yt his son should be borne of
that sex. Therefore he makes no mention of the dignity of the sex, but only
of the sex. And in that he names the sex, he signifies that Christ was
made true and very man of womankinde. As if he said: He was borne, not of man
and woman, but only of womankinde. Therefore when he names but only the
womankinde, saying: made of a woman, John. 1.^.14.
it is as if he should have said, made of a virgin. John the Evangelist, when
he thus sets forth the Word, that it was in the beginning, and was made
flesh, speaks not one word of his mother.

Furthermore, this place also witnesses that Christ, when the time of the
law was accomplished, did abolish the same, and so brought liberty to those
that were oppressed therewith, but made no new law after or besides that old
law of Moises. Wherefore the Monks and Popish Schoolmen do no less err
and blaspheme Christ, The error and blasphemy of the Papists and Turks.
in that they imagine that he has given a new law besides the law of Moises,
then do the Turks which vaunt of their Mahomet as of a new lawgeuer after
Christ, and better then Christ. Christ then came not to abolish the old law,
that he might make a new, but (as Paul here says) he was sent of his Father
into the world, to redeem those which were kept in thraldom under the law.
These words paint out Christ lively and truly: The true picture of Christ.
they do not attribute unto him the office to make any new law, but to redeem
them which were under the law. And Christ himself says: I judge no man. And in
an other place: John. 1.15. John. 3.17.
I came not to judge the world, but that the world should be saved by me:
That is to say, I came not to bring any law, nor to judge men according to the
same, as Moises and other lawgeuers, but I have an higher and a better office.
The law killed you, and I again do judge, The office of Christ.
condemn and kill the law, and so I deliver you from the tyranny thereof.

We that are old men, which have been so nusled up in this pernicious doctrine
of the Papists, that it has taken deep root even in our bones and marrow,
have conceived an opinion quite contrary to that which Paul here teaches. A
false opinion of Christ is not easily cast of.
For although we confessed with our mouth that Christ redeemed us from the
tyranny of the law, yet in very deed in our heart we thought him to be a
lawgeuer, a tyranne and a judge, more terrible then Moises him self. And this
perverse opinion we can not yet at this day in so great light of the truth,
utterly reject: so strongly are those things rooted in our hearts which we
learn in our youth. But ye which are yet young, and are not infected with this
pernicious opinion, may learn Christ purely with less difficulty the^ we
that are old can remove out of our minds these blasphemous imaginations which
we have conceived of him. Notwithstanding ye have not utterly escaped the
deceites of the Devil. For although ye be not as yet infected with this cursed
opinion, that Christ is a lawgeuer, yet have ye in you the root whereof it
springs, that is, ye have the flesh, The judgment of natural reason
concerning Christ.
reason, and the corruption of nature, which can judge no otherwise of Christ,
but that he is a lawgeuer. Therefore ye must endeavor with all your power to
learn so to know and to apprehend Christ, as Paul has set him forth in
this place. But if besides this natural corruption, there come also corrupt and
wicked teachers (of whom the world is full) they will increase this corruption
of nature, and so shall the evil be doubled: that is to say, evil instruction
will increase and confirm the pernicious error of blind reason, which
naturally judges Christ to be a lawgeuer, and printeth that error so mightily
in our minds, that without great travail and difficulty it can never be
abolished.

Wherefore it is very profitable for us to have always before our eyes this
sweet and comfortable sentence and such like, The sentences which set out
Christ plainly, ought alvvais to be before our eyes.
which set out Christ truly and lively, that in our whole life, in all
dangers, in the confession of our Faith before tyrannes, and in the hour of
death we may boldly and with a sure confidence say: O law, thou have no power
over me, and therefore thou do accuse and condemn me in vain. For I believe
in Jesus Christ the son of God, whom the Father sent into the world to redeem
us miserable sinners oppressed with the tyranny of the law. He gave his life
and shed his blood for me. Therefore feeling thy terrors and threatenings, O
law, I plunge my conscience in the wounds, blood, death, resurrection and
victory of my Savior Christ. Besides him I will see nothing, I will hear
nothing. This Faith is our victory, whereby we overcome the terrors of the
law, Faith is our victory. 1. John. 5.4.
sin, death and all evils, and yet not without great conflicts. And here do ye
children of God, which are daily exercised with grievous temptations, wrestle
and sweat in deed. The conflictes of the godly.
For oftentimes it comes into their minds yt Christ will accuse them and plead
against them: that he will require an account of their former life, and that he
will condemn them. They can not assure them selves that he is sent of his
Father to redeem us from the tyranny and oppression of the law. And whereof
comes this? They have not yet fully put of the flesh, which rebelleth against
the spirit. The vvrastli^g of the flesh against the spirit in the Saints.
Gala^ 5.17.
Therefore the terrors of the law, the fear of death, and such like
sorrowful and heavy sightes do oftentimes return, which hinder our Faith
that it can not apprehend the benefit of Christ (who has redeemed us from the
bondage of the law) with such assurance as it should do.

But how or by what means has Christ redeemed us? The manner of our
redemption. Galat. 3.23.
This was the manner of our redemption: He was made under the law. Christ
when he came found us all captives under governors and tutours, that is to
say, shut up and holden in prison under the law. What does he then?
Although he be Lord of the law, and therefore the law has no authority or
power over him (for he is the son of God) yet of his own accord he makes
him self subject to the law. Here the law executes upon him all the
jurisdiction which it had over us. It accuses and terrifieth us also: it
makes us subject to sin, death, the wrath of God, and with his sentence
condemns us. And this is does by good right: for we are all sinners, Romans
5.12. Ephesians. 2.3.
and by nature the children of wrath. Contrariwise, Christ did no sin,
neither was there any guile found in his mouth: therefore he was not subject
to the law. Yet notwithstanding the law was no less cruel against this
innocent, righteous and blessed Lamb, 1. Pet. 2.20
then it was against us cursed and damned sinners: yea much more rigorous. For
it accused him as a blasphemer and a seditious person: Math. 26.65. Luc. 23.5.
it made him guilty before God of the sins of the whole world: it so
terrified and oppressed him with heaviness and anguish of spirit, that he swette
blood, and briefly, it condemned him to death, Luke. 22.44. Luke. 23.24.33.
yea even to the death of the cross.

A marvelous combat between the law and Christ. Ephesians. 2.3.
This was in deed a wonderful combat, where the law being a creature, gives
such an assault to his creator, and against all right and equity practices
his whole tyranny upon ye Son of God which it exercised upon us the children
of wrath. Now therefore, because ye law did so horribly and so cursedly sin
against his God, it is accused and arraigned. The law rules all mankind.
There Christ says: O law, thou mighty Queen and cruel Regent of all
mankind, what have I done, yt thou have accused me, terrified me, and
condemned me which am innocent? Here the law, which had before condemned and
killed all men, when it has nothing wherewith to defend or purge it self, is
again so condemned and vanquished, yt it loses his whole right, not only
over Christ (whom it so cruelly handled and killed) but also over all them that
believe in him. For to those Christ says: Math. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor under the yoke of the law. The law condemned
and killed by Christ.
I could have overcome the law by my absolute power, without mine own smart:
for I am Lord of the law, and therefore it has no right over me. But I have
made my self subject unto the law for your cause which were under the law,
taking your flesh upon me: that is to say, of mine inestimable love I humbled
and yielded my self to the same prison, tyranny and bondage of the law, under
the which ye served as captives and bondslaues, I suffered the law to have
dominion over me which was his Lord, to terrify me, to make me thrall and
captive unto sin, death and the wrath of God: which it ought not to have
done. Therefore I have vanquished the law by double right and authority: Christ
by double right has conquered the law.
First as ye son of God and Lord of the law: Secondly in your person: which
is as much as if ye had overcome ye law your selves: for my victory is yours.

After this manner Paul speaks every where of this marvelous co^bate between
Christ and the law. And to make the matter more delectable and more apparent,
he is wo^t to set forth the law by a figure called Prosopopoeia is a figure
vvherby things that have no life, are fained personally to speak, or to be
spoken to. Ephesians. 2.16. Ephesians. 4.^. etc. Psalm. 68.18.
prosopopoeia, as a certain mighty person which had condemned and killed
Christ: whom Christ again ouercomming death, had conquered, condemned and
killed. Ephesians. 2. Killing enmity in himself. And again, chap. 4. out of the
Psalm. 68. Thou art gone up on high, thou hastled captivity captive. etc. He
uses the same figure also in his Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians and
Colossians. By sin he condemned sin, Romans 8.3.
etc. Christ therefore by this his victory, banished the law out of our
conscience, so yt now it can no more confou^d us in the sight of God, Christ hy
his victory has delivered us from the terrors of the law.
drive us to desperation, or condemn us. In deed it cease not still to
reveal our sin, to accuse and to terrify us: but the conscience taking hold
of this word of the Apostle: Christ has redeemed us from the law, is raised
up by faith, and conceaueth great comfort. Moreover it triumphs over the law
with a certain holy pride, saying: I care not for thy terrors and
threatenings. For thou have crucified the son of God, and this have thou done
most unjustly: therefore the sin that thou have committed against him, can not
be forgiven. The offense of the law against Christ, can not be forgeuen.
Thou have lost thy right and sovereignty, and now for ever thou art not
only overcome, condemned and slain unto Christ, but also to me believing in
him, unto whom he has freely given this victory. So the law is dead to us for
ever, so that we abide in Christ. Thanks be therefore to God, 1. Cor. 15.57.
which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

These things do also confirm this doctrine, that we are justified by faith
only. That we be made righteous by Faith.
For when this combat was fought betwixt Christ and the law, none of our works
or deserts came between, but only Christ was found, who putting upon him our
person, made him self subject to the law, and in perfect innocence suffered
all tyra^nie. Therefore the law, The law by his judgment killed the son of
God.
as a thief and a cursed murderer of the son of God, loses all his right,
and deserves to be condemned in such sort, that wheresoever Christ is, or is
once named, there it is compelled to avoid and fly away, no otherwise the^ the
Devil (as the Papists imagine) flies from the cross. Wherefore if we believe,
we are delivered from the law through Christ, Coloss. 2.1^.
who has triumphed over it by himself. Therefore this glorious triu^ph
purchased unto us by Christ, is not gotten by any works, but only by Faith:
therefore Faith only justifies.

These words then: Christ was made under the law, etc. as they are pithie
and import a certain vehemency, so are they diligently to be weyed and
considered. Christ was made under the law.
For they declare that the Son of God being made under the law, did not
only perform one or two works of the law, that is to say, he was not only
circumcised, or presented in the temple, or went up to Jerusalem with other at
the times appointed, or only lived ciuily under the law, Christ suffered all
the tyranny of the law.
but he suffered all the tyranny of the law. For the law being in his
principal use and full power, set upon Christ, and so horribly assailed him,
that he felt such anguish and terror, as no man upon the earth had ever felt
the like. This his bloody sweat does sufficiently witness: also his comfort by
the Angel, that mighty prayer which he made in the garden, and briefly: that
lamentable complaint upon the cross: O my God why have thou forsaken me?
These things he suffered to redeem those which were under ye law, that is to
say, in heaviness of spirit, in anguish and terror, and ready to despair,
which were oppressed with the heavy burden of their sins, as in deed we are
all oppressed. For as touching the flesh we sin daily against all the
commandments of God. But Paul gives us good comfort when he says: God sent
his son, etc.

So Christ a divine and humane person, begotten of God without beginning,
Christ came not to make laws, but to take the law clean away.
and borne of the virgin in the time appointed, came not to make a law, but to
feel and suffer the terrors of the law with all extremity, and to overcome
the same, that so he might utterly abolish the law. He was not made a teacher
of the law, but an obedient disciple to the law, that by this his obedience he
might redeem them which were under the law. This is clean contrary to the
doctrine of the Papists, who have made Christ a lawgeuer, yea much more
severe and rigorous the^ Moises. Paul teaches here clean contrary, to wit,
that God humbled his son under the law: that is to say, constrained him to
bear the judgment and curse of the law, sin, death, etc. For Moises the
minister of the law, sin, wrath and death, apprehended, The ministry of
Moises.
bound, condemned and killed Christ: and all this he suffered. Therefore Christ
stands as a mere patient, and not as an agent, in respect of the law. He is
not then a lawgeuer, or a judge after the law, but in that he made himself
subject to the law, Galath. 3.13.
bearing the condemnation of the law, he delivered us from the curse thereof.

It is not the proper office of Christ to teach the law
Now, whereas Christ in the Gospel gives commandments, and teaches the law,
or rather expounds it, this pertains not to the doctrine of Justification,
but of good works. Moreover, it is not the proper office of Christ (for the
which he came principally into the world) to teach the law, but an accidental
or a by office: like as it was to heal the weak, to raise up the dead. etc.
These are in deed excellent and divine works: but yet not the very proper and
principal works of Christ. For the Prophets also taught the law, and wrought
miracles. But Christ is God and man, who fighting against the law, suffered
the uttermost cruelty and tyranny thereof. And in that he suffered the tyranny
of the law, he vanquished it in himself: And afterward being raised up
again from death, he condemned and utterly abolished the law which was our
deadly enemy, so that it can not condemn and kill the faithful any more.
Wherefore the true and proper office of Christ is to wrestle with the law, with
the sin and the death of the whole world, and so to wrestle that he must
suffer and abide al these things, and by suffering them in him self, conquer
and abolish them, and by this means deliver the Faithful from the law and
from all evils. Therefore to teach the law and to work miracles, The
particular benefits of Christ.
are particular benefits of Christ, for the which he came not principally into
the world. For the Prophets, and especially the Apostles did greater miracles
then Christ did. John. 14. John. 14.12.


Seeing then that Christ has overcome the law in his own person, it follows
necessarily that he is naturally God. Christ is God by nature.
For there is none else whether he be man or angel, which is above the law,
but only God. But Christ is above the law, for he has vanquished it:
therefore he is the son of God, and naturally God. If thou lay hold upon
Christ in such sort as Paul here painteth him out, The true picture of
Christ.
thou can not err nor be confounded. Moreover, thou shall easily judge of
all kinds of life, of the religions and ceremonies of the whole world. But if
this true picture of Christ be defaced, or in any wise darkened, then follows
a confusion of all things. For the natural man can not judge of the law of God.
1. Cor. 2.14.
Here fails the cunning of the Philosophers, of the Canonistes, and of all
men. For the law has power and dominion over man. Therefore ye law judges man,
and not man the law: The obedience of the law is in the righteous.
only the Christian has a true and a certain judgment of the law. And how?
That it does not justify. Wherefore then is the law made, if it do not
justify? Righteousness before God which is received by Faith alone, is not ye
final cause why the righteous do obey the law, but the peace of the world,
thankfulness toward God, and good example of life, whereby other be provoked to
believe the Gospel. The Pope has so confounded and mingled the ceremonial
law, the moral law, and Faith together, that he has at length preferred the
ceremonial law before the moral law, and the moral law before Faith.

Verse. 5. That we might receive the adoption of the sons.
Paul sets forth and amplifieth very largely this place of Genesis 22. Genes.
22.18.
In thy Seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. In thy Seed.
A little before he called this Blessing of the seed of Abraham, righteousness,
life, the promise of the spirit, deliverance from the law, the testament. etc.
Here he calls it the adoption and inheritance of everlasting life. All these
this word Blessing does comprehend. For when the Curse (which is sin, death,
etc.) is abolished, then in the stead thereof succedeth the Blessing, that is,
righteousness, life, and all good things.

But by what merit have we received this Blessing, that is to say, this
adoption and inheritance of everlasting life? By none at all. For what can men
deserve that are shut under sin, Galath ^.^3.
subject to the curse of the law, and worthy of everlasting death? We have
then received this Blessing freely and being utterly unworthy thereof, but yet
not without merit. What merit is that? Not ours, but the merit of Jesus
Christ the son of God, who being made under the law, not for him self but
for us (as Paul said before, that he was made a curse for us) redeemed us which
were under the law. Wherefore we have received this adoption by the only
redemption of Jesus Christ the son of God, which is our rich and everlasting
merit, whether it be of congrue^ce or worthiness, The Papists merit ex
congruo and condig^o.
going before grace or coming after. And with this free adoption we have also
received the holy Ghost, which God has sent into our hearts, crying Abba
Father, as follows.

Verse. 6. And because you are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his
son into your hearts.
The holy Ghost is sent two manner of vvayes. Math. 3.16. Acts. 2.3.
The holy ghost is sent two manner of ways. In ye primative church he was sent
in a manifest and visible appeara^ce. So he came upon Christ at Iordane, in the
likeness of a Dove: and in the likeness of fire upon the Apostles and other
beleuers. And this was the first sending of the holy Ghost: which was necessary
in the primative church, for it was expedient that it should be established by
manifest miracles because of the unbelievers, 1. Cor. 14.22.
as Paul witnesses. 1. Cor. 14. Strange tongues (says he) be for a sign
and a token, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not. But after
that the Church was gathered together and confirmed with those miracles, it was
not necessary that this visible sending of the holy Ghost should continue any
longer.

Secondly the holy Ghost is sent by the word into the hearts of the beleuers,
as here it is said: God sent the spirit of his son. etc. This sending is
without any visible appearance: to wit, when by ye hearing of the external
word, we receive an inward feruencie and light, whereby we are changed and
become new creatures: whereby also we receive a new judgment, a new feeling,
and a new moving. This change and this new judgment is no work of reason, or
of the power of man, but is the gift and operation of the holy Ghost, Acts.
15.5.
which comes with the word preached, which purifieth our hearts by faith, and
brings forth in us spiritual motions. Therefore there is a great difference
betwixt us and those which with force and subteltie persecute ye doctrine of the
gospel. For we by the grace of God can certainly judge by the word, of the
will of God toward us: also of all laws and doctrines, of our own life and
of the life of others. Contrariwise the Papists and Sectaries can not certainly
judge of any thing: For they corrupt, they persecute and blaspheme the word.
Now, without the word a man can give no certain judgment of any thing.

And although it appear not before the world, Signs of renewing of the mind
in the Godly.
that we be renewed in spirit and have the holy Ghost, yet notwtstanding our
judgment, our speech and our confession do declare sufficiently that the holy
Ghost with his gifts is in us. For before we could judge rightly of nothing.
We spoke not as now we do. We confessed not yt all our works were sin and
damnable, Christ our only merit of congruence and worthiness, both before
grace and after.
that Christ was our only merit both before grace and after, as now we do
in the true knowledge and light of the Gospel. Wherefore let this trouble us
nothing at all, that the world (whose works we testify to be evil) judges
us to be most pernicious heretics and seditious persons, destroyers of
religion, and troublers of ye common peace, possessed of the Devil speaking in
us and governing all our actions. 1. Cor. 1.1^.
Against this perverse and wicked judgment of the world, let this testimony
of our conscience be sufficient, whereby we assuredly know that it is the gift
of God, Philip. 1.29.
that we do not only believe in Jesus Christ, but that we also openly preach
and confess him before the world. As we believe with our heart, so do we speak
with our mouth. according to ye saying of ye Psalm: I believed and therefore have
I spoken. Psalm. 116.10.


Moreover, we exercise our selves in the fear of God, and avoid sin as much
as we may. If we sin, we sin not of purpose, but of ignorance, and we are
sorry for it. We may slip, for the Devil lies in wait for us both day and
night. Also, The remnants of sin in the Saints.
the remnantes of sin cleave yet fast in our flesh: therefore as touching the
flesh we are sinners, yea after that we have received the holy Ghost. And there
is no great difference betwixt a Christian and a civil honest man. Small
difference in outvvard show between a christian, and a man that is but
outwardly and ciuily righteous.
For the works of a Christian in outward show are but base and simple. He does
his duty according to his vocation, he guides his family, he tilleth the
ground, he gives counsel, he aideth and succoureth his neighbor. These
works the carnal man does not much esteem, but thinks them to be common to
all men, and such as the heathen may also do. 1. Cor. 2.14.
For the world understands not the things which are of the spirit of God,
and therefore it judges peruersly of the works of the godly. But the
monstrous superstition of hypocrites and their will works they have in great
admiration. They count them holy works, and spare no charges in maintaining the
same. Contrariwise the works of the faithful (which although in outward
appearance they seem to be but vile and nothing worth, yet are they good works
in deed, and accepted of God because they are done in Faith, with a cherefull
heart, and with obedience and thankfulness toward God), these works, I say, they
do not only not acknowledge to be good works, but also they despise and
condemn them as most wicked and abominable. The world therefore believes
nothing less then that we have yt holy Ghost. Notwtstanding in the time of
tribulation or of the cross, and of the confession of our faith (which is yt
proper and principal work of those that believe) when we must either forsake
wife, children, goods and life, or else deny Christ, then it appears yt we
make confession of our Faith, that we confess Christ and his word by the power
of the holy Ghost.

We ought not therefore to dout whether the holy Ghost dwells in us or not: 1.
Cor. ^.16.
but to be assuredly persuaded that we are the temple of ye holy Ghost, as
Paul says. For if any man feel in himself a love toward the word of God,
and willingly hears, talks, writes and thinks of Christ, Signs of the
presence of the holy Ghost.
let that man know that this is not the work of man's will or reason, but the
gift of the holy Ghost: For it is impossible that these things should be done
without the holy Ghost. Contrariwise, where hatred and contempt of the word is,
there the Devil the God of this world reigns, 1. Cor. 4.4.
blinding men's hearts, and holding them captive, that the Gospel the glory of
Christ should not shine unto them. Which thing we see at this day in the most
part of the common people, which have no love to the word, but presumpteously
contemn it as though it pertained nothing at all unto them. But who so ever
do feel any love or desire to the word, let them acknowledge with
tha^kfulnes, that this affection is powered into them by the holy Ghost. For we
are not borne with this affection and desire, neither can we be taught by any
laws how we may obtain it: but this change is plainly and simply the work
of the right hand of the most highest. Therefore when we willingly and gladly
hear the word preached concerning Christ the son of God, who for us was
made man and became subject to the law, to deliver us from the malediction of
the law, hell, death and damnation: then let us assure our selves that God by
and with this preaching sends the holy Ghost into our hearts. Wherefore it is
very expedient for the Godly to know, that they have the holy Ghost.

This I say, to confute that pernicious doctrine of the Papists, The doctrine
of the Sophisters, teaching that no man could know whether he were in the
favor of God or no.
which taught that no man can certainly know (although his life be never so
upright and blameles) whether he be in the favor of God or no. And this
sentence commonly received, was a special principle and article of Faith in
the whole Papacy, whereby they utterly defaced the doctrine of Faith, tormented
men's consciences, banished Christ quite out of the Church, darkened and denied
all the benefits of the holy Ghost, abolished the whole worship of God, set up
Idolatry, contempt of God, and blasphemy against God in men's hearts. For he
that doubts of Gods good will toward him, and does not assure him self that
he is in the favor of God, this man can not believe that he has forgeuenes of
his sins, that God cares for him, or that he shall be saved.

Augustine says very well and godly, that every man sees most certainly his
own Faith, if he have Faith. This do they deny. God forbid (say they) that I
should assure my self that I am under grace, that I am holy, and that I have
the holy Ghost, yea although I live godly and do all good works. Ye which are
young, and are not infected with this pernicious opinion (whereupon the whole
kingdom of the Pope is grounded) take heed and fly from it as from a most
dangerous plague. We that are old men have been trained up in this error even
from our youth, and have been so nusled therein, that it has taken deep root
in our hearts. We must assure our selves that we are under grace. Romans 8.9.
Therefore it is to us no less labor to unlearn and forget the same, then to
learn and lay hold upon true Faith. But we must be assured and out of dout
that we are under grace, yt we please God for Christ's sake, and that we have
the holy Ghost: For if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none
of his.

Wherefore, whether thou be a Minister of Gods word or a Magistrate in the
common wealth, thou must assuredly think that thy office pleases God: but
this can thou never do unless thou have the holy Ghost. But thou will say,
I doubt not but that my office pleases God because it is Gods ordinance, but
I doubt of mine own person whether it please God or no. Here thou must resort
to the word of God, which teaches and assures us, that, not only the office
of the person, but also the person it self pleases God. For the person is
baptized, believes in Christ, is purged in his blood from all his sins,
lives in the communion and fellowship of his Church: Moreover he does not only
love the pure doctrine of the word, but also he is glad and greatly rejoices
when he sees it advanced, and the number of the faithful increased.
Contrariwise he detesteth the Pope and all Sectaries with their wicked doctrine,
according to that saying of the Psalm: I hate them that imagine evil things,
Psalm. 119.115.
but thy law do I love.

We ought therefore to be surely persuaded, that not only our office, but also
our person pleases God: Yea whatsoever it says, does, or thinks
particularly, the same pleases God, not for our own sakes, but for Christ's
sake, who was made under the law for us. Now, we are sure that Christ pleases
God, that he is holy. etc. For as much then as Christ pleases God and we are
in him, we also please God and are holy. Grace is more strong and mighty then
sin.
And although sin do still remain in our flesh, and we also daily fall and
offend, yet grace is more abundant and stronger then sin. The mercy and
truth of the Lord reigns over us for ever. Wherefore sin ca^ not terrify us
and make us doutfull of the grace of God which is in us. For Christ that most
mighty Giaunt has quite abolished the law, condemned sin, vanquished death
and all evils. Romans 1.34.
So long as he is at ye right hand of God, making intercession for us, we can
not doubt of the grace and favor of God toward us.

Moreover, God has also sent the spirit of his son into our hearts, as
Paul here says. But Christ is most certain in his spirit that he pleases
God. etc: therefore we also having the same spirit of Christ, must be assured
that we are under grace for his sake that is most assured. This I have said
concerning the inward testimony, whereby a Christian man's heart ought to be
fully persuaded that he is under grace and has the holy Ghost. Now, ye outward
signs (as before I have said) are, gladly to hear of Christ, to preach and
teach Christ, to render thanks unto him, to praise him, to confess him, yea with
the loss of goods and life: Moreover, to do our duty according to our
vocation as we are able: to do it (I say) in faith, joy. etc: Not to delight in
sin, nor to thrust our selves into an other man's vocation, but to attend upon
our own, to help our needy brother, to comfort the heavy hearted. etc. By
these signs, as by certain effects and co^seque^ts, we are fully assured and
confirmed, that we are in Gods favor. The wicked also do imagine that they
have the same signs, but they have nothing less. Hereby we may plainly see
that the Pope with his doctrine does nothing else, but trouble and torment men's
consciences, and at length drives them to desperation: For he not only
teaches, but also commands men to dout. Therefore, Psalm. 5.9. Psalm. 10.7.
according to ye Psalm: There is no truth or certainty in his mouth: And in
an other place: under his tongue is iniquity and mischief,

Here we may see what great infirmity is yet in the Faith of the Godly. For if
we could be fully persuaded that we are under grace, Weakness of Faith in the
godly.
that our sins are forgeuen, that we have the spirit of Christ, that we are
the children of God: then doubtless we should be joyful, and thankful to God
for this inestimable gift. But because we feel contrary motions, that is to
say, fear, doutfulnes, anguish and heuines of heart, and such like, therefore
we can not assure our selves hereof: yea our conscience judges it a great
presumption and pride to challenge this glory. Wherefore, if we will understand
this thing rightly and as we should do, we must put it in practice: for
without experience and practice it can never be learned.

Wherefore let every man so practice with him self, that his conscience may be
fully assured that he is under grace, and that his person and his works do
please God. And if he feel in himself any wavering or douting, let him
exercise his Faith and wrestle against this douting, and let him endeavor to
attain more certainty, so that he may be able to say: I know that I am
accepted, The full assurance of Faith. Galath. 4.4.
and that I have the holy Ghost: not for mine own worthiness, my work, my
merit, but for Christ's sake, who of his inestimable love toward us, made
him self thrall and subject to the law, and took away the sins of the
world. In him do I believe. If I be a sinner and err, he is righteous and can
not err. Moreover, I gladly hear, read, sing and write of him, and I desire
nothing more then that his Gospel may be known to the whole world, and that
many may be converted unto him.

These things do plainly witness that the holy Ghost is present with us and
in us. For such things are not wrought in the heart by man's strength, nor
gotten by his industry, exercise or travel, but are obtained by Christ alone,
who first makes us righteous by the knowledge of him in his holy Gospel, and
afterward he creates a new heart in us, brings forth new motions, and
gives unto us that assurance whereby we are persuaded that we please the father
for his sake: Esaias. 53.11. Psalm. 51.10.
Also he gives us a true judgment whereby we prove and try those things
which before we knew not, or else altogether despised. It behooves us therefore
to wrestle against this douting, yt we may daily overcome it more and more, and
attain to a full persuasion and certainty of Gods favor toward us, rooting
out of our hearts this cursed opinion, that a man ought to dout of ye grace
and favor of God: which has infected ye whole world. For if we dout whether
we be under grace, and whether we please God for Christ's sake or not, we deny
that Christ has redeemed us, we deny simply all his benefits. Ye yt are young
me^ may easily apprehe^d this pure doctrine of the Gospel, and aba^don this
pernicious opinion, because ye are not yet poisoned therewith.

Verse. 6. Crying: Abba Father.
Paul might have said: God sent the spirit of his son into our hearts,
calling, Abba Father. Now, he says not so, but, crying, Abba Father, that he
might show and set forth the temptation of a Christian, which yet is but weak
and weakly believes. Romans 8.26.
In the.8. to the Romans he calls this crying an unspeakable groaning. Likewise
he says: The spirit helps our infirmities: For we know not how to pray
as we ought, but the spirit makes intercession for us with unspeakable
gronings, etc.

And this is a singular consolation when he says here, that the spirit of
Christ is sent into our hearts, crying, Abba Father: And again, that he
helps our infirmities, making intercession for us with unspeakable gronings.
He yt could assuredly believe this, should never be overcome with any
affliction, were it never so great. But there are many things that hinder this
Faith in us. First our heart is borne in sin: Moreover this evil is
naturally grafted in us, that we doubt of the good will of God toward us, and
cannot assure our selves that we please God. 1. Pet. 5.8.
etc. Besides all this, the Devil our adversary rau^geth about with terrible
rorings, and says: Thou art a sinner: therefore God is angry with thee, The
Devils roaring.
and will destroy thee for ever. Against these horrible and intolerable
rorings, we have nothing whereupon to hold and stay our selves, but only the
word, which sets Christ before us as a conqueror over sin and death, and
over all evils. But to cleave fast to the word in this tentation and these
terrors of conscience, herein stands all the difficulty. For then Christ
appears to no sense. We see him not: the heart feels not his presence or
succor in temptation: but rather it seems that Christ is angry with us, and
that he forsakes us. Moreover, when a man is tempted and afflicted, he feels
the strength of sin and the infirmity of the flesh, Ephesians. 6.^6.
he douteth, he feels the flerie darts of the Devil, the terrors of death,
the anger and judgment of God. All these things cry out horribly against us,
so that we see nothing else but desperation and eternal death. But yet in the
midst of these terrors of the law, thundrings of sin, assaults of death,
and rorings of the Devil, ye holy Ghost (says Paul) cries in our hearts:
Abba Father. And this cry surmounteth those mighty and horrible cries of the
law, sin, death, the Devil, etc: The cry of the holy ghost in the hearts of
the godly.
it perceth the clouds and the heavens, and ascends up unto the ears of God.

Paul therefore signifies by these words, yt there is yet infirmity in the
godly: As he does also in the.8. chap. to the Romans when he says: The spirit
helps our infirmities. For as much therefore as the sense and feeling of the
contrary is strong in us: that is to say, for as much as we feel more the
displeasure of God, then his good will and favor toward us: therefore the
holy Ghost is sent into our hearts, which does not only sigh and make request
for us, but mightily cries: Abba Father, and prays for us according to the
will of God with tears and unspeakable gronings. And how is this done? When we
are in terrors and in the conflict of conscience, in deed we take hold of
Christ and believe that he is our Savior: but then do the law and sin
terrify and torment us most of all. Moreover the Devil assaileth us with all
his engines and fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16.
and goes about with all his power to pluck Christ from us, and to take from
us all consolations. Here we feel our selves almost overcome, and at the point
of desperation: for then are we that bruised reed and smoking flax which Esaias
speaks of. Esaias. 42.3.
Notwtstanding in the mean season the holy Ghost helps our infirmities, Romans
8.26. etc.
and makes intercession for us with unspeakable gronings, and certifieth our
spirits yt we are ye children of God. Thus the mind is raised up in terrors,
it looks unto his Savior and high Bishop Jesus Christ, it overcomes the
infirmity of the flesh, it conceaueth comfort again, and says: Abba Father.
This groaning which then we scantly feel, Paul calls a crying and
unspeakable groaning, which fills both heaven and earth. Moreover, he calls
it the crying and groaning of the spirit, because the holy Ghost stirs up
the same in our hearts when we are weak and oppressed with terror and
tentation.

Although then the law, sin and the Devil cry out against us never so much
with great and terrible rorings, which seem to fill heaven and earth, and
far to excede this groaning of our heart, yet can they not hurt us. For the
more fiercely they assail us, accuse and torment us with their cryings, so
much the more do we groan, The profit of temptations.
and in groaning lay hold upon Christ, call upon him with heart and mouth,
cleave unto him, and believe that he was made under the law, that he might
deliver us from the Curse of the law, and destroy both sin and death.
Galath. 3.13. Heb. 2.14.
And thus when we have taken hold of Christ by Faith, we cry through him:
Abba Father. And this our cry does far surmount the roaring of the law,
sin, the Devil. etc.

But so far of is it that we think this groaning which we make in these
terrors and in this our weakness, to be a cry, that scarsely we perceive it to
be a groaning. For our Faith which in tentation thus groneth unto Christ, is
very weak if we consider our own sense and feeling. And this is the cause
that we hear not this cry. We have but only the word, which when we
apprehend in this conflict, we have a little breathing, and then we groan. Of
this groaning some little feeling we have, Romans 3.27.
but the cry we hear not. But he (says Paul) which searches the hearts,
knovveth what is the meaning of the spirit. etc. To this searcher of the
hearts, this small and feeble groaning (as it seems unto us) is a loud and a
mighty cry, and an unspeakable groaning: in comparison whereof the great and
horrible rorings of the law, of sin, of death, of the devil, and of hell,
are nothing, neither can they be once heard. Paul therefore, not without cause,
calls this groaning of a godly afflicted heart, a cry, and a groaning of the
spirit which can not be expressed. For it fills the whole heaven, so that
the Angels think they hear nothing else but this cry.

How we are affected in the true trial and terrors of conscience.
But in us there is a clean contrary feling. For it seems unto us yt this our
small groaning does not so perce the clouds that there is nothing else heard in
heaven of God and his angels. Nay, we think, and especially during the time of
tentation, that the Devil horribly roreth against us, that the heavens thunder
and the earth tre^bleth, that all will fall upon us, that all creatures
threaten our destruction, that hell is open and ready to swallow us up. This
feling is in our heart, these horrible voices and this fearful show we hear
and we see. And this is it yt Paul says in the.2. Corrin. 12: 1. Cor. 12.9.
That the strength of Christ is made perfect through our weakness. For then is
Christ almighty in deed, then does he truly reign and triumph in us, when we
are so weak that we can scarsely groan. The groaning of the heart is a cry.
But Paul says, yt this groaning is in the ears of God, a most mighty cry
which fills both heaven and earth.

Christ also in the.18. of Luke in the parable of the wicked judge, calls
this groaning of a faithful heart, a cry, yea and such a cry as cease not day
and night to cry unto God, where he says: Hear what the unrighteous judge
says. Luke. 18.6.7.
Now shall not God aue^ge his elect, which cry day and night unto him, yea
though he suffer long for them? yea I tell you he vvil avenge them quickly. We
at this day in so great persecution and co^tradiction of the Pope, of tyra^nes
and Sectaries which fight against us both on the right hand and on the left,
can do nothing else but utter such gronings. The weapons of the godly,
vvhervvith they overthrow the kingdom of the Pope. etc.
And these were our gunnes and artillery wherwt we have so many years scattered
the counsels and enterprises of our adversaries: whereby also we have begone to
overthrow the kingdom of Antichrist. They also shall provoke Christ to hasten
the day of his glorious coming, wherein he shall abolish all rule, authority
and power, and shall put all his enemies under his feet. So be it.

In the.14. of Exodus the Lord speaks unto Moises at the red sea, saying:
Why criest thou unto me? Yet Moises cried not, Exodus 14.15. The cry of Moses
at the red sea.
but trembled and almost despaired, for he was in great trouble. It seemed that
infidelity reigned in him, and not Faith. For he saw the people of Israel so
compassed and enclosed with the Egyptians host and with the sea, that there was
no way whereby they might escape. Here Moises durst not once open his mouth.
How the^ did he cry? We must not judge therefore according to the feeling of
our own heart, The office of the holy ghost
but according to ye word of God, which teaches us that the holy Ghost is
given to those yt are afflicted, terrified, and ready to despair, to raise
them up and to comfort them, yt they be not overcome in their tentations and
afflictions, but may overcome them, and yet not without great terrors and
troubles.

The Papists dreamed that holy men had the holy Ghost in such sort that they
never had nor felt any tentation. They spoke of the holy Ghost only by
speculation and naked knowledge. But Paul says that the strength of Christ
is made perfect through our weakness: Also, that the spirit helps our
infirmities, and makes intercession for us with unspeakable gronings. In
whom the holy Ghost does his office, and at what time.
Therefore we have then most need of the help and comfort of the holy Ghost,
yea and then is he most ready to help us when we are most weak and nerest to
desperation. If any man suffer affliction with a constant and a joyful heart,
then has the holy Ghost done his office in him. And in deed he exercises his
work specially and properly in those which have suffered great terrors and
afflictions, and have, as the Psalm says, approached nigh to the gates of
hell: As I said of Moses, The tentation of Moses at the red sea.
which saw present death in the waters, and on every side whether so ever he
turned his face. He was therefore in extreme anguish and desperation, and, no
dout, he felt in his heart a mighty cry of the Devil against him, saying:
All this people shall this day perish, for they can escape no way. And of this
great calamity thou only shall be found to be the author because thou have
led them out of Egypt. Besides all this, the people cried out against him,
saying: Were there no graves in Egypt? Thou have brought us out yt we should
die here in the wilderness. Exodus 14.13.1^,
Had it not been better for us to have served the Egyptians, then here
wretchedly to die in the wilderness? The holy Ghost was not here in Moises by
bare speculation and knowledge only, but truly and effectually, who made
intercession for him with an unspeakable groaning, so that he sighed unto the
Lord and said: O Lord at thy commandment have I led forth this people: help
us therefore. This groaning or sighing unto God, the scripture calls a crying.

This matter I have the more largely prosecuted, that I might plainly show what
the office of the holy Ghost is, and when he specially exercises the same. In
temptation therefore we must in no wise judge thereof according to our own sense
and feeling, or by the crying of yt law, sin and the Devil. etc. If we then
follow our own sense and believe those cryings, we shall think our selves to be
destitute of all help and succor of the holy Ghost, and to be utterly cast
away from the presence of God. Nay rather let us then remember what Paul
says: The spirit helps our infirmities, etc. Also it cries: Abba Father,
that is to say, it utters a certain feeble sighing and groaning of the heart
(as it seems unto us) which notwithstanding before God is a loud cry and an
unspeakable groaning. The gronings of the faithful before God, are great cries.
Wherefore in the mids of thy temptation and infirmity, cleave only unto
Christ and groan unto him: he gives the holy Ghost which cries Abba Father:
And this feeble groaning is a mighty cry in the ears of God, and so fills
heaven and earth, that God hears nothing else: and moreover, it drowneth the
cries of all other things whatsoever.

Thou must mark also that Paul says: that the spirit makes intercession
for us in our temptation: not with many words or long prayer, but only with a
groaning, which notwithstanding can not be expressed: and that he cries not a
loud with tears, saying: Have mercy on me O God, Psalm. 31.1.
etc. but only utters a little sound and a feeble groaning, Ah Father.
as: Ah Father: This is but a little word, and yet notwithstanding it
comprehends all things. The mouth speaks not, but the affection of the
heart speaks after this manner. Although I be oppressed with anguish and terror
on every side, and seem to be forsaken and utterly cast away from thy
presence, yet am I thy child, and thou art my Father for Christ's sake: I am
beloved because of ye beloved. Wherefore this little word Father conceived
effectually in the heart, passes all the eloquence of Demosthenes, Cicero, and
of the most eloquent Rhetoricians that ever were in the world. This matter is
not expressed with words, but with gronings, which gronings ca^ not be uttered
with any words or eloquence, for no tongue can express them.

I have used many words to declare that a Christian must assure him self that
he is in the favor of God, and that he has the crying of the holy Ghost in
his heart. The Pope taught that we must dout of Gods favor toward us
This have I done that we may learn to reject and utterly to abandon that
deuillish opinion of the whole kingdom of the Pope, which taught that a man
ought to be uncertain and to stand in dout of the grace and favor of God
toward him. If this opinion be received, then Christ profits nothing. For he
yt douteth of Gods favor toward him, must needs dout also of the promises
of God, and so consequently of the will of God, He speaks not here of that
douting which sometimes rises of infirmity in the godly: but of willful
douting which the Papists teach and maintain.
and of the benefits of Christ: namely that he was borne, suffered, died, and
rose again for us. etc. But there can be no greater blasphemy against God,
then to deny his promises, to deny God himself, Christ. etc. Wherefore it was
not only an extreme madness, but an horrible impiety that ye Monks did so
earnestly entice the youth both men and women to their Monasteries, to their
religious and holy orders (as they called them) as to a most certain state of
salvation, and yet, when they had thus done, they bad them doubt of the grace
and favor of God toward them.

Moreover, the Pope called all the world to the obedience of the holy Church of
Rome, as to an holy state, in the which they might undoubtedly attain
salvation, and yet after he had brought them under the obedience of his laws,
he commanded them to dout of their salvation. So the kingdom of Antichrist
braggeth and vaunteth at the first, The Pope kingdom.
of the holiness of his orders, his rules and his laws, and assuredly promises
everlasting life to such as observe and keep them. But afterward when these
miserable men have long afflicted their bodies with watching, fasting, and such
like exercises according to the traditions and ordinances of men, this is all
that they gain thereby, that they are uncertain whether this obedience please
God or no? The Papacy is a very slaughterhouse of consciences.
Thus Satan most horribly dallied in the death of souls through the Pope, and
therefore is the Papacy a slaughterhouse of consciences, and the very kingdom
of the Devil.

Now, to establish and confirm this pernicious and cursed error, they
alleged the saying of Solomon, Eccle. 9. Eccle. 9.^^.
The just and the wise men are in the hands of God: and yet no man knovveth
whether he be worthy of love or of hatred. Some understand this of that
hatred which is to come, and some again of that which is present: but neither
of them understand Solomon, who in that place means nothing less then that
which they dream. Moreover the whole Scripture teaches us especially and
above all things that we should not dout, The chief drift of the Scripture, to
make us certain of the mercy of God tovvard us. Romans 4.25. John. 3.16.
but assure our selves and undoubtedly believe that God is merciful, loving and
patient: that he is neither dissembler nor deceauer, but that he is faithful
and true, and keeps his promise: yea and has performed that he promised, in
delivering his only begotten Some to death for our sins, that every one that
believes in him might not perish, but have everlasting life. Here we can not
dout, but that God is pleased with us, that he loves us in deed, that the
hatred and wrath of God is taken away, seeing he suffered his son to die for
us wretched sinners. Although this matter be set out and often repeted
thoroughout the whole Gospel, yet it profited nothing at all. This one saying
of Solomon peruersly understand, One sentence out of the book of the Preacher
not well understand, was of more force in the Papacy, then all the promises
of the scripture.
did more prevail (especially among the votaries and hypocrites of the
straiter religion) then all the promises and consolations of the whole
Scripture: yea then Christ him self. They abused the Scriptures therefore to
their own destruction, and were most justly punished for despising the
Scriptures and rejecting the Gospel.

It is expedient for us to know these things: First because the Papists vaunt
of their holiness, as if they had never committed any evil. Therefore they must
be convinced by their own abominations, wherewith they have filled the whole
world, as their own Books do witness, whereof there is yet an infinite number:
Secondly, that we may be fully certified that we have the pure doctrine of the
Gospel: Doutfulnes of salvation in th Papacy.
of which certainty the Pope can not glory. In whose kingdom though all things
else were sound and vncorrupt, yet this monstrous doctrine of douting of Gods
grace and favor, passes all other monsters. And although it be manifest that
the enemies of Christ's Gospel teach uncertain things because they command
that men's consciences should remain in dout, yet notwithstanding they condemn
and kill us as heretics, because we dissent from them, and teach those things
which are certain. And this they do with such deuillish rage and cruelty, as
if they were most assured of their doctrine.

Let us therefore give thanks unto God, that we are delivered from this
monstrous doctrine of douting, and can now assure our selves that the holy
Ghost cries and brings forth in our hearts unspeakable gronings. How we
may know that are i^ gods favor, and have the holy Ghost.
And this is our ankerhold and our foundation. The Gospel commands us to
behold, not our own good works, our own perfection: but God the promiser,
and Christ the Mediator. Contrariwise, the Pope commands us to look, not
unto God the promiser, nor unto Christ our high Bishop, but unto our works and
merits. On the one side must needs follow douting and desperation: but on yt
other side assurance of Gods favor and joy of the spirit. For we cleave unto
God who can not lie. For he says: Behold I deliver my Son to death, that
through his blood he may redeem thee from thy sins and from eternal death.
In this case I can not dout, The doctrine which we profess, is certain.
unless I will utterly deny God. And this is the reason that our doctrine is
most sure and certain, because it carries us out of our selves, and from the
consideration of our selves, to the end that we should not lean to our own
strength, to our own conscience, to our own feeling, our own person and our
own works: but to that which is without us, that is to say, the promise and
truth of God which can not deceive us. This the Pope knows not, and therefore
he wickedly imagines that no man knows, be he never so just or so wise,
whether he be worthy of love or of hatred. But if he be just and wise he
knows assuredly that he is beloved of God, or else he is neither just nor
wise.

Moreover, The true meani^g of the sentence out of the.9 of Ecclesiastes.
this sentence of Solomon speaks nothing at all of the hatred or favor of
God toward men, but it is a moral sentence reproving the ingratitude of men.
For such is the perverseness and ingratitude of the world, that the better a man
deserves, yt less thanks he shall have, and oftentimes he that should be his
most friend, What thanks the world gives to them that deserve well of it.
shall be his most enemy. Contrariwise, such as least deserve, shall be most
esteemed. So David a holy man and a good King, was cast out of his kingdom. The
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles were slain. To conclude, the hystories of
all nations witness, that many men well deserving of their country, were cast
into banishment by their own Citizens, and there lived in great misery, and
some also shamefully perished in prison. Wherefore Solomon in this place
speaks not of the conscience having to do with God, and of the favor and
judgment of God, but of the judgments and affections of men among them
selves. As though he would say: There are many just and wise men, by whom God
works much good, and gives peace and quietness unto men. But so far of are
they from acknowledging the same, that oftentimes they requite them again very
ilfauouredly for their well deseruings. Therefore although a man do all things
never so well, yet he knows not whether by this his diligence and faithfulness
he deserve the hatred or favor of men.

So we at this day, when we thought we should have found favor among our
countrymen the Germains, for that we preach unto them the Gospel of peace,
life, and eternal salvation, instead of favor we have found bitter and
cruel hatred. In deed at the first many were greatly delited with our
doctrine, and received it gladly. We supposed that they would have been our
friends and brethren, and that with one consent together with us, they would
have planted and set forth this doctrine to others. But now we find that they
are false brethern and our deadly enemies, which sow and spread abroad errors
and false doctrine, and that which we teach well and godly, they pervert and
overthrow, stirring up offenses in the Churches. Whosoever therefore does his
duty godly and faithfully, in what kind of life so ever he be, and for his
well doing receaueth nothing again but the unkindness and hatred of men, How
we must overcome unthankfulness. Psalm. 109.3.4.
let him not vex and torment him self therefore: but let him say with Christ:
They hated me without a cause. Also: For that they should have loved me, they
sclaundered me, but I did pray.

The Pope therefore with this deuillish doctrine, whereby he commanded men to
dout of the favor of God toward them, took away God and all his promises out
of the Church, buried all the benefits of Christ, and abolished the whole
Gospel. These inconveniences do necessarily follow: for men do not lean to the
promises of God, but to their own works and merits. Therefore they can not
be assured of the good will of God toward them, but must needs dout thereof,
and so at length despair. No man can understand what Gods will is, and what
pleases him, The will of God is seen in his word.
but in his word. This word assures us that God cast away all anger and
displeasure which he had conceived against us, when he gave his only begotten
son for our sins. etc. Wherefore let us utterly abandon this deuillish
douting wherewith the whole Papacy was poisoned, and let us be fully assured
that God is merciful unto us, that we please him, that he has a care over us,
that we have the holy Ghost which makes intercession for us with such crying
and groaning as can not be expressed.

Now, this is the true crying and groaning in deed, when a man in tentation
calls upon God: not as a tyranne, not as an angry judge, not as a torme^ter,
but as a father, although this groaning be so soft and so secret, that it can
scantly be perceived. For in serious tentations, and in the time of trial where
the conscience wrastleth with the judgment of God, it is wont to call God, not
a Father, but an unjust, an angry and cruel tyranne and judge. And this crying
which Satan stirs up in the heart, far passes the cry of the spirit, and
is strongly felt. For then it seems that God has forsaken us, and will cast
us down into hell. So ye faithful complain oftentimes in the Psalms: I am
cast from the presence of God. Also: I am become as a broken vessel. etc. This
is not in deed the groaning that cries, Abba Father: but the roaring of Gods
wrath, which cries strongly, O cruel judge, O cruel tormentour. etc. Here now
it is time that thou turn away thine eyes from the law, from works, and from
the sense and feling of thine own conscience, and lay hold by Faith of the
promise, that is to say, of the word of grace and life, which raises up
again the conscience, so that now it begins to groan and say: Although the
law accuse me, sin and death terrify me never so much, yet O my God, thou
promisest grace, righteousness and everlasting life through Jesus Christ: And so
yt promise brings a sighing and a groaning, which cries Abba Father.

Verse. 7. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son.
This is the shutting up and the conclusion of that which he said before. As
if he should say: This being true that we have received the spirit by the
Gospel, whereby we cry, Abba Father: then is this decree pronounced in
heaven, that there is now no bondage any more, but mere liberty and adoption.
And who brings this liberty? verily this groaning. By what means? The father
offreth unto me by his promise, his grace and his fatherly favor. This
remains then, By what means the adoption comes unto v^.
that I should receive this grace. And this is done when I again with this
groaning do cry, and with a childly heart do assent unto this name Father.
Here then the Father and the Son meet, and the marriage is made up without
all pomp and solemnity: that is to say, nothing at all comes between: no
law nor work is here required. For what should a man do in these terrors
and horrible darkness of tentations? Here is nothing else but the father
promising, and calling me his son by Christ, who was made under the law.
etc. and I receiving and answering by this groaning, saying: Father. Here then
is no exacting, nothing is required, but only yt childly groaning that
apprehends a sure hope and trust in tribulation, and says: Thou promisest,
and call me thy child for Christ's sake, and I again receive this and call
thee Father. This is in deed to be made children simply and without any
works. But these things without experience and practice can not be understand.

Paul in this place takes this word Servant otherwise then he did before in
the.3. chapt. where he says: Galath. 3.28.
There is neither bond not free. etc. Here he calls him a Servant of the
law, that is subject to ye law, Galat. 4.3.
as he did a little before: We were in bondage under the rudime^ts of the
world. What Paul means by a servant in this place.
Wherefore to be a Servant in this place after Paul, is to be guilty and
captive under the law, under the wrath of God and death: to behold God, not as
a merciful Father, but as a tormentour, an enemy and a tyranne. This is in
deed to be kept in bondage and Babilonicall captivity, and to be cruelly
tormented therein. For the law delivers not from sin and death, Romans 3.20.
Romans 4.15.
but reuealeth and increases sin and engenders wrath. This bondage (says
Paul) continues no longer: it oppresses us not, nor makes us heavy any
more, etc. Paul says: Thou shall be no more a servant. But the sentence is
more general if we say: there shall be no bondage in Christ any more, but
mere fredome and adoption. For when Faith comes, that bondage cease,
Galath. 3 2^.
as he said before in the third Chapter.

Now, if we by the spirit of Christ crying in our hearts, Abba Father, be no
more seruau^ts, but children: then it follows that we are not only delivered
from the horrible monsters of the Pope, and all the abominations of men's
traditions, but also from all the jurisdiction and power of the law of God.
Wherefore we ought in no wise to suffer the law to reign in our conscience,
The law must not be suffered to rule in the conscience. Reuelat. 10.3.
and much less the Pope with his vain threatenings and terrors. In deed he
roreth mightily as a Lion Apoc. 10. and threatens to all those that obey not
his laws, the wrath and indignation of almighty God and of his blessed
Apostles. etc. But here Paul armeth and comfort us against these rorings,
when he says: Thou art no more a servant but a son. Take hold of this
consolation by Faith, The law has no power over the conscience, but over the
flesh.
and say: O law, thy tyranny can have no place in the throne where Christ my
Lord sits: there I can not hear thee (much less do I hear thy monsters O
Antichriste): for I am free and a son, who must not be subject to any bondage
or servile law. Let not Moises therefore with his laws, (much less the Pope)
ascend up into the bridechamber there to lie: that is to say, to reign in
the conscience: which Christ has delivered from the law, to the end that it
should not be subject to any bondage. Let the servants abide with the Ass in
the valley: Genesis 22.4.5.
Let none but Isaac ascend up into the Mountain with his father Abraham:
that is, let the law have dominion over the body and over the old man: let
him be under the law and suffer the burden to be laid upon him: let him
suffer him self to be exercised and vexed with the law: let the law limite
and prescribe unto him what he ought to do, what he ought to suffer, and how
he ought to live and to govern him self among men. But let it not defile the
bed in which Christ should rest and sleep alone: that is to say, let it not
trouble the conscience. For she alone ought to live with Christ her Spouse in
the kingdom of liberty and adoption.

If then (says he) by the spirit of Christ ye cry: Abba Father, then are ye
in deed no longer servant, but free men and sons. Therefore ye are without
the law, without sin, without death: that is to say, ye are saved, and ye
are now quite delivered from all evils: Wherefore the adoption brings with it
the eternal kingdom, What the adoption brings.
and all yt heavenly inheritance. Now, how inestimable the glory of this gift
is, man's heart is not able to conceive, and much less to utter. In the mean
time we see this but darkely and as it were a far of: 1. Cor. 13.1^.
We have this little groaning and feeble Faith which only rests upon the
hearing and the sound of the voice of Christ promising. Therefore we must not
measure this thing by reason or by our own feeling, but by the promise of God.
Now, because he is infinite, therefore his promise is also infinite, although
it seem to be never so much enclosed in these narrow streites, these anguishes
I mean. Wherefore there is nothing that can now accuse, terrify, or bind the
conscience any more. For there is no more servitude, but adoption: which not
only brings unto us liberty from the law, sin and death, but also the
inheritance of everlasting life, as follows.

Verse. 7. Now, if thou be a son, thou art also the heir of God thorough
Christ.
For he that is a son, must be also an heir: for by his birth he is worthy
to be an heir. There is no work or merit that brings to him the
inheritance, but his birth only. And so in obtaining the inheritance he is a
mere patient and not an agent: that is to say, not to beget, not to labor, not
to care: but to be borne is that which makes him an heir. So we obtain
eternal gifts, namely ye forgeuenes of sins, righteousness, the glory of the
resurrection and everlasting life, not as agents but as patie^ts: that is, not
by doing but by receiving. Nothing here comes between: but faith alone
apprehends ye promise offered. Like as therefore a son in ye politic and
household government is made an heir by his only birth: so here faith only
makes us sons of God, borne of the word, which is the womb of God, wherein
we are conceived, carried, borne, and nourished up. etc. By this birth the^ we
are made new creatures, 1. Pet. 1.23. The word of God is the womb of God.
formed by Faith in the word: we are made Christians, children and heirs of
God through Jesus Christ. Now, being heirs we are delivered from death, sin
and the Devil, and we have righteousness and eternal life.

But this far passes all man's capacity, that he calls us heirs: not of
some rich and mighty Prince, not of the Emperor, not of the world: but of God
the almighty creator of all things. This our inheritance then (as Paul says
in an other place) is inestimable. And if a man could comprehend the great
excellency of this matter, that he is the son and heir of God, and with a
constant Faith believe the same, this man would esteem all the power and riches
of all the kingdoms of the world but as filthy donge in comparison of his
eternal inheritance. He would abhor whatsoever is high and glorious in the
world: yea, the greater the pomp and glory of the world is, the more would he
hate it. To conclude, whatsoever the world most highly estemeth and magnifieth,
that should be in his eyes most vile and abominable. For what is all the
world, with all his power, riches and glory, in comparison of God whose son
and heir he is? Furthermore, he would heartely desire with Paul to be loosed
and to be with Christ, Philip. 1.^1.
and nothing could be more welcome unto him, the^ speedy death, which he would
embrace as a most joyful peace, knowing that it should be the end of all his
miseries, and that through it he should attain to his enheritance. etc. Yea a
man that could perfectly believe this, should not long remain alive, but should
be swalowed up incontinent with excessive joy.

But the law of the members striving against the law of the mind, hinders
Faith in us, and suffers it not to be perfect. Therefore we have need of the
help and comfort of the holy Ghost, The godly have need of the comfort of the
holy Ghost.
which in our troubles and afflictions may make intercession for us with
unspeakable groaning, as before I have said. Sin yet remains in the flesh,
which oftentimes oppresses the conscience, and so hinders faith that we can
not with joy perfectly behold and desire those eternal riches which God has
given unto us through Christ. Paul himself feeling this battle of the flesh
against ye spirit, Romans 7.24.
cries out: O vvretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? He accuses his body, which notwtstanding it behooved him to love,
calling it by an odious name, his death. As if he would say: My body does more
afflict me, and more grievously vex me the^ death it self: For it hi^dred in
hi^ also this joy of spirit. He had not always the sweet and joyful
cogitations of the heavenly inheritance to come, but he felt oftentimes also
great heaviness of spirit, anguish and terrors.

Hereby we may plainly see how hard a matter Faith is: which is not easily and
quickly apprehended, as certain full and lothing spirits dream, which
swallow up at once all that is contained in the holy Scriptures. The great
infirmity which is in the Saints, and the striving of the flesh against the
spirit, Galath. ^.^7.
do sufficiently witness how feeble Faith is in them. For a perfect Faith
brings by and by a perfect contempt and lothing of this present life. If we
could fully assure our selves, and constantly believe that God is our Father,
and we his sons and heirs, then should we utterly contemn this world with
all the glory, righteousness, wisdom and power, with all the royal scepters
and crowns, and with all the riches and pleasures thereof. We should not be so
careful for this life: we should not be so addicted to the world and worldly
things, trusting unto them when we have them: lamenting and despairing when we
lose them: but we should do all things with great love, humility and
patience. But we do the contrary, for the flesh is yet strong, but Faith is
feeble and the spirit weak. In this life we have but only the first fruits
of the spirit. Romans 8.23.
Therefore Paul says very well, that we have here in this life, but only the
first fruits of the spirit, and that in the world to come, we shall have the
tenthes also.

Verse. 7. Thorough Christ.
Paul has Christ always in his mouth, he can not forget him. Paul has
alvvayes the name of christ in his mouth.
For he did well forsee that nothing should be less known in ye world (yea
among them which should profess themselves to be Christians) then Christ and
his Gospel. Therefore he talks of him and sets him before our eyes
continually. And as often as he speaks of grace, righteousness, the promise,
adoption and inheritance, he is always wo^t to add: In Christ, or, thorough
Christ, covertly impugning the law. As if he would say: These things come unto
us, neither by the law, nor by the works thereof: much less by our own
strength, or by the works of men's traditions: but only by Christ.

Verse. 8.9. But even then when ye knevv not God, ye did service unto them
which by nature were no Gods. But now seeing ye know God, yea rather are
known of God: how turn you again unto impotent and beggarly rudiments,
whereunto ye will be in bondage again.
This is the conclusion of Paul's disputation. From this place unto the end of
the Epistle he does not much dispute, but only gives precepts as touching
manners. Notwithstanding he first reproves the Galathians, being sore
displeased that this divine and heavenly doctrine should be so suddenly and so
easily removed out of their hearts. As if he would say: Ye have teachers which
will bring you back again into the bondage of the law. This did not I: but by
my doctrine I called you out of darkness and of the ignorance of God, into a
wonderful light and knowledge of him. 1. Pet. 1.9.
I brought you out of bondage, and set you in the freedom of the sons of God,
not by preaching unto you the works of the law, or the merits of men, but
the grace and righteousness of God, and the giving of heavenly and eternal
blessings through Christ. Now, seeing this is true, why do ye so soon forsake
the light and return to darkness? Why do ye suffer your selves so easily to be
brought from grace unto the law, from freedom to bondage?

Here again we see (as before I have said) that to fall in Faith is an easy
matter, To slide in Faith, is an easy thing.
as the example of the Galathians witnesses. The example of the Anabaptists,
Libertines, and such other heretics witnesses the same also at this day. We
for our part do set forth the doctrine of Faith with continual travel, by
preaching, by reading and by writing: we purely and plainly distinguish the
Gospel from the law, The sleightes of the devil to bring men from Faith to the
law.
and yet do we little prevail. This comes of the Devil, who goes about by
all subtle means to seduce men and to hold them in error: he can abide
nothing less then the true knowledge of grace and Faith in Christ. Therefore,
to the end he may take Christ clean out of sight, he sets before them other
shows, wherewith he so deceaueth them that by little and little he leads them
from Faith and the knowledge of grace, to the disputation of the law. When he
has brought this about, then is Christ taken away. It is not without cause
therefore that Paul speaks so much and so often of Christ, and that he
goes about so purely to set forth the doctrine of Faith: whereunto he
attributes righteousness only and alone, and takes it from the law, declaring
that the law has a clean contrary effect: that is, to engender wrath, to
increase sin etc. For he would gladly persuade us, that we should not suffer
Christ to be plucked out of our heart: that the spouse should not suffer her
husband to depart out of her arms, but should always embrace him and cleave
fast unto him, who being present there is no danger: yea there is the
Faithful groaning, fatherly good will, adoption and inheritance.

But why says Paul that the Galathians turned back again to weak and
beggarly rudiments or ceremonies, that is to say, Why Paul says that the
Galathians returned back to vveake and beggarly elements.
to the law, whereas they never had the law: for they were Gentiles
(notwithstanding he wrote these things to ye Jews also, as afterward we will
declare): or why speaks he not rather after this manner? Once when ye knevve
not God, ye did service unto them which by nature were no gods: but now,
seeing ye know God, why turn ye back again, forsaking the true God, to worship
Idols? Does Paul take it to be all one thing, to fall from the promise to the
law, from faith to works: and to do service unto Gods which by nature are no
Gods? I answer: Whosoever is fallen from the article of justification, is
ignorant of God and an Idolater. Therefore it is all one thing whether he
afterward turn again to the law, or to the worshipping of Idols: it is all
one, whether he be called a Monk, a Turk, a Jew or an Anabaptist. For when
this article is taken away, there remains nothing else but error,
hypocrisy, impiety and idolatry, how much so ever it seem in outward
appearance to be the very truth, the true service of God, and true holiness. etc.

The reason is, God is known by Christ only. John. 1.18.
because God will or can be known no otherwise then by Christ, according to
that saying of John. 1: The only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. He is the Seed promised unto Abraham, in whom
God has established all his promises. Wherefore Christ is the only mean and,
as ye would say, the glass by the which we see God, that is to say, we know
his will. For in Christ we see that God is not a cruel exactour or a judge,
but a most favorable, loving and merciful Father, who to the end he might
bless us, that is to say, deliver us from the law, sin, death and all
evils, and might endue us with grace, righteousness and everlasting life, spared
not his own Son, Romans 8.32. The true knowledge of God.
but gave him for us all. etc. This is a true knowledge of God, and a divine
persuasion, which deceaueth us not, but painteth out God unto us lively.

He that is fallen from this knowledge, must needs conceive this fantasy in his
heart: I will set up such a service of God: I will enter into such an order: I
will choose this or that work, and so will I serve God, and I doubt not but
God will accept this, and reward me with everlasting life for the same. For he
is merciful and liberal, giving all good things even to the unworthy and
unthankful: much more will he give unto me grace and everlasting life for my
great and manifold good deeds and merits. This is the highest wisdom, The
highest wisdoms of reason.
righteousness and religion that reason can judge of: which is common to all
nations, to the Papists, Jews, Turks, heretics etc. They can go no higher
then that Pharisey did, of whom mention is made in the Gospel. Luke. 15.11.12.
They have no knowledge of the Christian righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.14. Romans 3.11.
or of the righteousness of Faith. For the natural man perceaueth not the
mysteries of God. Also: There is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God. etc. Therefore there is no difference at all between a
Papist, There is no difference between the Turks, Jews and Papists.
a Jew, a Turk and an heretic. In deed there is a difference of the persons,
the places, rites, religions, works and worshippings: notwithstanding there is
all one and the same reason, the same heart, opinion, and cogitation in them
all. For the Turk thinks the self same thing that the Charterhouse monk
does: namely, if I do this or that work, God will be merciful unto me: if I
do it not, he will be angry. There is no mean between man's working and the
knowledge of Christ. If this knowledge be darkened or defaced, it is all one
whether thou be a Monk, a Turk, a Jew. etc.

Wherefore it is an extreme madness that the Papists and Turks do so strive among
themselves about the religion and service of God, contending that both of them
have the true religion and true worship of God. And the Monks themselves agree
not together. For one of them will be accounted more holy then an other for
certain foolish outward ceremonies, and yet in their hearts the opinion of
them all is so like, tha^ one egg is not more like to an other. For this is
the imagination of the^ all: The imagination of all the meritmongers alike.
If I do this work, God will have mercy upon me: if I do it not he will be
angry. And therefore every man that reuolteth from the knowledge of Christ,
must needs fall into Idolatry, and conceive such an imagination of God as is
not agreeable to his nature. As the Charterhouse Monk for the observing of his
Rule, the Turk for the keeping of his Alcoran, has this affiance, that he
pleases God and shall receive a reward of him for his labor.

Such a God as after this sort forgeueth sins and justifies sinners, All
meritmongers honor a God which by nature is no God.
can no where be found, and therefore this is but a vain imagination, a
dream, and an Idol of the heart. For God has not promised that he will save
and justify men for the religions, observations, ceremonies, and ordinances
devised by men: yea God abhors nothing more (as the whole Scripture
witnesses) then such willworks, such service, rites and ceremonies: God
abhors vvil vvorshippings and works de^^sed by man.
for the which also he overthrows whole kingdoms and Empires. Therefore, as
many as trust to their own strength and righteousness, do serve a God, but
such a God as they them selves have devised, and not the true God in deed. For
the true God speaks thus: No righteousness, wisdom, Doctrine concerning the
true God.
nor religion pleases me, but that only whereby the Father is glorified
through the Son. Whosoever apprehends this Son, and me, and my promise in
him by Faith, to him I am a God, to him I am a Father, him do I accept,
justify and save. All other abide under wrath, because they worship that thing
which by nature is no God.

Whosoever forsakes this doctrine, To what evils they be subject, which
destroy the doctrine of faith.
must needs fall into the ignorance of God: he understands not what the true
Christian righteousness, wisdom, and service of God is: he is an Idolater
abiding under the law, sin, death, and the power of the Devil, and all
things that he does, are accursed and condemned. Therefore the Anabaptist
imagining with him self that he pleases God if he be rebaptised, if he
forsake his house, wife and children, if he mortify his flesh and suffer much
adversity, and at length death it self, yet there is not one drop of the
knowledge of Christ in him, but secluding Christ, he dreameth altogether of
his own works, of the forsaking of his goods, of his affliction and
mortification, and now differs nothing from the Turk, Jew, or Papist in
spirit or in heart, but only in the outward appearance, works and ceremonies
which he has chosen to him self. The same confidence in works, have all the
Monks and other religious orders: notwithstanding in their apparel and other
outward things there is a difference.

There are at this day very many like unto these, which notwithstanding would
be counted among the true professors and teachers of the Gospel, and as
touching the words, they teach that men are delivered from their sins by the
death of Christ. But because they teach faith in such sort, that they attribute
more to charity then to faith, they highly dishonor Christ and wickedly
pervert his word. For they dream yt God regards and accepts us for our
charities sake, whereby we being reconciled to God, do love God and our
neighbor. If this be true, then have we no need of Christ at all. Such men
serve not the true God, but an Idol of their own heart, which they themselves
have devised. For the true God does not regard or accept us for our charity,
virtues, or newnes of life, but for Christ's sake. etc.

But they make this objection. Yet notwithstanding the Scripture commands yt
we should love God with all our heart etc. It is true. But it follows not, yt
because God commands us, therefore we do it. If we did love God with all our
heart. etc. then, no dout we should be justified, and live through this
obedience, Romans 1^.5.
as it is written: He that shall do these things shall live in them. But the
Gospel says: Thou do not these things: therefore thou shall not live in
them. For this sentence: Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. requires a
perfect obedience, a perfect fear, trust, and love toward God. These things
men neither do nor can perform in this corrupt nature. Therefore this law:
Thou shall love the Lord thy God. etc. justifies not, but accuses and
condemns all men, according to that saying: Romans 4.15. Romans 1^.4.
The law causes wrath. etc. Contrariwise, Christ is the finishing and
accomplishing of the law to righteousness, to every one that believes. Of this
we have spoken largely before.

In like manner the Jew keeping the law with this opinion, that he by this
obedience will please God, serves not the true God, but is an Idolater, God is
not known and the Blessing given through the law, but by the gospel. Genes.
22.18.
worshipping a dream and an idol of his own heart, which is no where to be
found. For ye God of his fathers, whom he says he worshippeth, promised to
Abraham a Seed, thorough ye which all nations should be blessed. Therefore God
is known and the Blessing is given, not by the law, but by the Gospel of
Christ. Although Paul speak these words: The^ when ye knevv not God, ye did
service etc. properly and pri^cipally to the Galathians, which were Gentiles:
yet notwtstanding by ye same words he also touches ye Jews, who though they
had rejected their Idols outwardly, yet in their hearts they worshipped them
more then did the Gentiles, Romans 2.^2. The Gentiles Idolatry was gross.
Co^trarivvise the Jews Idolatry was outwardly holy, and therefore more
hurtful.
as it is said. Romans 2. Thou abhorrest Idols, and committest sacrilege. The
Gentiles were not the people of God, they had not his word, and therefore their
Idolatry was gross. But the Idolatrous Jews cloked their Idolatry with ye
name and word of God (as all Iusticiaries which seek righteousness by works,
are wont to do) and so with this outward show of holiness they deceived many.
Therefore Idolatry the more holy and spiritual it is, the more hurtful it is.

But how may these two contrary sayings which ye Apostle here sets down, be
reconciled together? Ye knevv not God: and ye worshipped God. I answer: All
me^ naturally have this general knowledge, yt there is a God, Romans 1.19.20.
according to ye saying. To. 1. Forasmuch as that which may be known of god,
was manifest in the^. For God was made manifest unto the^, in that ye
invisible things of him did appear by ye creation of the world. Moreover ye
ceremonies and religions which were, and always remained among al nations,
sufficiently witness yt all men have had a certain general knowledge of God.
But whether they had it by nature or by the tradition of their forefathers, I
will not here dispute.

But here some will object again. If all me^ knew God, wherefore the^ does Paul
say, that ye Galathians knew not God before ye preaching of the Gospel? I
answer: There is a double knowledge of God: A general and particular
knowledge of God.
general and particular. All men have ye general knowledge, namely, that there
is a God, that he created heaven and earth, that he is just, that he punishes
ye wicked. But what god thi^keth of us, what his will is toward us, what he will
give and do to the end we may be delivered from sin and death and be saved
(which is the true knowledge of God in deed) this they know not. As it may be
yt I know some man by sight, who^ yet in deed I know not thoroughly, because I
understand not what affection he bears toward me. So me^ know naturally yt
there is a god, but what his will is, or what is not his will, they do not
know. For it is written: Romans 3.11. John. 1.18.
There is none that understands God. And in an other place: No man has seen
God: that is to say, no man has known what is ye will of God. Now, No man
has seen God.
what does it avail thee if thou know yt there is a God, and yet art ignorant
what is his will toward thee? Here some think one thing, and some an other.
The Jews imagine this to be ye will of God, if they worship him according to
the rule of Moses law: The diverse opinions of men concerning the will of God.
Romans 1.22.
the Turk if he observe his Alcoran: the Monk if he keep his order and
perform his vows. But all these are deceived, and become vain in their own
cogitations, as Paul says Romans 1. not knowing what pleases or displeases
God: therefore in steed of the true and natural God, they worship the dreams
and imaginations of their own heart.

This is it that Paul means when he says: when ye knevv not God: that is,
when ye knew not the will of God, ye served those which by nature were no gods:
that is to say, ye served ye dreams and imaginatio^s of your own heart,
whereby ye imagined without the word, ye God was to be worshipped with this or that
work, with this or that rite or ceremony. For upon this proposition, which all
men do naturally hold, Whence idolatry came.
namely that there is a God, has sprung all Idolatry, which without yt
knowledge of the Divinity could never have come into the world. But because
men had this natural knowledge of God, they conceived vain and wicked
imaginations of God without and against the word, which they esteemed and
maintained as the very truth it self, and so dreamed that God is such a one as
by nature he is not. The opinion of the Monk, as touching Gods will.
So the Monk imagines him to be such a God as forgeueth sins, gives grace
and everlasting life for the keeping of his Rule. This God is no where to be
found: therefore he serves not the true God, but that which by nature is no
God: to wit, the imagination and Idol of his own heart: that is to say, his
own false and vain opinion of God, which he dreameth to be an undoubted
truth. Now, reason it self will enforce us to confess that man's opinion is no
God. Worshippers of God without his word.
Therefore who so ever will worship God without this word, serves not the true God
(as Paul says): but that which by nature is no God.

Therefore whether ye call rudiments here the law of Moises, or else the
traditions of the Gentiles (albeit he speaks here properly and principally of
the rudiments of Moises) there is no great difference. For he that falls from
grace to the law, falls with no less danger then he that falls from grace
to Idolatry. For without Christ there is nothing else but mere Idolatry,
Without Christ all vvorshippi^gs and all laws are Idolatry.
an Idol and false imagination of God, whether it be called Moises law, or the
Popes ordinance, or the Turks Alcoran, etc. Therefore he says with a certain
admiration:

Verse. 9. But now seeing ye know God.
As though he would say: This is a marvelous thing, that ye knowing God by the
preaching of Faith, do so suddenly revolt from the true knowledge of his will
(wherein I thought ye were so surely established, that I feared nothing less
then that ye should so easily be overthrown) do now again by the instigation
of the false Apostles, return to the weak and beggarly ceremonies, which ye
would serve again afresh. Ye heard before by my preaching, that this is the
will of God, The will of God.
to bless all nations: not by circumcision or by the observation of the law,
but by Christ promised to Abraham. They that believe in him shall be blessed
with faithful Abraham: they are the sons and heirs of God. Galath. 3.9.
Galath. 4.7.
Thus (I say) have ye known God.

Verse. 9. Yea rather are known of God. etc.
He corrects the sentence going before [:But now seeing ye have known God]
or rather turns it after this manner: yea rather ye are known of God. For he
feared lest they had lost God utterly. As if he would say: Alas, are ye come to
this point, that now ye know not God, but return again from grace to the law?
Yet notwithstanding God knows you. And in deed our knowledge is rather
passive then active: that is to say, it consists in this, that we are rather
known of God, then that we know him. All our doing, that is, all our endeavor
to know and to apprehend God, is to suffer God to work in us. He gives the
word: which when we have received by Faith given from above, we are newborn
and made the sons of God. This is then the sense and meaning. Ye are known
of God, that is, ye are visited with the word, ye are endued with Faith and the
holy Ghost, whereby ye are renewed. etc. Wherefore even by these words. Ye are
known of God, Ye are known of God.
he takes away all righteousness from the law, and denies that we attain the
knowledge of God through the worthiness of our own works. For no man knovveth
the father but the son, Math. 11.17.
and he to whom the son will reveal him. Also: Esaias. 53.11.
He by his knowledge shall justify many, because he shall bear our
iniquities. Wherefore our knowledge concerning God, consists in suffering and
not in doing.

He much meruelleth therefore, that seeing they knew God truly by the Gospel,
they returned so suddenly back to weak and beggarly rudiments, by the
persuasion of the false apostles. As I my self also should greatly marvel if
our Church (which by the grace of God is godly reformed in pure doctrine and
Faith) should be seduced and perverted by some fond and frantike head, through
the preaching of one or two sermons, that they would not acknowledge me for
their pastor any more. Which thing notwithstanding shall one day come to
pass, if not whilst we live, yet when we are dead and gone. For many shall
then rise up, which will be masters and teachers: who under a color of true
religion shall teach false and perverse doctrine, and shall quickly overthrow
all that we in so long time and with so great travel have builded. We are not
better then the Apostles, who, The Apostles even in their life time savv the
subuersio^ of those churches, which they had planted.
whiles they yet lived saw (not without their great grief and sorrow) the
subversion of those Churches which they themselves had planted through their
ministry. Therefore it is no great marvel if we be constrained to behold the
like evil at this day in those Churches, where Sectaries do reign, who
hereafter when we are dead, shall possess those Churches which we have won
and planted by our ministry, and with their poison infect and subvert the
same. And yet notwithstanding Christ shall remain and reign to the end of
the world, and that maruelously, as he did under the Papacy.

Paul seems to speak very spitefully of the law, Rudiments or elements are
called the pri^ciples and first beginning of any thing, and so the law is but
as an A.B.C in respect of the Gospel
when he calls it rudiments (as he did also before in the beginning of this
chapt.) and not only rudiments, but weak and beggetly rudiments and
ceremonies. Is it not blasphemy to give such odious names to the law of God?
The law being in his true use ought to serve the promises and to stand with
the promises and grace. But if it fight against them, it is no more the holy
law of God, but a false and a deuilish doctrine, and does nothing else but
drive men to desperation, and therefore must be rejected.

Wherefore, when he calls the law weak and beggarly rudiments, he speaks
of the law in respect of proud and presumpteous hypocrites which would be
justified by it, Rom 4.15.
and not of the law being spiritually understand, which engenders wrath. For
the law (as I have often said) being in his own proper use, accuses and
condemns a man: When the law is vveake and beggarly, and when it is strong
and mighty.
and in this respect it is not only a strong and a rich rudiment, but also
most mighty and most rich, yea rather an invincible power and riches: and if
here the conscience be compared with the law, then is it most weak and
beggarly. For it is so tender a thing, that for a small sin it is so troubled
and terrified, that it utterly despaireth, unless it be raised up again.
Wherefore the law in his proper use has more strength and riches, then heaven
and earth is able to contain: in so much that one letter or one tittle of the
law is able to kill all ma^kinde, as the history of the law given by Moises
Exodus 19.20. does witness. This is the true and divine use of the law, of
which Paul speaks not in this place.

Paul then entreats here of hypocrites, which are fallen from grace, or
which have not yet attained to grace. These, abusing ye law, seek to be
justified by it. They exercise and tire themselves day and night in the works
thereof: as Paul witnesses of the Jews. To. 10. For I bear the^ record
(says he) that they have the zeal of God, Romans 10.2.3.
but not according to knowledge, for they being ignorant of the righteousness
of God. etc. Such do hope so to be strengthened and enriched by the law, that
they may be able to set their power and riches which they have gotten by the
righteousness thereof, against the wrath and judgment of God, and so to appease
God, and to be saved thereby. In this respect then we may well say that ye law
is a weak and a beggarly rudiment: When the law is a vveake and beggarly
rudiment.
that is to say, which can give neither help nor counsel.

And who so lists to amplify this matter, may further say, that the law is
a weak and a beggarly rudiment, because it makes men more weak and beggarly:
Again, because that of it self it has no power or riches whereby it is able
to give or to bring righteousness: And moreover, that it is not only weak and
beggarly, but eue^ weakness and beggary it self. How then shall it enrich or
strengthen those, which were before both weak and beggarly? Therefore to seek
to be justified by the law, is as much as if a man being weak and feeble
already, would seek some other greater evil whereby he might overcome his
weakness and poverty, which notwithstanding would bring unto him utter
destruction. As if he which has ye falling sickness, would seek to join unto
it the Pestilence for a remedy: or if a Leaper should come to a Leaper, or a
beggar to a beggar, the one to help and to enrich the other.

Paul therefore shows, The more a man seeks to be justified by the law,
the more he is drowned in sins. Ephesians. 2.3.
that they which seek to be justified by the law, have this commodity
thereby, that daily they become more and more weak and beggarly. For they be
weak and beggarly of them selves: that is to say, they are by nature the
children of wrath, subject to death and everlasting damnation: and yet they lay
hold upon that which is nothing else but mere weakness and beggerie, seeking to
be strengthened and enriched thereby. Therefore every one that falls from the
promise to the law, from faith to works, does nothing else but lay upon him
self such a burden, being weak and feeble already, as he is not able to
bear. Acts. 15.1^.
Ac. 15. and in bearing thereof is made ten times more weak, so that at length
he is driven to despair, unless Christ come and deliver him.

This thing the Gospel also witnesses, speaking of the woman which was
grieved 12. years with a bloody issue, Luke. 5.43. Of the vvoma^ which was
diseased with the bloody issue.
and suffered many things of many Physicians, upon whom she had spent all her
substance, and yet could not be cured, but the longer she was under their
hands, the worse she was. As many therefore as do the works of the law to the
end they may be justified thereby, are not only not made righteous, but twice
more unrighteous then they were before, that is (as I have said) more weak and
beggarly, and more unapt to do any good work. This have I proved to be true
both in my self and in many others. I have known many Monks in ye Papacy which
with great zeal have done many great works for the attaining of righteousness
and salvation, and yet were they more impatie^t, more weak, more miserable,
more faithles, more fearful, and more ready to despair the^ any other. The
civil Magistrates who were ever occupied in great and weighty affairs, were
not so impatient, so fearful, so faint hearted, so superstitious and so
faithles as these Iusticiaries and Meritmongers were.

Whosoever the^ seeks righteousness by ye law, what ca^ he imagine else, but ye
god being angry, must needs be pacified with works? Now, when he has once
conceived this fantasy, he begins to work. But he ca^ never find so many
good works as are able to quiet his conscience: but still he desires more. Yea
he finds sins in those works yt he has don already. Therefore his
conscience can never be certified, The conscience is never quieted through
works.
but must needs be always in dout, and thus think with it self: Thou have
not sacrificed as thou should do: thou have not prayed aright: this thou
have left undone: this or that sin thou have committed. Here the heart
trembles and feels it self oppressed with innumerable sins which still
increase without end, so that he swarueth from righteousness more and more,
until at length he fall to desperation. Hereof it comes that many being at
the point of death, have uttered these desperate words: O wretch that I am: I
have not kept mine order: Whether shall I fly from the wrath of Christ, that
angry judge? would to God I had been made a swinheard or the vilest wretch in
the whole world.

What profit Monks have by their religion.
Thus the Monk in the end of his life is more weak, more beggarly, more
faithles and fearful then he was at the beginning when he first entered into
his order. The reason is, because he would strengthen himself through weakness,
and enrich him self through poverty. The law or men's traditions, or the Rule
of his order should have healed him when he was sick, and enriched him when he
was poor: but he is become more feeble and more poor the^ the Publicanes and
harlots. The Publicanes and harlots have not an heap of good works to trust
unto as the Monks have: but although they feel their sins never so much,
Luke. 18.13.
yet they can say with the Publicane: O Lord be merciful to me a sinner. But
contrariwise ye Monk which has spent all his time in weak and beggarly
elements, is confirmed in this opinion: A lively description of all the
religious hypocrites in the kingdom of Antichrist.
If thou keep thy rule thou shall be saved, etc. With this false persuasion he
is so deluded and bewitched, that he can not apprehend grace, no nor once
remember grace. Thus, notwtsta^ding all the works which either he does or has
done, be they never so many and so great, he thinks that he has never done
enough, but has still an eye to more works, and so by heaping up of works
he goes about to appease the wrath of God and to justify him self, until he
be driven to utter desperation. The Fable is this, that a dog svvimming over
the water with a piece of flesh in his mouth, let the flesh go, and snatched
at the shadovve which appeared in the water.
Wherefore, whosoever falls from Faith, and follows the law, is like to
Esopes dog, which forgoeth the flesh, and snatcheth at the shadow. Wherefore
it is impossible that such as seek righteousness and salvation by the law
(whereunto men are naturally inclined) should ever find quietness and peace of
conscience: yea they do nothing else but heap laws upon laws, whereby they
torment both themselves and others, and afflict men's consciences so miserably,
that through extreme anguish of heart many die before their time. For one law
always brings forth ten more, and so they increase without number and without
end.

Now, who would have thought that the Galathians, Falling away from the
Gospel is very easy.
which had learned so sound and so pure a doctrine of such an excellent Apostle
and teacher, could be so suddenly led away from the same, and utterly
perverted by the false Apostles? It is not without cause that I repete this so
often: that to fall away from the truth of the Gospel is an easy matter. The
reason is, because men do not sufficiently consider, no not the very
faithful, what an excellent and a precious treasure the true knowledge of
Christ is. Therefore they do not labor so diligently and so carefully as they
should do, to obtain and to retain the same. Moreover, the greater part of
those that hear the word, are exercised with no cross or affliction: they
wrestle not against sin, death and the Devil, but live in security without
any conflict. Such men, They that are not tried with afflictions and
tentations, never feel the power of the word of god.
because they are not proved and tried with tentations, and therefore are not
armed with ye word of God against the subtilties of the Devil, never feel the
use and power of the word. In deed whilst they are among faithful ministers
and preachers, they ca^ follow their words and say as they say, persuading
themselves that they perfectly understand the matter of justification. But when
they are gone, Math. 7.15.
and wolves in sheep clothing are come in their place, it happens unto them
as it did to the Galathians: that is to say, they are suddenly seduced and
easily turned back to weak and beggarly rudiments.

Paul has here his peculier manner of speech, Paul's manner of speech.
which the other Apostles did not use. For there was none of them besides Paul
that gave such names to the law: to wit, that it is a weak and a beggarly
rudiment: that is to say, utterly unprofitable to righteousness. And surely I
durst not have given such terms unto the law, but should have thought it
great blasphemy against God, if Paul had not so done before. But of this I
have entreated more largely before, where I showed when the law is weak and
beggarly, and when it is most strong and rich. etc. Now, If the law of God be
vveak and not able to obtain righteousness, much more the Popes traditions.
if the law of God be weak and unprofitable to Justification, much more are
the laws and decrees of the Pope, weak and unprofitable to Justification.
Therefore we give sentence against the ordinances, laws and decrees of the
Pope with such boldness and assurance as Paul did against the law of God, that
they are not only weak and beggarly rudiments, and utterly unprofitable to
righteousness, but also execrable, accursed, deuilish and damnable: for they
blaspheme grace, they overthrow the Gospel, abolish faith, take away Christ.
etc.

For as much then as the Pope requires that we should keep his laws as
necessary to salvation, he is very Antichrist and the Vicar of Satan. And as
many as cleave unto him, and confirm his abhominatio^s and blasphemies, or
keep them to this end, that thereby they may merit the forgeuenes of their
sins, are the servant of Antichrist and of the Devil. Now, such has the
doctrine of the Papisticall church ben of a long time, yt these laws ought to
be kept as necessary to salvation. Thus the Pope sits in the temple of God,
vaunting him self to be God: he sets him self against God, 1 These. 2.^.
and exalts himself above all that is called God or worshipped etc: And men's
consciences more feared and reverenced the laws and ordinances of the Pope,
then the word of God and his ordinances. The Popes triple crown.
By this means he was made the Lord of heaven, of earth, and of hell, and bare
a triple crown upon his head. The Cardinals also and Bishops his creatures,
were made Kings and Princes of ye world: And therefore if he did not burden men's
consciences with his laws, he could not long maintain his terrible power, his
dignity and his riches: but his whole kingdom would quickly fall.

This place which Paul here handles, is weighty and of great importance, To
fall from the grace of God.
and therefore the more diligently to be marked: to wit, that they which fall
from grace to the law, do utterly lose the knowledge of the truth: they see
not their own sins: they neither know God nor the Devil, nor them selves:
and moreover they understand not the force and use of the law, What judgment
they give of the law, that know not Christ.
although they brag never so much that they keep and observe the same. For
without the knowledge of grace, that is to say, without the Gospel of Christ,
it is impossible for a man to give this definition of the law, that it is a
weak and a beggarly rudiment, and unprofitable to righteousness. But he rather
judges quite contrary of the law: to wit, that it is not only necessary to
salvation, but also that it strengthens such as are weak, and enricheth such
as are poor and beggarly: that is to say, that such as obey and observe the
same, shall be able to merit righteousness and everlasting salvation. If this
opinion remain, the promise of God is denied, Christ is taken away, lying,
impiety and idolatry is established. The thundrings of Luther against the
Pope and his laws.
Now, the Pope with all his Bishops, his Schools, and whole Sinagoge, taught
that his laws are necessary to salvation: Therefore he was a teacher of weak
and beggarly elements, wherewith he made the Church of Christ through out the
whole world, most weak and beggarly: that is to say, he burdened and miserably
tormented the Church with his wicked laws, defacing Christ and burying his
Gospel.

Verse. 9. Whereunto ye will be in bondage again.
This he adds, to declare that he speaks of proud and presumpteous
hypocrites, which seek to be justified by the law, as I have showed before.
For otherwise he calls the law holy and good. 1. Timot. 1.^.
As 1. Timot. 1. We know that the law is good, if it be rightly used: to
wit, ciuily to bridle evil doers, and spiritually to increase
transgressions. Galath. 3.19.
But, whosoever observes the law to obtain righteousness before God, makes
the law which is good, 1. Timot. c. 7.
damnable and hurtful unto him self. He reproves the Galathians therefore,
because they would be in bondage to the law again, which does not take away
sin, but increases sin. For whilst a sinner, being weak and poor of
himself, seeks to be justified by the law, he finds nothing in it but
weakness and poverty it self. And here two sick and feeble beggars meet
together, of whom the one is not able to help and heal the other, but rather
molesteth and troubles the other.

We, as being strong in Christ, will gladly serve the law: not the weak and
beggarly, but the mighty and rich law: that is to say, so far forth as it
has power and dominion over the body. For then we serve the law but only in
our body and outward members, and not in our conscience. But the Pope requires
that we should obey his laws with this persuasion, that if we do this or
that, we are righteteous: if we do it not we are damned. Here the law is more
then a weak and beggarly element. For whiles this bondage of the conscience
continues under the law, there can be nothing but mere weakness and poverty.
Wherefore all the weight of the matter lies in this word, To serve. The
meaning therefore of Paul is this, that he would not have the conscience to
serve under the law as a captive, but to be free and to have dominion over the
law. For the conscience is dead to the law through Christ, and the law again
unto the conscience: Whereof we have more largely entreated before in the second
Chapter.

Verse. 10. Ye observe days and months, times and years,
By these words he plainly declares what ye false apostles taught, The
doctrine of the false apostles.
namely ye observation of days, months, times and years. The Jews were
commanded to keep holy the Saboth day, the new Moons, the first and the
seueth month, the three appointed times or feasts, The holy days of the
Jews.
namely, the pascall or passover, the feast of weeks, of ye tabernacles, and
the year of Jubilee. These ceremonies the Galathians were also constrained by
the false apostles to keep as necessary to righteousness. Therefore he says that
they, losing ye grace and liberty which they had in Christ, were turned back
to the serving of weak and beggarly elements. For they were persuaded by ye
false apostles, that these laws must needs be kept, and by keeping of them they
should obtain righteousness: but if they kept them not they should be damned.
Contrariwise Paul can in no wise suffer that men's consciences should be bound
to the law of Moses, but always delivers them from the law. Behold I Paul
(says he a little after in the.5. chap.) do write unto you, Galath. 5.2.
that if ye be circumcised, Coloss. 2.16.
Christ shall profit you nothing. And Coloss. 2. Let no man judge you in meat
or drink, or in a piece of an holy day, or of a new Moon, Luke 17.20.
or Saboth day. etc. So says our Savior Christ: The kingdom of God comes
not with observation of the law. Much less then are men's consciences, to be
burdened and snared with men's traditions.

Verse. 11. I am in fear of you, lest I have bestovved on you labor in vain.
Here Paul shows him self to be greatly troubled through the fall of the
Galathians: whom he would more bitterly reprove, but that he fears lest if he
should deal with them more sharply, The fatherly affection of Paul toward
the Galathia^s.
he should not only not make them better, but more offend them and so utterly
alienate their minds from him. Therefore in writing he changes and mitigateth
his words, and as though all the harm redou^ded unto him self, he says: I am
in fear of you lest I have bestovved my labor on you in vain: That is to
say, it greueth me that I have preached ye gospel with so great diligence and
faithfulness amongst you, and see no fruit to come thereof. Notwithstanding,
although he show a very loving and a fatherly affection toward them, yet
withal he chideth them somewhat sharply, but yet covertly. For when he says,
that he had labored in vain, What this word, to labor i^ vain, imports.
that is to say, that he had preached the Gospel among them without any fruit,
he shows covertly that either they were obstinate unbelievers, or else were
fallen from ye doctrine of faith. Now, both these, as well unbelievers as
backsliders from ye doctrine of faith, are sinners, wicked, unrighteous and
damned. Such therefore do obey the law in vain, they observe days, months and
years in vain. And in these words: I am in fear of you, lest I have bestovved
on you labor in vain, is contained a certain secret excommunication. For ye
Apostle means hereby yt the Galathia^s were secluded and separate from
Christ, unless they spedely returned to ye sincere and sound doctrine again:
yet he pronounced no open sentence against them. For he perceived that he could
do no good with over sharp dealing: wherefore he changes his style, and
speaks them very fair, saying:

Verse. 12. Be ye as I: for I am even as you.
Hitherto Paul has been occupied wholly in teaching, and being moved with this
great enormitie and wicked reuolting of the Galathians, he was vehemently
incensed against them, and chid them bitterly, calling them fools, bewitched,
not believing the truth, crucifiers of Christ, etc. Now, the greater part of his
Epistle being finished, The Apostle now speaks them fair, whom before he
did sharply chide.
he begins to perceive that he had handled them too sharply. Therefore being
careful lest he should do more hurt then good through his severity, he
shows that this his sharp chiding proceeded of a fatherly affection and a
true Apostolical heart: And so he amplifieth the matter with sweet and gentle
words, to the end that if he had offended any (as no dout there were many
offended) by these sweet and loving words he might win them again.

And here by his own example he admonishes all Pastors and Ministers, that
they ought to bear a fatherly and motherly affection: A right pattern of a
godly pastor.
not toward ravening wolves, but toward the poor sheep, miserably seduced
and going astray, patiently bearing with their faults and infirmities, Galath.
6.1.
instructing and restoring them with the spirit of mekenes: For they can not be
brought into the right way again by any other means: and by over sharp
reproving and rebuking they are provoked to anger, or else to desperation, but
not to repentance. And here is to be noted by the way, that such is the nature
and fruit of true and sound doctrine, that when it is well taught and well
understand, The fruit of sound doctrine.
it joins men's hearts together with a singular concord: but when men reject
godly and sincere doctrine, and embrace errors, this unity and concord is
soon broken. The agreement of minds is broken by wicked doctrine.
Therefore as soon as thou see thy brethern seduced by vain and fantastical
spirits, to fall from the article of Justification, thou shall perceive that
by and by they will pursue the faithful with bitter hatred, whom before they
most tenderly loved.

This we find to be true at this day in our false brethern and other Sectaries,
who at the beginning of the reformation of the Gospel, were glad to hear us,
and read our Books with great zeal and affection. They acknowledged the
grace of the holy Ghost in us, and reverenced us for the same as the ministers
of God. Some of them also lived familiarly with us for a time, and behaved them
selves very modestly and soberly. They which fall from sound doctrine, become
worse the^ they were before.
But when they were departed from us and perverted by the wicked doctrine of
the Sectaries, they showed them selves more bitter enemies to our doctrine and
our name then any other. I do much and often marvel whereupon they should
conceive such a deadly hatred against us, whom they before so dearly and so
tenderly loved: For we offended them not in any thing, nor gave them any
occasion to hate us. Yea they are constrained to confess yt we desire nothing
more then that the glory of God may be advanced, the benefit of Christ
truly known, and the truth of the Gospel purely taught: which God has now
again in these later days reueiled by us unto this unthankful world: which
thing should rather provoke them to love us then to hate us. I marvel therefore
not without cause, whereof this change comes. Verily there is no other cause,
but that they have gotten unto them selves new masters and harkened to new
teachers, whose poison has so infected the^, that now of very friends they are
become our mortal enemies. The condition of the Apostles.
And I see the condition of the Apostles and all other faithful ministers to be
such, that their disciples and hearers being once infected with the errors of
the false Apostles and heretics, have and do set them selves against them,
and become their enemies. There were very few amongst the Galathians which
continued in the sound doctrine of the Apostle: All the rest being seduced by
the false apostles, did not acknowledge Paul for their pastor and teacher any
more: yea there was nothing more odious unto them then the name and doctrine of
Paul. And I fear me that this Epistle brought very few of them back again
from their error.

If the like case should happen unto us: that is to say, if in our absence our
Church should be seduced by fantastical heads, and we should write hither, not
one or two, but many Epistles: we should prevail little or nothing at all. Our
men (a few only excepted of the stronger sort) would use themselves no
otherwise toward us, then they do at this day which are seduced by the
Sectaries: who would sooner worship the Pope, then they would obey our
admonitions or approve our doctrine. No man shall persuade them that they,
rejecting Christ, do return again to weak and beggarly elements, and to
those which by nature are no Gods. They can abide nothing less, then to hear
that their teachers by whom they are seduced, are ouerthrowers of ye Gospel of
Christ, and troublers of men's consciences. The Lutherans (say they) are not
only wise, they alone do not preach Christ, they alone have not the holy
Ghost, the gift of prophecy, and the true understanding of the Scriptures. The
Anabaptists brag altogether of the spirit, of illuminations and reuelatio^s.
Our teachers are in nothing inferior unto them: yea in many things they
excel them, because they follow the spirit and teach spiritual things.
Contrariwise they never yet tasted what true Divinity meant, but stick in the
letter, and therefore they teach nothing but the Catechism, Faith, and
charity. etc. Wherefore, Falling from Faith is easy.
like as to fall in Faith is an easy matter (as I am wont to say) so is it
most perilous: to wit, even from the high heaven into the deep pit of
hell. It is not such as properly follows the nature of man, as murder,
adultery and such like, but deuilish and the proper work of the devil. For
they which so fall, ca^ not be easily recovered again, but most commonly they
continue perverse and obstinate in their error. Therefore ye later end of
those men is worse then the beginning: As our Savior Christ witnesses when he
says: The unclean spirit being cast out of his house, when he returns he
enters in again not alone, but takes unto him seven spirits worse then
himself, and there dwells. etc.

Paul therefore perceauing through the revelation of the holy Ghost, that it
was to be feared lest the minds of the Galathians, who^ of a godly zeal he
had called folish and bewitched. etc. should rather by this sharp chiding be
more stirred up against him then amended, (especially since he now knew that
ye false apostles were among them, who would expound this sharp chiding which
proceeded from a fatherly affection to the worst, and would cry out: Now, Paul
which some of you so greatly praise, shows what he is, and with what spirit
he is led: when he was with you he would seem to be unto you a father, but his
letters show in his absence that he is a tyranne. etc.) therefore he is so
troubled through a godly care and fatherly affection, that he can not well tell
how and what to write to them. For it is a dangerous thing for a man to defend
his cause with those which are absent and have now begun to hate him, who also
be persuaded by others that his cause is not good. Therefore being in great
perplexity, he says a little after: Galath. 4.20.
I am troubled and at my wits end for your cause: that is, I know not what
to do, or how to deal with you.

Verse. 12. Be ye as I am, for I am as ye are.
These words are to be understand, not of doctrine, but of affections.
Therefore the meaning is not: Be ye as I am: that is to say, He mitigateth his
former sharp chiding.
think of doctrine as I do: but bear such an affection toward me as I do
toward you. As though he would say: Perhaps I have too sharply chidden you,
but pardon this my sharpnes, and judge not my heart by my words, but my words
by the affection of my heart. My words seem rough and my chastisement sharp,
but my heart is loving and fatherly. Therefore (O my Galathians) take this my
chiding with such a mind as I bear toward you: For the matter required that
I should show my self so sharp and severe toward you.

Even so may we also say of our selves. Our correction is severe, and our manner
of wryt^ng sharp and vehement: but certainly there is no bitterness in our
heart, no envy, no desire of revenge against our adversaries: but there is in
us a godly carefulnes and sorrow of spirit. We do not so hate ye Pope and
other erroneous spirits, that we wish any evil unto them, or desire their
destruction: but rather we desire that they may return again to the right
way, and be saved together with us. The Master.
The Scholemaster chastises his scholar, not to hurt him, but to reform him.
The rod is sharp, but correction is necessary for the child, and the heart
of him that corrects, loving and friendly. So the father chastises his son,
The Father.
not to destroy him, but to reform and amend him. Chastisement necessary and
profitable.
Stripes are sharp and grievous to ye child, but the fathers heart is loving
and kind: And unless he loved his child, he would not chastise him, but cast
him of, despair of his welfare, and suffer him to perish. This correction
therefore which he gives to his child, is a token of a fatherly affection, and
is profitable for the child. Even so, O my Galathians, think ye likewise of
my dealing toward you: then will ye not judge my chiding to be sharp and
bitter, but profitable for you. Chastisement for the present time seems not
to be joyous, Heb. 12.11.
but grievous: but afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby. Let the same affection therefore be in you
toward me, which I have toward you. I bear a loving heart toward you: the
same I desire again of you.

Thus he speaks them fair, and with this fair speech he still continues,
that he might pacify their minds which were stirred up against him by his
sharp chiding. Notwithstanding he reuoketh not his severe words. In deed he
confesses that they were sharp and bitter: but necessity (says he)
compelled me to reprehend you somewhat sharply and severely: but that which I
did, proceeded of a sincere and loving heart toward you. The Physician.
The Physician gives a bitter potion to his patient, not to hurt him, but to
cure him. If then the bitterness of the medicine which is given to the sick
body is not to be imputed to the Physician, but to the medicine and the
malady: judge ye also in like manner of my severe and sharp reprehension.

Verse. 12. Brethern, I beseech you: ye have not hurt me at all.


Is this to beseech the Galathians, when he calls them bewitched, disobedient
to the truth, and crucifiers of Christ? It seems rather to be a great
rebuke. But contrariwise Paul says, that it is no rebuke but an earnest
beseeching: and in deed so is it. The stripes of a friend, are better then the
kisses of an enemy.
And it is as much as if he said: I confess that I have chidden you somewhat
bitterly, but take it in good part, and then shall ye find this my chiding, to
be no chiding, but a praying and a beseeching. If a father likewise do sharply
correct his son, it is as much as if he said: My son I pray thee be a good
child. etc. It seems in deed to be a correction, but if ye respect the
fathers heart, it is a gentle and an earnest beseching.

Verse. 12. Ye have not hurt me at all.


As if he said: Why should I be angry with you, or of a malicious mind speak
evil of you, seeing ye have nothing offended me? An objection.
Why then say thou that we are perverted, that we have forsaken thy
doctrine, that we are foolish, bewitched? etc. These things do witness that we
have offended thee. He a^swereth: Ye have not offended me, but your selves: and
therefore I am thus troubled, not for mine own cause, but for the love I bear
unto you. Think not therefore that my chiding did proceed of malice, or any
evil affection. For I take God to witness, ye have done me no wrong, but
contrariwise ye have bestowed great benefits upon me.

Thus speaking them fair, he prepares their minds to suffer his fatherly
chastisements with a childely affection. And this is to te^per wormewode or a
bitter potion with honey and sugar, to make it sweet again. So parents
speak their children fair when they have well beaten them, giving them
apples, pears and other like things, whereby the children know that their
parents love them and seek to do them good, how sharp so ever their
correction does appear.

Verse. 13. And ye know how through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the
Gospel unto you at the first. And the trial of me which was in my flesh, ye
despised not, neither abhorred, but ye received me as an angel of God, yea, as
Christ Jesus.


Now he declares what pleasures he had received of the Galathians. The first
benefit (says he) which I esteem greatest of all, He praises the Galathia^s
because they were not offended with his weakness.
was this. When I began first to preach the Gospel amongst you, and that
through infirmity of the flesh and great tentatio^s, my cross did nothing at
all offend you. But ye showed your selves so loving, so kind and so friendly
toward me, that not only ye were not offended with this my infirmity of the
flesh, with my tentations and perils wherewith I was almost overwhelmed: but
also ye loved me dearly, and received me as an angel of God, yea rather as
Jesus Christ himself. This is in deed a great commendation of the Galathians,
The commendation of the Galathians.
that they received the Gospel of a man so contemptible and afflicted on every
side as Paul was. For where he preached the Gospel amongst them, both the
Jews and and Gentiles murmured and raged against him. For all the mighty,
wise, religious and learned me^, hated, persecuted, and blasphemed Paul. With
all this the Galathia^s were no whit offended, but turning their eyes from the
beholding of this infirmity, these tentations and dangers, they did not only
hear that pore, despised, wretched and afflicted Paul and acknowledged them
selves to be his disciples, but also they received and heard him as an angel
of God, yea as Jesus Christ himself. This is a worthy commendation and a
singular virtue of the Galathians: and in deed it is such a commendation as he
gives to non of all those to whom he wrote, besides these Galathians.

What the infirmity of the flesh is after Ieromes opinion.
Jerome and certain other of the ancient fathers expound this infirmity of
the flesh in Paul, to be some disease of the body, or some tentation of lust.
These men lived when the Church was outwardly in a peaceable and prosperous
estate without any cross or persecution. For then the Bishops began to
increase in riches, The judgment of the fathers when the church was in
prosperity.
estimation and glory in the world. And many also exercised tyranny over the
people which were committed to their charge, as ye Ecclesiastical history
witnesses. Few did their duty, and they that would seem to do it, forsaking
the doctrine of the Gospel, Mark that when the church began to grovve in
honor and wealth of the world, it decreased in virtue, knowledge, and other
spiritual gifts which before it possessed.
set forth their own decrees to yt people. Now, when the Pastors and Bishops
are not exercised in the word of God, but neglect the pure and sincere
preaching thereof: they must needs fall into security: For they are not
exercised with tentatio^s, with yt cross and persecutions, which are wont
always undoubtedly to follow ye pure preaching of the word: Therefore it was
impossible that they should understand Paul. But we by the grace of God, have
sound and sincere doctrine, which also we preach and teach freely, and therefore
are compelled to bear the bitter hatred, afflictions and persecutions of ye
Devil and the world. And if we were not exercised outwardly by tyra^nes and
Sectaries with force and subtlety, and inwardly with terrors and the fiery
darts of ye Devil, Paul should be as obscure and unknown unto us as he was
in times past to the whole world, and is yet to the Papists, the Anabaptists
and other our adversaries. Who they are that best understand the Scriptures.
Therefore ye gift of knowledge and interpretation of the Scriptures, and our
diligence, with our inward and outward tentations, open unto us the meaning of
Paul, and the sense of all the holy Scriptures.

Paul therefore calls the infirmity of the flesh, What the weakness of the
flesh is, which Paul speaks of.
no disease of ye body or tentation of lust, but his suffering and affliction
which he sustained in his body: so that he sets the same against the virtue
and power of the spirit. But lest we should seem to wrest and pervert Paul's
words, let us hear himself speaking in the.2. Corrin. 12. 2. Corin. 12.9.10
Very gladly vvil I rejoice rather in mine infirmities, that the power of
Christ may dvvell in me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches,
in necessities, in persecutions, in anguish for Christ's sake: for when I am
vveake then am I strong. And in the.11. chap. In labors more abundant: 2.
Cor. 11.23.24.25.
in stripes above measure: in prisons more plenteous: in death often. Of the
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one: I was thrice beaten
with rods: I was once stoned: I suffered thrice shipwreck. etc. These
afflictions which he suffered in his body he calls the infirmity of the
flesh, and not any corporal disease. As though he would say: When I preached
the Gospel amongst you, I was oppressed with sundry tentations and afflictions.
I was always in danger both of the Jews, of the Gentiles and also of false
brethern. I suffered hunger, and wa^ted all things. I was as the very filth and
of scouring of the world. He makes mention of this his infirmity in many
places, as in ye. 1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 4.6.11.12. and in many other.

We see then that Paul calls afflictions the infirmities of the flesh which
he suffered in ye flesh, like as yt other Apostles, the Prophets, and al godly
men did: notwtstanding he was mighty in spirit. For ye power of Christ was in
him, which always reigned and triumphed through him. Which thing he testifies
in yt. 2. Cor. 12. with these words: 2. Cor. 12.9.10.
For when I am vveake, then am I strong. Also: I vvil gladly rejoice in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me. And in the.2. chapter.
Thanks be to God which alvvayes makes us to triumph in Christ. 2. Cor. 2.14.
As though he would say: In deed the Devil, the Jews and the Gentiles rage
cruelly against us: notwithstanding we continue constant and invincible against
all their assaults, The power of the spirit in Paul.
and will they nil they our doctrine prevails and triumphs. This was the
strength and power of yt spirit in Paul, against the which he sets here the
infirmity and bondage of the flesh.

Now, this infirmity of the flesh in the Godly does wonderfully offend reason.
Therefore Paul so highly commends the Galathians, for that they were not
offended with this great infirmity, and with this vile and contemptible form of
the cross which they saw in him: but received him as an angel, yea as Christ
him self. And Christ also armeth the Faithful against this base and
contemptible form of the cross in which he appeared, Math. 11.6.
when he says: Blessed is he that is not offended in me. And surely it is a
great matter that they which believe in him do acknowledge him to be the Lord
of all, and Savior of the world: whom notwithstanding they hear to have been
the most miserable of all others, Psalm. 21.7.
the last of men, yea a very scorn of men, and a contempt of the world:
briefly, despised and hated of all men, and condemned to the death of the
cross, and even of his own people, and especially of those that were esteemed
the best, the wisest, and holiest of all other. This is a great matter (I say),
not to be moved with these great offenses, and to be able, not only to
contemn them, but also to esteem this pore Christ so spitefully scorned,
spitte upon, whipped and crucified, more then the riches of all the richest,
the strength of all the strongest, the wisdom of all ye wisest, the holiness of
all the holiest me^, with all the crowns and scepters of all the Kings and
Princes of the whole world. They therefore are worthily called blessed of
Christ, which are not offended in him.

The spiritual tentations of Paul.
Now, Paul had not only outward tentations (whereof I have spoken already) but
also inward and spiritual tentations, as Christ had in the garden: Such as
that was whereof he complains in the 2. Corrin. 12. that he felt the prick or
sting of the flesh, 2. Cor. 12.7.
and the angel of Satan which buffetted him. This I say by the way, because
the Papists expounded this to be a motion of fleshly lust: but it was a
spiritual tentation. And herein is no repugnance that he adds this word
Flesh, saying: A prick was given me in my Flesh. Yea he calls it of purpose
a prick in the flesh. For the Galathians and others which were conversant with
Paul, had seen him oftentimes in great anguish, terror and heaviness of
spirit. Wherefore the Apostles had not only bodily, 2. Cor. 7.5.
but also spiritual tentations, which also he confesses in the.2. Cor. 7.
with these words: Fightings without, and terrors within. And Luke says in
the last of the Acts, The sorrow of spirit in the Apostles.
that Paul when he had long striued in the tempests of the sea, even unto
heaviness of his spirit, was again refreshed, and waxed bold when he saw the
brethern that came from Rome to meet him at the market of Appius and three
Tauernes. Also, in the.2. Phil. he confesses, Philip. 2.27.
that God had mercy upon him, in that he restored Epaphroditus so weak and
near to death, unto health again, lest he should have sorrow upon sorrow.
Therefore besides outward tentations, the Apostles also suffered great anguish,
heaviness and terrors.

But why says Paul, that he was not despised of the Galathians? It seems
that they despised him, when they fell away from his Gospel. Paul expounds
himself. When I first preached to you the Gospel (says he) ye did not as
other people for the most part have done, who being greatly offended through
this my infirmity and tentation of the flesh, have despised and rejected me.
For man's reason is soon offended with this vile and contemptible form of the
cross, and judges those that are so afflicted to be stark mad which will
go about to comfort, help and succor others: Also, those that boast of their
great riches, that is to say, of righteousness, strength, victory over sin,
death and all evils: of joy, salvation, and everlasting life, and yet
notwithstanding they themselves are needy, weak, heavy hearted and despised,
evil entreated, and slain, as very noisome poisons of commonweals and of
Religion, John. 17.^.
and they that kill them think they do high service unto God. Therefore, when
they promise unto others eternal treasures, and they themselves perish so
wretchedly before the world, they are laughed to scorn and compelled to hear:
Luke. 4.32.
Physician cure thy self And hereof come these complaints which are every
where in the Psalms: I am a worm and no man. etc. Again: Psalm. 22.6.15.
Depart not from me, for tribulation is at hand, and there is none to help.
etc.

This is therefore a great commendation of the Galathians, The praise of the
Galathians.
that they were not offended with this infirmity and tentation of Paul, but
received him as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus. It is in deed a great
virtue and worthy of great praise to hear the Apostle. But it is a greater,
and a true Christian virtue, to give ear unto one so miserable, weak and
contemptible as Paul was among the Galathians (as here he witnesses of him
self) and to receive him as an angel from heaven, and to give him such honor
as if he had been Christ Jesus him self: and not to be offended with his
afflictions being so great and so many. Wherefore, by these words he highly
commends the virtue of the Galathians, which he says, he will keep in
perpetual remembrance, and so much estemeth the same, that he desires it may
be known unto all men. Notwithstanding in setting forth so highly their
benefits and praises, he shows covertly how entirely they loved him before
the coming of the false apostles, and therwithall he moves them to continue
as they began, and to embrace him with no less love and reverence then they
did before. And hereby it may also appear, that the false apostles had greater
authority among the Galathians then Paul himself. For the Galathians being
moved with their authority, preferred them far above Paul, whom before they
so dearly loved and received as an angel of God. etc.

Verse. 15. What was then your felicity?
As if he would say: How happy were ye counted: how much were ye then praised
and commended? The like manner of speech we have in the song of the virgin
Marie: Luke. 1.48.
All generations shall call me blessed: And these words: What was then your
felicity? contain in them a certain veheme^cie. As if he would say: ye were
not only blessed, but in all things most blessed and highly co^me^ded. Thus he
goes about to qualify and mitigate his bitter potion, that is to say, his
sharp chiding, fearing lest the Galathians should be offended therewith:
especially knowing that ye false apostles would sclau^der him and most
spitefully interpret his words. Heretics wrest things that are spoken well
to an evil meaning.
For this is the quality and nature of these Vipers, that they will sclaunder
and maliciously pervert those words which proceed from a simple and sincere
heart, and wrest them clean contrary to the true sense and meaning thereof.
They are marvelous cunning workmen in this matter, far passing all the wit
and eloquence of all the Rhetoricians in the world. For they are led with a
wicked spirit, which so bewitcheth them, that they being enflamed with a
devilish rage against the Faithful, can no otherwise do, but maliciously
interpret and wickedly pervert their words and wrytings. Therefore they are
like unto the spider, which sucketh venom out of sweet and pleasant flowers:
and this proceeds not of the flowers, but of their own venomous nature, which
turns that into poison which of it self is good and wholesome. Paul
therefore by these mild and sweet words goes about to prevent the false
apostles, to the end they should have no occasion to sclaunder and pervert his
words after this manner: Paul handles you very vngentely, he calls you
foolish, bewitched, and disobecient to the truth: which is a sure token that he
seeks not your salvation, but accounts you as damned and rejected from
Christ.

Ver. 15. For I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have
plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.
He praises the Galathians above measure. Ye did not only entreat me (says
he) most courteously and with all reverence, receiving me as an angel of God
etc: but also if necessity had required, ye would have plucked out your own
eyes and given them to me: yea, ye would have bestowed your lives for me. And
in deed the Galathians bestowed their lives for him: For in that they received
and maintained Paul (whom the world accounted, most execrable and accursed)
they turned upon their own heads as receauers and mainteiners of Paul, the
cruel hatred and indignation of all the Jews and Gentiles.

So also at this day the name of Luther is most odious to yt world. The name of
Luther odious.
He that praises me, sins worse then any idolater, blasphemer, periurer,
whoremonger, adulterer, murderer or thief. It must needs be therefore that
the Galathians were well established in the doctrine and faith of Christ, seeing
that they with so great danger of their lives, received and maintained Paul
which was hated throughout all ye world: For else they would never have
sustained ye cruel hatred of the whole world.

Verse. 16. Am I therefore beco^e your enemy, because I tell you the truth?
Here he shows the reason, why he speaks the Galathians so fair. For he
suspecteth that they take him for their enemy, because he had reproved them so
sharply. I pray you (says he) set apart these rebukes, and separate them from
doctrine, and ye shall find that my purpose was not to rebuke you, but to teach
you the truth. In deed I confess that my Epistle is sharp and severe: but by
this severity I go about to call you back again to the truth of the Gospel,
from ye which ye are fallen, and to keep you in the same: therefore apply this
sharpnes and this bitter potio^, not to your persons, but to your disease: And
judge me not to be your enemy in rebuking you so sharply, but rather think
that I am your father. For unless I loved you dearly as my children, and knew
also that I am beloved of you, I would not have reproved you so sharply.

It is the part of a friend, freely to admonish his friend if he do amiss: and
when he is so admonished, if he be wise he is not angry with the other which
has so friendly admonished him and told him the truth, but gives him thanks.
It is commonly seen in the world that truth brings hatred, Truth procures
hatred.
and that he is accounted an enemy which speaks the truth. But amongst
friends it is not so: much less amongst Christians. Seeing therefore I have
reprehended you of mere love, to the end ye might abide in the truth, ye ought
not to be offended with me, nor lose the truth or think me your enemy because
of my fatherly reprehension. All these things are spoken of Paul, to confirm
that which he said before: Be ye as I am: Ye have not hurt me. etc.

Verse. 17. They are ielous over you amiss. etc.
He reproves here the flattery of the false apostles. For Satan is wont by his
ministers, through wonderful subtlety and crafty sleightes to begile the
simple: Romans 16.18.
As Paul says Romans 16. With fair speech and flattering they deceive the
hearts of the simple. For first of all they make great protestations that they
seek nothing else but the aduau^cement of Gods glory: and moreover that they
are moved by the spirit (because the miserable people are neglected, or else
because the truth is not purely taught of others) to teach the infallible
truth, 1. Timot. 2.4.
that by this means the elect may be delivered from error, and may come to
the true light and knowledge of the truth. Moreover, they promise undoubted
salvation to those that receive their doctrine. If vigilant and faithful
pastors do not withstand these ravening wolves, they will do great harm to
ye church under this pretense of godliness and under this sheep clothing.
Math. 7.15.
For ye Galathia^s might say: Why do thou inuey so bitterly against our
teachers, Paul answers here to an objection that might be made against him.
for that they be jealous over us? For that which they do, they do of zeal
and mere love: this ought not to offend thee, etc. In deed (says he) they are
ielous over you, but their jealousy is not good.

Here note that zeal or jealousy, properly signifies an angry love, Zeal.
or, as ye would say, a godly envy. Elias says: I have been very ielous for
the Lord of hosts. After this manner the husband is ielous toward his wife,
2. Reg. 19.1^.
the father toward his son, the brother toward his brother: that is to
say, they love them entierly: yet so that they hate their vices and go about
to amend them. Such a zeal the false Apostles pretended to bear toward the
Galathians. Paul in deed confesses that they were very zealous toward the
Galathians, The simple are deceived by the pretense and fained zeal of
heretics.
but their zeal (says he) was not good. Now, by this color and subtle
pretense the simple are deceived, when these seducers do make them to believe
that they bear a great zeal and affection toward them, and that they bear
a great zeal and affection toward them, and that they are very careful for
them. Paul therefore warns us here to put a difference betwixt a good zeal
and an evil zeal. A good zeal and an evil zeal.
In deed a good zeal is to be commended, but not an evil zeal. I am as
zealous over you (says Paul) as they. Now judge ye which of our zeales is
better, mine or theirs: which is good and godly, which is evil and carnal.
Therefore let not their zeal so easily seduce you. For,

Ver. 17. They would exclude you, that you should altogether love the^.
As if he said: True it is, that they are very zealous toward you, The zeal
of the false apostles.
but by this means they seek that ye again should be zealous toward them,
and reject me. If their zeal were sincere and godly, then surely they would be
content that I also should be beloved of you as well as they. But they hate our
doctrine, and therefore their desire is to have it utterly overthrown, and
their own preached amongst you. Now, to yt end they might bring this to
pass, they go about by this jealousy to pluck your hearts from me, and to
make me odious unto you: to ye end that when ye have conceived an hatred
against me and my doctrine, and turned your affection and zeal toward them,
ye should love them only, and receive no other doctrine but theirs. Thus he
brings the false apostles into suspicion among the Galathians, showing that
by this goodly pretense they go about to deceive them. So our Savior Christ
also warns us, saying: Take heed of false prophets, Math. 7.15.
which come to you in sheep clothing.

Paul suffered ye same tentation which we suffer at this day. He was
maruelously troubled with this enormitie, Many evils followed Paul's doctrine,
notvvithstanding that it was godly and holy.
that after the preaching of his doctrine which was divine and holy, he saw so
many sects, commotio^s, dissipations of commonweals, chau^ges of kingdoms and
such other like things to ensue, which were the cause of infinite evils and
offenses. He was accused of ye Jews to be a pernicious fellow, a mouer of
sedition in his whole nation, Acts. 24.5.
and to be an author of the sect of the Nazarites. As if they had said: This
is a seditious and a blasphemous fellow: for he preaches such things whereby he
not only overthrows ye Jewish common wealth excellently well ordered and
stablished by the laws of God: but also abolisheth even the ten
commandments, the religion and service of God, and our priesthood and
publishes through out the world the Gospel (as he calls it): whereof are
sprung infinite euilles, seditions, offenses, and sects. He is compelled to
hear of ye Gentiles also which cried out against him in Philippi, Acts.
16.20.21.
that he was a troubler of their City, and preached ordinances which were not
lawful for them to receive. etc.

Such troubles of commonweals and other calamities, as famine, The Jews
imputed all evils to the doctrine of the Apostles.
wars, dissensions and Sects, ye Jews and Gentiles imputed to the doctrine
of Paul and of the other Apostles: and therefore they persecuted them as
common plages, and enemies of ye public peace and religion. The Apostles
notwtstanding all this did not cease to do their office, but most constantly
preached and confessed Christ. For they knew yt they should rather obey God
then men: and that it was better that the whole world should be troubled and in
an uproar, Acts. 5.29.
then that Christ should not be preached, or that one soul should be neglected
and perish.

In the mean time it was (no dout) a heavy cross to the Apostles to see these
offenses: for they were not made of iron. It was a wonderful grief unto them
that that people for whose sakes Paul wished to be separate from Christ,
should perish with all their ornaments. They saw that great tumultes and
chaunges of kingdoms should follow their doctrine. Romans 9.3. The Apostles were
the beholders of great evils, not without their great grief.
And (which was more bitter unto them then death it self, but specially to
Paul) they saw that even amongs them there sprang up many Sects. It was
heavy news to Paul, when he heard that the Corinthians denied the
resurrection of the dead: when he heard that the churches which were planted by
his ministry were troubled, that the Gospel was overthrown by the false
apostles, and that all Asia was revolted from his doctrine, and certain great
personages.

But he knew that his doctrine was not ye cause of these offenses and Sects,
The consolation of Paul.
and therefore he was not discouraged: he forsook not his vocation, but went
forward, knowing that ye Gospel which he preached was ye power of God to
salvation to all that believe, Romans 1.16.
howsoever it seemed to ye Jews and Gentiles to be a folish and offensive
doctrine. 1. Cor. 1.23.
He knew that they are blessed which are not offended by this word of the
cross, whether they be teachers or hearers, as Christ himself says: Blessed
is he which is not offended in me. Math. 11.6.
Contrariwise he knew that they were condemned, which judged this doctrine to
be foolish and heretical. Therefore he says as Christ said of the Jews and
Gentiles which were offended with this doctrine: Math. 15.14. All the troubles
which are at this day the world lays unto Luthers charge.
Let the^ alone, they are blind, and leaders of the blind.

We also are constrained at this day to hear the same spoken of us, which was
said of Paul and the other Apostles: to wit, that ye doctrine of the Gospel
which we profess, is the cause of many and great enormities, as of seditions,
wars, sects and innumerable offenses. Yea they impute unto us all the troubles
which are at this day. Surely we teach no heresies or wicked doctrine, but we
preach ye glad tidings co^cerni^g Christ, that he is our high Priest and our
Redemer. Moreover, our adversaries are constrained (if they will confess the
truth) to grant us this, that we have given no occasion through our doctrine,
of seditio^s, wars, or tumults: but always have taught that honor and
reverence must be given to the Magistrate, because God has so commanded.
Neither are we ye authors of offenses: but in that the wicked are offended, the
fault is in themselves and not in us. God has commanded us to preach the
doctrine of the Gospel without any respect of offense. But because this
doctrine condemns the wicked doctrine and idolatry of our adversaries, they
being provoked thereby, breed offenses of themselves, which the Schoolmen
called offenses taken, Offense tak^
which they said ought not to be avoided, nor can be avoided.

Christ taught the Gospel, having no regard to the offense of the Jews.
Suffer the^ (says he): they are blind, and leaders of the blind. Math.
15.14. Acts. 4.31. Acts. 2.21.36. Acts. 2.36. Acts. 4.12.
The more the priests forbad ye Apostles to preach in ye name of Christ, the
more the Apostles gave witness that the same Jesus whom they had crucified, is
both Lord and Christ: and whosoever should call upon him, should be saved:
and that there was none other name given unto men under heaven through which
they could be saved. etc.

Even so we preach Christ at this day, The complaints of the adversaries
against the doctrine of the gospel.
not regarding the clamours of the wicked Papists and all our adversaries:
which cry out that our doctrine is seditious and full of blasphemy, that it
troubles commonweals, overthrows religion, and teaches heresies, and
briefly that it is the cause of all evils. When Christ and his Apostles
preached, John. 11.48.
the same was said likewise of them. Not long after, the Romans came, and
according to their own prophecy, destroyed both the place and ye nation.
Wherefore let the enemies of the Gospel at this day take heed that they be not
overwhelmed with these evils, which they prophecy unto themselves.

These they make grievous and heinous offenses, The Papists justify their
own horrible sins, and condemn our good deeds.
that Monks and priests do marry wives, that we eat flesh upon the fridayes,
and such like. But this is no offense to them at al, that by their wicked
doctrine they seduce and daily destroy innumerable souls, yt by their evil
examples they offend the weak, that they blaspheme and condemn ye gospel of
the glory of the mighty God, and that they persecute and kill those ye love the
sincerity of doctrine and the word of life: this (I say) is to them no
offense, but an obedience, a service and an acceptable sacrifice unto God.
Math. 15.14. Apoc. 22.11.
Let us ^^er them therefore: For they are blind, and leaders of the blind. He
that hurts, let him hurt still, and he that is filthy, let him be more
filthy. But we, because we believe, will speak and set forth the wonderful
works of the Lord so long as we have breath, and will endure ye persecutions of
our adversaries until the time that Christ our high Bishop and King shall come
from heaven, who we hope will come shortly as a just judge to take vengeance
of all those that obey not his Gospel. 1. These. 1.8.
So be it.

With these offenses which the wicked allege, the godly are nothing moved: For
they know that the Devil hates nothing more then the pure doctrine of the
Gospel, The Devil defaceth the gospel with infinite offenses.
and therefore he goes about to deface it with innumerable offenses, that by
this means he might root it out of men's hearts for ever. Before, when
nothing else was taught in the church but man's traditions, the Devil did not so
rage. For whilst the strong man kept the house, all that he possessed was in
peace: but now when a stronger comes which vanquisheth and binds that strong
one and spoileth his house, Luke. 11.21.22.
then he begins to rage in deed. And this is an infallible token, that the
doctrine which we profess is of God. Job. 40.16.
For else (as it is said in ye 40. of Job) that Behemoth would lie hid under
the trees in the covert of the reed and fennes. But now, that he rangeth about
like a roaring Lion and stirs up such hurly burleis, 1. Pet. 5.8.
it is a manifest token that he feels ye power of our preaching.

When Paul says: They are ielous over you, but amiss, he shows by the way
who are the authors of sects: to wit, those ielous spirits which in all
times overthrow the true doctrine, Zealous spirits vvithous knowledge, are the
authors of Sects.
and trouble the public peace. For these being stirred up with a perverse zeal,
imagine that they have a certain singular holiness, modesty, patience and
doctrine above others, and therefore they think that they are able to provide
for ye salvation of all men, yt they can teach more profound and profitable
things, ordain better service and ceremonies then all other teachers besides:
whom they despise as nothing in comparison of themselves, and abase their
authority, and corrupt those things which they have purely taught. The false
apostles had such a wicked and perverse zeal, stirring up sects, not only in
Galatia, but also in all ye places whersoeuer Paul and the other Apostles had
preached: after the which sects followed innumerable offenses and marvelous
troubles. For the Devil (as Christ says) is a lier and a murderer, John. 8.44.
and therefore he is wont, not only to trouble men's consciences by false
doctrine, but also to stir up tumultes, seditions and wars.

There are very many in Germany at this day which are possessed with this
kind of jealousy: which pretend great religion, modesty, doctrine and
patience, and yet in very deed they are ravening wolves: Math. 7.15.
who with their hypocrisy seek nothing else but to discredit us, that the
people might esteem, love, and reverence them only, and receive no other
doctrine but theirs. Now, because these men have a great opinion of them selves
and despise other, it can not be but that there must needs follow horrible
dissentions, sects, divisions and seditions. But what should we do? We can
not remedy this matter: as Paul could not do in hi time. Notwithstanding he
gained some which obeyed his admonitions. So I hope also that we have called
some back from the errors of the Sectaries.

Verse. 18. But it is a good thing to love earnestly alvvayes in a good thing,
and not only when I am present with you.
As if he should say: I commend you for this, that ye loved me so entirely when
I preached the Gospel amongst you in the infirmity of ye flesh. Ye ought to
have borne ye same affection toward me now when I am absent, eue^ as if I had
never departed from you. For although I be absent in body, yet have ye my
doctrine, which ye ought to retain and maintain, seeing ye received ye holy
ghost through it: thinking with your selves that Paul is always present with you
as long as ye have his doctrine. I do not therefore reprehend your zeal, but I
praise it, and so far forth I praise it, as it is the zeal of God or of the
spirit, The zeal of the spirit, and the zeal of the flesh.
and not of the flesh. Now, the zeal of the spirit is always good: for it is
an earnest affection and motion of the heart to a good thing, and so is not ye
zeal of the flesh. He commends therefore the zeal of the Galathians, that
thereby he may pacify their minds, and that they may patiently suffer his
correction. As if he would say: Take my correction in good part: for it
proceeds not of an angry but of a sorrowful heart and careful for your
salvation. A lively picture of a faith full pastor.
This is a lively example to teach all ministers how to be careful for their
sheep, and to assay every way, that by chiding, fair speaking or entreating,
they may retain them in sound doctrine, and turn them from subtle seducers
and false teachers.

Verse. 19. My little children, of whom I travail in birth again, until
Christ be formed in you.
All his words are weighty and fitly framed to the purpose, that they may
move the hearts of the Galathians, and win their favor and good will again.
And these are sweet and loving words, when he calls them his children. When
he says: of whom I travail in birth, it is an allegory. For the Apostles
are in the stead of parents: as Scholemasters also are in their place and
calling. The Apostles are parents.
For as the parents beget the bodily form, even so the other beget the form
of the mind. The form of a Christian mind, and how it is gotten.
Now, the form of a Christian mind is Faith, or the confidence of the heart
which lays hold upon Christ and cleaves to him alone and to nothing else.
The heart being furnished with this confidence or assurance, to wit, that for
Christ's sake we are righteous, has the true form of Christ. Now, this form
is given by the ministry of the word, 1. Cor. 4.15.
as it is said. 1. Corrinthians. 4: I have begotten you through the Gospel,
that is to say, in spirit, that ye might know Christ and believe in him. 1.
Cor. 3.3.
Also. 2. Corrinthians. 3. Ye are the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us and
written, not with incke, but with the spirit of the living God. For the
word comes from the mouth of the Apostle or of the minister, and enters into
the heart of him that hears it: There the holy Ghost is present, and
emprinteth the word in the heart, so that it consents unto it. Thus every
godly teacher is a father, which engenders and forms the true shape of a
Christian heart, and that by the ministry of the word.

Moreover, by these words: of whom I travail in birth, he touches the false
apostles. As though he would say: I did beget you rightly through the Gospel,
but these corrupters have formed a new shape in your heart, not of Christ, but
of Moses: so that now your affiance is not grounded any more upon Christ, but
upon the works of the law. This is not the true form of Christ, but it is
an other form, and altogether deuilish. And he says not: of whom I travail
in birth until my form be fashioned in you, but until Christ be formed in
you: The form of Christ.
that is to say, I travail that ye may receive again the form and similitude
of Christ, and not of Paul. In which words he again reproves the false
apostles: For they had abolished the form of Christ in the hearts of the
beleuers, and had devised an other form, that is to say, their own: As he
says. Chap. 6. They would have you circumcised, that they might rejoice in
your flesh. Galath. ^.13.


Of this form of Christ he speaks also in the third to the Colossians: Put
ye on the nevve man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him
that created him. Coloss. 3.10.
Paul therefore goes about to repair the form of Christ in the Galathians
that was disfigured and corrupted by the false apostles: which is, Who be like
to God.
that they should think, speak and will, as God does, whose thought and will
is, that we should obtain remission of our sins and everlasting life by
Jesus Christ his only Son, whom he sent into the world to the end he might
be the propiciation for our sins, and that we should know that through this
his son he is appeased and become our loving father. They that believe this
are like unto God: that is to say, all their thoughts are of God, as the
affection of their heart is: they have the same form in their mind which God
or Jesus Christ has. This is to be renewed in the spirit of our mind, and
to put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, as Paul says, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.24.


He says then, that he traueileth again of the Galathians in birth:
notwithstanding in such sort, that the form of the children be not the form
of the Apostle: so that the children should not resemble the form of Paul, or
of Cephas, etc. but of an other Father, that is to say, Christ. I will fashion
him (says he) in you, to the end ye may be like minded in all things unto
Christ himself. To be brief: Philip. 2.5^
I travel of you in birth: that is to say, I labor carefully to call you
back again to your former Faith the which ye have lost (being deceived by the
craft and subteltie of the false apostles) and are returned to the law and
works. Therefore I must now again carefully travel to bring you back from
the law to the Faith of Christ. This he calls to travel in birth. etc.

Verse. 20. And I would I were with you now, that I might change my voice.
etc.
These are the true cares of an Apostle. It is a common saying, An Epistle or
letter is a dead messenger.
that a letter is a dead messenger: for it can give no more then it has. And
no Epistle or letter is written so exactly wherein there is not somewhat
lacking. For the circumstances are diverse: there is a diversity of times,
places, persons, manners and affections: all which no Epistle can express:
Therefore it moves the reader diversely, making him now sad, now merry, as he
him self is disposed. But if any thing be spoken sharply or out of time, ye
lively voice of a man may expound, mitigate, or correct the same. Therefore the
Apostle wishes that he were with them, to the end he might temper and change
his voice, as he should see it needful by the qualities of their affections.
As, if he should see any of them very much troubled he might so temper his
words, that they should not be oppressed thereby, with more heaviness:
Contrariwise if he should see others high minded, he might sharply reprehend
them; lest they should be too secure and careless, and so at length become
contemners of God.

Wherefore he could not devise how he being absent, should deal with them by
letters. As if he should say: If my Epistle be to sharp, I fear I shall more
offend then amend some of you. Again: if it be too gentle, it will not
profit those which are perverse and obstinate: For dead letters and words
give no more then they have. Contrariwise the lively voice of a man compared to
an Epistle, is a Queen: For it can add and diminish, it can change it self
in to all manner of affections, times, places and persons. To be brief, I would
gladly convert you by letters, that is to say, call you back from the law to
the Faith of Jesus Christ: but I fear that I shall not so do by my dead
letters. But if I were with you, I could change my voice, I could reprove them
bitterly that are obstinate, and comfort the weak with sweet and loving
words, as occasion should require.

Verse. 20. For I am troubled for you.
That is to say: I am so troubled in my spirit, that I know not how by letters
to behave my self toward you. Here is a lively description of the true
affections of an Apostle. He omitteth nothing: he chideth the Galathians: he
entreats them: he speaks them fair: he highly commends their Faith,
laboring by all means to bring them back again to the truth of the Gospel,
The true affections of an Apostle.
and to deliver them out of the snares of the false apostles. These are
vehement words, proceeding from a heart stirred up and enflamed with a hot
burning zeal, and therefore ought diligently to be considered.

Verse. 21. Tell me, ye that will be under the law, do ye not hear the
law?
Here would Paul have closed up his Epistle: for he desired not to write any
more, but rather to be present with the Galathians, and to speak unto them him
self. But he being in great perplexity and very careful for this matter,
takes by the way this allegory, The use of allegories and similitudes.
which then came into his mind. For the people are greatly delighted with
allegories and similitudes, and therefore Christ himself oftentimes uses
them. For they are as it were certain pictures which set forth things as if
they were painted before the eyes of the simple, and therefore they move and
persuade very much, especially the simple and ignorant. First therefore he
stirs up the Galathians with words and wrytings: Secondly he painteth out
the matter it self before their eyes with this goodly allegory.

Now, How Paul handles allegories.
Paul was a marvelous cunning workman in handling of allegories: For he is
wont to apply them to the doctrine of Faith, to grace and to Christ, and not
to the law and the works thereof, as Origin and Hierom do, Origin and Hierom.
who are worthily reprehended for that they turned the plain sentences of the
Scripture, where allegories have no place, into unfit and foolish allegories.
Therefore to use allegories it is oftentimes a very dangerous thing. For
unless a man have the perfect knowledge of Christian doctrine, he can not use
allegories rightly and as he should do.

But why does Paul call the book of Genesis, Why Paul calls the book of
Genesis the law.
out of the which he aleageth the history of Ismael and of Isaac, the law,
seeing that book contains nothing at all concerning the law: and specially
that place which he aledgeth speaks not of any law, but only contains a
plain history of Abraham's two children. Paul is wont to call the first book
of Moses the law after the manner of the Jews, which although it co^taine no
law besides the law of circumcision, but the principal doctrine thereof is
concerning Faith, and that the Patriarchs pleased God because of their Faith,
yet the Jews notwithstanding, only because of the law of circumcision which
is there contained, called the book of Genesis the law, as well as the other
books of Moses. So did Paul him self also being a Jew. And Christ under the
title of the law, comprehends not only the books of Moses, but also ye
Psalms. John 15. But it is, John. 15.25. Psalm 35.19.
that the word might be fulfilled which is vvrytten in their law: They
hated me without a cause.

Verse. 22.23. For it is vvrytten, that Abraham had two sons, one by a
servant, and one by a free woman. But he which was of the servant was
borne after the flesh: and he which was of the free woman, was borne after
the spirit.
As if he said: Ye forsake grace, Faith and Christ, and turn back again to
the law: ye will be under the law, and become wise through it. Therefore I
will talk with you of the law. I pray you then, Abraham's two sons.
consider the law diligently. Ye shall find that Abraham had two sons,
Ismael by Agar, and Isaac by Sara. They were both the true sons of Abraham.
Ismael was as well the true son of Abraham as Isaac was, for both came of
one father, of one flesh, and of one Seed. Ismael was a son after the
flesh, and Isaac after the promise.
What was then the difference? This makes not the difference (says Paul)
that the mother of one was free, and the other bond (albeit it pertains to
the allegory): but that Ismael which was borne of the bondwoman, was borne
after the flesh, that is to say, without the promise and the word of God. An
objection.
But Isaac was not only borne of the freewoman, The answer.
but also according to the promise. What the^? Yet was Isaac notwithstanding
as well borne of the seed of Abraham as Ismael was. I grant that they were
both the children of one father, Both Isaac and Ismael were the children of
one father.
and yet notwithstanding there is a difference. For although Isaac were borne
of the flesh, yet the promise went before. None observed this difference but
only Paul, which he gathered out of the text of Genesis after this manner.
Genes. 16.2.


In that Agar conceived and brought forth Ismael, there was no word of God that
foreshewed that this should come to pass: but by the permission of Sara,
Abraham went in to his servant Agar, whom Sara being barren had given to wife
to Abraham, as is said in the book of Genesis. Sara had hard the promise of
God as concerning the sede, but she vvaiteth not gods appointed time.
For Sara had heard that Abraham by the promise of God, should have seed of
his body, and she hoped that she should be the mother of this seed. But when
she had waited now for the promise many years with great anguish of spirit,
and saw that the matter was so long differred, she was out of hope. This holy
woman therefore gives place for the honor of her husband, Sara resigneth up
her right.
and resigneth her right to an other, that is to say, to her maid.
Notwithstanding she suffers not her husband to marry an other wife out of his
house, but she gives unto him in marriage her servant, to the end that she
might be builded by her: For so says the history, Genesis 16.1.2. etc.
Genes. 16. Now Sara Abraham's wife bare him no children, and she had a maid
an Egyptian, Agar by name. And Sara said unto Abraham: Behold now the Lord
has restrained me from child bearing. I pray thee go in to my maid: it may
be that I shall be builded by her. The humility of Sara.
This was a great humility of Sara, who so abased her self, and took in good
part this tentation and trial of her faith. For thus she thought. God is no
lier: that which he has promised to my husband he will surely perform. But
peradventure God will not that I shall be the mother of that Seed. It shall
not grieve me that Agar should have this honor, unto whom let my Lord enter:
for I may peradventure be builded by her.

Ismael therefore is borne without the word and promise at the only request of
Sara. Ismael the son of Abraham according to the flesh.
For there is no word of God which commanded Abraham thus to do, or promised
unto him a son, but all this is done at That is said to be done at adventure
or by chance, whereof man knovveth not the cause: although unto God it be
foreknovvne and appointed. Romans 9.8.
adventure: which the words do also declare: It may be (says she) that I
shall be builded by her. Seeing therefore there was no word of God spoken to
Abraham before, as there was when Sara should bring forth Isaac, but only the
word of Sara: it is evident enough that Ismael was the son of Abraham after
the flesh only, without the word of God: therefore he was borne at adventure,
and unlooked for as an other child is. This Paul observed and diligently
considered.

In the.9. Chapt. to the Romans he prosecuteth the same argument which here
he repeteth and sets forth in an allegory, and concludes strongly, that
all the sons of Abraham are not the sons of God. Abraham (says he) has
two sorts of children. Abraham has two sorts of children.
Some are borne of his flesh and blood, but the word and promise of God goes
before, as Isaac. Other are borne without the promise, as Ismael. Therefore the
children of the flesh (says he) are not the children of God, but the children
of the promise, etc. And by this argument he mightily stops ye mouths of
the proud Jews, which gloried that they were the seed and children of
Abraham: As also Christ does in the.3. of Math. and in the 8. of John. As if he
said: It follows not: I am the carnal sede of Abraham, therefore I am ye child
of God. Esau is ye natural son, therefore the heir. Nay rather (says he)
they that will be the children of Abraham, besides their carnal birth, must be
also the sons of the promise, and must believe. And they are the true children
of Abraham, Who be the true sons of Abraham.
and consequently of God, who have the promise and believe.

But Ismael, because he was not promised of God to Abraham, is a son after
the flesh only, and not after the promise, and therefore he was borne at
adventure as other children be. For no mother knows whether she shall have a
child or no, Note this concerning the mother.
or if she perceive her self to be with child, yet she can not tell whether it
shall be a son or a daughter. But Isaac was expressly named, Genes. 17.19.
Genesis. 17. Sara thy wife (says the angel to Abraham) shall bear thee a
son, and thou shall call his name Isaac. The mother and the son are
expressly named.
Here the son and the mother are expressly named. Thus, for this humility of
Sara, because she gave up her right and suffered the contempt of Agar, Genesis.
16. God requited her with this honor, that she should be the mother of the
promised son. etc.

Verse. 24. The which things are spoken by allegories.
An allegory is that vvherby one thing is spoken, and an other thing is meant.
Allegories do not strongly prove and persuade in Divinity, but as certain
pictures they beutifie and set out the matter. For if Paul had not proved
the righteousness of Faith against the righteousness of works by strong and
pithie arguments, he should have little prevailed by this allegory. But because
he had fortified his cause before with invincible arguments taken of
experience, What account is to be made of allegories.
of the example of Abraham, the testimonies of the Scripture, and similitudes:
now, in the end of his disputation he adds an allegory, to give a beauty
to all the rest. For it is a seemly thing sometime to add an allegory when
the foundation is well laid and the matter thoroughly proved. For as painting is
an ornament to set forth and garnish an house already builded: so is an
allegory the light of a matter which is already otherwise proved and confirmed.

Verse. 24.25. For these mothers are the two They are called two couenaunts,
one of the old, another of the new testament although in very deed they are
not two, but are so called in respect of the times.
Testamentes: the one which is Agar of mount Syna, which engenders unto
bondage. (For Agar or Syna is a mountain in Arabia.
Abraham is a figure of God.
Abraham is a figure of God, which has two sons, that is to say, two sorts
of people are represented by Ismael and Isaac. These two are borne unto him by
Agar and Sara, the which signify the two Testaments, Two sorts of people.
the old and the new. The old is of mount Syna, begetting unto bondage, Two
testaments.
which is Agar. For the Arabians in their language call Agar the same mountain
which the Jews call Sina (which seems to have that name of brambles and
thorns): Sina.
Agar.
which also Ptolomaeus and the Greek commentaries do witness. After the same
manner diverse names are given to many mountains, according to the diversity of
nations. Hermon.
So the mount which Moses calls Hermon, of the Sidonians is called Sirion,
and of the Amorites Senir.

Now, this serves very well to the purpose, that mount Sina in ye Arabians
language signifies as much as an handmaid: and I think the likeness of this
name gave Paul light and occasion to seek out this allegory. Agar brought
forth a son, not an heir but a servant.
Likewise then as Agar the bondmaid brought forth to Abraham a son, and yet
not an heir but a servant, so Sina the allegorical Agar, brought forth to
God a son, that is to say, a carnal people. Again, as Ismael was the true
son of Abraham, Sina brought unto God a son, but a carnal people.
so the people of Israel had the true God to be their father, which gave them
his law, his oracles, religion and true service, and the temple: as it is said
in the Psalm. 147: He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel. Psalm. 147.19.
Notwithstanding this only was the difference: Ismael was borne of a bondmaid
after the flesh, that is to say, without the promise, and could not therefore be
the heir. So the mystical Agar, that is to say, The people of the law.
mount Sina where the law was given and the old Testament ordained, brought
forth to God, who is yt great Abraham, a people, but without the promise, that
is to say, a carnal and a servile people, and not the heir of God. For the
promises as touching Christ the geuer of all Blessing, and as touching the
deliverance from the curse of the law, from sin and death: also as touching
the free remission of our sins, of righteousness and everlasting life, are not
added to the law, but the law says: Romans 10.5.
He that shall do these things shall live in them.

Therefore the promises of the law are conditional, The promises of the law
and the gospel.
promising life, not freely, but to such as fulfill the law, and therefore they
leave men's consciences in doubt: for no man fulfilleth the law. But the
promises of the new Testament have no such condition joined unto them, nor
require any thing of us, nor depend upon any condition of our worthiness, but
bring and give unto us freely forgeuenes of sins, grace, righteousness and
life everlasting for Christ's sake, as I have said more largely in an other
place.

Therefore the law or the old Testament contains only conditional promises:
for it has always such conditions as these are, The promises of God in the
law are conditional. Deuteronomy. 26.1. etc.
joined to it: If ye harken to my voice: If ye keep my statutes: if ye walk
in my vvayes, ye shall be my people. etc. The Jews not considering this, How
the Jews took the promises of God.
laid hold of those conditional promises as if they had been absolute and
without all condition: which they supposed that God could never revoke, but must
needs keep them. Hereupon, when they heard the Prophets foreshew the
destruction of the city of Jerusalem, of the temple, of the kingdom and
priesthood (which could well discern betwixt the corporal promises of the
law, and the spiritual promises concerning Christ and his kingdom): The
Jews persecuted the Prophets.
they persecuted and killed them as heretics and blasphemers of God: For they
saw not the condition that was annexed: If ye keep my commandments, it
shall go well with you. etc.

The law brings forth bondmen, or bondseruau^ts
Therefore Agar the bondmaid brings forth but a bond servant. Ismael then is
not the heir, although he be the natural son of Abraham, but remains a
bondsman. What is here lacking? The promise and Blessing of the word. So the
law given in mount Sina, which the Arabians call Agar, begets none but
servants. For the promise made as concerning Christ, was not annexed to the
law. Wherefore (O ye Galathians) if ye, forsaking the promise and faith, fall
back to the law and works, ye shall always continue servant: that is, ye
shall never be delivered from sin and death, but ye shall always abide under
the curse of the law. For Agar gendreth not the seed of the promise and
heirs, The law makes not heirs, neither does it justify.
that is to say, the law justifies not: it brings not the adoption and
inheritance, but rather it hinders the inheritance, and works wrath.

Verse. 25. And it answers to Jerusalem which now is, and she is in
bondage with her children.
This is a wonderful allegory. As Paul a little before made Agar of Sina, so
now of Jerusalem he would gladly make Sara: but he dares not, neither can he
so do: but is compelled to join Ierusasalem with mount Sina. For he says:
The same belongs to Agar, seeing mount Agar reaches even to Jerusalem. And
it is true that there be continual mountains reaching from Arabia Petrea,
unto Cades Bernea of Jury. He says then that this Jerusalem which now is,
that is to say, this earthly and temporal Jerusalem is not Sara: but
pertains to Agar: The earthly Jerusalem pertains to Agar.
for there Agar reigns. For in it is the law begetting unto bondage: in it is
the worship and ceremonies, the temple, the kingdom, the Priesthood: and
whatsoever was ordained in Sina by the mother which is the law, That which
was ordained in Sina, was kept in Jerusalem.
the same is done in Jerusalem. Therefore I join her with Sina, and I
comprehend both in one word, to wit, Sina or Agar.

I durst not have been so bold to handle this allegory after this manner, but
would rather have called Jerusalem Sara or the new Testament, especially seeing
the preaching of the Gospel began in it, the holy Ghost was there given, and
the people of the new Testament were there borne: and I would have thought that
I had found out a very fit allegory. It is not for every man to dally with
allegories.
Wherefore it is not for every man to use allegories at his pleasure: for a
goodly outward show may soon deceive a man and cause him to err. Who would
not think it a very fit thing to call Sina Agar, and Jerusalem Sara? Two
Ierusalems, an heavenly and an earthly.
In deed Paul makes Jerusalem Sara, but not this corporal Jerusalem, which
he simply joins unto Agar: but that spiritual and heavenly Jerusalem in
which the law reigns not nor the carnal people, Sara the heavenly Jerusalem.
as in that Jerusalem which is in bondage with her children, but wherein the
promise reigns, wherein is also a spiritual and a free people.

And to the end that the law should be quite abolished, and that whole
kingdom which was established in Agar: The earthly Jerusalem destroyed.
the earthly Jerusalem was horribly destroyed, with all her ornaments, ye temple,
ye ceremonies. etc. Now, although ye new testament began in it, and so was
spread through out the whole world, notwtstanding it appertains to Agar: that
is to say, it is the city of the law, The city of the law.
of ye ceremonies and of ye priesthood instituted by Moses. Briefly it is
gendred of Agar the bondwoman, and therefore is in bondage with her children,
that is to say: The earthly Jerusalem in bondage.
it walks in the works of the law, and never attaineth to the liberty of
the spirit, but abides continually under the law, sin, an evil conscience,
the wrath and judgment of God, and under the gilt of death and hell. In deed
it has the liberty of the flesh, it has a corporal kingdom, Jerusalem had a
corporal kingdom for a time.
it has magistrates, riches, and possessions, and such like things: but we
speak of the liberty of the spirit, whereby we are dead to the law, to sin
and death, and we live and reign in grace, forgeuenes of sins, righteousness
and everlasting life. This can not the earthly Jerusalem perform, and
therefore it abides with Agar.

Verse. 26. But Jerusalem which is above, is free: which is the mother of us
all.
That earthly Jerusalem (says he) which is beneath, having the policy and
ordinances of the law is Agar, and is in bondage with her children: that is to
say, she is not delivered from the law, sin and death. But Jerusalem, which
is above, that is to say, the spiritual Jerusalem, is Sara (albeit Paul
adds not the proper name of Sara, but gives her an other name, calling her
the free woman), that is to say, that true Lady and freewoman, which is the
mother of us all, begetting us unto liberty, and not unto bondage as Agar does.

Now, this heavenly Jerusalem which is above, is the Church, that is to say,
Who are the citizens of the church.
the Faithful dispersed through out the whole world: which have one and the same
Gospel, one and the same Faith in Christ, the same holy Ghost, and the same
Sacraments.

Above.
Therefore understand not this word [Aboue] of the triumphant Church (as the
Schoolmen do) which is heaven: The church triumphant and militant.
but of the militant church in earth, as they call it. For the godly are said
to have their conversation in heaven, Philip. 3. Our conversation is in heaven,
not locally: Philip. 3.20.
but in that a Christian believes, in that he lays hold of those
inestimable, heavenly and eternal gifts he is in heaven, Ephesians. 1. Which
has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ.
Ephesians. 1.3.
We must therefore distinguish ye heavenly and spiritual Blessing from the
earthly. The earthly and heavenly blessing.
For the earthly Blessing is to have a good civil government both in commonweals and families: to have children, peace, riches, fruits of the earth, and
other corporal commodities. But the heavenly Blessing is to be delivered from
the law, The heavenly blessing.
sin, and death: to be justified and quickened to life: to have peace with
God: to have a faithful heart, a joyful conscience, and spiritual
consolation: to have the knowledge of Jesus Christ: to have the gift of
Prophecy and the revelation of the Scriptures: to have the gifts of the holy
Ghost, and to rejoice in God. These are the heavenly blessings which Christ
gives to his Church.

Wherefore Jerusalem which is above, that is to say, the heavenly Jerusalem is
the church which is now in the world: and not the city of the life to come,
The interpretation of the Monks.
or the Church triumphant, as the idle and unlearned Monks and the
Schooledoctors dreamed, which taught that the Scripture has four senses: the
literal sense, the figurative sense, the allegorical sense, The four senses
of the scripture, according to the Papists.
and the moral sense, and according to these senses they have foolishly
interpreted almost all the words of the Scriptures. As this word Jerusalem
literally signified that city which was so named: figuratively a pure
conscience: allegorically ye church milita^t: morally the celestial City or
the church triumphant. With these trifeling and foolish fables, they rent the
Scriptures into so many and diverse senses, that seely poor consciences could
receive no certain doctrine of any thing. But Paul says here that the old
and earthly Jerusalem belongs unto Agar, The heavenly Jerusalem which is yet
upon earth.
and that it is in bondage with her children, and is utterly abolished. But the
new and heavenly Jerusalem, which is a Queen and a freewoma^, is appointed of
god in earth and not in heaven, to be the mother of us all, of whom we have
been engendered, and yet daily are gendred. Therefore it is necessary that this
our mother should be in earth among men, as also her generation is.
Notwithstanding she gendreth by the holy Ghost, by the ministry of the word
and sacraments, and not in the flesh.

This I say to the end that in this matter we should not be carried away with
our cogitations into heaven, but that we should know that Paul sets the
Jerusalem which is above, The heavenly Jerusalem is set against the earthly,
not locally but spiritually.
against the earthly Jerusalem, not locally but spiritually. For there is a
distinction between those things which are spiritual, and those which are
corporal or earthly. The spiritual things are above, the earthly are beneath:
So Jerusalem which is above, is distinguished from the carnal and temporal
Jerusalem which is beneath, not locally (as I have said) but spiritually. For
this spiritual Jerusalem which took her beginning in the corporal Jerusalem,
The spiritual Jerusalem dispersed thorovv out the whole world
has not any certain place as has the other in Judea: but it is dispersed
through out the whole world, and may be in Babylon, in Turkey, in Tartarie, in
Scythia, in Judea, in Italy, in Germany, in the Isles of the sea, in the
mountains and valleis, and in all places of the world where men dwell which
have the Gospel and believe in Jesus Christ.

Wherefore Sara or Jerusalem our free mother, is the Church it self, the spouse
of Christ, of whom we all are gendred. This mother gendreth free children
without ceasing to the end of the world, as long as she exercises the
Ministry of the word, that is to say, as long as she preaches and publishes
the Gospel: for this is truly to gender. Now, she teaches the Gospel after
this manner: to wit, that we are delivered from the Curse of the law, from
sin, death and all other evils through Jesus Christ, and not by the law,
neither by works. Therefore Jerusalem which is above, that is to say, the
Church, is not subject to the law and works, but she is free and a mother,
without the law, sin and death. Now, such a mother as she is, such children
she gendreth.

This allegory teaches very aptly that the Church should do nothing else but
preach and teach the Gospel truly and sincerely, The Church begets
children by teaching.
and by this means should gender children. So, we are all fathers and children
one to an other: For we are begotten one of an other. I being begotten by other
through the Gospel, do now beget other, which shall also beget other
hereafter: and so this begetting shall endure to the end of the world. Now, I
speak of the generation, not of Agar the bondmaid, which gendreth her
bondseruauntes by the law, but of Sara the freewoman, who gendreth heirs
without the law, and without man's works or endeavors. For in that Isaac is
heir and not Ismael (albeit notwithstanding that both of them were the
natural sons of Abraham) Isaac had the inheritance by the word of promise,
Isaac is heir through the promise. Genes. 17.19.
namely: Sara thy wife shall bring thee a son, and thou shall call his name
Isaac. This did Sara well understand, and therefore she says: Cast out the
bondvvoman and her son: And Paul also aledgeth these words afterward.
Wherefore as Isaac has ye inheritance of his father only by the promise and by
his birth, without the law and without works: even so we are borne through the
Gospel of that freewoma^ Sara, true heirs of the promise. She, that is to say,
the church enstrueteth us, nourishes us, and carries us in her womb, in her
lap, and in her arms: she forms and fashioneth us to the image of Christ,
Ephesians. 4.13.
until we grow up to a perfect man, etc. So all things are done by the
ministry of the word. Wherefore the office of the freewoman is to gender
children to God her husband without ceasing and without end: that is to say,
such children as know that they are justified by Faith and not by the law.

Esaias. 54.1.
Verse. 27. For it is vvrytten: Rejoice thou barren that bear no children:
break forth and cry thou that trauailest not: for the desolate have many more
children then she which has an husband.
Paul aledgeth this place out of Esaias the Prophet, which is altogether
allegorical. Esaias. 54.
It is written (says he) that the mother of many children, and she which has
an husband must be sick and die and contrariwise, that the barren and she
which has no children, must have abundance of children. After the same manner
Hanna sings in her song, out of yt which Esaias ye Prophet took his Prophecy,
1. Sam. 2. The bow and the mighty men are broken, The song of Anna. 1. Sam.
2.4.5.
and the vveake have girded them selves with strength. They that were full
are hired forth for bread, and the hungry are no more hired, so that the
barren has borne seven: and she that had many children is feeble. A marvelous
matter (says he): she that was fruitful shall be made barren, and she that was
barren fruitful. Moreover, such as before were strong, full, rich, glorious,
righteous and blessed, shall become feeble, hungry, poor, ignominious,
sinners, subject to death and damnation: And contrariwise the feeble and
hungry, etc. shall be strong and satisfied, etc.

The Apostle shows by this allegory of the Prophet Esaias, the difference
which is betwixt Agar and Sara, that is to say, The difference betwixt the
sinagoge and the church.
betwixt the sinagoge and the church, or betwixt the law and the Gospel. The
law being the husband of the fruitful woman, that is to say, of the sinagoge,
begets very many children. For men of all ages, not only idiotes, but also
the wisest and best (that is to say, all mankind except the children of the
freewoman) do neither see nor know any other righteousness then the
righteousness of the law: much less do they know any which is more excellent:
Wherefore they think them selves righteous if they follow the law and
outwardly perform the works thereof.

Now, although these be fruitful, have many disciples, and shine in the
righteousness and glorious works of the law: yet notwithstanding they be not
free but bondseruauntes: For they are the children of Agar, which gendreth to
bondage. Now, if they be servants, they can not be pertakers of the
inheritance, John. 8 3^.
but shall be cast out of the house: for servants remain not in the house
for ever: Yea, they are already cast out of the kingdom of grace and liberty.
For he that believes not, is judged already. John. 3.18.
They remain therefore under the malediction of the law, under sin and
death, under the power of the Devil, and under the wrath and judgment of God.

Now, if the Moral law it self or the ten commandments of God, can do
nothing else but gender servants, that is to say, can not justify, but only
terrify, accuse, condemn, and drive men's consciences to desperation: 1.
Timot. 4.1.
how then (I pray you) shall the laws of men, or the laws of the Pope
justify, which are the doctrines of Devils? They therefore that teach and
set forth either the traditions of men, or the law of God as necessary to
obtain righteousness before God: do nothing else but gender servants. The
teachers of the law gender bond-seruaunts.
Notwithstanding such teachers are counted the best men: they obtain the
favor of the world, and are most fruitful mothers: for they have an infinite
number of disciples. For man's reason understands not what Faith and true
godliness is, Reason is taken with hypocrisy.
and therefore it neglects and despises it, and is naturally addicted to
superstition and hypocrisy, that is to say, to the righteousness of works.
Now, because this righteousness shines and flourishes every where, therefore
it is as a mighty Emperesse of the whole world. They therefore which teach the
righteousness of works by the law, beget many children which outwardly seem
to be free, and have a glorious show of excellent virtues, but in conscience
they are servants and bondslaues of sin: therefore they are to be cast out
of the house and condemned.

Contrariwise Sara the freewoman, that is to say, the true church seems to be
barren. The church seems to be barren. 1. Cor. 1.18.
For the Gospel which is the word of the cross and affliction, which the
Church preaches, shines not so brightly as the doctrine of the law and
works, and therefore she has not so many disciples to cleave unto her.
Moreover, she bears this title, that she forbids good works, The Gospel
has but fevv disciples.
makes men secure, idle, and negligent, raises up heresies and seditions, and
is the cause of all mischief: and therefore she seems to bring no success
or prosperity, but all things seem to be full of barennes, desolation and
desperation. Therefore the wicked are certainly persuaded, that the church with
her doctrine can not long endure. The Jews assured themselves that the church
which was planted by the Apostles, should shortly be overthrown: the which by
an odious name they called a Sect. For thus they speak to Paul in the.28.
Chapter of yt Acts. Acts. 21.22. How many years, days and times have our
Papists appointed when the gospel should be ouerthrovne, and they receive
their idolatrous Mass and other abominations again?
As concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. In
like manner how often (I pray you) have our adversaries ben deceived, which
somewhiles appointed one time, and somewhiles an other, when we should be
certainly destroyed? Christ and his Apostles were oppressed: but after their
death the doctrine of the Gospel was further spread abroad then it was during
their life. In like manner our adversaries may oppress us at this day but the
word of God shall abide for ever. How much so ever then the church seem to be
barren and forsaken, weak and despised, and outwardly to suffer persecution:
and moreover be compelled to hear this reproach, that her doctrine is heretical
and seditious: notwithstanding she alone is fruitful before God: she gendreth
by the ministry of the word an infinite number of children, heirs of
righteousness and everlasting life: And although outwardly they suffer
persecution, yet in spirit they are most free: who not only are judges over
all doctrines and works, but also are most victorious conquerours against the
gates of hell.

The church in heaviness.
The Prophet therefore confesses, that the church is in heaviness, for else he
would not exhort her to rejoice. He grants that she is barren before the
world: For else he would not call her barren and forsaken, having no children:
but before God he says she is fruteful, and therefore he bids her rejoice.
As though he would say: The church barren before the world.
Thou art in deed forsaken and barren, and have not the law for thy husband,
and therefore thou have no children. But rejoice: for although thou have not
the law for thy husband, but art forsaken as a virgin that is ready to marry
(for he will not call her widow) which should have an husband if she were not
forsaken of him, or if he were not slain: thou (I say) which art solitary and
forsaken of thy husband the law, and not subject to the marriage of the law,
shall be a mother of innumerable children. The people of grace.
Wherefore the people or the Church of the new Testament is altogether without
the law as touching the conscience, and therefore she seems to be forsaken in
the sight of the world. But although she seem to be never so barren without
the law and without works, yet notwithstanding she is most fruitful before
God, and brings forth an infinite nombre of children, not in bondage but in
freedom. By what means? Not by the law, but by the word and spirit of Jesus
Christ which is given by the Gospel, through which she conceaueth, brings
forth and nourishes her children.

Paul therefore plainly shows by this allegory the difference betwixt the
law and the Gospel: The difference betwixt the law and the gospel.
First when he calls Agar the old Testament, and Sara the new: Again, when
he calls the one a bondmaind, the other a freewoman: Moreover, when he says
that the married and fruitful is become barren and cast out of the house with
her children. Contrariwise the barren and forsaken is become fruitful, and
brings forth an infinite number of children, and those also inheritours. By
these differences are resembled the two sorts of people, of Faith and of the
law I mean. The people of Faith have not the law for their husband, they
serve not in bondage, they are not borne of that mother Jerusalem which now is:
but they have the promise, they are free, and are borne of free Sara.

He separateth therefore the spiritual people of the new Testament from the
other people of the law, when he says that the spiritual people are not the
children of Agar the bondmaid, but of Sara the freewoman, which knows nothing
of ye law. And by this means he places the people of faith far above and
without the law. Now, if they be above and without the law, then are they
justified by the spiritual birth only, which is nothing else but Faith: and
not by the law or by the works thereof. Now, as the people of grace, neither
have, nor can have the law: so the people of the law neither have nor can
have grace: The people of grace without the law, and the people of the law
without grace.
for it is impossible that the law and grace should stand together. Therefore
we must be justified by faith, and lose the righteousness of the law: or else be
justified by the law, and lose the righteousness of Faith. But this is a foul
and a lamentable loss, to lose grace and to return to the law. Contrariwise
it is an happy and blessed loss, to lose the law, and lay hold of grace.

We therefore (following the example and diligence of Paul) do endeavor as
much as is possible, to set forth plainly the difference betwixt the law and
the Gospel: which is very easy as touching the words. For who sees not that
Agar is not Sara, and that Sara is not Agar? Also, that Ismael is not Isaac,
and that he has not that which Isaac has? A man may easily discern these
things: but in great terrors and in the agony of death, when the conscience
wrastleth with the judgment of God, it is the hardest thing of all others to
say with a sure and a steadfast hope: I am not ye son of Agar, but of Sara:
that is to say, the law belongs nothing unto me: For Sara is my mother, who
brings forth free children and heirs, and not servant.

Paul then by this testimony of Esaias has proved that Sara, that is to say,
the church is the true mother which brings forth free children and heirs:
Contrariwise that Agar, that is to say, the sinagoge gendreth many children in
deed: but they are servants and must be cast out. Moreover, because this
place speaks also of the abolishing of the law and of Christian liberty, it
ought to be diligently considered. For as it is the most principal and
special article of Christian doctrine, to know that we are justified and saved
by Christ, so is it also very necessary to know and understand well the
doctrine concerning the abolishment of the law. For it helps very much to
confirm our doctrine as touching Faith, and to attain sound and certain
consolation of conscience, when we are assured that the law is abolished, and
specially in great terrors and serious conflicts.

I have often said before, and now I say again (for it can not be too often
repeted), that a Christian laying hold of the benefit of Christ through
Faith, The law is abolished to all christians.
has no law, but all the law is to him abolished with all his terrors and
torments. This place of Esaias teaches the same thing, and therefore it is very
notable and full of comfort, stirring up the barren and forsaken to rejoice,
which was counted worthy to be mocked or pitied according to the law. For such
as were barren were accursed according to the law: but the holy Ghost turns
this sentence, and pronounces the barren worthy of praise and Blessing: and
contrariwise the fruitful, and such as bring forth children, accursed, when he
says: Rejoice thon barren, which bear not: Esaias. 54.1. The church is
barren and forsaken before the world.
Break forth into joy and rejoice thou that trauailest not: For the desolate
has many more children then the married wife. Howsoever then Sara, that is to
say, the Church seem to be forsaken and barren before the world, not having
the righteousness and works of the law: yet notwithstanding she is a most
fruitful mother, having an infinite number of children before God, as the
Prophet witnesses. Contrariwise, although Agar seem never so fruitful, The
children of the bondvvoma^ with their mother, are cast out of the house.
and to bring forth never so many children, yet notwithstanding she has no
issue remaining: for the children of the bondwoman are cast out of the house
together with their mother and receive not the inheritance with the children of
the freewoman, as Paul says afterward.

Because therefore we are the children of the freewoman, the law our old
husband is abolished, Romans. Romans ^.4.5.6.
7: who as long as he had dominion over us, it was impossible for us to bring
forth children free in spirit, or knowing grace: but we remained with the
other in bondage. True it is, that as long as the law reigns, men are not
idle, but they labor sore, Math. 10.12. The people of the law laborious and
painful.
they bear the burden and the heat of the day, they bring forth and gender
many children: but as well the fathers as the children are bastardes, and do
not belong to the freemother: Therefore they are at length cast out of the
house and inheritance with Ismael they die and are damned. It is impossible
therefore that men should attain to the inheritance, that is to say, that they
should be justified and saved by the law, although they travel never so much,
and be never so fruitful therein. Accursed therefore be that doctrine, life
and religion, which endeuoreth to get righteousness before God by the law or
the works thereof. But let us prosecute our purpose as touching the
abolishment of the law.

The Scholedoctors speaking of yt abolishment of the law, say that ye Judicial
and the ceremonial laws are pernicious since the coming of Christ and
therefore are abolished: but not the moral law. These blind Doctors knew not
what they said. But if thou will speak of ye abolishment of the law, talk of
it as it is in his own proper use and office, The whole law is abolished.
and as it is spiritually taken, and comprehend withal the whole law, making
no distinction at all betwixt the Judicial, Ceremonial and Moral law. For
when Paul says, that we are delivered from the curse of the law by Christ, he
speaks of the whole law, and principally of the Moral law, which only
accuses, curses and condemns the conscience: which the other two do not.
Wherefore we say that the Moral law, or the law of the ten commandments
has no power to accuse and terrify the conscience, in which Jesus Christ
reigns by his grace: for he has abolished the power thereof.

A godly man feels the terrors of the law, but by faith in Christ he is
comforted. Romans 3.1. John. 3.36.
Not that the conscience does not at all feel the terrors of the law (For in
deed it feels them): but that they can not condemn it nor bring it to
desperation. For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
Romans 8. Also: If the son shall make you free, ye shall be free in deed.
John. 8. Howsoever then a Christian man be terrified through the law, showing
unto him his sin, notwithstanding he therefore despaireth not: For he
believes in Jesus Christ and being baptized in him and cleansed by his blood, he
has remission of all his sins. Now, when our sin is pardoned through
Christ, who is the Lord of the law (and yet so pardoned that he gave himself
for it) the law being a servant has no more power to accuse and condemn us
for sin, The law has no power over a hose that believe.
seeing it is forgeuen us and we are now made free forasmuch as the son has
delivered us from bondage: Wherefore the law is wholly abolished to them that
believe in Christ.

But thou will say: I do nothing. True it is that thou can do nothing
whereby thou may be delivered from the tyranny of the law. But hear this
joyful tidings which the holy Ghost brings unto thee out of the words of
the Prophet: Rejoice thou that art barren. 1. Cor. 1.30. Galath. 3.13.
etc As if he would say: Why art thou so heavy, since there is no cause why
thou should so mourn? But I am barren and forsaken. etc. Well: although
thou be never so barren and forsaken. etc, not having the righteousness of the
law, notwithstanding Christ is thy righteousness: he was made a curse for thee
to deliver thee from the curse of the law. If thou believe in him the law is
dead unto thee. And so much as Christ is greater then the law, so much have
thou a more excellent righteousness then the righteousness of the law. Moreover,
thou art fruitful and not barren: for thou have many more children then she
which has an husband.

The outvvard abolishment of the law.
There is also an other abolishment of the law which is outward: to wit, that
the politic laws of Moises do nothing belong unto us at all. Wherefore we
ought not to call them back again, nor superstitiously bind our selves unto
them: as some went about to do in times past, The gospel does not release us
from all laws.
being ignorant of this liberty. Now although the Gospel make us not subject
to the Judicial laws of Moises, yet notwithstanding it does not exempt us
from the obedience of all civil laws, but makes us subject in this corporal
life to the laws of that government wherein we live, that is to say: it
commands every one to obey his Magistrate and laws, not only because of
wrath, but also for He speaks of such government as God has appointed,
which no private man may conte^ne with out the br^ch of conscience. 1 Pet.
2.13.14. Romans 13 5.
conscience sake. 1. Pe. 2. Romans 13. And the Emperor, or any other Prince
should not offend if he used some of the Judicial laws of Moises: yea he
might use them freely and without offense. Therefore the Popish Schoolmen are
deceived, which dream that the Judicial laws of Moses are pernicious and
deadly since the coming of Christ.

Likewise we are not bound to the Ceremonies of Moses, much less to the
ceremonies of the Pope. But because this bodily life can not be altogether
without ceremonies and rites (for there must needs be some introduction)
therefore the Gospel suffers ordinances to be made in the church as
touching days, times, places. The ceremonies of Moses law do not bind us,
much less the ceremonies of the Pope.
etc. that the people may know upon what day, in what hour, and in what place
to assemble together to hear the word of God. It permits also that lessons
and readings should be appointed, as in the Schools, especially for the
instruction of children and such as are ignorant. These things it permits,
to the end that all may be done comely and orderly in the church. 1. Cor. 14.
not that they which keep such ordinances, do thereby merit remission of
sins. 1. Cor. 14.40. Two things to be taken head of in the keeping or
commanding of ceremonies: the offense of the vveake, and the pernicious
opinion of merit.
Moreover they may be changed or omitted without sin, so that it be done
without offense of the weak.

Now Paul speaks here especially of the abolishment of the moral law:
which is diligently to be considered. For he speaks against the righteousness
of the law, that he might establish the righteousness of Faith, concluding
thus: If only grace or Faith in Christ justify, then is the whole law
abolished, without any exception. And this he confirms by the testimony of
Esaias, whereby he exhorts the barren and forsaken to rejoice: for it seems
that she has no child, nor hope ever to have any, that is to say, she has no
disciples, no favor nor countenance of the world, because she preaches the
word of the cross of Christ crucified, against all the wisdom of the flesh.
But thou that art barren (says the Prophet) let not this any whit trouble
thee: yea rather lift up thy voice and rejoice, for she that is forsaken has
more children then she that has an husband: that is to say she that is married
and has a great number of children shall be made weak, and she that is
forsaken shall have many children.

He calls the church barren because her children are not begotten by the
law, by works, by any industry or endeavor of man: The church is barren.
but by the word of Faith in the spirit of God. Here is nothing else but
birth: no working at all. Contrariwise, they that are fruitful, labor and
exercise themselves with great travel in bearing and bringing forth. Here is
altogether working, and No spiritual birth, which is wrought by the word
and spirit of God.
no birth. But because they endeavor to get the right of children and heirs
by the righteousness of the law or by their own righteousness, they are
servants and never receive the inheritance, no though they tire them selves
to death with continual travel. For they go about to obtain that b^ their
own works against the will of God, which God of his mere grace will give to
all beleuers for Christ's sake. The faithful work well also: but they are not
thereby made sons and heirs (for this their That is, their regeneration in
Christ by Faith and the holy Ghost.
birth brings unto them): but this they do to the end that they being now
made children and heirs, might glorify God by their good works, and help their
neighbors.

Verse. 28. Therefore brethern, we are after the manner of Isaac, children of
the promise.
That is to say, we are not children of the flesh, as Ismael, or as all the
fleshly Israel, which gloried that they were the seed of Abraham and the
people of God. But Christ answered them, John. 8: If ye were the sons of
Abraham, Ioh. 8.37.40.42.
ye would not seek to kill me which speak the truth unto you. Also: If God
were your Father, then would ye love me and receive my word. As if he would
say: Brethern borne and brought up together in one house, Of children, some be
as Ismael, and some as Isaac.
know one an others voice: But ye be of your father the Devil. etc. We are not
such children (says he) as they are: which remain servants, and at length
shall be cast out of the house. But we are children of the promise as Isaac
was: that is to say, of grace and of Faith, borne only of the promise. The
children of the promise.
Concerning this I have spoken sufficiently before in the third chapter
entreating upon this place: In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. Therefore we are pronounced righteous: not by the law, by works, or
our own righteousness, but by the mere mercy and grace of God. Paul repeteth
very often, and diligently sets forth the promise which is received by Faith
alone: for he knew that it was very necessary so to do.

Hitherto as touching the allegory out of Genesis: to the which Paul annexeth
the place of Esaias as an interpretation. Now he applifieth the history of
Ismael and Isaac, for our example and consolation.

Verse. 19. But as then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that
was borne after the spirit, even so is it now.
This place contains a singular consolation. Whosoever are borne and live in
Christ, and rejoice in this birth and inheritance of God, have Ismael for
their enemy and their persecutour. This we learn at this day by experience:
For we see that all the world is full of tumultes, persecutions, sects and
offenses. Wherefore, if we did not arm our selves with this consolation of
Paul and such like, and well understand this article of Justification, we
should never be able to withstand the violence and subtle sleightes of Satan.
For who should not be troubled with these cruel persecutions of our
adversaries, and with these sects and infinite offenses, which a sort of busy
and fantastical spirits stir up at this day? Verily it is no small grief
unto us, when we are constrained to hear that all things were in peace and
tranquillity before the Gospel came abroad: The judgment of the world
concerning the gospel.
but since the preaching and publishing thereof, al things are unquiet and the
whole world is in an uproar, so that every one armeth himself against an
other. When a man that is not endued with the spirit of God hears this, by
and by he is offended, and judges that the disobedience of subjects against
their magistrates, that seditions, wars, plages and famine, that the
overthrowing of commonweals, kingdoms and countries, that sects, offenses
and such other infinite evils do proceed altogether of the doctrine of the
Gospel.

Against this great offense we must comfort and arm our selves with this sweet
consolation, What the faithful must be content to be called in this world.
John. 16.2.
that the faithful must bear this name and this title in the world, that they
are seditious and schismatikes, and the authors of innumerable evils. And
hereof it comes that our adversaries think they have a just cause, yea that
they do God high service when they hate, persecute, and kill us. It can not be
then but that Ismael must persecute Isaac: But Isaac again persecuteth not
Ismael. Who so will not suffer the persecution of Ismael, let him not profess
himself to be a Christian.

But let our adversaries (which so vehemently amplify and exaggerate these
evils at this day) tell us what good things ensued ye preaching of the Gospel of
Christ and his Apostles. What followed the preaching of the Gospel.
Did not the destruction of ye kingdom of the Jews follow? was not the Roman
Empire overthrown? was not ye whole world in an uproar. And yet ye Gospel was
not the cause hereof, which Christ and his Apostles preached for the profit
and salvation of men, and not for their destruction. But these things followed
through the fault of ye people, Psalm. 2.2.3.
the nations, the Kings and Princes, who being possessed of ye Devil, would
not hearke^ to ye word of grace, life, and eternal salvation: but detested and
condemned it as a doctrine most pernicious and hurtful to religion and commonweals. And that this should so come to pass, the holy Ghost foretold by David
when he says, Psalm. 2. Why do the heathen rage, and the people murmr in
vain. etc.

Psalm. 2.2.3.
Such tumultes and hurly burlies we hear and see at this day The adversaries
lay the fault in our doctrine. But ye doctrine of grace and peace stirs not
up these troubles: but ye people, nations, kings, and Princes of the earth (as
the Psalm says) rage, murmr, conspire and take counsel, not against us
(as they think) nor against our doctrine, which they blaspheme as false and
seditious: but against the Lord and his anointed. Therefore all their counsels
and practices are and shall be disappoynted and brought to naught: He that
dwells in the heaven shall laugh: Psalm. 2.4.
the Lord shall have them in derision. Let the^ cry out therefore as long as
they list, that we raise up these tumults and seditions: notwithstanding this
Psalm comfort us, and says, that they themselves are the authors of these
troubles. They can not believe this, and much less can they believe that it is
they which murmr, rise up, The blindness of the adversaries. John. 16.2.
and take counsel against the Lord and his anointed: nay rather they think
that they maintain ye Lords cause, that they defend his glory, and do him
acceptable service in persecuting us: but ye Psalm lies not, and that shall
the end declare. Here we do nothing, but only suffer, as our conscience
bears us witness in the holy Ghost. Romans 9.1.
Moreover, the doctrine for the which they raise up such tumultes and offenses,
is not ours, but it is the doctrine of Christ. This doctrine we can not deny,
nor forsake the defense thereof, seeing Christ says: Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful nation, Luke.
9.26.
of him shall the son of man be ashamed when he shall come in his glory, and
in the glory of the father and of the holy angels.

He therefore that will preach Christ truly, and confess him to be our
righteousness, must be content to hear that he is a pernicious fellow, and that
he troubles all things. Paul a pestiferous fellow. Acts. 17.6.7.
They which have troubled the world (said the Jews of Paul and Silas, Acts.
17.) are also come unto us, and have done contrary to the decrees of Caesar.
And in the. 24. of the Acts. We have found this pestilent fellow stirring up
sedition among all the Jews through out the whole world, Acts. 24.3.
and the author of the Sect of the Nazarites. etc. In like manner also the
Gentiles complain in the. 16. of the Acts: These men trouble our City.
Acts. 16.20.
So at this day they accuse Luther to be a troubler of the Papacy and of the
Roman Empire. If I would keep silence, then all things should be in peace
which the strong man possesses, Luke. 11.21.2^.
and the Pope would not persecute me any more. But by this means the Gospel
of Jesus Christ should be blemished and defaced. If I speak, the Pope is
troubled and cruelly rages. Either we must lose the Pope an earthly and
mortal man, or else the immortal God, Christ Jesus, life and eternal
salvation. Let the Pope perish then, and let God be exalted, let Christ reign
and triumph for ever.

Christ himself when he foresaw in spirit the great troubles which should
follow his preaching, comforted himself after this manner: I came (says he) to
send fire upon the earth, Luke. 12.49. How Christ comfort him self against
the evils that should follow his preaching.
and what vvil I but that it be kindled? In like manner we see at this day that
great troubles follow the preaching of the Gospel through the persecution and
blasphemy of our adversaries and the ingratitude of the world. This matter so
greueth us that oftentimes after the flesh and after the judgment of reason,
we think it had been better that the doctrine of the Gospel had not been
published, then that after ye preaching thereof the public peace should be so
troubled? But according to the spirit we say boldly with Christ: I came to
send fire upon the earth, and what will I but that it should now be kindled?
Now, after that this fire is kindled, there follow forthwith great commotions.
For it is not a King or an Emperor that is thus provoked: but the God of this
world, 2. Cor. 4.4.
which is a most mighty spirit, and the Lord of the whole world. This weak
word preaching Christ crucified, sets upon this mighty and terrible
adversary. He means the Devil.
Behemoth feeling the divine power of this word, stirs up all his members,
shakes his tail, and makes the depth of the sea to boil like a pot. Job.
41. Hereof come all these tumultes, Job. 41.14.22.
all these furious and cruel rages of the world.

Wherefore let it not trouble us that our adversaries are offended and cry out
that there comes no good by the preaching of the Gospel. They are infidels,
they are blind and obstinate, and therefore it is impossible that they should
see any fruit of the Gospel. The faithful see infinite profits by the
Gospel.
But contrariwise we which believe, do see the inestimable profits and fruits
thereof: although outwardly for a time we be oppressed with infinite evils,
despised, spoiled, accused, condemned as the outcasts and filthy dunge of the
whole world, and put to death: and inwardly afflicted with the feeling of our
sin, and vexed with Devils. For we live in Christ, in whom and by whom we
are made Kings and Lords over sin, death, the flesh, the world, hell, and all
evils: In whom and by whom also we tread under our feet that Dragon and
Basiliske which is the King of sin and death. Psalm. 91.13.
How is this done? In Faith. For ye blessedness which we hope for, is not yet
revealed, which in ye mean time we wait for in patience, and yet
notwithstanding do now assuredly possess the same by faith.

The article of justification comfort us against al scla^ders and tentations.
We ought therefore diligently to learn the article of justification: for that
only is able to support us against these infinite sclaunders and offenses, and
to comfort us in all our tentatio^s and persecutions. For we see that it ca^
not otherwise be, but that ye world will be offended with the pure doctrine of the
Gospel, and continually cry out that no good comes of it: For the natural man
understands not those things which are of the spirit of God: 1. Cor. 2.12.
for they are folishnes to him. 1. Cor. 2. He only beholds the outward
evils, The world ca^ not but be offended at the preaching of the Gospel.
troubles, rebellions, murders, sects, and such other like things. With these
sights he is offended and blinded, and finally falls into the contempt and
blaspheming of God and his word.

On yt contrary part we ought to stay and comfort our selves in this, that our
adversaries do not accuse and condemn us for any manifest wickedness which we
have committed, as adultery, murder, theft and such like, but for our
doctrine. Why our adversaries do condemn us.
And what do we teach? That Christ the son of God by ye death of ye cross
has redeemed us from our sins and from everlasting death. Therefore they do
not impugn our life, but our doctrine: yea ye doctrine of Christ, and not
ours. Therefore if there be any offense, it is Christ's offense and not ours, and
so ye fault wherefore they persecute us, Christ has committed and not we. Now,
whether they will condemn Christ, and pluck him out of heaven as an heretic
and seditious person for this fault that he is our only iustifier and Savior,
let them look to that. As for us, we commending this his own cause unto
himself, are quiet beholders whether of them shall have the victory, Christ or
they. In deed after the flesh it greueth us that these Ismaelites hate and
persecute us so furiously: Grief after the flesh, and glory after the spirit.
Romans 5.3.
notwtstanding according to the spirit we glory in these afflictions: both
because we know that we suffer them not for our sins, but for Christ's cause,
whose benefit and whose glory we set forth: and also because Paul gives us
warning aforehand, that Ismael must mock Isaac and persecute him.

The Jews expound this place, which Paul alleges out of the 21. of Genesis,
Gene. 21.9. The exposition of the Jews.
of Ismael mocking and persecuting Isaac after this manner: that Ismael
constrained Isaac to commit Idolatry. If he did so, yet I believe not yt it was
any such gross idolatry as ye Jews dream of: to wit, that Ismael made
images of clay after the manner of the Gentiles, which he compelled Isaac to
worship: For this Abraham would in no wise have suffered. What manner of man
Ismael was.
But I think that Ismael was in outward show a holy man, as Caine was, who
also persecuted his brother, and at length killed him: not for any corporal
thing, but because he saw that God esteemed him above the other. In like manner
Ismael was outwardly a lover of religion: he sacrificed and exercised himself
in well doing. Therefore he mocked his brother Isaac, and would be esteemed a
better man then he, for two causes: Ismael would be preferred before Isaac for
two causes.
First for his religion and service of God: Secondly for his civil government
and inheritance. And these two things he seemed justly to challenge to himself.
For he thought that the kingdom and Priesthode pertained to him by ye right of
Gods law as the first borne: and therefore he persecuted Isaac spiritually
because of religion, and corporally because of his inheritance.

This persecution always remains in the Church, Ismael alvvayes persecuteth
Isaac.
especially when the doctrine of the Gospel flourishes: to wit, that the
children of the flesh mock the children of the promise and persecute them. The
Papists persecute us at this day, and for none other cause, but for that we
teach that righteousness comes by the promise. For it vexes the Papists, that
we will not worship their Idols, that is to say, The spiritual persecution.
that we set not forth their righteousness, their works and worshippings
devised and ordained by men, as available to obtain grace and forgeuenes of
sins. And for this cause they go about to cast us out of the house, that is
to say, they vaunt that they are the Church, the children and people of God,
and that the inheritance belongs unto them. etc. Contrariwise they
excommunicate and banish us as heretics and seditious persons, and if they
can, they kill us also: and in so doing they think they do God good service.
So, as much as in them lies, they cast us out of this life, and of the life to
come. The Anabaptists and such other do hate us deadly because we impugn and
detest their errors and heresies which they spread abroad and daily renew in ye
church: and for this cause they judge us to be far worse then ye Papists, and
therefore they have conceived a more cruel hatred against us, then against ye
Papists.

As soon therefore as the word of God is brought to light, The Devil
persecuteth the church by violence and subteltie.
the Devil is angry, and uses all his force and subtle sleightes to persecute
it, and utterly to abolish it: Therefore he ca^ no otherwise do, but raise up
infinite sects, horrible offenses, cruel persecutions and abominable murders.
For he is the father of lying and a murderer. He spreads his lies thorowout
the world by false teachers, and he kills men by tyrannes. By these means he
possesses both the spiritual and the corporal kingdom: Ephesians. 6.16.
the spiritual by the lying of false teachers (stirring up also without
ceasing every one of us perticularly by his fiery darts to heresies and
wicked opinions): the corporal kingdom by ye sword of tyrannes. The spiritual
and corporal persecution of the godly.
Thus this father of lying and of murder, stirs up persecution on every
side, both spiritual and corporal against the children of the freewoman. The
spiritual persecution which we are at this day constrained to suffer of
heretics, is to us most grievous and intolerable because of the infinite
offenses and sclaunders wherewith the Devil goes about to deface our
doctrine. For we are enforced to hear that the heresies and errors of the
Anabaptists and other heretics, and all other enormities, do proceed from
our doctrine. The corporal persecution, by which tyrannes lie in wait for our
goods and lives, is more tolerable: For they persecute us not for our sins,
but for the testimony of the word of God. Let us learn therefore even by the
title which Christ gives to the Devil: to wit, that he is the father of
lying and murder, John. 1.44.
John. 8. that when the Gospel flourishes and Christ reigns, then sects of
perdition must needs spring up, and murderers, persecuting the Gospel,
must rage every where. And Paul says: 1. Cor. 11.19.
That there must be heresies. He that is ignorant of this, is soon offended,
and falling away from the true God and true Faith, he retourneth to his old
God and old false faith.

Paul therefore in this place armeth the godly beforehand, that they be not
offended with those persecutions, sects and offenses, saying: But as then he
that was borne after the flesh, etc. As if he would say: False brethren at the
first are friends, but afterward they become most deadly enemies.
If we be the children of ye promise and borne after the spirit, we must
surely look to be persecuted of our brother which is borne after ye flesh: that
is to say, not only our enemies which are manifestly wicked, shall persecute
us, but also such as at the first were our dear friends, with whom we were
familiarly conversant in one house, which received from us the true doctrine of
the Gospel, shall become our deadly enemies, The brethern borne after the
flesh, must persecute the brethern that are borne after the spirit. Psalm. 41.9.
and persecute us extremely. For they are brethren after the flesh, and must
persecute their brethern which are borne after the spirit. So Christ in
the.41. Psalm complains of Judas: The man of my peace whom I trusted,
which did eat of my bread, has lifted up the hele against me. But this is
our consolation, that we have not given any occasion to our Ismaelites to
persecute us. The Papists persecute us because we teach ye pure and sincere
doctrine of ye Gospel: which if we would forsake, they would persecute us no
more. The true doctrine of the gospel is the cause of persecution.
Moreover, if we would approve the pernicious heresies of the Sectaries, they
would praise us. But because we detest and abhor the impiety both of the one
and the other, therefore do they so spitefully hate and so cruelly persecute
us.

But not only Paul (as I have said) armeth us against such persecutions and
offenses, Christ comfort his against the hatred and persecutions of the
world. John. 15.19.
but Christ himself also most sweetly comfort us in the.15. of John,
saying: if ye were of the world, the world would love you: but because ye
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you. As if he would say: I am the cause of all these persecutions
which ye endure: and if ye be killed it is I for whose sake ye are killed. For
if ye did not preach my word and confess me, the world would not persecute
you. But it goes well with you: Math. 10.24. John. 15.20.
For the servant is not greater then his master. If they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you for my names sake.

By these words Christ lays all the fault upon himself, The name of
Christ is the cause why the world rages against the godly. John. 16.33.
and delivers us from all fear. As if he would say: Ye are not the cause why
the world hates and persecuteth you, but my name which ye preach and confess,
is the cause thereof. But be of good comfort: I have overcome the world. This
comfort vpholdeth us, so that we dout nothing but that Christ is strong
enough, not only to bear, but also to vanquish all the cruelty of tyrannes,
and the subtle sleightes of heretics. And this he has declared in showing
forth his power against the Jews and Romans, whose tyranny and persecutions
he suffered for a time: Christ remains king and conqueror, though the gates
of hell fight against him.
He also suffered the subtelties and crafty practices of heretics, but in
time and place he overthrew them all, and remained King and conqueror. Let the
Papists then rage as much as they will: let the Sectaries sclaunder and
corrupt the Gospel of Christ as much as they can: notwithstanding Christ
shall reign eternally, and his word shall stand for ever, when all his enemies
shall be brought to naught. Moreover, this is a singular consolation, that the
persecution of Ismael against Isaac shall not always continue, but shall
endure for a little while, and when that is ended, the sentence shall be
pronounced, as follows.

Verse. 30. But what says the Scripture? Genesis 21.2^.
Cast out the servant and her son: For the son of the servant shall not
be heir with the son of the freevvoman.
This word of Sara was very grievous to Abraham: and, no doubt, when he heard
this sentence, his fatherly bowels were moved with compassion toward his son
Ismael: for he was borne of his flesh. And this the Scripture plainly
witnesses, Genes. 21. when it says: And this thing was very grievous in
Abraham's sight, Genesis 21.11.
because of his son. God confirmed the sentence of Sara. Genesis 21.12.
But God confirmed the sentence which Sara pronounced, saying to Abraham: Let
it not be grievous in thy sight for the child and for thy bondvvoman: In all
that Sara shall say unto thee hear her voice: For in Isaac shall thy Seed be
called.

The sentence pronounced against the Ismalites, is effectual. etc.
The Ismaelites hear in this place the sentence pronounced against them, which
overthrows the Jews, Grecians, Romans, and all such other as persecute the
Church of Christ. The self same sentence also shall overthrow the Papists,
and as many as trust in their own works, which at this day boast them selves
to be the people of God and the Church: The vain hope of hypocrites in
condemning others.
which also trust that they shall surely receive the inheritance, and judge us
which rest upon the promise of God, not only to be barren and forsaken, but
also heretics cast out of the Church, and that it is impossible that we should
be sons and heirs. But God overthrows their judgment and pronounces this
sentence against them, that because they are the children of the bondwoman, and
persecute the children of the freewoman: The children of the bondvvoman have no
inheritance with the children of the freevvoman. John. 10.35. The vineyard
shall be let out to other husbandmen.
therefore they shall be cast out of the house, and shall have no inheritance
with the children of promise: to whom only the inheritance belongs because
they are the children of the freewoman. This sentence is ratified, and can
never be revoked: wherefore it shall assuredly come to pass that our
Ismaelites shall not only lose the Ecclesiastical and politic government
which now they have, but also everlasting life. For the Scripture has foretold
that the children of the bondwoman shall be cast out of the house, that is to
say, out of the kingdom of grace: for they can not be heirs together with the
children of the freewoman.

Now, here is to be noted that the holy Ghost calls the people of the law
and works, as it were in contempt, the child of the bondwoman. As if he said:
Why do ye vaunt of the righteousness of the law and works, and why do ye
glory that ye are the people and children of God for the same? If ye know not
of whom ye are borne, I will tell you. Ye are borne bondseruauntes of a
bondwoman. And what servants? The bondseruauntes of the law, They that are
borne of the bondvvoman are borne servant of the law.
and consequently of sin of death, and of everlasting damnation. Now, a
servant is no inheritour, but is cast out of the house. Wherefore the Pope with
all his kingdom, and all other Iusticiaries (what outward appearance of holiness
so ever they have) which hope to obtain grace and salvation by the law, The
Pope and all that seek righteousness by works, are children of the
bondvvoman. Philip. 3.19.
are servants of that bondwoman, and have no inheritance with the children
of the freewoman. I speak now, not of the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops and Monks
that were manifestly wicked, who have made their bellies their God, and have
committed such horrible sins as I will not willingly name: but of the best of
them, such I mean as lived holily, and went about through great labor and
travail by keeping of their Monkish order, to pacify the wrath of God, and to
merit remission of their sins and everlasting life. These hear their
sentence here pronounced, that the sons of the bondwoman must be cast out of
the house with their mother the bondwoman.

Such sentences diligently considered, make us certain of our doctrine, and
confirm us in the righteousness of Faith, The world embraces the righteousness
of works, and condemns the righteousness of Faith.
against the doctrine and righteousness of works, which the world embraces and
magnifieth, condemning and despising the other. And this troubles and
offends weak consciences: which albeit they plainly see the impiety, the
execrable wickedness, and horrible abominations of the Papists, yet
notwithstanding, they are not easily persuaded, that all the multitude which
bears the name and title of the church do err, and that there are but few
of them which have a sound and a right opinion of the doctrine of Faith. A
comparison of the old Papacy, and of the Papacy at this day.
And if the Papacy had the same holiness and austeritie of life which it had in
the time of the ancient fathers, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine and others, when
the Clergy had not yet so evil a name for their Simonie, excess, abundance
of riches, dissolute living, voluptuousnes, whoredom, sodomitrie and such
other infinite abominations, but lived after the rules and decrees of the
fathers religiously and holily in outward show, and unmarried, what could we do
now against the Papacy?

The single life which the Cleargye kept very straightly in the time of the
fathers, was a goodly thing, The Iusticiaries make such a show of holiness, as
if they were angels and no men. Coloss. 2.^^.
and made of men very Angels in in the sight of the world: and therefore
Paul in the second Chapter to the Colossians calls it the religion of
Angels. And the Papists sing thus of their virgins: He led an angelical
life whilst he lived in the flesh, The contemplative life of Monks and such
other, which sequestered themselves from the world and all vvorldly affairs.
and yet lived contrary to the flesh. Moreover, the life which they call the
contemplative life (whereunto the clergy men were then very much given, utterly
neglecting all civil and household government) had a goodly show of holiness.
Wherefore, if that outward show and appearance of the old Papacy remained at
this day, we should peradventure do but little against it by our doctrine of
Faith, seeing we do now so little prevail when (that old show of outward
holiness and severe discipline being utterly abolished) there is nothing to be
seen but a very sink and puddle of all vices and abominations.

But admit the case that the old discipline and religion of the Papacy were
yet remaining: notwithstanding we ought by the example of Paul (who vehemently
pursued the false apostles, which outwardly appeared to be very godly and holy
men) to fight against the Meritmongers of the Papisticall kingdom, and to say:
Although ye live a single life tiering and consuming your bodies with
continual travail, and walking in the humility and religion of Angels, yet
are ye servants of the law, of sin and of the Devil, and must be cast out
of the house: for ye seek righteousness and salvation by your works, and not
by Christ.

Wherefore we ought not so much to consider the wicked life of the Papists, as
their abominable doctrine and hypocrisy, against the which we specially
fight. Let us suppose then that the religion and discipline of the old Papacy
does yet still flourish, The devotion and discipline of the old Popery.

No holiness of life can be set against Gods judgment.


and that it is now observed with as much severity and straitnes as ever it
was: yet must we say notwithstanding: If ye have nothing but this holiness and
chastity of life to set against the wrath and judgment of God, ye are in
very deed the sons of the bondwoman, which must be cast out of the kingdom
of heaven and be damned.

The Papists at this day do not defend their wicked life, but their doctrine.
And now, they themselves do not defend their wicked life: nay rather they
which are the best and the soundest of them all do detest it: but they fight
for the maintenance and defense of the doctrine of Devils, for hypocrisy, and
for the righteousness of works. Here they allege the authority of Councels
and the examples of holy fathers, whom they affirm to have been the authors of
their holy orders and statutes. Therefore we fight not against the manifest
wickedness and abominations of the Papacy, but against the greatest holiness
and holiest Saints thereof, which think they lead an angelical life, whilst
they dream that they keep not only ye commandments of God, but also the
counsels of Christ, and do works of superogation, The Papists divide the
Gospel into precepts and counsels. The precepts they are bound to keep (say
they) but not the counsels, and therefore if they keep them, it is a work of
superogation, that is, more then needs.
and such as they are not bound to do. This we say is to labor in vain,
except they take hold of that only and alone, which Christ says is only
necessary, and choose the good part with Marie, which shall not be taken from
them.

This did Bernard, a man so godly, so holy and so chaste, that he is to be
commended and preferred above them all. He being once grievously sick, and
having no hope of life, put not his trust in his single life wherein he had
lived most chastely, nor in his good works and deeds of charity whereof he
had done many: but removed them far out of his sight, and receiving the
benefit of Christ by Faith, he said: *I have lived wickedly. But thou Lord
Jesus Christ, by double right do possess the kingdom of heaven: First,
Bernards confession.
because thou art the son of God: Secondly, because thou have purchased it by
thy death and passion. The first thou keep for thy self by thy birthright.
The second thou geuest to me, not by the right of my works, but by the right
of grace. He set not against the wrath of God his Monkerie nor his angelical
life: but he took hold of that one thing which was necessary, and so was
saved. I think that Hierome, Gregory, and many other fathers were saved after
the same sort. And it is not to be doubted but that also in the old Testament
many Kings of Israel and other Idolaters were saved in like manner, who at the
hour of death, casting away their vain trust which they had in Idolles, took
hold of the promise of God, which was made unto the Seed of Abraham, that is
to say, Christ in whom all nations should be blessed. And if there be any of
the Papists which shall be saved, they must simply lean, not to their own
good deeds and deserts, but to the mercy of God offered unto us in Christ, and
say with Paul: Phil. 3.9.
I have not mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is
by Faith in Christ.

Verse. 31. Then brethern we are not children of the servant, but of the
freevvoman.
Paul here concludes his allegory of the barren church, and of the fruitful
people of the law. The children of the bondvvoman are under the law.
We are not (says he) the children of the bondwoman: that is to say, we are
not under the law which begets unto bondage, that is, which terrifieth,
accuses and brings to desperation: but we are delivered from it by Christ:
Therefore it can not terrify nor condemn us. Of this we have spoken enough
before. Moreover, The children of the bondvvoman shall at length be cast out.
Math. 25.29.
although the sons of the bondwoman do persecute us never so much for a
time, yet this is our comfort, that they shall be compelled to leave the
enheritance unto us, which belongs unto us that are the sons of the
freewoman, and shall at length be cast into utter darkness.

Paul therefore by these words [bondwoman and freewoman] took occasion (as
we have heard) to reject the righteousness of the law, and to confirm the
doctrine of Justification. And of purpose he takes hold of this word
[freewoman] vehemently urging and amplifying the same, especially in the
beginning of the chapter following. Whereupon he takes occasion to reason of
Christian liberty: ye knowledge whereof is very necessary. For the Pope has
in a manner quite overthrown it, and made the Church subject to man's traditions
and ceremonies, and to a most miserable and filthy bondage. That liberty
which is purchased by Christ, is unto us at this day a most strong fort and
munition whereby we defend our selves against the tyranny of the Pope. Wherefore
we must diligently consider this doctrine of Christian liberty, as well to
confirm the doctrine of justification, as also to raise up and comfort weak
consciences against so many troubles and offenses, which our adversaries do
impute unto the Gospel. Now, Christian liberty is a very spiritual thing,
Christian liberty. Romans 9.23.
which the carnal man does not understand. Yea they which have the first
fruits of the spirit, and can talk well thereof, do very hardly retain it in
their heart. It seems to reason that it is a matter of small importance.
Therefore if ye holy Ghost do not magnify it, and add a weight unto it, it is
conte^ned.

The fifth Chapter.
PAVLE now drawing toward the end of his Epistle, disputes very vehemently
in defense of the doctrine of Faith and Christian liberty, against the false
apostles, the enemies and destroyers of the same: against whom he casts out
very thundering words, to beat them down and utterly to vanquish them. Paul
tries every way to keep the Galathians in the liberty of the Gospel.
And therewithal he exhorts the Galathians to fly their pernicious doctrine
as a dangerous poison. In his exhortation he intermingleth threatenings and
promises, trying every way that he may keep them in that liberty which Christ
had purchased for them, saying:

Verse. 1. Stand fast therefore in that liberty wherein Christ has made us
free.
That is to say: Be ye steadfast. So Peter says: Be sober and vvatch, for your
adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about, 1. Pet. 5.3.^.
seeking whom he may devour, whom resist, being steadfast in the Faith. Be ye
not careless (says he) but steadfast and constant. Lie not down and sleep,
but stand up. As if he would say: It stands you in hand to be watchful and
constant, The godly must stand fast that they lose not their liberty in
Christ.
that ye may keep and hold fast that liberty wherein Christ has made you
free. They that are secure and negligent can not keep this liberty. For Satan
most deadly hates the light of the Gospel, that is to say, the doctrine of
grace, liberty, consolation and life. Satan deadly hates the light of the
Gospel.
Therefore when he sees that it begins once to appear, forthwith he
fights against it with all might and maine, stirring up storms and
tempests to hinder the course thereof, and utterly to overthrow it. Wherefore
Paul warns the Faithful not to sleep, not to be negligent: but constantly
and valiantly to resist Satan, that he spoil them not of that liberty which
Christ has purchased for them.

Every word has here a certain vehemency. Stand, says he. As if he should
say: Here have ye need of great diligence and vigilancie. In that liberty. In
what liberty? Not in that wherewith the Emperor has made us free, but in that
wherewith Christ has made us free. The Emperor has given, or rather was
compelled to give to the Bishop of Rome a free city and other lands: also
immunities, The freedom of the Papists.
privileges and prerogatives. etc. This is also a liberty, but it is a civil
liberty, whereby the Pope with all his clergy is exempt from all public
charges. The fleshly liberty.
Moreover there is a fleshly or rather a deuilish liberty, whereby the Devil
chiefly reigns through out ye whole world. For they that enjoy this liberty
obey neither God nor laws, but do what they list. This liberty the people
seek and embrace at this day: The Anabaptists and Libertines will be free to
do what they list.
and so do the Sectaries which will be at liberty in their opinions and in
all their doings, to the end they may teach and do whatsoever they dream to
be good and sound, without reprehension. These stand in that liberty wherein
the Devil has made them free. But we speak not here of this liberty: albeit
the whole world seeks no other liberty. Neither do we speak of the civil
liberty: but of a far other manner of liberty which the Devil hates and
resists with all his power.

This is that liberty whereby Christ has made us free: not from an earthly
bondage, or from the Babylonicall captivity, or from the tyranny of ye
Turks, but from Gods everlasting wrath. And where is this done? In the
conscience. There rests our liberty, and goes no farther. For Christ has
made us free, not ciuily nor carnally, but divinely, Freedom from the wrath of
God to come.
that is to say, we are made free in such sort, that our conscience is now free
and quiet, not fearing the wrath of God to come. This is that true and
inestimable liberty, to the excellency and majesty whereof if we compare ye
other, they are but as one drop of water in respect of ye whole sea. To have
God favorable unto us for Christ's sake, is an incomprehensible freedom.
For who is able to express what a thing it is when a man is assured in his
heart, that God neither is nor will be angry with him, but will be for ever a
merciful and a loving father unto him for Christ's sake? This is in deed a
marvelous and an incomprehensible liberty, to have the most high and
sovereign Majesty so favorable unto us, that he does not only defend,
maintain and succor us in this life, 1. Cor. 15.41.43.44.
but also as touching our bodies w^ll so deliver us, that our bodies which are
sown in corruption, in dishonor and infirmity, shall rise again in
incorruption, Freedom from the law, sin and death. etc
in glory and power. Wherefore this is an inestimable liberty, that we are made
free from the wrath of God for ever: and is greater then heaven and earth and
all other creatures.

Of this liberty there follows an other, whereby through Christ we are made
free from the law, sin, death, the power of the Devil, hell, etc. For as
the wrath of God can not terrify us for that Christ has delivered us from
the same: so the law, sin and death, can not accuse and condemn us. And
although the law accuse us and sin terrify us, yet they can not drive us to
desperation. For Faith, which ouercometh the world, by and by says: These
things belong not unto me: for Christ has made me free, and delivered me from
them all. Likewise death which is the most mighty and most dreadful thing in
all the world, is utterly vanquished in the conscience by this liberty of the
spirit. Wherefore the majesty of this Christian liberty is highly to be
esteemed, and diligently considered. It is an easy matter for a man to speak
these words [freedome from the wrath of God, The fruits of Christian liberty
are not easily felt and laid hold of in tentations.
sin, and death] but in the time of tentation, experience and practice to
apply them to him self, and to feel the excellency of this liberty and the
fruit thereof, it is a harder matter then can be expressed.

Therefore our conscience must be enstructed and prepared before hand, that when
we feel the accusation of the law, the terrors of sin, the horror of
death and the wrath of God, we may remove these heavy sightes and fearful
fantasies out of our minds, A remedy against the terrors of the mind in
tentations.
and set in the place thereof ye freedom purchased by Christ, ye forgeuenes of
sins, righteousness, life and ye everlasting mercy of god. And albeit ye
feeling of the contrary be very strong, yet let us assure our selves that it
shall not long endure: according to that saying of the Prophet: Esaias. 54.8.
For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season: but
with everlasting mercy I have compassion on thee. But this is very hard to
do. Wherefore that liberty which Christ has purchased for us, is not so
soon believed as it is named. If it could be apprehended with a sure and a
steadfast Faith, then no rage or terror of the word, of the law, sin, death
or ye Devil could be so great, but by and by it should be swalowed up as a
little drop of water is swallowed of the maine sea. And certainly this Christian
liberty swalloweth up at once and takes quite away the whole heap of evils,
ye law, sin, death, Gods wrath, and briefly the serpent him self, with his
head and whole power, and in the stead thereof it places righteousness, peace
and everlasting life, Luke. 11 28. John. 13.17.
etc. But blessed is he that understands and believes.

Let us learn therefore to magnify this our liberty purchased by Jesus
Christ the son of God, Christian liberty.
by whom all things were created both in heaven and earth. Which liberty he
has purchased with no other price then with his own blood, to deliver us, not
from any bodily or temporal servitude, but from a spiritual and everlasting
bondage under mighty and invincible tyrannes, to wit, the law, sin, death
and the Devil, and so to reconcile us unto God his father. Now, since these
enemies are overcome, and we reconciled unto God by the death of his son, it
is certain that we are righteous before God, and that what so ever we do,
pleases him. And although there be certain remnantes of sin yet still in
us, they are not laid to our charge, but pardoned for Christ's sake.

Paul uses words of great force and vehemency. Liberty is freely given unto
us for Christ's sake.
Stand (says he) in that liberty vvherin Christ has made you free. This
liberty then is not given unto us by ye law or for our righteousness, but
freely for Christ's sake: Which thing Paul here witnesses, and plainly
declares through out his whole Epistle. John. ^.36.
Christ also in the.8. of John says:) If the son shall make you free, there
shall ye be free in deed. He only is set betwixt us and the evils which
trouble and afflict us: he has overcome them and taken them away, so that they
ca^ no more oppress us nor condemn us. In the sted of sin and death he
gives unto us righteousness and everlasting life: and by this means he
chau^geth the bondage and terrors of the law, into the liberty of conscience
and consolation of the Gospel, Math. 9.^. John. 5.24.
which says: Be of good comfort my son, thy sins are forgeuen thee.
Whosoever then believes in Christ the son of God, he has this liberty.

Reason can not perceive the excellency of this matter: which when a man
considers in spirit he shall see that it is inestimable. For who is able to
conceive in his mind how great and unspeakable a gift it is to have the
forgeuenes of sins, righteousness and everlasting life, in the sted of the
law, sin, death and the wrath of God, and to have God him self favorable
and merciful for ever? Hypocrites brag of God.
The Papists and the hypocrites that seek the righteousness of the law or
their own righteousness, do glory that they likewise have remission of sins,
righteousness, life, and the grace of God. For they vaunt that they also have
this liberty, and they promise the same unto others: but in very deed they
are the servants of corruption, and in the time of tentation all their vain
confidence vanishes away even in a moment. For they trust unto the works and
satisfactions of men, and not to the word of God nor unto Christ. Wherefore it
is impossible for the Iusticiaries which seek to win heaven, life and
salvation by works and merits, to know what the liberty and deliverance from
sin is.

Contrariwise our liberty has for her foundation Christ him self, who is
our everlasting high Bishop, sitting at the right hand of God and making
intercession for us. Wherefore the forgeuenes of sins, righteousness, life and
liberty which we have through him, is sure, certain and perpetual, so that we
believe this. Wherefore if we cleave unto Christ with a steadfast Faith, and
stand fast in that liberty wherein he has made us free, we shall obtain
those inestimable gifts: but if we be careless and negligent we shall lose
them. It is not without cause that Paul bids us watch and stand fast: for
he knew that the Devil seeks nothing more then to spoil us of this liberty
which cost Christ so great a price, and to enta^gle us again by his ministers
in the yoke of bondage, as follows.

Verse. 1. And be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
Paul has spoken most effectually and profoundly as concerning grace and
Christian liberty, and with high and mighty words has exhorted the
Galathians to continue in the same: for it is easily lost. Therefore he bids
them stand fast, lest that through negligence or security they fall back
again from grace and Faith, to the law and works. Now, because reason judges
that there can be no danger in preferring the righteousness of ye law before
the righteousness of Faith: therefore with a certain indignation he enueyeth
against the law, and with great contempt he calls it a yoke, yea a yoke of
bondage. Acts. 15.^0. Acts. 10.43.
So Peter calls it also. Acts. 15: Why tempt ye God to lay a yoke on the
disciples necks, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? And
thus he turns all things to the contrary. For the false Apostles did abase
the promise, and magnified the law and the works thereof in this wise: The
law is a yoke of bondage. Galat. 4.10.
If ye will be made free (say they) from sin and death and obtain
righteousness and life, fulfill the law, be circumcised, observe days, months,
times and years, offer sacrifices, and do such other like things: then shall
this obedience of the law justify and save you. But Paul says the contrary.
They (says he) that teach the law after this sort, do not set men's consciences
at liberty, but snare and entangle them with a yoke, yea and that with a yoke
of bondage.

He speaks therefore of the law very basely and contemptuously, and calls it
an hard bondage and a servile yoke. And this he does not without great cause.
For this pernicious opinion of the law, that it justifies and makes men
righteous before God, is deeply rooted in man's reason, and all mankind is so
wrapped in it, that it can hardly get out. And Paul seems here to compare
those that seek righteousness by the law, unto oxen that be tied to the yoke,
They that seek righteousness by the law, are compared to oxen tied to the yoke.
to the end he might take from it the glory of justifying and of righteousness.
For like as oxen that draw in the yoke with great toil, receive nothing thereby
but forage or pasture, and when they be able to draw the yoke no more, are
appointed to the slaughter: even so they that seek righteousness by the law
are captives and oppressed with the yoke of bondage, that is to say, with the
law: and when they have tired themselves a long time in the works of the law
with great and grievous toil, in the end this is their reward, that they are
miserable and perpetual servant. And whereof? even of sin, death, Gods
wrath, and of the Devil. No greater bondage then the bondage of the law.
Wherefore there is no greater or harder bondage, then the bondage of the law.
It is not without cause then, that Paul calls it the yoke of bondage. For as
we have often said before, the law does but reveal, increase and aggrauate
sin, accuse, terrify, condemn, and gender wrath, and finally it drives
poor consciences into desperation, which is the most miserable and most
grievous bondage that can be Romans 3.4.5.

He uses therefore very vehement words. For he would gladly persuade them
that they should not suffer this importable burden to be laid upon their
shoulders by the false apostles, or be entangled again with the yoke of
bondage. As if he should say: We stand not here upon a matter of small
importance, but either of everlasting liberty, or everlasting bondage. For
like as freedom from Gods wrath and all evils is not temporal or carnal, but
everlasting: even so the bondage of sin, death, the Devil and damnation
(wherewith all they be oppressed which will be made righteous and saved by the
law) is not corporal and such as continues but for a time, but everlasting.
For such workers of the law as go about to perform and accomplish all things
precisely and exactly (for of such Paul speaks) can never find quietness and
peace of conscience in this life. They always dout of the good will of God
toward them: they are always in fear of death, of the wrath and judgment
of God: and after this life they shall be punished for their unbelief with
everlasting damnation.

Therefore the doers of the law, and such as stand altogether upon the
righteousness and works thereof, are rightly called the Devils martyrs. Who be
the Devils Martyrs.
They take more pains and punish them selves more in purchasing hell
(according to the proverb) then the Martyrs of Christ do in obtaining
heaven. For they are tormented two manner of ways. First, they miserably
afflict themselves whilst they live here by doing of many hard and great
works, and all in vain: and afterward when they die, they reap for a
recompense everlasting damnation. Thus are they most miserable Martyrs, both in
this life and in the life to come, and their bondage is everlasting.
Contrariwise, the godly have troubles in this world, but in Christ they have
peace, because they believe that he has overcome the world. John. 16.23.
Wherefore we must stand fast in that freedom which Christ has purchased for
us by his death, and we must take good heed that we be not entangled again
with the yoke of bondage: As it happens at this day to the fantastical
spirits, who falling away from Faith and from this freedom, have procured unto
them selves here a temporal bondage, and in the world to come shall be
oppressed with an everlasting bondage. The corporal liberty of the Papists.
As for the Papists, the most part of them are become at this day plain
Epicures: Therefore whiles they may, This may truly be said also of our
Libertines and carnal gospellers at this day.
they use the liberty of the flesh, singing this careless song: Ede, bibe,
lude, post mortem nulla voluptas: That is, Eat, drink, and make good cheer,
for after this life there is no pleasure. But they are the very bondslaues of
the Devil, by whom they are holden captives at his will and pleasure,
therefore they shall feel this everlasting bondage in hell. Hitherto Paul's
exhortation has been vehement and earnest, but that which follows does far
pass it.

Verse. 2. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing.
Paul here wonderfully stirred up with zeal and feruencie of spirit,
thundreth against the law and circumcision: and these thundering words
proceeding of great zeal and indignation, the holy Ghost wresteth from him in
saying: Behold, I Paul, etc. I (I say), Galath. 6.6.
who know that I have not received the Gospel by man, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ, and have commission and authority from above to teach and
define, etc. do tell you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing at all. This is a very hard sentence: whereby Paul declares, that, to
be circumcised, is as much as to make Christ utterly unprofitable: not in
respect of himself, but of the Galathians, who being deceived by the
subtelties of the false apostles, believed that, besides faith in Christ, it
was needful for the faithful to be circumcised, without the which they could
not obtain salvation.

This place is as it were a touchstone, whereby we may most certainly and
freely judge of all doctrines, works, The judgment of the godly touching all
doctrines, religions and ceremonies.
religions and ceremonies of all men. Whosoever teach that there is any thing
necessary to salvation (whether they be Papists, Turks, Jews or Sectaries)
besides Faith in Christ, or shall devise any work or religion, or observe any
Rule, tradition or ceremony whatsoever, with this opinion that by such things
they shall obtain forgeuenes of sins, righteousness and everlasting life:
they hear in this place the sentence of the holy Ghost pronounced against them
by the Apostle, that Christ profits them nothing. Seeing Paul durst give
this sentence against the law and circumcision, which were ordained of God
himself, what durst he not do against the chafe and the dross of men's
traditions?

Wherefore this place is a terrible thunderbolt against all the kingdom of the
Pope. For all the Priests, Monks, Who they be to whom Christ is
unprofitable.
and Heremites that live in their cloisters (I speak of the best of them)
reposed all their trust and confidence in their own works, righteousness,
vows and merits, and not in Christ, whom they most wickedly and blasphemously
imagined to be an angry judge, an accuser and co^demner: And therefore here
they hear their judgment, that Christ profits them nothing. For if they can
put away sins and deserve forgeuenes of sins and everlasting life through
their own righteousness and straitnes of life: then to what purpose was Christ
borne? What profit have they by his death and bloudsheding, by his
resurrection, victory over sin, death and the Devil, seeing they are able
to overcome these monsters by their own strength? And what tou^ge can
express, or what heart can conceive how horrible a thing it is to make Christ
unprofitable? Therefore the Apostle casts out these words with great
displeasure and indignation: If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing: that is to say, no profit shall redound unto you of all his
benefits: but he has bestowed them all upon you in vain.

Hereby it appears sufficiently that nothing under the son is more hurtful
then the doctrine of men's traditions and works: for they utterly abolish and
overthrow at once the truth of the Gospel, Nothing is more hurtful then the
doctrine of men's traditions and works. Coloss. 2.3. Coloss. 2.9.
Faith, the true worshipping of God and Christ him self, in whom the father
has ordained all things, Colossians. 2. In Christ are hid all the treasures
of wisdoms and knowledge: In him dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily.
Wherefore all they that are either authors or maintainers of the doctrine of
works, are oppressors of the Gospel, they make the death and victory of
Christ unprofitable, they blemish and deface his Sacraments and utterly take
away the true use thereof, and briefly they are blasphemers, enemies, and
deniers of God and of all his promises and benefits. Who so is not moved with
these words of Paul (which calls the law a yoke of bondage, The law of
God the yoke of bondage.
and says that they which affirm the keeping of circumcision to be necessary
to salvation, make Christ unprofitable): and can not be driven from the law
and circumcision, nor yet from the confidence which he has in his own
righteousness and works, nor be stirred up to seek that liberty which is in
Christ, his heart is harder then stone and iron.

This is therefore a most certain and clear sentence, that Christ is
unprofitable, that is to say, he is borne, crucified and risen again in vain
to him that is circumcised, that is, which puts his trust in circumcision.
For (as I have said before) Paul speaks not here of the work of
circumcision (which hurts not him that has no affiance or opinion of
righteousness in it): Good works are not condemned, but confidence in good
works is condemned.
but of the use of the work, that is to say of the confidence and righteousness
that is annexed to the work: For we must understand Paul according to ye
matter whereof he entreats, or according to the argument which he has in
hand: which is, that me^ be not justified by the law, by works, by
circumcision or such like. He says not that works of them selves are nothing,
but the confidence and righteousness of works are nothing: for that makes
Christ unprofitable. Therefore who so receaueth circumcision with this opinion
that it is necessary to justification, to him Christ avails nothing.

Let us bear this well in mind in our private tentations when the Devil
accuses and terrifieth our conscience to drive it to desperation. For he is
the father of lying and the enemy of Christian liberty: therefore he tormenteth
us every moment with false fears, that when our conscience has lost this
Christian liberty, it should feel the remorse of sin and condenmation, and
always remain in auguish and terror. When that great dragon (I say) that old
serpent the Devil (who deceaueth the whole world and accuses our brethern in
the presence of God day and night. Apoc. 12.) comes and lays unto thy
charge that thou have not only done no good, Revel. 12.10.
but have also transgressed the law of God, say unto him: What we must
answer the Devil, when he accuses and tempts us.
Thou troublest me with the remembrance of my sins past: Thou put me also
in mind yt I have done no good. But this is nothing to me: for if either I
trusted in mine own good deeds, or distrusted because I have done none, Christ
should both ways profit me nothing at all. Therefore whether thou lay my
sins before me, or my good works, I pass not, but removing both far out
of my sight, I only rest in that liberty wherein Christ has made me free. I
know him to be profitable unto me: therefore I will not make him unprofitable:
which I should do, if either I should presume to purchase my self favor and
everlasting life by my good deeds, or should despair of my salvation because
of my sins.

Wherefore let us learn with all diligence to separate Christ far from all
works, as well good as evil: from all laws both of God and man, and from all
troubled consciences: for with all these Christ has nothing to do. He has
to do, I grant, with afflicted consciences: howbeit not to afflict them more,
but to raise them up, and in their affliction to comfort them. Therefore if
Christ appear in the likeness of an angry judge, or of a lawmaker that
requires a strait account of our life past: then let us assure our selves that
it is not Christ but a raging feende. For the Scripture painteth out Christ to
be our reconciliation, our advocate and our comforter. The true picture of
Christ
Such a one he is and ever shall be: he can not be unlike himself.

Therefore whenever the Devil tra^sforming himself into ye likeness Christ,
disputes with us after this manner: This thou ought being admonished by my
word to have done, and have not done it: and this thou ought not to have
done, and have done it: know thou therefore that I will take vengeance on thee,
etc. let this nothing at all move us, but by and by let us thus think with
our selves: Christ speaks not to poor afflicted and despairing consciences
after this manner: Math. 12.20.
He adds not affliction to the afflicted: He breaks not the bruised reed,
Esaias. 42.3.
neither quenches he the smoking flax. In deed to the hard hearted he
speaks sharply: but such as are terrified and afflicted, he most lovingly and
comfortably allureth unto him, saying: Come unto me all ye that travel and be
heavy laden, Math. 11.28. Math. 9.13. Math. 9.2. John. 15.33.
and I will refresh you. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Be of good comfort my son, thy sins are forgeuen thee. Be not
afraid, have overcome the world. The son of man came to seek out and save
that which was lost. Luke. 19.10.
We must take good heed therefore lest that we, being deceived by the
wonderful sleights and infinite subtelties of Satan, do receive an accuser
and condemner in the sted of a comforter and Savior, and so under the vizour
of a false Christ, that is to say, of the Devil, we lose the true Christ and
make him unprofitable unto us. This much have we said as touching private and
particular tentations, and how we should use our selves therein.

Verse. 3. For I testify again unto every man which is circumcised, that he
is bound to keep the whole law.
The first inconvenience is in deed very great, where Paul says that Christ
profits them nothing which are circumcised: and this that follows is nothing
less, where he faith that they which are circumcised, are bound to keep ye
whole law. He speaks these words with such earnestnes, that he confirms them
with an oath. I testify, that is to say, I swear by ye living God. But these
words may be expounded two ways, negatiuely and affirmatively. Negatiuely
after this manner. I testify unto every man which is circumcised that he is
bound to keep the whole law, The doers of the law do not the law.
that is to say, that he performs no piece of the law: yea that in the very
work of circumcision he is not circumcised, and even in the fulfilling of the
law he fulfilleth it not, but tra^sgresseth it. And this seems to me to be
the simple and true meaning of Paul in this place. Verse. 12.
Afterward in the.6. Chapter he expounds him self, saying: They themselves
which are circumcised, keep not the law. So he says also before in the
third Chapter. Verse. 10.
Whosoever are of the works of the law are under the curse. As if he said:
Although ye be circumcised, yet are ye not righteous and free from the law,
but by this deed ye are rather detters and bondseruauntes of the law: And the
more ye go about to satisfy the law, and to be set free from it, the more
ye entangle and snare your selves in the yoke thereof, so that it has more
power to accuse and condemn you. This is to go backward like the crabbe, and
to wash away filth with filth.

And this which I say by occasion of Paul's words, I have learned both in my
self and others. I have seen many which have painfully travailed, and upon
mere conscience have done as much as was possible for them to do, in fasting,
in prayer, in wearing of hear, in punishing and tormenting their bodies with
sundry exercises (whereby at length they must needs have utterly consumed
them, The conscience is not quieted and pacified with the observation of man's
traditions.
yea although they had been made of iron), and all to this end that they might
obtain quietness and peace of conscience: notwithstanding, the more they
travailed, the more they were stricken down with fear, and specially when the
hour of death approached they were so fearful, that I have seen many
murderers and other male factours condemned to death, dying more courageously
then they did: which notwithstanding had lived very holily.

Therefore it is most true, that they which do the law, do it not: For the
more they go about to fulfill the law, the more they transgress it. Even so
we say and judge of men's traditions. The more a man strives to pacify his
conscience thereby, the more he troubles and tormenteth it. When I was a Monk,
I endeavored as much as was possible, to live after the streit rule of mine
Order. I was wont to shriue my self with great devotion, and to reckon up all
my sins (yet being always very contrite before): and I returned to
confession very often, and thoroughly performed the penance that was enjoined
unto me: Yet for all this my conscience could never be fully certified, but was
always in doubt, and said: This or that thou have not done rightly: thou wast
not contrite and sorrowful enough: this sin thou did omit in thy
confession, etc. Therefore the more I went about to help my weak, wavering
and afflicted conscience by men's traditions, the more weak and doubtful, and
the more afflicted I was. And thus, the more I observed men's traditions, the
more I transgressed them, and in seeking after righteousness by mine Order, I
could never attain unto it. For it is impossible (as Paul says) that the
conscience should be pacified by the works of the law, and much less by men's
traditions, without the promise and glad tidings concerning Christ.

Wherefore they that seek to be justified and quickened by the law, are much
further of from righteousness and life, then the Publicanes, sinners and
harlots. For they can not trust to their own works, seeing they be such, for
the which they can not hope to obtain grace and sorgeuenes of sins.
Confidence in works utterly takes away Faith, or at least hinders it in us.
For if righteousness and works done according to the law do not justify, how
can sins justify which are committed contrary to the law? Therefore in this
point they are in far better case then the Iusticiaries: for they have no
affiance in their own works: which greatly hinders true Faith in Christ, if
it do not utterly take it away. Contrariwise the Iusticiaries which abstain
outwardly from sins, and live holily and without blame in the sight of the
world, can not be without the opinion of their own righteousness, with the
which true Faith in Christ can not stand: And for this cause they be more
miserable then Publicanes and harlotes, Iusticiaries and meritmongers will be
reco^pensed for their works with everlasting life.
who offer not their good works to God in his displeasure, that for the same
he may recompense them with everlasting life (as the Iusticiaries do) for they
have none to offer: but desire that their sins may be pardoned for Christ's
sake, etc.

He that receaueth Moises in one point, must receive him in all.
The other exposition is affirmative: He that is circumcised, is also bound to
keep the whole law. For he that receaueth Moses in one point, must of
necessity receive him in all. And it nothing helps to say: that circumcision
is necessary, and not the rest of Moises laws. For by the same reason that
thou art bound to keep circumcision, thou art also bound to keep the whole
law. Now, to be bound to keep the whole law, is nothing else but to show in
effect, that Christ is not yet come. If this be true, then are we bound to
keep all the Jewish ceremonies and laws touching meats, places and times: and
Christ must be looked for as yet to come, that he may abolish the Jewish
kingdom and priesthood, and set up a new kingdom thorowout the whole
world. But the whole Scripture witnesses, and the sequel thereof plainly
declares that Christ is already come, that by his death he has redeemed
mankind, that he has abolished the law, and that he has fulfilled all
things which all the Prophets have foretold of him. Therefore the law being
clean abolished and quite taken away, he has given unto us grace and truth.
It is not then the law nor the works thereof, but it is Faith in Jesus
Christ, that makes a man righteous.

Some would bind us at this day to certain of Moises laws that like them
best, as the false apostles would have done at that time. But this is in no
wise to be suffered. For if we give Moises leave to rule over us in any thing,
we are bound to obey him in all things. Wherefore we will not be burdened with
any law of Moises. We grant that he is to be read amongst us, Christians are
free from the policy of Moises, as touching their conscience.
and to be heard as a Prophet and a witness bearer of Christ: and moreover,
that out of him we may take good examples of good laws and holy manners. But we
will not suffer him in any wife to to have dominion over our conscience. In
this case let him be dead and buried, and let no man know where his grave
is. Deuteronomy. 34.


The former exposition: that is to say, the negative seems to me to be more
apt and more spiritual: notwythstanding both are good, and both do condemn
the righteousness of the law. The first is, that we are so far from obtaining
righteousness of the law, that the more we go about to accomplish the law, the
more we transgress the law: The second is: that he which will perform any
piece of the law, is bound to keep the whole law: To conclude, that Christ
profits them nothing at all that will be justified by the law.

Hereby it appears that Paul means nothing else, but that the law is a
plain denial of Christ. Now, They that seek to be justified by the law,
deny Christ.
it is a wonderful thing that Paul dare affirm, that the law of Moises
which was given by God to the people of Israel, is a denial of Christ. Why
then did God give it? Before the coming of Christ, and before his
manifestation in the flesh, the law was necessary. For the law is our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ. But now that Christ is revealed, in
that we believe in him, Gal. 3.14.
we are no longer under the Scholemaster. Hereof we have spoken largely enough
before in the end of the third Chapter. Who so teaches then, that the law is
necessary to righteousness, teaches a plain denial of Christ and of all his
benefits, he makes God a lier, yea he makes the law also a lier: For the
law it self bears witness of Christ, and of the promises made as
concerning Christ, and has foretold that he should be a King of grace, and
not of the law.

Verse. 4. Ye are abolished [or seperated] from Christ: 1. Cor. 1.12.
whosoever are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace.
Paul conde^neth not circumcision, but to trust in circumcision, is that
which he conde^neth.
Here Paul expounds himself, and shows that he speaks not simply of the
law nor of the work of circumcision, but of the confidence and opinion that
men have to be justified thereby. As if he would say: I do not utterly
condemn the law or circumcision (for it is lawful for me to drink, to eat,
and to keep company with the Jews according to the law: it is lawful for me
to circumcise Timothy:) but to seek to be justified by the law, as if Christ
were not yet come, or being now present, he alone were not able to justify:
this is it which I condemn, for this is to be separated from Christ. Therefore,
says he, ye are abolished: that is, ye are utterly void of Christ, Christ
is not in you, he works not in you any more: Ye are not partakers of the
knowledge, the spirit, the fellowship, the favor, the liberty, the life, or
the doings of Christ, but ye are utterly separate from him, so that he has no
more to do with you, nor ye with him.

Christ and the law can not dvvell together.
These words of Paul are diligently to be noted: that to seek righteousness by
the law, is nothing else but to be separated from Christ, and to make him
utterly unprofitable. What can be spoken more mightily against the law? what
can be set against this thunderbolte. Wherefore it is impossible that Christ
and the law should dwell together in one heart: for either the law or Christ
must give place. But if thou think that Christ and the law can dwell
together, then be thou sure yt Christ dwells not in thy heart, but the
Devil in the likeness of Christ, accusing and terrifying thee, and straightly
exacting of thee the law and ye works thereof. True Faith.
For the true Christ (as I said before) neither calls thee to a reckening
for thy sins, nor bids thee trust to thine own good works. And the true
knowledge of Christ or Faith disputes not whether thou have done good works
to righteousness, or evil works to condemnation: but simply concludes after
this sort: if thou have done good works, thou art not therefore justified, or
if thou have done evil works, thou art not therefore condemned. I neither
take from good works their praise, nor commend evil works. But in the matter
of justification, I say, we must look how we may hold Christ, lest if we seek
to be justified by the law, we make him unprofitable unto us. For it is
Christ alone that justifies me, both against my evil deeds, and without my
good deeds. If I have this persuasion of Christ, I lay hold of the true
Christ. But if I think that he exacteth the law and works of me to
salvation, then he becomes unprofitable unto me, and I am utterly serated from
him.

These are dreadful sentences and threatenings against the righteousness of the
law and man's own righteousness. Moreover, they are also most certain
principles which confirm the article of justification. This is the^ a final
conclusion: We must either forgo Christ or the law.
Either thou must forgo Christ or the righteousness of the law. If thou
retain Christ, thou art righteous before God: but if thou stick to the law,
Christ avails thee nothing: thou art bound to keep the whole law, and thou
have now sentence already pronounced against thee: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is every one that fulfilleth not all the things that are vvrytten in
this law. As we have said of the law, so we say also of men's traditions.
Either the Pope with his religious rout must reject all those things wherein
hitherto he has put his trust, or else Christ shall be unprofitable to them.
And hereby we may plainly see how pernicious and pestilent the Popish doctrine
has been. For it has led men clean away from Christ, The doctrine of the Pope
led us quite away from Christ, and made him altogether unprofitable to us.
and made him altogether unprofitable. God complains in the.23. of Jeremy,
that the Prophets prophesied lies and the dreams of their own heart, to the
end that his people should forget his name. Therefore like as the false
Prophets leaving the right interpretation of the law, and the true doctrine
concerning the Seed of Abraham in whom all the nations of the earth should be
blessed, preached their own dreams, to the end that the people should forget
their God: even so the Papists having darkened and defaced the doctrine of
Christ, so that they made it of none effect, taught and set forth nothing
else but the doctrine of works, whereby they drew the whole world away from
Christ. Who so earnestly considers this matter, it will make his heart to
tremble.

Verse. 4. Ye are fallen from grace.
That is to say: Ye are no longer in the kingdom of grace. For like as he that
is in a ship, on which side so ever he falls into the sea, is drowned: even
so he which is fallen from grace must needs perish. He therefore that will be
justified by the law, is fallen into the sea, What danger it is to seek
righteousness by the law.
and has cast himself into danger of eternal death. Now, if they fall from
grace which will be justified by the moral law: whether shall they fall (I
pray you) which will be justified by their own traditions and vows? Even to
the bottom of hell. No forsooth: they fly up into heaven, for so they
themselves have taught us. Who so ever live (say they) according to the Rule of
S. Fraunces, Dominicke, Benedict or such other, the peace and mercy of God is
upon them. Again, All they that observe and keep chastity, obedience, etc.
shall have everlasting life. But let these toys go to the Devil from whom
they came, and hearken what Paul teaches thee here: and what Christ
teaches, John. 3.3^.
saying: He that believes in the son of God has everlasting life: but he
that believes not in the sons shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides upon him. Again, he that believes not is judged already. John 5.18.


Now like as all the doctrine of the Papists (to note this by the way)
concerning men's traditions, The Popes kingdom is grounded upon men's traditions.
works, vows and merits, was most common in the world: so was it thought to
be the best and most certain of all others: whereby the Devil has both set
up and stablished his kingdom most mightily. Therefore when we at this day
do impugn and vanquish this doctrine by the power of Gods word, as chafe is
driven away by the wind, it is no marvel that Satan rages so cruelly against
us, raises up sclaunders and offenses every where, and sets the whole
world in our tops. Then, will some man say: It had been better to have held
our peace, for then had none of these evils been raised up. But we ought more
to esteem the favor of God, whose glory we set forth, then to care for ye
tirranny of ye world which persecuteth us. For what is the Pope and the whole
world in comparison of God? In deed we are weak, and bear an heavenly
treasure in brickle and earthly vessels: 1. Cor. 4.7.
but although the vessels be never so brickle, yet is the treasure
inestimable.

These words: Ye are fallen from grace, must not be coldly or slenderly
considered: for they are weighty and of great importance. He that falls from
grace, What he loses thrt falls from grace.
utterly loses the atonement, the forgeuenes of sins, the righteousness,
liberty and life that Jesus Christ has merited for us by his death and
resurrection: and instead thereof he purchases to himself the wrath and
judgment of God, sin, death, the bondage of the Devil and everlasting
damnation. And this place strongly confirms and fortifieth our doctrine
concerning Faith or the article of justification, and maruelously comfort us
against the cruel rage of the Papists that persecute and condemn us as
heretics because we teach this article. In deed this place ought to fear yt
enemies of Faith and grace, that is to say, all that seek righteousness by
works, from persecuti^g and blaspheming ye word of grace life and everlasting
salvation: But they be so hardhearted and obstinate, that seeing they see not,
and hearing they hear not, and when they read this dreadful sentence of the
Apostle pronounced against them, they understand it not. Let us therefore let
them alone: Math. 15.1^.
They are blind, and leaders of the blind.

Verse. 5. For we in spirit vvait for the hope of righteousness through Faith.
Paul here knitteth up the matter with a notable conclusion, saying: Ye will
be justified by the law, by circumcision and by works: but we seek not to be
justified by this means, lest Christ should be made utterly unprofitable unto
us: and we become detters to perform the whole law, and so finally fall away
from grace: but we wait in spirit through Faith for the hope of righteousness.
Every word is here diligently to be noted, for they are pithie and full of
power. He does not only say, as he is wont: We are justified by Faith, or in
spirit by Faith, but moreover he adds: We wait for the hope of
righteousness, including hope also, that he may comprehend the whole matter of
Faith.

Hope, after the manner of the Scriptures, is taken two ways: for the thing
that is hoped for, and for the affection of him that hops. For the thing
which is hoped for, it is taken in yt first chapt. to the Coloss: Verse. 3.
For the hopes sake which is laid up for you in heaven: that is to say, the
thing which ye hope for. For the affection of him that hops, it is taken in
ye 8 chap. to ye Romans: For we are saved by hope. Verse. 14.25.
So hope in this place also may be taken two ways, and so it yeldeth a double
sense. The first is: We wait in spirit through Faith for the hope of
righteousness, that is to say, the righteousness hoped for, which shall be
certainly revealed in such time as it pleases the Lord to give it. The
second: We wait in spirit by Faith for righteousness with hope and desire: that
is to say, we are righteous: howbeit our righteousness is not yet revealed, but
hangs yet in hope. For, as long as we live here, sin remains in our
flesh: Romans 8.24. Romans 7.15.16.17 Romans 7.23.
there is also a law in our flesh and members rebelling against the law of
our mind, and leading us captives unto the service of sin. Now when these
affections of the flesh do rage and reign, and we on the other side through
the spirit do wrestle against the same, then is there a place for hope. In
deed we have begun to be justified through Faith: whereby also we have
received the first fruits of the spirit, and the the mortification of the
flesh is also begun in us: but we be not yet perfetly righteous. It remains
then that we be perfectly justified, and this is it that we hope for. So our
righteousness is not yet in actual possession but lies under hope.

This is a sweet and a sound consolation, whereby afflicted and troubled
consciences feeling their sin, and terrified with every fiery dart of the
Devil, may be maruelously comforted. For the feeling of sin, the wrath of
God, death, hell and all other terrors, is wonderful strong in the conflict
of conscience: as I my self being taught by experience do know. Then counsel
must be given to the poor afflicted in this wise: Brother thou desire to
have a sensible feeling of thy justification: that is, thou would have such
a feling of Gods favor, as thou have of thine own sin: but that will not
be. But thy righteousness ought to surmount all feeling of sin: that is to
say, thy righteousness or justification whereupon thou hold, stands not
upon thine own feeling, but upon thy hoping that it shall be revealed when it
pleases the Lord. Wherefore thou must not judge according to the feeling of
sin which troubles and terrifieth thee, The righteousness of the faithful
stands not in feeling.
but according to the promise and doctrine of Faith, whereby Christ is
promised unto thee, who is thy perfect and everlasting righteousness. Thus ye
hope of the afflicted consisting in the inward affection, is stirred up by
Faith in the midst of all terrors and feeling of sin, to hope that he is
righteous. Moreover, if hope be here taken for the thing which is hoped for, it
is thus to be understand, that that which a man now sees not, he hops in
time shall be made perfect and clearly reueiled.

Either sense may well stand: but the first touching the inward desire and
affection of hoping, brings more plentiful consolation. For my righteousness
is not yet perfect, it can not yet be felt: yet I do not despair: for Faith
shows unto me Christ in whom I trust, and when I have laid hold of him by
Faith, I wrestle against the fiery darts of the Devil, and I take a good
heart through hope against the feeling of sin, assuring my self that I have
a perfect righteousness prepared for me in heaven. So both these sayings are
true, that I am made righteous already by that righteousness which is begun in
me: and also I am raised up in the same hope against sin, and wait for the
full consummation of perfect righteousness in heaven. These things are not
rightly understand, but when they be put in practice.

What difference there is between Faith and Hope.
Here rises a question, what difference there is between Faith and Hope. The
Sophisters and Schooleme^ have labored very much in this matter, but they
could never show any certainty. Yea to us which travel in the holy Scriptures
with much diligence, and also with more fulness and power of spirit (be it
spoken without any brag) it is hard to find any difference. For there is so
great affinity between Faith and hope, that the one can not be separate from
the other. Notwithstanding there is a difference between them, which is
gathered of their several offices, diversity of working, and of their ends.

First, they differ in respect of their subject, that is, Faith and hope differ
in respect of their subject. Exodus 25.20.
of the ground wherein they rest: For Faith rests in the understanding, and
hope rests in the will: but in very deed they can not be separated, the one
having respect to the other, as the two Cherubins of the Mercieseat, which
could not be divided.

Secondly, they differ in respect of their office, that is, The difference
between faith and hope in their office.
of their working. For faith tells what is to be done, it teaches,
prescribes, and directs, and it is a knowledge. Hope is an exhortation which
stirs up the mind that it may be strong, bold, and courageous: that it may
suffer and endure adversity, and in the midst thereof wait for better things.

Thirdly, they differ as touching their object, that is, The difference as
touching the object.
the special matter whereunto they look. For Faith has for her object the
truth, teaching us to cleave surely thereto, and looks upon the word and
promise of the thing that is promised. Hope has for her object the goodness of
God, and looks upon the thing which is promised in the word, that is, upon
such matters as Faith teaches us to be hoped for.

Fourthly, they differ in order: Difference in order. Romans 5.3.4.5.
For Faith is the beginning of life before all tribulation. Heb. 11. But hope
comes afterward proceeding of tribulations. Romans 5.

Fifthly, they differ by the diversity of working: Difference in vvorking.
For Faith is a teacher and a judge, fighting against errors and heresies,
judging spirits and doctrines. But hope is as it were the General or Captain
of the field, fighting against tribulation, the cross, impatiencie, heaviness
of spirit, weakness, desperation and blasphemy, and it waits for good things
even in the midst of all evils.

Therefore, when I am instructed by Faith in the word of God, and lay hold of
Christ, believing in him with my whole heart, then am I righteous by this
knowledge. When I am so justified by Faith or by this knowledge, by and by
comes the Devil the father of lies, and labors to extinguish my Faith by
wiles and subtilties: that is to say, by lies, errors and heresies. Moreover,
because he is a murderer, he goes about also to oppress it by violence. Here
hope wrastlinge, lays hold on the thing revealed by Faith, and ouercometh
the Devil that warreth against Faith: and after this victory follows peace
and joy in the holy Ghost: So that in very deed faith and hope can scarsely be
discerned the one from the other, and yet is there a certain difference
between them. And that it may be the better perceived, I will set out the
matter by a similitude.

In civil government Prudence and Fortitude do differ, and yet these two
virtues are so joined together, that they can not easily be severed. Now,
fortitude is a constancy of mind, which is not discouraged in adversity, but
endures valiantly, and waits for better things. But if fortitude be not
guided by prudence, it is but temeritie and rashness. The difference between
faith and hope in divinity, is the same that is between fortitude and
prudence in policy.
On the other side, if fortitude be not joined with prudence, that prudence is
but vain and unprofitable. Therefore like as in policy prudence is but vain
without fortitude: even so in Divinity Faith without hope is nothing: For hope
endures adversity and is constant therein, and in the end ouercometh all evils.
And on the other side, like as fortitude without prudence is rashness, even so
hope without faith is a presumption in spirit, and a tempting of God: for it
has no knowledge of Christ and of the truth which Faith teaches, and therefore
it is but a blind rashness and arrogancy. Wherefore a godly man before all
things, must have a right understanding instructed by Faith, according to the
which the mind may be guided in afflictions, that it may hope for those good
things which Faith has revealed and taught.

To be short, Faith is conceived by teaching: for thereby the mind is
instructed what the truth is. Hope is conceived by exhortation: for by
exhortation hope is stirred up in afflictions, which confirms him that is
already justified by Faith, that he be not overcome by adversities, but that he
may be able more strongly to resist them. Notwtstanding if the spark of Faith
should not give light to ye will, it could not be persuaded to lay hold upon
hope. We have Faith then, whereby we are taught, understand, and know the
heavenly wisdom, apprehende Christ and continue in his grace. But as soon as
we lay hold upon Christ by Faith and confess him, forthwith our enemies, the
world, the flesh and the Devil rise up against us, As soon as we begin to
lay hold on Christ our enemies the fle^h, the world and the Deui^l rise up
against us, but hope vvr^s^l^th against them all.
hating and persecuting us most cruelly both in body and spirit. Wherefore we
thus believing and justified by Faith in spirit, do wait for the hope of our
righteousness: And we wait through patience: for we see and feel the flat
contrary. For the world with his Prince the Devil, assaileth us mightily both
within and without. Moreover, sin yet still remains in us, which drives us
into heaviness. Notwithstanding we give not over for all this, but raise up
our mind strongly through Faith, which lightneth, teaches and guides the
same. And thus we abide firm and constant, and overcome al adversities through
him which has loved us, until our righteousness which we believe and wait for,
be revealed. By Faith therefore we began, by hope we continue, and by
revelation we shall obtain the whole. In the mean time whilst we live here,
because we believe, we teach the word, and publish the knowledge of Christ unto
others. Thus doing we suffer persecution (according to this text: I believed and
therefore did I speak: Psalm. 116.10.
and I was fore troubled) with patience, being strengthened and encouraged
through hope: whereunto the Scripture exhorts us with most sweet and
comfortable promises taught and revealed unto us by Faith. And thus does hope
spring up and increase in us, Ro^. 15. That through patience and comfort of the
Scripture we may have hope. Romans 15.^.


Paul therefore, not without cause joins patience in tribulatio^s, and hope
together in the.5. and.8. to the Romans, and in other places also: for by them
hope is stirred up. Romans 5.1. Romans 1.24.
But Faith (as also I have showed before) goes before hope: for it is the
beginning of life, and begins before all tribulation: For it learneth
Christ, and apprehends him without the cross. Notwithstanding the knowledge
of Christ can not be long without the cross, without troubles and conflictes.
The true knowledge of Christ is not without the cross.
In this case the mind must be stirred up to a fortitude of spirit, (For
hope is nothing else but a spiritual fortitude, as Faith is nothing else but a
spiritual prudence) which consists in suffering, according to this saying:
That through patience, etc. These three things then dwell together in ye
faithful: Faith which teaches ye truth, Faith. Hope. Charity of love.
and defends from errors: Hope which endures and ouerco^eth al adversities,
as well bodily as ghostly: and Charity which works all good things, as it
follows in the text. And so is a man entire and perfect in this life, as well
within as without, 1. Cor. 13.1^.
until the righteousness be revealed which he waits for: and this shall be a
perfect and an everlasting righteousness.

Moreover this place contains both a singular doctrine and consolation. As
touching the doctrine it shows that we are made righteous, not by the works,
sacrifices or ceremonies of Moises law, much less by the works and traditions
of me^, but by Christ alone. What so ever is in us besides him, Whatsoever the
world estemeth to be good and holy without Christ, is sin.
is of the flesh and not of the spirit. What so ever then the world counts
to be good and holy without Christ, is nothing else but sin, error, and
flesh. Wherefore circumcision, and the observation of the law: also the works,
religions and vows of the Monks and of all such as trust in their own
righteousness, are altogether carnal. But we (says Paul) are far above all
these things in the spirit and inward man: For we possess Christ by Faith,
and in the mids of our afflictions through hope we wait for that righteousness
which we possess already by Faith.

The comfort is this: that in serious conflicts and terrors, wherein ye feeling
of sin, A svvete consolation in anguish and trouble of conscience.
heaviness of syirite, desperation and such like, is very strong (for they
enter deeply into the heart and mightily assail it) thou must not follow
thine own feeling. For if thou do, thou will say: I feel the horrible
terrors of the law and the tyranny of sin, not only rebelling against me,
but also subduing and leading me captive, and I feel no comfort or
righteousness at all. Therefore I am a sinner and not righteous. If I be a
sinner, then am I guilty of everlasting death. But against this feeling thou
must wrestle, and say: Although I feel my self utterly overwhelmed and
swalowed up with sin, and my heart tells me that God is offended and angry
with me, yet in very deed it is not true, but that mine own sense and feeling
so judges. The word of God (which in these terrors I ought to follow, and not
mine own sense) teaches a far other thing: namely that God is near unto
them that are of a troubled heart, and saves them that are of an humble
spirit. Psalm. 51.17. Psalm. 51.
Also, he despises not an humble and a contrite heart. Moreover, Paul shows
here, that they that are justified in spirit by Faith, do not yet feel the
hope of righteousness, but wait still for it.

Wherefore when the law accuses and sin terrifieth thee, and thou feel
nothing but the wrath and judgment of God, despair not for all that, but take
unto thee the armor of God, the shield of Faith, the helmet of hope, and the
sword of the spirit, and try how good and how valiant a warrior thou art.
Lay hold of Christ by Faith, who is the Lord of the law and sin, and of all
things else which accompany them. Believing in him thou art justified: which
thing reason and the feeling of thine own heart when thou art tempted, do not
tell thee, but the word of God. Moreover, in the midst of these conflictes
and terrors which often return and exercise thee, wait thou patiently
through hope for righteousness, which thou have now by Faith, although it be yet
but begun and imperfect, until it be revealed and made perfect in the kingdom
of heaven.

But thou will say: I feel not my self to have any righteousness, Our
righteousness consists not in feeling, but in believing. Ephesians. 5.^6. Romans 5.8.
Romans 5.34. Rom 14.9. 1. Cor. 15.3.
or at least wise I feel it but very little. Thou must not feel, but believe
that thou have righteousness. And except thou believe that thou art righteous,
thou do great injury unto Christ, who has cleansed thee by the washing of
water through the word, who also died upon the cross, condemned sin and
killed death, that through him thou might obtain righteousness and
everlasting life. These things thou can not deny (except thou will openly
show thy self to be wicked, and blasphemous against God, and utterly to despise
God, all his promises, Jesus Christ with all his benefits): and so
consequently thou can not deny but that thou art righteous.

Let us learn therefore in great and horrible terrors, when our conscience
feels nothing but sin, and judges that God is angry with us, and that
Christ has turned his face from us, not to follow the sense and feeling of our
own heart, but to stick to the word of God, which says yt God is not angry,
but looks to ye afflicted, Esaias. 66.2.
to such as are troubled in spirit, and tremble at his word: and that Christ
turns not himself away from such as labor and are heavy laden, Math. 11.28.
but refreshes and comfort them. This place therefore teaches plainly,
that the law and works bring unto us no righteousness or comfort at all, but
this does the holy Ghost only in the Faith of Christ, who raises up hope in
terrors and tribulations, which endures and overcomes all adversities. Very
few there be that know how weak and feeble Faith and hope are under the
cross, and in the conflict. For it seems that they are but as smoking flax,
Esaias. ^2.3.
which is ready by and by to be put out with a vehement wind. But the
faithful, who believe in the midst of these assaults and terrors, hoping
against hope: that is to say, fighting through Faith in the promise as touching
Christ, against the feeling of sin and of the wrath of God: do afterward
find by experience, that this spark of Faith being very little (as it
appears to natural reason: for reason can scarsely feel it) is as a mighty
fire, and swaloweth up all our sins and all terrors.

There is nothing more dear or precious in all the world to the true children
of God, The treasure of the Faithful.
then this doctrine. For they that understand this doctrine, do know that
whereof all the world is ignorant: namely that sin, death and all other
miseries, afflictions and calamities, as well corporal as spiritual, do
turn to the benefit and profit of the elect. Moreover, they know that God is
then most nere unto them, when he seems to be farthest of, and that he is
then a most merciful and loving Savior, when he seems to be most angry, to
afflict, and to destroy. Also they know that they have an everlasting
righteousness, which they wait for through hope, as a certain and sure
possession laid up for them in heaven, even when they feel the horrible
terrors of sin and death: Moreover that they are then Lords of all things,
when they are most destitute of all things, according to that saying: having
nothing, and yet possessing all things. 2. Cor. 6.7.10.
This says the Scripture, is to conceive comfort through hope. But this
cunning is not learned without great and often tentations.

Verse. 6. For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing,
neither uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love.
A true and a lively Faith.
That is to say, Faith which is not fained nor hypocritical, but true and
lively. This is that faith which exercises and requires good works through
love. It is as much to say as: He that will be a true Christian in deed, or
one of Christ's kingdom, must be a true beleuer. Now, he believes not truly if
works of charity follow not his Faith. So on both hands, Paul shuts all
hypocrites out of the church of God both on the right hand and on the left.
as well on ye right hand as on ye left, he shuts hypocrites out of Christ's
kingdom. On the left hand he shuts out the Jews, and all such as will work
their own salvation, saying: In Christ neither circumcision, that is to say:
no works, no service, no worshipping, no kind of life in the world, but faith
without any trust in works or merits avails before God. On the right hand he
shuts out all slothful and idle persons, which say: if faith justify
without works, then let us work nothing, but let us only believe and do what
we list. Not so ye enemies of grace. Paul says otherwise. And although it be
true that only faith justifies, yet he speaks here of Faith in an other
respect, that is to say, that after it has justified, it is not idle, but
occupied and exercised in working through love. The whole life of a Christian.
Paul therefore in this place sets forth the whole life of a Christian man,
namely, that inwardly it consists in faith toward God, and outwardly in
charity and good works toward our neighbor. So that a man is a perfect
Christ an inwardly through faith before God, who has no need of our works,
and outwardly before men, to whom our Faith profits nothing, but our charity
or our works. Therefore when we have heard or understand of this form of
Christian life: to wit, that it is faith and charity (as I have said), it is
not yet declared what Faith or what charity is: for this is an other question.
For as touching faith or the inward nature, force, and use of Faith, he has
spoken before. Where he showed that it is our righteousness, or rather our
justification before God. Here he joins it with charity and works, that is
to say, he speaks of the external office thereof, which is to stir us up
to do good works, and to bring forth in us the fruits of charity to the
profit of our neighbor.

Verse. 7. Ye did run well: who did let you, that ye did not obey the
truth?
These are plain words. Paul affirms that he teaches them the truth, and
the self same thing that he taught them before, and that they ran well so
long as they obeyed the truth, that is, they believed and lived rightly: but now
they did not so since they were misled by the false apostles. Moreover he uses
here a new kind of speech in calling the Christian life a course or a race.
For among the Hebrews, The christian life is a course or a race.
to run or to walk signifies as much as to live or to be conversant. The
teachers do run when they teach purely, and the hearers or learners do
run when they receive the word with joy, and when the fruits of the spirit
do follow. Which thing was done as long as Paul was present, as he witnessed
before in the third and fourth chap. And here he says: Ye did run well:
that is to say, all things went forward well and happily among you, ye lived
very well, ye went on the right way to everlasting life, which the word of God
promised you, etc.

These words: Ye did run well, contain in them a singular comfort. This
tentation oftentimes exercises the godly, that their life seems unto them to
be rather a certain slow creeping, then a running. But if they abide in sound
doctrine and walk in the spirit, let this nothing trouble them, though
their doings seem to go slowly forward, or rather to creep. God judges
far otherwise. For that which seems unto us to be very slow and scarsely to
creep, That which seems to us to creep, runs svviftly in Gods sight.
Math. 5.4. Luke. 6.21. Romans 8.28.
runs swiftly in Gods sight. Again, that which is to us nothing else but
sorrow, mourning and death, is before God, joy, mirth and true happiness.
Therefore Christ says: Blessed are ye that mourn and weep for ye shall
receive comfort: ye shall laugh. etc. All things shall turn to ye best to them
which believe in ye son of God, be it sorrow; or be it death it self.
Therefore they be true runners in deed, and whatsoever they do, it runs
well and goes happily forward by ye furtherance of Gods spirit, which can not
skill of slow procedings.

Verse. 7. Who did let you that you did not obey the truth?
They are hindered in this course which fall away from Faith and grace to the
law and works: as it happened to the Galathians being misled and seduced by the
false apostles, whom he covertly reprehendeth with these words: Galath. 3.1.
who did let you that ye did not obey the truth? In like manner he said before
in the third Chap. who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth?
And here Paul shows by the way, False doctrine bevvitcheth men.
that men are so strongly bewitched with false doctrine, that they embrace lies
and heresies in the sted of the truth and spiritual doctrine. And on the other
side they say and swear that ye sound doctrine which before they loved, is
erroneous, and that their error is sound doctrine, maintaining and defending
the same with all their power. Even so the false apostles brought the
Galathians, which ran well at the beginning, into this opinion, to believe
that they erred and went very slowly forward when Paul was their teacher. But
afterward they being seduced by the false apostles and falling clean away
from the truth, were so strongly bewitched with their false persuasion, that
they thought them selves to be in an happy state, and that they ran very
well. The same happens at this day to such as are seduced by the Sectaries and
fantastical spirits. Therefore I am wont to say, Falling in doctrine comes of
the Devil.
that falling in doctrine comes not of man, but of the Devil, and is most
perilous: to wit, even from the high heaven to the bottom of hell: For they
that continue in error, are so far of from acknowledging their sin, that
they maintain the same to be high righteousness. Wherefore it is impossible for
them to obtain pardon.

Verse. 8. It is not the persvvasion of him that calls you.
This is a great consolation and a singular doctrine, whereby Paul shows
how the false persuasions of such as are deceived by wicked teachers, may be
rooted out of their hearts. The authority of the false apostles.
The false apostles were ioly fellows, and in outward appearance far passing
Paul both in learning and in godliness. The Galathians being dedeceaued with
this goodly show, supposed that when they heard them, they heard Christ him
self, and therefore they judged their persuasion to be of Christ.
Contrariwise Paul shows that this persuasion and doctrine was not of Christ,
who had called them in grace, but of the Devil: And by this means he woonne
many of them from this false persuasion. Likewise we at this day revoke many
from error that were seduced, when we show that their opinions are
fantastical, wicked, and full of blasphemies.

Again, this consolation belongs to all those that are afflicted, which
through tentation conceive a false opinion of Christ. A consolation for them
which conceive a false opinion of Christ.
For the Devil is a wonderful crafty perswader, and knows how to amply
the least sin, yea a very trifle, in such sort that he which is tempted shall
think it to be a most heinous and horrible crime, and worthy of eternal
damnation. Here the troubled conscience must be comforted and raised up in
such sort as Paul raised up the Galathians: to wit, that this cogitation
or persuasion comes not of Christ, for as much as it fights against the
word of the Gospel, which painteth out Christ, not as an accuser, a cruel
exactor, etc. but as a meek, humble hearted, and a merciful Savior and
comforter.

But if Satan overthrow this (For he is a cunning workman, and will leave no
way unassayed) and lay against thee the word and example of Christ in this
wise: True it is that Christ is meek, gentle and merciful, but to those which
are holy and righteous. Contrariwise, to the sinners he threatens wrath and
destruction. Luke. 13. Also he pronounces that the unbelievers are damned
already. John. 3. Moreover, Christ wrought many good works: he suffered also
many euilles, and commands us to follow his example. But thy life is neither
according to Christ's word nor his example: For thou are a sinner, and there is
no Faith in thee: Yea thou have done no good at all, and therefore those
sentences which set forth Christ as a severe judge, do belong to thee, and not
those comfortable sentences which show him to be a loving and a merciful
Savior, etc. Here let him that is tempted comfort himself after this manner.

Christ is set out in the Scriptures as a gift and as an example. Coloss. 2.3.
1. Cor. 1.30.
The Scripture sets out Christ unto us two manner of ways: First as a gift.
If I take hold of him in this sort, I can want nothing. For in Christ are hid
all the treasures of wisdoms and knowledge: He, with all that is in him, is
made unto me of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.
Therefore although I have committed both many and grievous sins: yet
notwithstanding if I believe in him, they shall all be swalowed up by his
righteousness. Secondly, the Scripture sets him forth as an example to be
followed. Notwithstanding I will not suffer this Christ (I mean as he is an
example) to be set before me, but only in the time of joy and gladness when I
am out of tentation (where I can scarsely follow the thousand part of his
example) that I may have him as a mirror to behold and view how much is yet
wanting in me, that I become not secure and careless. But in the time of
tribulation I will not hear nor admit Christ, but as a gift, who dying for my
sins, has bestowed upon me his righteousness, and has done and accomplished
that for me, which was wanting in my life: Romans 10.4.
For he is the end and fulfilling of the law unto righteousness to every one
that believes.

It is good to know these things, not only to the end that every one of us
may have a sure and a certain remedy in the time of tentation, whereby we may
eschew that venom of desperation, wherewith Satan thinks to poison us: but
also to the end we may be able to resist the furious Sectaries and
Schismatikes of our time. For the Anabaptists count nothing more glorious in
their whole doctrine, then that they so severely urge the example of Christ and
the cross: especially seeing ye sentences are manifest wherein Christ
comme^deth the cross to his disciples. We must learn therefore how we may
withstand this Satan, tra^sforming himself into the likeness of an Angel.
Which we shall do if we make a difference between Christ set forth unto us
sometimes as a gift, and sometimes as an example. The preaching of him both
ways has his convenient time, which if it be not observed, the preaching of
salvation may so be turned into poison. To whom Christ must be set out as a
gift, and to whom as an example.
Christ therefore must be set forth unto those which are already cast down
and bruised through the heavy burden and weight of their sins, as a Savior
and a gift, and not as an example or a lawgeuer. But to those that are secure
and obstinate, he must be set forth as an example. Also the hard sentences of
the Scripture, and the horrible examples of the wrath of God must be laid
before them: as of the drowning of the whole world, of the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrha, and such other like, that they may repent. Let every
Christian therefore when he is terrified and afflicted, learn to cast away ye
false persuasion which he has conceived of Christ, and let him say: O cursed
Satan, why do thou now dispute with me of Doing and Working, seeing I am
terrified and afflicted for my sins already? Nay rather, seeing I now labor
and am heavy laden, Math. 11.28.
I will not hearken to thee which art an accuser and a destroyer, but to
Christ the Savior of mankind, which says that he came into the world to
save sinners, to comfort such as are in terror, anguish and desperation, and
to preach deliverance to the captives. etc. This is the true Christ, and there
is none other but he. I can seek examples of holy life in Abraham, Esaias, John
Baptist, Paul and other Saints. But they can not forgive my sins, they can
not deliver me from the power of the Devil and from death, they cannot save me
and give me everlasting life. For these things belong to Christ alone, John.
6.27. Math. 3.17. 1. Pet. 1.17. Coloss. 1.13.
whom God the father has sealed: therefore I will not hear thee nor acknowledge
thee for my teacher, O Satan, but Christ, of whom the father has said: This
is my well beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Let us learn
in this wise to comfort our selves through Faith in tentation, and in the
persuasion of false doctrine: else the Devil will either seduce us by his
ministers, or else kill us with his fiery darts.

Verse. 9. A little leaven does leaven the whole lump.
This whole Epistle sufficiently witnesses how Paul was grieved with the fall
of the Galathians, and how often he beat into their heads (sometime chiding
and sometime entreating them) the exceeding great and horrible enormities that
should ensue upon this their fall, unless they repented. This fatherly and
Apostolical care and admonition of Paul moved some of them nothing at all:
For many of them acknowledged Paul no more for their teacher, but preferred
the false apostles far above him: of whom they thought them selves to have
received the true doctrine, and not of Paul. The false apostles misreported
Paul to the churches.
Moreover the false apostles, no doubt, sclaundered Paul among the Galathians,
saying that he was an obstinate and a contentious fellow, which for a light
matter would break the unity of the churches, and for no other cause but that
he alone would be counted wise and be magnified of them. Through this false
accusation they made Paul very odious unto many.

Some other which had not yet utterly forsaken his doctrine, thought that there
was no danger in dissenting a little from him in the doctrine of justification
and Faith. Wherefore, when they heard that Paul made so heinous a matter of
that which seemed unto them to be but light and of small importance, then
marvelled, and thus they thought with themselves: Be it so that we have swarned
something from the doctrine of Paul, and that there has been some fault in
us: yet that being but a small matter, he ought to wink thereat, or at least
not to vehemently to amplify it, lest by the occasion thereof the concord of
the Churches should be broken. Whereunto he answers with this sentence: A
little leven leueneth, [or makes sovver] the whole lump of dough. And this is
a caveat or an admonition which Paul stands much upon. And we also ought
greatly to esteem the same at this day. For our adversaries in like manner
object against us that we are contentious, obstinate, and intractable in
defending our doctrine, and even in matters of no great importance. But these
are the crafty fetches of the Devil, whereby he goes about utterly to
overthrow our doctrine. To this we answer therefore with Paul, that a little
leven makes sour the whole lump.

In Philosophy a small fault in the beginning is a great and a foul fault in
the end. So in Divinity one little error overthrows the whole doctrine.
Doctrine and life must be separate far a sunder.
Wherefore we must separate life and doctrine far asunder. The doctrine is
not ours, but Gods, whose ministers only we are called: therefore we may not
change or diminish one tittle thereof. The life is ours: therefore as touching
that, we are ready to do, The doctrine of Faith.
to suffer, to forgive, etc. what so ever our adversaries shall require of us,
so that Faith and doctrine may remain sound and vncorrupt: of the which we say
always with Paul: A little leven leueneth, etc.

A small mote in the eye hurts the eye. And our Savior Christ says: Luke.
11.34.
The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, then is
thy whole body light: but if thine eye be evil, then thy body is dark. Luke.
11.36.
Again. If thy body shall have no part dark, then shall all be light. By this
allegory Christ signifies, that the eye, that is to say, the doctrine ought
to be most simple, clear and sincere, Iam. 2.10.
having in it no darkness, no cloud. etc. And James the Apostle says: He that
fails in one point is guilty of all. This place therefore makes very much for
us against these cauillers which say that we break charity, to the great hurt
and damage of the churches. But we protest that we desire nothing more then to
be at unity with all men: so that they leave unto us the doctrine of Faith
entire and vncorrupt: to the which all things ought to give place, be it
charity, an Apostle, or an angel from heaven.

Let us suffer them therefore to extol charity and concord as much as they
list: Charity suffers all things, but Faith suffers nothing 1. Cor. 13.^.
but on the other side let us magnify the majesty of the word and Faith.
Charity may be neglected in time and place without any danger: but so can not
the word and Faith be. Charity suffers all things, gives place to all men.
Contrariwise, Faith suffers nothing, gives place to no man. Charity in
giving place, in believing, Charity may be deceived, but faith cannot.
in giving and forgeuing is oftentimes deceived, and yet notwithstanding being
so deceived, it suffers no loss which is to be called true loss in deed:
that is to say, it loses not Christ: Therefore it is not offended, but
continues still constant in well doing, yea even toward the unthankful and
unworthy. Contrariwise in the matter of Faith and salvation, when men teach
lies and errors under the color of the truth and seduce many, here has
charity no place: When we must exercise charity and when not.
For here we lose not any benefit bestowed upon the unthankful, but we lose
the word, Faith, Christ, and everlasting life. Let it not move us therefore
that they urge so much the keeping of charity and concord: For who so loves
not God and his word, it is no matter what or how much he loves.

Paul therefore, by this sentence admonishes, as well teachers as hearers, to
take heed that they esteem not the doctrine of Faith as a light matter, wherwt
they may dally at their pleasure. It is as a bright sun beam coming down
from heaven, which lightneth, directs and guides us. Now, like as the world
with all the wisdom and power thereof is not able to stop or turn away the
beams of ye sun coming down from heaven directly unto the earth: even so
can there nothing be added to the doctrine of Faith, or taken from it: for that
is an utter defacing and overthrowing of the whole.

Verse. 10. I have trust in you through the Lord.
As if he would say: I have taught, admonished, and reproved you enough, so
that ye would hearken unto me. Notwithstanding I hope well of you in the Lord.
Here rises a question, whether Paul does well when he says he has a good
hope or trust of the Galathians, seeing the holy Scripture forbids any trust
to be put in men. Both Faith and charity have their trust and belief,
Whether we may trust unto men?
but after diverse sorts by reason of the diversity of their obiectes. Faith
trusts in God, and therefore it can not be deceived: charity believes man and
therefore it is often deceived. Now, this Faith that springs of charity is
so necessary to this present life, that without it life can not continue in the
world. For if one man should not believe and trust an other, what life should we
live upon earth? The true Christians do sooner believe and give credit through
charity, then the children of this world do. For faith toward men is a
fruit of ye spirit, or of christian Faith in the godly. Hereupon Paul had a
trust of yt Galathians, yea though they were fallen from his doctrine: but yet
through ye Lord. As if he should say: I trust unto you so far forth, as the
Lord is in you, and ye in him: that is to say, so far forth as ye abide in
the truth. From which if you fall away, seduced by the ministers of Satan, I
will not trust unto you any more. Thus it is lawful for the godly to trust and
believe men.

Verse. 10. That ye will be none otherwise minded.
To wit, concerning doctrine and Faith, then I have taught you, and ye have
learned of me: That is to say, I have a good hope and trust of you, yt ye will
not receive any other doctrine which shall be contrary to mine.

Verse. 10. But he that troubles you shall bear his condemnation, whatsoever
he be.
By this sentence Paul, as it were a judge sitting upon the judgment seat,
condemns the false apostles, calling them by a very odious name, Wicked
teachers are troublers of men's consciences.
troublers of the Galathians: whom they esteemed to be very godly men, and far
better teachers then Paul. And withal he goes about to terrify the
Galathians with this horrible sentence: whereby he so boldly condemns the
false apostles, to the end that they should fly their false doctrine as a
most dangerous plague. As if he should say: What mean ye to give ear to
those pestilent fellows, which teach you not, but only trouble you. The
doctrine that they deliver unto you is nothing else but a trouble unto your
consciences. Wherefore how great so ever they be, they shall bear their
condemnation.

Now, a man may understand by these words: Whosoever he be, that the false
apostles in outward appearance were very good and holy men. The authority of
the false apostles.
And peradventure there was amongst them some notable disciple of the Apostles
of great name and authority. For it is not without cause that he uses such
vehement and pithie words. He speaks after the same manner also in the first
Chapter, saying: If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise
then we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Galath. 1.8.^.
And it is not to be doubted but that many were offended with this vehemency
of the Apostle, thinking thus with them selves: Wherefore does Paul break
charity? why is he so obstinate in so small a matter? why does he so rashly
pronounce sentence of eternal damnation against those that are ministers as
well as he? He passes nothing of all this: but proceeds on still, and boldly
curses and condemns all those that pervert the doctrine of faith, be they
never so highly esteemed, seem they never so holy and learned.

Wherefore (as I give often warning) we must diligently discern between
doctrine and life. Doctrine is heaven, life is the earth. The difference
betwixt doctrine and life.
In life is sin, error, uncleanness and misery, mingled with vinegar, as the
proverb says. There let charity wink, forbear, be beguiled, believe, hope,
and suffer all things: there let forgeuenes of sins prevail as much as may
be, so that sin and error be not defended and maintained. But in doctrine
like as there is no error, so has it no need of pardon. No error in the
doctrine of Faith.
Wherefore there is no comparison between doctrine and life. One little point of
doctrine is of more value, then heaven and earth: and therefore we can not
abide to have the least jot thereof to be corrupted. But we can very well
wincke at the offenses and errors of life. For we also do daily err in life
and conversation, yea all the saints err: and this do they earnestly
confess in the Lords prayer, and in the Creed. But our doctrine, blessed be
God, is pure: we have all the articles of our Faith grounded upon the holy
Scripture. Those the Devil would gladly corrupt and overthrow. Therefore he
assaileth us so craftily with this goodly argument, that we ought not to break
charity and the unity of the churches.

Verse. 11. And brethern, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer
persecution? Then is the sclaunder of the cross abolished.
Paul laboring by all means possible to call the Galathians back again,
reasons now by his own example. Acts 13.50. Acts. 17.4.
I have procured to my self (says he) the hatred and persecution of the
Priests and Elders, and of my whole nation, because I take away righteousness
from circumcision: which if I would attribute unto it, the Jews would not
only cease to persecute me, but also would love and highly commend me. But
now, because I preach the Gospel of Christ and the righteousness of Faith,
abolishing the law and circumcision, therefore I suffer persecution. The false
apostles enemies of the cross of Christ.
Contrariwise the false apostles, to avoid the cross, and this deadly hatred
of the Iew^sh nation, do preach circumcision: and by this means they obtain
and retain the favor of the Jews: as he says in the.6. Chapt. following:
Gal. 6.12.
They compel you to be circumcised, etc. Moreover, they would gladly bring to
pass, yt there should be no dissension, but peace and concord between the
Gentiles and the Jews. The doctrine of Faith.
But that is impossible to be done without the loss of the doctrine of Faith,
which is the doctrine of the cross and full of offenses. Wherefore when he
says: If I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? Then
is the sclaunder of the cross abolished: he means that it were a great
absurdity and inconvenience if the offense of the cross should cease. After
the same manner he speaks. 1. Cor. 1.17. 2. Pet. 1.11.
1. Cor. 1. Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not with wisdoms of
words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect. As if he
said: I would not that the offense and cross of Christ should be abolished.

Here may some man say: The Christians then are mad men to cast them selves
into danger of their own accord: For what do they else by preaching and
confessing the truth, but procure unto them selves the hatred and enimitie of
the whole world, and raise offenses? This (says Paul) does nothing at all
offend or trouble me, but makes me more bold, The church is in best case and
most flouri^heth under the cross.
and causes me to hope well of the happy success and increase of the church,
which flourishes and grows under the cross: For it behooves that Christ
the head and spouse of the Church should reign in the mids of all his
enemies. Psalm. 110. On the contrary part, when the cross is abolished, and the
rage of tyrannes and heretics cease on yt one side, and offenses on the
other side, and all things are in peace, the Devil keeping the entry of the
house: this is a sure token that the pure doctrine of Gods word is taken away.

Bernard considering this thing, says that the Church is then in best state,
when Satan assaileth it on every side, as well by subtle sleights as by
violence: and contrariwise yt it is then in worst case when it is most at ease.
And he aledgeth very well and to yt purpose that sentence of Ezechias in his
song: Esaias. 3^.17.
Behold, for felicity I had bitter grief, applying it to the church, living
in ease and quietness. Wherefore Paul takes it for a most certain sign that it
is not the Gospel, if it be preached in peace. Contrariwise ye world takes it
for a most certain sign that the Gospel is heretical and seditious
doctrine, because it sees great vprours, tumults, offenses and sects, and
such like to follow the preaching thereof. He means that God sometimes in
punishing shows him self as though it were not he but Satan: and
contrariwise Satan, when he flattereth, shows him self as though he were
God and not Satan.
Thus God sometimes shows him self in the similitude of the Devil, and the
Devil likewise shows him self in the likeness of God: And God will be known
under the similitude of the Devil, and will have the Devil known under the
likeness of God.

The cross immediately follows the doctrine of the word, according to that
saying. Psalm. 116: I believed and therefore have I spoken: and I was sore
troubled. Now, the cross of the Christians is persecution with reproach and
ignominy, and without any compassion, and therefore it is very offensive. First
they suffer as ye vilest people in the world: and so did the Prophet Esaias
foreshew even of Christ himself. cap. 53. He was reputed amongst the wicked.
Moreover, Esaias. 53.12.
murderers and thieves have their punishments qualified, and men have
compassion on them. Here is no offense or sclaunder joined with the punishment.
Contrariwise, like as the world judges the Christians to be of all other me^
the most pestilent and pernicious, so does it think that no torments are
sufficient to punish them for their heinous offenses. The world has no pity
upon the godly
Neither is it moved with any compassion toward them, but puts them to the
most opprobrious and shameful kinds of death that can be. And it thinks that
it gains hereby a double commodity. John 16.2.3. What the world looks for
by the death of the godly.
For first it imagines that it does high service unto God in killing of them:
secondly that the common peace and tranquillity is restored and stablishing by
taking away such noisome plagues. Therefore the death and cross of the
Faithful is full of offenses. But let not this reproachful dealing (says
Paul) and the continuance of Christ's cross and offense thereof move you: but
rather let it confirm you. For as long as the cross endures, it shall go
well with the Gospel.

In like manner Christ also comfort his disciples in the.5. of Math. Math.
5.10. Mark. 9.10. Luke 14.34. Acts. 5.41. 1 Pet. 3.14. 1. Pet. 4.14.
Blessed are ye (says he) when men revile you and persecute you, and shall
falsely say all manner of evil against you for my names sake. Rejoice and be
glad, for great is your revvard in heaven: For so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you. The church ca^ not suffer this rejoicing to be wrested
from her. Wherefore I would not wish to be at concord with the Pope, the
bishops, Luther vvil be at no unity with the enemies of the Gospel.
the princes and the Sectaries, unless they would consent unto our doctrine.
For such concord were a certain token that we had lost the true doctrine. To
be short, as long as the church teaches the Gospel, it must suffer
persecution. For the Gospel sets forth the mercy and glory of God: The
Gospel sets forth the glory of God, and discloseth the crafts of the
Devil.
It discloseth the malice and sleightes of the Devil, painting him out in his
right colors, and plucking from him the counterfeit visour of Gods Majesty,
whereby he deceaueth the whole world: that is to say, it shows that all
worshippings, religious Orders invented by men, and traditions concerning
single life, meats, and such other things, whereby men think to deserve
forgeuenes of sins and everlasting life, are wicked things and deuelish
doctrine. There is nothing then that more stirs up the Devil, than the
preaching of the Gospel. For that plucketh from him the dissembled vizour of
God, and bewrays him to be as he is in deed, that is to say, the Devil and
not God. Wherefore it can not be, but that as long as the Gospel flourishes,
the cross and the offense thereof must needs follow it, or else truly the
Devil is not rightly touched, but slenderly tickled. But if he be rightly
hitte in deed, he rests not, but begins horribly to rage, and to raise up
troubles every where.

If Christians then will hold the word of life, let them not be afraid or
offended when they see that the Devil is broken lose and rages every where,
that all the world is on an vprour, that tyrannes exercise their cruelty, and
heresies spring up: but let them assure them selves, Math. 5.12.
that these are signs, not of terror, but of joy, as Christ himself
expounds them, saying: Rejoice and be glad. etc. God forbid therefore that
the offense of the cross should be taken away. Which thing should come to
pass if we should preach that which the Prince of this world and his members
would gladly hear, that is to say, the righteousness of works. Then should we
have a gentle Devil, a favorable world, a gracious Pope, and merciful
Princes. But because we set forth the benefits and glory of Christ, they
persecute and spoil us both of our goods and lives.

Verse. 12. Would to God they were cut of that do disquiet you.
Is this the part of an Apostle, not only to denounce the false apostles to be
troublers, Paul wishes that the false apostles were cut of.
to condemn them and to deliver them to Satan, but also to wish that they
might be utterly rooted out and pearish? And what is this else but plain
cursing? Paul (as I suppose) alludeth here to circumcision. As if he would
say: They compel you to cut of the foresakin of your flesh: but I would that
they themselves might be utterly cut off by the root.

Here rises a question: whether it be lawful for Christians to curse? Why
not? howbeit not always, nor for every cause. Whether it be lavvful for
Christians to curse.
But when the matter is come to this point, that Gods word must be evil spoken
of and his doctrine blasphemed, and so consequently God him self, then must we
turn this sentence and say: Blessed be God and his word, and what so ever is
without God and his word, accursed be it: yea though it be an Apostle or an
Angel from heaven. So he said before in the first Chapter: Galath. 1.3.4.
Although we or an Angel from heaven preach otherwise unto you, then that
which we have preached, let him be accursed.

Hereby it may appear how great a matter Paul made of a little leaven, which
for the same durst curse the false apostles, who in outward appearance were men
of great authority and holiness. Let not us therefore make little account of the
leaven of doctrine: For although it be never so little, yet if it be neglected,
it will be the cause that by little and little the truth and our salvation shall
be lost, and God himself be denied. For when the word is corrupted, and God
denied and blasphemed (which must needs follow if the word be corrupted) there
remains no hope of salvation. But for our parts, if we be cursed, railed
upon and slain, there is yet one that can raise us up again, and deliver
us from the curse, death and hell.

Wherefore let us learn to advance and extol the Majesty and authority
of Gods word. The Majesty of Gods word is highly to be advanced.
For it is no small trifle (as brainsicke heads surmise at this day): but
every title thereof is greater then heaven and earth. Wherefore in this respect
we have no regard of Christian charity or concord, but we sit as it were on
the judgment seat, that is to say: we curse and condemn all men, which in the
least point deface or corrupt the Majesty of Gods word: For a little leaven
makes sour the whole lump. But if they leave us Gods word entire and
sound, we are not only ready to keep charity and peace with them: but also
we offer our selves to be their servants, and to do for them what so ever we
are able: If not, let them perish and be cast down into hell: and not only
they, but even the whole world also: so that God and his pure word do remain.
For as long as he remains, life, salvation, and the faithful shall also
remain.

Paul therefore does well in cursing those troublers of the Galathians, and in
pronouncing sentence against them, to wit, that they are accursed with all
that they teach and do: and in wishing that they might be cut of, especially
that they might be roted out of the church of God, that is, that god should not
govern nor prosper their doctrine nor their doings. And this malediction
proceeds from the holy ghost. As Peter also in the.8. of the Acts curses
Simon the Sorcerer: Thy money and thou perish together. Acts. ^.20.21.
And the holy Scripture oftentimes uses cursing, against such troublers of
men's consciences, and chiefly in the Psalms: Psalm. 54.5. Psalm. 55.15.
as Psalm. 55. Let death come upon them: let them go As Corah, Dathan, and
Abiron.
quick into the pit of corruption. Also, Let sinners be turned down into
hell, and all they that forget God.

Hitherto Paul has fortified the place of Justification with strong and
mighty arguments. Moreover, to the end he might omit nothing, here and there
he has intermingled chidings, praisings, exhortations, threatenings and such
like. In the end he adds also his own example, Paul's example in suffering.
namely that he suffers persecution for this doctrine, thereby admonishing
all the Faithful, not to be offended nor dismayed when they shall see such
vprours, Sects and offenses raised up in the time of the Gospel: but rather
to rejoice and be glad. For the more the world rages against the Gospel, the
more the Gospel prospers and goes happily forwards.

This consolation ought at this day to encourage us: for it is certain that
the world hates and persecuteth us for none other cause, but for that we
profess the truth of the Gospel. What the world condemns in godly
teachers.
It does not accuse us for theft, murder, whoredom and such like: but it
detesteth and abhors us because we teach Christ faithfully and purely, and
give not over the defense of the truth. Therefore we may be out of all doubt,
that this our doctrine is holy and of God, because the world hates it so
bitterly: For otherwise there is no doctrine so wicked, so foolish and
pernicious, which the world does not gladly admit, embrace and defend: and
moreover it reverently entertaineth, cherishes and flattereth the professors
thereof, and does all that may be done for them. Only the true doctrine of the
Gospel, life and salvation, and the ministers thereof, it utterly abhors,
and works all the spite that may be devised against them. It is therefore an
evident token that the world is so cruelly bent against us for no other thing,
but only because it hates the word. Wherefore when our adversaries charge us,
that there rises nothing of this doctrine but wars, seditions, offenses,
Sects and other such infinite enormities: let us answer: Blessed be yt day
wherein we may see these things. An objection.
But the whole world is in an vprour. And well done: For if ye world were not so
troubled: if the Devil did not rage and stir up such broiles, we should not
have the pure doctrine of of the Gospel which can not be preached but these
broils and tormoiles must needs follow. Therefore that which ye count to be a
great evil, we take to be a special happiness.

The Doctrine of good works.
Now follow exhortations and precepts of life and good works. For it is the
custom of the Apostles, after they have taught Faith, The Apostles after the
doctrine of faith, add precepts of good life.
and in structed men's consciences, to add precepts of good works, whereby they
exhort yt faithful to exercise ye duties of charity one toward an other.
And reason it self after a sort teaches and understands this part of
doctrine: but as touching the doctrine of Faith, it knows nothing at all
thereof. To ye end therefore that it might appear that Christian doctrine does
not destroy good works, or fight against civil ordinances: the Apostle also
exhorts us to exercise our selves in good works and in an honest outward
conversation, and to keep charity and concord one with an other. The world
can not therefore justly accuse the Christians that they destroy good works,
that they are troublers of ye public peace, civil honesty, etc: for they
teach good works and all other virtues better then all the Philosophers and
Magistrates of the world, because they adioyne Faith with their doings.

Verse. 13. For brethern ye have been called unto liberty: only use not your
liberty as an occasion unto the flesh, but by love serve one an other.
As if he would say: Ye have now obtained liberty through Christ, that is to
say, ye be far above all laws as touching conscience and before God: ye be
blessed and saved, Christ is your life. Philip. 1.21.
Therefore although the law, sin and death trouble and terrify you, yet can
they not hurt you nor drive you to despair. And this is your excellent and
inestimable liberty. Now stands it you in hand to take good heed, that ye
use not that liberty as an occasion to the flesh.

This evil is common and the most pernicious of all others that Satan
stirs up in the doctrine of Faith: namely that in very many he turns this
liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, into the liberty of the flesh.
Of this the Apostle Jude also complains in his epistle. Jude. 1.4.
There are crept in certain wicked me^ (says he) which turn the grace of
our God into vvantonnes. Carnal men understand not the doctrine of Faith.
For the flesh is utterly ignorant of ye doctrine of grace, that is to say, it
knows not that we are made righteous, not by works, but by Faith only, and
that the law has no authority over us. Therefore when it hears the
doctrine of faith, it abuses and turns it into wantonness, and by and by thus
it gathers: The saying of the wicked.
If we be without law, let us the^ live as we list, let us do no good, let us
give nothing to the nedie, and let us not suffer any evil, for there is no law
to constrain us or bind us so to do.

Wherefore there is danger on either side: albeit the one is more tolerable
then the other. If grace or Faith be not preached, no man can be saved: for it
is Faith alone that justifies and saves. On the other side, if Faith be
preached (as of necessity it must be) the more part of men understand the
doctrine of Faith carnally, The greatest part of men understand the doctrine of
Faith carnally
and draw the liberty of the spirit into the liberty of the flesh. This may
we see in all kinds of life, as well of the high as ye low. All boast
themselves to be professors of the Gospel, and all brag of Christian
liberty: and yet serving their own lusts, they give themselves to
covetousness, pleasures, pride, envy, and such other vices. No man does his
duty faithfully: no man charitably serves the necessity of his brother. The
grief hereof makes me sometimes so impatient, yt many times I wish such swine
which tread precious pearls under their feet, were yet still remaining under
the tyranny of the Pope: For it is impossible that this people of Gomorrha
should be governed by the Gospel of peace.

Moreover, even we which teach the word, do not now our duty with so great
zeal and diligence in the light of the Gospel, as we did before in the darkness
of ignorance. For the more certain we be of the freedom purchased unto us by
Christ, so much the more cold and negligent we be in handling the word, in
prayer, in well doing, and in suffering aduersites. The profit of tentations.
And if Satan did not vex us inwardly with spiritual tentations, and
outwardly with the persecutions of our adversaries, and moreover with the
contempt and ingratitude of our own fellows, we should become utterly
careless, negligent, and untoward to all good works: and so in time we should
lose the knowledge and Faith of Christ forsake the ministry of the word, and
seek an easier kind of life for the flesh. Which thing many of our men begin
to do, for that they travailing in the ministry of the word, can not only
not live of their labor, but also are most miserably entreated even of those
by whom they were delivered from the servile bondage of the Pope by the
preaching of the Gospel. These men forsaking poor and offensive Christ,
entangle them selves with ye affairs of this present life, serving their own
bellies and not Christ: but with what fruit, that shall they find by
experience in time to come.

For as much then as we know that the Devil lays wait most of all for us
that have the world (for the rest he holds in captivity and slavery at his
pleasure) and labors with might and maine to take from us the liberty of
the spirit, or at least wise to turn the same into the liberty of the flesh:
we teach and exhort our brethern with singular care and diligence by the
example of Paul, that they think not this liberty of the spirit purchased
by the death of Christ, to be given unto them, that they should make it an
occasion of carnal liberty, or (as Peter says) should use the same as a
cloak for their wickedness: 1. Pet. 2.16.
but that they should serve one an other through love.

To the end therefore that Christians should not abuse this liberty (as I have
said) the Apostle lays a yoke and bondage upon their flesh by the law of
mutual love. The godly are free according to the spirit, but bond servant
according to the flesh.
Wherefore let the godly remember that in conscience before God, they be free
from the curse of the law, from sin and from death, for Christ's sake: but
as touching the body they are servants and must serve one an other through
charity, according to this commandment of Paul. Let every man therefore
endeavor to do his duty diligently in his calling, and to help his
neighbor to the uttermost of his power. This is it which Paul here requires
of us: Serve ye one an other through love. Gal. 5.17.
Which words do not set the Christians at liberty, but shut them under
bondage as touching the flesh.

Moreover this doctrine concerning mutual love which we must maintain and
exercise one toward an other, can not be beaten into the heads of carnal
men, nor sink into their hearts. The Christians do gladly receive and obey
this doctrine. Others as soon as liberty is preached, by and by do thus
infer: If I be free, Carnal men abuse Christian liberty.
then may I do what I list: This thing is mine own, why then should I not
sell it for as much as I may get? Moreover, seeing we obtain not salvation
by our good works, why should we give any thing to yt poor? Thus do they most
carelessly shake of the yoke and bondage of the flesh, and turn the liberty of
the spirit into wantonness and sleshly liberty. But we tell such careless
contemners (although they believe us not, but laugh us to scorn), that if they
use their bodies and their goods after their own lust (as in deed they do,
for they neither help the poor, nor lend to the needy, but beguile their
brethern in bargaining, snatching and scraping unto themselves by hook or by
crook what so ever they can get), we tell them (I say) that they be not
free, brag they never so much of their liberty, but have lost Christ and
Christian liberty, are become the bondslaues of the Devil, and are seven
times worser under the name of Christian liberty, then they were before under
the tyranny of the Pope. For the Devil which was driven out of them, has
taken unto him seven other feends worse then him self, and is returned into
them again: therefore the end of these men is worse then the beginning.

As touching us, we have a commandment of God to preach ye gospel, which
offers to all men liberty from the law, sin, death and Gods wrath, freely
for Christ's sake, if they believe. It is not in our power to conceal or revoke
this liberty now published by ye Gospel: Christian liberty must be taught,
though men abuse it.
for Christ has given it unto us freely, and purchased it by his death.
Neither can we co^straine those swine which run headlong into all
licentiousnes and dissolutenes of the flesh, to help other me^ with their
bodies or goods: therefore we do what we can, that is to say, we diligently
admonish them that they ought so to do. If we nothing prevail by these
admonitions, we commit the matter to God, and he will recompense these scorners
with just punishment in his good time. In the mean while this is our comfort,
that as touching the godly, our labor is not lost, of whom many (no doubt) by
our ministry are delivered out of the bondage of the Devil, Coloss. 1.1^.
and translated into the liberty of the spirit. These (which notwithstanding
are but few) which acknowledge the glory of this liberty of the spirit, and on
the other side are ready through charity to serve other men, and know
themselves to be detters to their brethern as touching the flesh: do more
rejoice us than the innumerable multitude of those that abuse this liberty,
are able to discourage us.

Paul uses here very apt and plain words, when he says: Brethern ye are
called into liberty. And because no man should dream that he speaks of the
liberty of the flesh, They which understand the Christian liberty, serve one
another through love.
he expounds him self what manner of liberty he means, saying: Only use
not your liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but serve ye one an other
through love. Wherefore let every Christian know, that, as touching the
conscience, Christ has made him Lord over the law, sin and death, so that
they have no power over him. Contrariwise let him know that this outward
bondage is laid upon his body, that he should serve his neighbor through
love. They that understand Christian liberty otherwise, enjoy the commodities
of the Gospel to their own destruction, and are worse Idolaters under the
name of Christ, then they were before under the Pope. Now Paul goes about to
declare out of the ten commandments, what it is to serve one an other through
love.

Verse. 14. For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, which is this:
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Paul, after that he has laid the foundation of Christian doctrine, is wont
to build gold, silver and precious stones upon it. Now, there is no other
foundation, as he himself says to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3.11.1^.
than Jesus Christ, or the righteousness of Christ. Upon this foundation he
builds now good works, yea good works in deed: all which he comprehends
in one precept: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. As if he should
say: when I say that ye must serve one an other through love, I mean the self
same thing that the law says in an other place: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Leuitis. 19.1^.
And this is truly to interpret the Scriptures and Gods commandments.

Now, in giving precepts of love, he covertly touches by the way the false
teachers: against whom he sets him self mightily, that he may defend and
stablish his doctrine of good works against them. As if he said: O ye
Galathians, I have hitherto taught you the true and spiritual life, and now
also I will teach you what be good works in deed. And this will I do to the
end ye may know that the vain and foolish works of ceremonies which the
false Apostles do only urge, are far inferior to the works of charity.
For such is the foolishnes and madness of all wicked teachers and fantastical
spirits, Meritmo^gers and hypocrites understand not the doctrine of faith and
of good works. 1. Cor. 3.12.15.
that not only they leave the true foundation and pure doctrine: but also
continuing always in their superstitions, they never attain to good works.
Therefore (as Paul says) they build nothing but wood, hay and stubble upon
the foundation. So the false apostles, which were the most earnest defenders of
works, did not teach or require the works of charity, as that Christians
should love one an other, that they should be ready to help their neighbors in
all necessities, not only with their goods, but also with their body: that is
to say, with tongue, hand, heart, and with their whole strength: but only they
required that circumcision should be kept, Galath. 4.1^.
that days, months, years and times should be observed: and other good
works they could teach none. For after they had destroyed the foundation which
is Christ, and darkened the doctrine of Faith, it was impossible that there
should remain any true use, exercise, or opinion of good works. Take away the
tree, and the fruit must needs perish.

The Apostle therefore diligently exhorts the Christians to exercise
themselves in good works, after that they have heard and received the pure
doctrine of Faith. For the remnauntes of sin do yet still remain even in
those that be justified: which, as they are contrary to Faith and hinder it: so
do they hinder us from doing good works. Reason is naturally delited with
superstition.
Moreover, man's reason and the flesh, which in the saints them selves
resists the spirit, and in the wicked does mightily reign, is naturally
delited with Pharisaicall superstitions: that is to say, it takes more
pleasure in measuring God by her own imaginations, than by his word, and does
the works that she her self has chosen, with far greater zeal then those
which God has commanded. Wherefore it is necessary that the godly preachers
should as diligently teach and urge the doctrine of good works, as the
doctrine of Faith: for Satan is a deadly enemy to both. Notwithstanding faith
must first be planted: for without Faith it is impossible to understand what a
good work is, or what pleases God.

Let no man think therefore that he thoroughly knows this commandment: Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In deed it is very short and easy as
touching the words: No man loves his neighbor as himself.
but show me the teachers and hearers that in teaching, learning, and living
do exercise and accomplish it rightly. Therefore these words: Serve ye one an
other through love: and these also, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
are incomprehensible, and no man, no not even the godly do sufficiently
consider, teach, and exercise the same. And (which is a wonderful thing) the
faithful have this tentation, that if they omit never so light a matter which
they ought to do, by and by their conscience is wounded: but they are not so
troubled if they neglect the duties of charity (as daily they do), Natural
corruption and superstition remaining in the faithful.
or bear not a sincere and brotherly love and affection toward their
neighbor. For they do not so much regard the commandment of charity, as
their own superstitions: from the which they be not altogether free during
this life.

Paul therefore reprehendeth ye Galathians in these words: For the whole law
is fulfilled in one word. As if he had said: ye are drowned in your
superstitions and ceremonies concerning places and times, which profit neither
your selves nor others: and in ye mean while ye neglect charity which ye
ought only to have kept. What madness is this? So says Jerome: We wear and
consume our bodies with watching, A saying of Hierome.
fasting and labor: but we neglect charity, which is the only lady and
mistress of works. And this may be well seen in the Monks, who straightly
observe their traditions concerning their ceremonies, fasting, watching,
apparel and such like. In this case if they omit any thing, be it never so
little, they sin deadly. But when they do not only neglect charity, but also
hate one an other to the death, they sin not, nor offend God at all.

Therefore by this commandment Paul, Paul teaches good works, and
condemns evil works.
not only teaches good works, but also condemns fantastical and
superstitious works. He not only builds gold, silver and precious stones
upon the foundation, but also throws down the wood, and burns up the hay
and stubble. God witnessed by examples in the old Testament how much he did
always esteem of charity: whereunto he would have yt very law it self and the
ceremonies thereof to give place. 1. Sam. 31.6.
At such time as David and they that were with him were hungry, and had not
what to eat, they did eat the holy shewbread, which by the law the lay
people might not eat, but only the priests. Math. 12.3.^^.
Christ's disciples brake the Saboth in plucking the ears of corn: yea and
Christ him self brake the Saboth (as said the Jews) in healing the sick on
the Saboth day. All these things show that charity or love ought to be
preferred before all laws and ceremonies, and that God requires nothing so
much at our hands as love toward our neighbor. The same thing Christ also
witnesses when he says: And the second is like unto this. Math. 22.2^.


Verse. 14. For all the law is fulfilled in one word.
As if he said: Why do ye burden your selves with the law? Why do ye so
toil and tormoile your selves about the ceremonies of the law, about meats,
days, places and such other things: as how ye ought to eat, drink, keep
your feasts, sacrifice? etc. Leave of these follies, and hearken what I say:
All the law is fully comprehended in this one saying: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. God deliteth not in the observation of the ceremonies
of the law, neither has he any need of them. The only thing that he
requires at your hands is this, that ye believe in Christ whom he has sent:
Ephesians. 1.2.
in whom ye are made perfect, and have all things. But if unto Faith, which is
the most acceptable service of God, ye will also add laws, then assure your
selves that all laws are comprehended in this short commandment: Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. Endeavor your selves to keep this
commandment: which being kept, ye have fulfilled all laws.

Paul is a very good expounder of Gods commandments: For he draws all
Moises into a brief sum, A brief sum of all Moises laws.
showing that nothing else is contained in all his laws (which are in a manner
infinite) but this short sentence: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Natural reason is offended with this baseness and shortness of words: for it is
soon said: The shortness of the doctrine of all true christianity.
Believe in Christ. And again: Love thy neighbor as thy self. Therefore it
despises both the doctrine of Faith and true good works. Notwtstanding this
base and vile word of faith (as reason takes it): Believe in Christ, is ye
power of God to the faithful, whereby they overcome sin, death, ye Devil,
etc. whereby also they attain salvation and eternal life. To serve our
neighbor through charity.
Thus to serve one an other through love, that is, to instruct him that goes
astray, to comfort him that is afflicted, to raise up him that is weak, to
help thy neighbor by all means possible, to bear with his infirmities, to
endure troubles, labors, ingratitude and contempt in the Church, and in civil
life and conversation to obey the Magistrate, to give due honor to thy
parents, to be patient at home with a froward wife and an unruly family.
etc: these (I say) are works which reason judges to be of no value. But,
believe me, they are such works, that the whole world is not able to comprehend
the excellency and worthiness thereof (for it does not measure works or any
other thing by the word of God, but by the judgment of wicked, blind and
foolish reason): Yea it knows not the value of any one of the least good
works yt can be, which are true good works in deed.

Therefore, when men dream that they well understand the commandment of
charity, they are utterly deceived. In deed they have it written in their
heart: for they naturally judge that a man ought to do unto an other, as he
would an other should do unto him. But it follows not therefore that they
understand it: For if they did, they would also perform it in deed, and would
prefer love and charity before all their works. A description of an
hypocrite.
They would not so highly esteem their own superstitious toys, as to go with
an heavy countenance hanging down the head, to be unmarried, to live with
bread and water, to dwell in the wilderness, to be poorly apparelled, etc.
These monstrous and superstitious works, which they have devised and chosen
unto themselves, God neither commanding nor approving the same, they esteem to
be so holy and so excellent, that they surmount and darken charity, which is
as it were ye Sun of all good works. Charity the bright sun of all good
works.
So great and incomprehe^sible is the blindness of man's reason, that it is
unable, not only to judge rightly of the doctrine of Faith, but also of
external conversation and works. Wherefore we must fight strongly, as well
against the opinions of our own heart (to the which we are naturally more
inclined in the matter of salvation then to the word of God), as also against
the counterfeit visour and holy show of our own wilworkes: that so we may
learn to magnify the works which every man does in his vocation, although
they seem outwardly never so base and contemptible, if they have the warrant
of Gods word: and contrariwise, to despise those works which reason chooses
without the commandment of God, seem they never so excellent and holy.

Of this commandment I have largely entreated in an other place, and therefore
I will now but lightly ouerrunne it. A brief exposition of this commandment:
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
In deed this is briefly spoken: Love thy neighbor as thy self, but yet very
aptly and to yt purpose. No man can give a more certain, a better or a nearer
example then a man's own self. Therefore, if thou would know how thy
neighbor ought to be loved, How our neighbor ought to be loved.
and would have a plain example thereof, consider well how thou love thy
self. If thou should be in necessity or danger thou would be glad to
have the love and friendship of all men, to be helped with the counsel, the
goods and the strength of all men and of all creatures. Wherefore thou have no
need of any book to instruct and to admonish thee how thou ought to love
thy neighbor: for thou have an excellent book of all laws even in thy heart.
Thou need no Scholemaster in this matter: ask counsel only of thine own
heart, and that shall teach thee sufficiently that thou ought to love thy
neighbor as thy self. Moreover, Charity a singular virtue.
love or charity is an excellent virtue, which not only makes a man willing
and ready to serve his neighbor with tongue, with hand, with money and worldly
goods: but with his body, and even with his life also. And thus to do, it is
not provoked by good deserts or any thing else, neither is it hindered through
evil deserts or ingratitude. The mother does therefore nourish and cherish
her child, because she loves it.

Now, my neighbor is every man, Who is our neighbor.
specially which has need of my help, as Christ expounds it in the.10.
chapt. of Luke. Who although he has done me some wrong, or hurt me by any
manner of way: yet notwithstanding he has not put of the nature of man, or
ceased to be flesh and blood, and the creature of God most like unto my self:
briefly, he cease not to be my neighbor. As long then as the nature of man
remains in him, The commandment of charity.
so long also remains the commandment of love, which requires at my hand,
that I should not despise mine own flesh, nor render evil for evil, but
overcome evil with good: or else shall love never be as Paul describes it.1.
Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 13.7.


Paul therefore commends charity to the Galathians, and to all the
faithful (for they only love in deed), and exhorts them that through
charity one of them should serve an other. As if he would say: Ye need not to
burden your selves with circumcision, and with the ceremonies of Moises law:
but above all things continue in the doctrine of faith which ye have received
of me. Afterward, if ye will do good works, I will in one word show you the
chiefest and greatest works, and how ye shall fulfill all laws: Serve ye one
an other through love. Ye shall not lack them to whom ye may do good, for the
world is full of such as need the help of others. This is a perfect and a
sound doctrine of Faith and love: The doctrine of faith and charity the
shortest and longest.
and also the shortest and the longest Divinity. The shortest as touching the
words and sentences: but as touching the use and practice it is more large,
more long, more profound, and more high then the whole world.

Verse. 15. If ye bite and devour one an other, take heed lest ye be consumed
one of an other.
By these words Paul witnesses that if the foundation, that is to say, if
Faith in Christ be overthrown by wicked teachers, no peace or concord ca^
remain in the church either in doctrine or life: but there must needs be
diverse opinions and dissensions from time to time both in doctrine and life,
whereby it comes to pass that one biteth and deuoureth an other, that is to
say, one judges and condemns an other, until at length they be consumed.
Hereof not only the Scripture, but also the examples of all times bear
witness. After that Aphrike was perverted by the Manichees, by and by followed
the Donatistes, who also disagreeing among them selves, were divided into three
sundry Sects. And how many Sects have we at this day springing up one after
an other? One Sect brings forth an other, and one condemns an other. Thus,
when the unity of the spirit is broken, it is impossible that there should be
any concord either in doctrine or life, but daily new errors must needs spring
up without measure and without end.

Paul therefore teaches that such occasions of discord are to be avoided, and
he shows how they may be avoided. This (says he) is ye way to unity and
concord: Let every man do his duty in that kind of life which God has
called him unto: Let him not lift up himself above others, nor find fault at
other men's works, The way how to keep concord.
and commend his own, but let every one serve an other through love. This is a
true and a simple doctrine touching good works. This do not they teach which
have made shipwreck of faith and have conceived fantastical opinions
concerning Faith and good works: but disagreeing among them selves as touching
the doctrine of Faith and works, they bite and devour, that is to say, they
accuse and condemn one an other, as Paul here says of the Galathians. If ye
bite and devour one an other, take heed lest ye be consumed one of an other.
As if he would say: do not accuse and condemn one an other for circumcision,
for observing of holy days or other ceremonies, but rather give your selves to
serve and help one an other through charity: Or else if ye continue in biting
and devouring one an other, take heed that ye be not consumed, that is to say,
that ye perish not utterly, yea and that bodily, which commonly happens,
especially to the authors of Sects, as it did to Arrius and others, The end of
the authors of wicked opinions.
and to certain also in our time. For he that has laid his foundation on the
sand, and builds hay, stubble and such like, must needs fall and be
consumed: for all those things are ordained for the fire. I will not say that
after such bitings and deuourings, the ruin and destruction, not of one city,
but of whole countries and kingdoms are wont to follow. Now the Apostle shows
what it is to serve one an other through love.

It is a hard and a dangerous matter to teach that we are made righteous by
faith without works, and yet to require works withal. Here, except the
ministers of Christ be faithful and wise disposers of the mysteries of God,
rightly dividing the word of truth: faith and works are by and by confounded.
Both these doctrines, as well of faith as of works, must be diligently taught
and urged: and yet so, that both may remain with in their bounds. Otherwise,
How the doctrine of faith and of works is to be taught.
if they teach works only (as they do in the Popes kingdom) then is faith lost.
If faith only be taught, then carnal men by and by dream that works be not
needful.

The Apostle began a little before, to exhort men to good works, and to teach
that the whole law was fulfilled in one word, namely: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Here will some man say: An objection.
Paul thorowout his whole Epistle takes away righteousness from the law: for
says he, By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified: Also, As many
as are under the works of the law, Galat. 2.16. Galat. 3.10.
are under the curse. But now, when he says that ye whole law is fulfilled in
one word, he seems to have forgotten the matter whereof he has entreated in
all this Epistle, and to be of a quite contrary opinion: to wit, that they
which do the works of charity, fulfill the law and be righteous. To this
objection he answers after this manner.

Verse. 16. But I say, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
works of the flesh.


As if he should have said: I have not forgotten my former discourse concerning
Faith, neither do I now revoke the same in that I exhort you to mutual love,
saying: that the whole law is fulfilled through love: but I am still of the
same mind and opinion that I was before. To the end therefore that ye may
rightly understand me, I add this moreover: Walk in the spirit, and ye
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

A confutation of the argument of the Schoolmen: Love is the fulfilling of the
law: therefore the law justifies. Although Paul speaks here expressly and
plainly enough, yet has he little prevailed. For the Schoolmen not
understanding this place of Paul: Love is the fulfilling of the law, have
gathered out of it after this manner: If love be the fulfilling of the law, it
follows then that love is righteousness: therefore if we love, we be righteous.
These profound clerks do argue from the word to the work, Arguments from
precept to work.
from doctrine or precepts, to life, after this sort: The law has commanded
love: therefore the work of love follows out of hand. But this is a foolish
consequence, to draw an argument from precepts, and to ground the conclusion
upon works.

True it is that we ought to fulfill the law, and to be justified through the
fulfilling thereof: but sin hinders us. In deed the law prescribes and
commands that we should love God with all our heart, So evil consequence of
the Sophisters: It is vvrytte^, therefore it is done
etc. and that we should love our neighbor as our selves, but it follows not:
this is written, therefore it is done: the law commands love, therefore we
love. There is not one man to be found upon the whole earth, which so loves
God and his neighbor, as the law requires. But in the life to come, where we
shall be thoroughly cleansed from all vices and sins, and shall be made as pure
and as clear as the Sun: we shall love perfectly and shall be righteous
through perfect love. But in this life that purity is hindered by the flesh:
for as long as we live, sin remains in our flesh. The Love of our self
corrupt.
By reason whereof the corrupt love of our selves is so mighty, that it far
surmounteth ye love of god and of our neighbor. In the mean time
notwithstanding, that we may be righteous in this life also, Sin is not here
laid to our charge because of our Faith in Christ. 1. Cor. 13.1^.
we have Christ the Mercy seat and throne of grace, and because we believe in
him, sin is not imputed unto us. Faith therefore is our righteousness in this
life. But in the life to come, when we shall be thoroughly cleansed and delivered
from all sins and concupiscence, we shall have no more need of Faith and
hope, but we shall then love perfectly.

It is a great error therefore to attribute justification or righteousness to
love, which is nothing: or if it be any thing, Charity can not pacify God.
yet is it not so great that it can pacify God: for love even in the faithful
(as I have said) is imperfect and impure: Apoc. 21.27.
But no unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of God. Notwithstanding in
the mean while this trust and confidence sustaineth us, that Christ, Esaias.
53.9. 1. Pet. 2.22. 1. John. 3.2.
who a lonely committed no sin, and in whose mouth was never found any guile,
does ouershadow us with his righteousness. We being covered with this He
alludeth to the place of Exodus, Chapt. 13.21.
cloud, and shrouded under this shadow, this heaven of remission of sins and
throne of grace: do begin to love and to fulfill the law. Yet for this
fulfilling we are not justified nor accepted of God whilst we live here. But
when Christ has delivered up the kingdom to God his father and abolished all
principality, and God shall be all in all: then shall Faith and hope cease,
and love shall be perfect and everlasting. 1. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 13.12.
This thing the popish Schoolmen understand not, and therefore when they hear
that love is the sum of the whole law, by and by they infer: Ergo the law
justifies. Or contrariwise, when they read in Paul that Faith makes a man
righteous: yea, say they, Faith formed and furnished with charity. But that is
not the meaning of Paul, Faith adorned with charity is the papists
righteousness.
as I have largely declared before.

If we were pure from all sin, and were inflamed with perfect love both
toward God and our neighbor, then should we in deed be righteous and holy
through love, and God could require no more of us. This is not done in this
present life, but is differred until ye life to come. Romans 1.23.
In deed we receive here the gift and first fruits of the spirit, so that we
begin to love, howbeit very slenderly. But, if we loved God truly and
perfectly as the law of God requires, which says: Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Math. 22.3^. Mark. 12.2^. Luke. 10.27.
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength then should we be as well
contented with poverty as with wealth, with pain as with pleasure, and with
life as with death. Perfect love.
Yea he that could love God truly and perfectly in deed, should not long
continue in this life, but should straight way be swalowed up by this charity.

But now man's nature is so corrupt and drowned in sin, that it can not have
any right sense or cogitation of God. It loves not God, but hates him deadly.
God first loved us. 1. John. 4.10. Galath. 2 4. Galath. 4.4.5.
Wherefore as John says: We loved not god, but he loved us, and sent his son
to be a reconciliation for our sins. And as Paul says before in the second
Chap: Christ has loved me and given him self for me. And in the.4. Chap. But
when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman,
and made under the law, that he might redeem them which were under the
law. We being redeemed and justified by this Son, begin to love, according to
that saying of Paul in the.8. to the Romans: That which was impossible to
the law, (in as much as it was vveake because of the flesh) God sending his
own son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin
in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, that
is, might begin to be fulfilled. They are mere dreams therefore which the
Sophisters and Schoolmen have taught concerning the fulfilling of the law.

Wherefore Paul shows by these words: Walk in the spirit, how he would have
that sentence to be understand, where he said: Serve ye one an other through
love. And again: Love is the fulfilli^g of the law. etc. As if he should say.
When I bid you love one an other, this is it that I require of you, that ye
walk in the spirit. For I know that ye shall not fulfill the law because sin
dwells in you as long as ye live, and therefore it is impossible that ye
should fulfill the law. Notwithsta^di^g in ye mean while endeavor your selves
diligently to walk in ye spirit, that is, wrestle in spirit against the flesh,
and follow spiritual motions. etc.

It appears then that he had not forgotten the matter of iustifition. For
when he bids them to walk in ye spirit, he plainly denies that works do
justify. As if he should say: When I speak of ye fulfilling of ye law, I mean
not that ye are justified by ye law: but this I mean, that there be two
contrary capitaines in you, the spirit and the flesh. God has stirred up in
your bodies a strife and a battle. For the spirit wrastleth against the
flesh, Galath. 5.17.
and the flesh against the spirit. Here I require nothing else of you, but that
ye follow the spirit as your captain and guide, and that ye resist that
captain ye flesh: for that is all that ye be able to do. Obey the spirit and
fight against the flesh. Therefore when I teach you to observe the law, and
exhort you to love one an other, think not that I go about to revoke that
which I have taught concerning the doctrine of Faith, and that now I attribute
justification to the law or to charity: but my meaning is, that ye should
walk in the spirit, and that ye should not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Paul uses very fit words and to the purpose. As if he would say: we come
not yet to the fulfilling of the law: therefore we must walk in the spirit
and be exercised therein, that we may think, say, and do those things which
are of the spirit, and resist those things which are of the flesh: therefore he
adds.

Verse. 16. And ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.


As if he would say: Desires and lusts of the flesh even in the godly.
The desires or lusts of the flesh be not yet dead in us, but spring up
again and fight against the spirit. The flesh of no faithful man is so good,
which being offended would not bite and devour, or at the least omit somewhat
of that commandment of love. Yea even at the first brunt he can not refrain
him self, but is angry with his neighbor, desires to be revenged, and
hates him as an enemy, or at the least loves him not so much as he should
do, and as this commandment requires. And this happens even to the
faithful.

Therefore the Apostle has given this rule for the faithful, that they should
serve one an other through love, that they should bear the burdens and
infirmities one of an other, and that they should forgive one an other. And
without this bearing and forbearing through love, it is impossible that peace
and concord should continue amongst Christians. For it can not be, but that
thou must needs often offend, and be offended. Thou see many things in me
which offend thee, and I again see many things in thee which mislike me. Here,
if one bear not with an other through love, there shall be no end of
dissension, discord, envy, hatred and malice.

Wherefore Paul would have us to walk in the spirit, To walk in the spirit.
lest we fulfill ye lust of the flesh. As if he should say: Although ye be moved
with wrath and displeasure against your brother, offending you or doing any thing
hainously against you, yet notwtsta^ding resist and repress these violent
motions through the spirit. Bear with his weakness and love him according to
that commandment: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. For thy brother
does not therefore cease to be thy neighbor, because he slippeth or offe^deth
thee: but the^ has he most need yt thou should exercise and show thy
charity toward him. And this commandment: Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, requires the self same thing: to wit, that thou should not obey
yt flesh: which when it is offended, hates, biteth and deuoureth. But wraste
against it in spirit, and continue through the same in the love of thy
neighbor, although thou find no thing in him worthy of love.

The Scholemen take the concupiscence of the flesh for carnal lust. In deed
it is true that even yt godly, especially ye yo^ger sort are tempted with
fleshly lust. Yea, they also that be married (so corrupt and pestilent is
flesh) are not without such carnal lust. Here let every one (I speak now to
the godly being married, What the concupiscence or lust of the flesh is after
Paul.
both man and wife) diligently examine him self, and, no doubt, many shall
find this in themselves, that the beauty and conditions of an other man's wife
pleases him better then of his own: and so contrariwise. His own lawful
wife he lotheth or misliketh and loves her which is unlawful. And this
commonly is wont to happen, not in marriage only, but in all other matters.
Men set light by that which they have, and are in love with that which they
have not: as the Poet says: Nitimur in vetitum semper cupimusque negata: That
is,
Of things most forbidden we alvvaies are feign:
And things most denied we seek to obtain,


I do not deny therefore but that the concupiscence of the flesh comprehends
carnal lust, but not that only For concupiscence comprehends all other
corrupt affections, wherewith the very faithful are infected, some more, some
less: as pride, hatred, covetousness, impatiency and such like. Yea Paul
rehearses afterward among the works of the flesh, not only these gross
vices, but also idolatry, heresies and such other. It is plain therefore that
he speaks of the whole concupisce^ce of the flesh and of the whole dominion
of sin, which strives eue^ in the godly who have received the first fruits
of the spirit, against the dominion of the spirit. He speaks therefore not
only of carnal lust, pride, covetousness. etc: but also of incredulity,
distrust, despair, hatred, and contempt of God, idolatry, heresies and such
other, when he says: And ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. As if he
should say: I write unto you that ye should love one an other. This ye do not,
neither can ye do it because of the flesh, which is infected and corrupted
with concupiscence, and does not only stir up sin in you, but also is
sin it self. For if ye had perfect charity, no heaviness, no adversity could
be so great, which should be able to hurt or hinder that charity: for it would
be spread throughout the whole body. There should be no wife, were she never so
hard favored, whom her husband would not love entirely, lothing all other
women, though they were never so fair and beautiful. But this is not done:
therefore it is impossible for us to be made righteous through love.

Wherefore, think me not to revoke and unsay that which I have taught
concerning Faith: For Faith and hope must continue, that by the one we may be
justified, and by the other we may be raised up in adversities, and endure
unto the end. Moreover, we serve one an other through charity, because Faith
is not idle: but charity is weak and little. Therefore when I bid you walk in
the spirit, I do sufficiently declare that ye are not justified through
charity.

And when I exhort you to walk in the spirit, that ye fulfill not the
concupiscence of the flesh: I do not require of you that ye should utterly put
of the flesh or kill it, but that ye should bridle and subdue it. For God will
have mankind to endure even to the last day. And this can not be done without
parents, which do begette and bring up children. These means continuing,
it must needs be that flesh also must continue, and consequently sin, for
flesh is not without sin. Therefore in respect of the flesh we are sinners:
but in respect of the spirit, we are righteous: and so we are partly sinners,
and partly righteous. Notwithstanding, Beleuers are both sinners and righteous.
our righteousness is much more plentiful then our sin, because the holiness
and righteousness of Christ our Mediator does far excede the sin of the
whole world: And the forgeuenes of sins which we have through him is so
great, so large, and so infinite, that it easily swaloweth up all sins, so
that we walk according to the spirit. etc.

The Papists dreamed that this commandment belongs only to their
Cleargymen, and that the Apostle exhorts them to live chastely by subduing the
flesh with watching, fasting, labor. etc: and then they should not fulfill the
concupiscence of the flesh, that is to say, carnal lust. As though the whole
concupiscence of ye flesh were overcome when this fleshly lust is subdued:
which notwithstanding they were never able to suppress and keep under with
any yoke that they could lay upon the flesh. Hierome.
Which thing Hierome (I say nothing of others) who was a marvelous lover and
defender of chastity, does plainly confess. O (says he) how often have I
thought my self to be in ye midst of the vain delites and pleasures of
Rome, even when I was in the wild wilderness, which being burnt up with the
heat of the Sun, yeldeth an ouglesome habitation to the Monks? etc. Again:
I, who for fear of hell had condemned my self to such a prison, thought my
self oftentimes to be dau^cing among young women, when I had no other company
but Scorpions and wild beasts. My face was pale with fasting, but my mind
was inflamed with desires in my cold body, and although my flesh was half dead
already, yet the flames of fleshly lust boiled within me. etc.

If Hierome felt in him self such flames of fleshly lust, who lived in the
barraine wilderness with bread and water: The vehement flames of carnal lust in
Hierome.
what do our holy bellygods the Cleargiemen feel (think ye): who so stuff
and stretch out them selves with all kinds of dainty fare, that it is marvel
their bellies burst not? Wherefore these things are written, not to Heremites
and Monks (as the Papists dream) nor to sinners in ye world only: but to the
universal church of Christ, and to all the faithful: whom Paul exhorts to
walk in the spirit, that they fulfill not the lusts of ye flesh: that is to
say, not only to bridle the gross motions of the flesh, as carnal lust,
wrath, impatiencie, and such like: but also ye spiritual motions, as douting,
blasphemy, idolatry, contempt and hatred of God, etc.

The flesh is to be subdued and not killed. Ephesians. 5.29.
Paul (as I have said) does not require of the godly, yt they should utterly
put of or destroy the flesh: but that they should so bridle it, that it might
be subject to the spirit. In the.10. to the Romans he bids us cherish the
flesh. For as we may not be cruel to other men's bodies, nor vex them with
unreasonable labor: even so we may not be cruel to our own bodies. Wherefore,
according to Paul's precept, we must cherish our flesh, that it may be able to
endure the labors both of the mind and of the body: but yet only for
necessities sake, and not to nourish the lusts thereof. Therefore if thy flesh
begin to wax wanton, repress it and bridle it by the spirit. 1. Cor. 7.9.
If it will not be, marry a wife, for it is better to marry then to burn.
Thus doing thou walk in the spirit, that is, thou folowest Gods word and
do his will.

Verse. 17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh.


When Paul says that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, he admonishes us that we must feel the concupiscence of
the flesh, The godly feel the concupiscence or lust of the flesh.
that is to say, not only carnal lust, but also pride, wrath, heaviness,
impatiencie, incredulity, and such like. Notwithstanding he would have us so
to feel them, that we consent not unto them, nor accomplish them: that is,
that we neither think, speak, nor do those things which the flesh provoke
us unto. As, if it move us to anger, yet we should be angry in such wise (as we
are taught in the fourth Psalm) that we sin not. As if Paul would thus say:
Psalm. 4.4.
I know that the flesh will provoke you unto wrath, envy, doubting,
incredulity and such like: But resist it by ye spirit, that ye sin not. But
if ye forsake the guiding of the spirit, and follow the flesh, ye shall fulfill
the lusts of the flesh, and ye shall die, as Paul says in the.8. to the
Romans. So this saying of the Apostle is to be understand, not of fleshly
lust only, but of the whole kingdom of sin.

Verse. 17. And these are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do the
same things that ye would.
These two captains or leaders (says he) the flesh and the spirit, are one
against an other in your body, so that ye can not do what ye would. And this
place witnesses plainly, yt Paul writes these things to the faithful, that
is, to the church believing in Christ, baptized, The faithful have flesh which
resists the spirit. Romans 7.1^.
justified, renewed, and having full forgeuenes of sins. Yet notwithstanding
he says that she has flesh rebelling against the spirit. After the same
manner he speaks of him self in the.7. to the. Romans I (says he) am carnal
and sold under sin. And again: I see an other law in my members rebelling
against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin
which is in my members. Also: O vvretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? etc.

Here, not only the Schoolmen, but also some of the old fathers are much
troubled, seeking how they may excuse Paul. The godly feel the terrors and
captivity of sin.
For it seems unto them absurd and unseemly to say that that elect vessel
of Christ should have sin. But we credit Paul's own words, wherein he plainly
confesses that he is sold under sin, that he is led captive of sin, that
he has a law in his members rebelling against him, and that in ye flesh he
serves ye law of sin. Here again they answer, yt the Apostle speaks in
the person of the wicked. But the wicked do not complain of the rebellion of
their flesh, of any battle or conflict, or of the captivity and bondage of
sin: for sin mightily reigns in them. This is therefore yt very complaint
of Paul and of all the faithful. Wherefore they have done very wickedly which
have excused Paul and all the faithful to have no sin. For by this
persuasion (which proceeds of ignorance of ye doctrine of faith) they have
robbed ye church of a singular consolation: they have abolished the forgeuenes
of sins, and made Christ of none effect.

Wherefore when Paul says: I see an other law in my members, etc. he
denies not that he has flesh, and the vices of the flesh in him. It is likely
therefore that he felt sometimes the motions of carnal lust. But yet (no doubt)
these motions were well suppressed in him by the great and grievous afflictions
and tentations both of mind and body, wherwt he was in a manner continually
exercised and vexed, as his Epistles do declare: Or if he at any time being
merry and strong, felt ye lust of ye flesh, wrath, impatiency or such like: yet
he resisted them by the spirit, and suffered not those motions to bear rule in
him. Therefore let us in no wise suffer such comfortable places (whereby Paul
describes the battle of the flesh against the spirit in his own body) to
be corrupted with such folish gloses. The Schoolmen, ye Monks, and such
other, never felt any spiritual tentations: and therefore they fought only for
the repressing and ouercomming of fleshly lust and lechery: and being proud
of that victory which they never yet obtained, The Monks and such other
cloisterers never had experience of any spiritual tentations.
they thought them selves far better and more holy then married men. I will
not say, that under this holy pretense rhey nourished and maintained all kinds
of horrible sins, as dissension, pride, hatred, disdain, and despising of
their neighbors, trust in their own righteousness, presumption, contempt of
all godliness and of the word of God, infidelity, blasphemy and such like.
Against these sins they never fought: Nay rather they took them to be no
sins at all: They put righteousness in the keeping of their foolish and wicked
vows, and unrighteousness in the neglecting and contemning of the same.

But this must be our ground and ankerholde, that Christ is our only and
perfect righteousness. Christ our righteousness
If we have nothing whereunto we may trust: yet these three things (as Paul
says) Faith, hope, and love do remain. Therefore we must always believe, and
always hope: we must always take hold of Christ as the head and fountain of
our righteousness. Romans 9.33.
He that believes in him shall not be ashamed. Moreover, we must labor to be
outwardly righteous also: that is to say, not to consent to the flesh, which
always enticeth us to some evil: but to resist it by the spirit. The outvvard
righteousness of the faithful.
We must not be overcome with impatiencie for the unthankfulness and contempt of
the people, which abuses the Christian liberty: but through the spirit we
must overcome this and all other temptations. Look then how much we strive
against the flesh by the spirit, so much are we outwardly righteous: Albeit
this righteousness does not commend us before God.

Let no man therefore despair if he feel the flesh oftentimes to stir up
new battle against the spirit, The godly feling the corruptions of the flesh,
must not despair.
or if he can not by and by subdue the flesh, and make it obedient unto the
spirit. I also do wish my self to have a more valiant and constant heart,
which might be able, not only boldly to contemn the threatenings of tyrants,
the heresies, offenses and tumults which Satan and his soldiers the enemies of
the Gospel stir up: but also might by and by shake of the vexatio^s and
anguish of spirit, and briefly, might not fear ye sharpnes of death, but
receive and embrace it as a most friendly ghest. But I find an other law in my
members, rebelling against the law of my mind, etc. Some other do wrestle
with inferior temptations, as poverty, reproach, impatiencie and such like.

Let no man marvel therefore or be dismayed when he feels in his body this
battle of the flesh against the spirit: but let him pluck up his heart and
comfort him self with these words of Paul: The flesh lusts against the
spirit. Also: These are contrary one to an other, so that ye do not those
things that you would. The battle of the flesh and the spirit in the godly.
For by these sentences he comfort them that be tempted. As if he should
say: It is impossible for you to follow ye guiding of the spirit in all things
without any feeling or hinderance of the flesh: Nay, the flesh will resist, and
so resist and hinder you, that ye can not do those things which gladly ye
would. Here it shall be enough if ye resist the flesh and fulfill not the lust
thereof: that is to say, if ye follow the spirit and not the flesh, which easily
is overthrown by impatiencie, coueteth to revenge, biteth, grudgeth, hates
God, is angry with him, despaireth, etc. Therefore when a man feels this
battle of the flesh, let him not be discouraged therewith, but let him
resist in spirit, and say: I am a sinner, and I feel sin in me: for I have
not yet put of the flesh, in which sin dwells so long as it lives. But I
will obey the spirit and not the flesh: that is, To walk in the spirit.
I will by Faith and hope lay hold upon Christ, and by his word I will raise
up my self, and being so raised up, I will not fulfill the lust of the
flesh.

It is very profitable for the godly to know this, and to bear it well in
mind: for it wonderfully comfort them when they are tempted. When I was a
Monk I thought by and by that I was utterly cast away, if at any time I felt
the lust of the flesh: that is to say, if I felt any evil motion, fleshly
lust, wrath, hatred or envy against any brother. I assayed many ways to help
and to quiet my conscience, but it would not be: For the concupiscence and lust
of my flesh did always return, so that I could not rest, but was continually
vexed with these thoughts: This or that sin thou have committed: thou art
infected with envy, with impatiencie, and such other sins: therefore thou art
entered into this holy Order in vain, and all thy good works are unprofitable.
If then I had rightly understand these sentences of Paul: The flesh lusts
contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the flesh: And, These two
are one against an other, so that ye can not do the things that ye would do,
I should not have so miserably tormented my self, but should have thought and
said to my self as now commonly I do: Let all troubled consciences comfort
them selves by this example of Martin Luther, and say as he said.
Martine, thou shall not utterly be without sin, for thou have flesh: thou
shall therefore feel the battle thereof: according to that saying of Paul:
The flesh resists the spirit. Despair not therefore, but resist it
strongly, and fulfill not the lust thereof. Thus doing thou art not under the
law.

Stanpitius a godly learned man of whom he made mention before.
I remember that Staupitius was wont to say: I have vowed unto God above a
thousand times, that I would become a better man: but I never performed that
which I vowed. Hereafter I will make no such vow: for I have now learned by
experience, that I am not able to perform it. Unless therefore God be
favorable and merciful unto me for Christ's sake, and grant unto me a
blessed and happy hour when I shall depart out of this miserable life, I
shall not be able with all my vows and all my good deeds, to stand before
him. This was not only a true, A holy desper^tion
but also a godly and an holy desperation: and this must all they confess both
with mouth and heart, which will be saved. For the godly trust not to their own
righteousness, but say with David: Enter not into judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. ^ Psalm 143.2. Psalm. 130.^.
Again. If thou O Lord should straightly mark iniquities, O Lord who shall
stand? They look unto Christ their Reconciler, who gave his life for their
sins. Moreover, they know that the remnant of sin which is in their flesh,
What the godly must do when they feel sin.
is not laid to their charge, but freely pardoned. Notwithstanding in the mean
while they fight in spirit against the flesh, lest they should fulfill the
lusts thereof. And although they feel the flesh to rage and rebel against
the spirit, and them selves also to fall sometimes into sin through
infirmity, yet are they not discouraged, not think therefore that their state
and kind of life, and the works which are done according to their calling,
displease God: but they raise up them selves by Faith.

The faithful therefore receive great consolation by this doctrine of Paul,
in that they know them selves to have part of the flesh and part of the
spirit, The conflict and battle of the flesh and the spirit in the children
of God.
but yet so notwithstanding that the spirit rules and the flesh is subdued
and kept under awe, that righteousness reigns and sin serves. He that
knows not this doctrine, and thinks that the faithful ought to be without
all fault, and yet sees the contrary in him self, must needs at the length
be swalowed up by the spirit of heaviness, and fall into desperation. But who
so knows this doctrine well and uses it rightly, to him the things that are
evil turn unto good. Rom 1.^8.
For when the flesh provoke him to sin, by occasion thereof he is stirred up
and enforced to seek forgeuenes of sins by Christ, and to embrace the
righteousness of Faith, which else he would not so greatly esteem, nor seek for
the same with so great desire. Therefore it profits us very much to feel
sometimes the wickedness of our nature and corruption of our flesh, that yet by
this means we may be waked and stirred up to Faith, and to call upon
Christ. A Christian a marvelous workman.
And by this occasion a Christian becomes a mighty workman and a wonderful
creator, which of heaviness can make joy, of terror comfort, of sin
righteousness, and of death life, when he by this means repressing and
brideling the flesh, makes it subject to the spirit.

Wherefore let not them which feel the lust of the flesh, despair of their
salvation. Let them feel it and all the force thereof, so that they consent
not to it. Let the passions of lust, wrath and such other vices shake them,
so that they do not overthrow them. Let sin assail them, so that they do
not accomplish it. Yea the more godly a man is, the more does he feel that
battle. And hereof come those lamentable complaints of the faithful in the
Psalms and in the whole Scripture. Of this battle the Heremites, the Monks
and the Schoolmen, and all that seek righteousness and salvation by works,
know nothing at all.

But here may some man say: that it is a dangerous matter to teach that a man
is not condemned, if by and by he overcome not the motions and passions of the
flesh which he feels. For when this doctrine is taught amongst the common
people, it makes them careless, negligent and slothful. Read more hereof
before in the lease 246. and in the line. 32.
This is it which I said a little before, that if we teach Faith, then carnal
men neglect and reiecte works: If works be required, then is Faith and
consolation of conscience lost. Here no man can be compelled, neither can there
be any certain rule prescribed. But let every man diligently try him self
to what passion of the flesh he is most subject, and when he finds that,
let him not be careless, nor flatter him self: but let him watch and
wrestle in spirit against it, that if he can not altogether bridle it, yet at
the least he do not fulfill the lust thereof.

This battle of the flesh against the spirit, all the children of God have had
and felt: And the self same do we also feel and prove. He that searches his
own conscience, if he be not an hypocrite, shall well perceive that to be true
in him self which Paul here says: that ye flesh lusts against the spirit.
The children of God do feel the rebellion of the flesh against the spirit.
All the faithful therefore do feel and confess that their flesh resists
against the spirit, and that these two are so contrary the one to the other in
themselves, that, do what they can, they are not able to perform that which
they would do. Therefore the flesh hinders us the we cannot keep the
commandments of God, that we can not love our neighbors as our selves, much
less can we love God with all our heart: Therefore it is impossible for us to
become righteous by the works of the law. In deed there is a good will in us,
and so must there be (for it is the spirit it self which resists the flesh),
which would gladly do good, fulfill the law, love God and his neighbor, and
such like, but the flesh obeys not this good will, but resists it: and yet
God imputes not unto us this sin: For he is merciful to those that believe
for Christ's sake.

But it follows not therefore that thou should make a light matter of sin
because God does not impute it. True it is that he does not impute it. To whom
God does not impute sin.
But to whom, and for what cause? To such as repent, and lay hold by Faith
upon Christ the Mercyseat, for whose sake, as all their sins are forgeuen
them: even so yt remnants of sin which are in them, be not imputed unto them.
They make not their sin less the^ it is, but amplify it and set it out as
it is in deed: for they know that it can not be put away by satisfactions,
works or righteousness, but only by ye death of Christ. And yet notwithstanding
the greatness and enormitie of their sin does not cause them to despair, but
they assure themselves that the same shall not be imputed unto them or laid
unto their charge.

This I say lest any man should think that after faith is received, there is
little account to be made of sin. Sin is truly sin, whether a man commit
it before he has received the knowledge of Christ, or after. And God always
hates sin: yea all sin is damnable as touching the fact it self. But in
that it is not damnable to him that believes, it comes of Christ, who by his
death has taken away sin. But to him that believes not in Christ, not only
all his sins are damnable: but even his good works also are sin, according
to that saying: Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. Romans 14.23.
Therefore the error of the Scholemen is most pernicious, The error of the
Sophisters or Scholemen.
which do distinguish sins according to the fact, and not according to the
person. He that believes has as great sin as the unbeliever. But to him that
believes, it is forgeuen and not imputed. To the unbeliever it is not pardoned,
but imputed. To the beleuer it is venial: to the unbeliever it is mortal and
damnable: Not for any difference of sins, or because the sin of the beleuer
is less, and the sin of the unbeliever greater: but for the difference of the
persons. For the faithful assures him self by Faith that his sin is
forgeuen him, for as much as Christ has given him self for it. Therefore
although he have sin in him and daily sins, yet he continues godly: but
contrariwise the unbeliever continues wicked. The wisdoms of the godly.
And this is the true wisdom and consolation of the godly, that although they
have and commit sins, yet they know that for Christ's sake they are not
imputed unto them.

This I say for the comfort of the godly. The godly only feel sin.
For they only feel in deed that they have and do commit sins, that is to
say, they feel that they do not love God so fervently as they should do:
that they do not believe him so heartily as they would, but rather they
oftentimes dout whether God have a care of them or no: they are impatient, and
are angry with God in adversity. Hereof (as I have said) proceed the
sorrowful complaints of the faithful in the scriptures, and specially in the
Psalms. And Paul him self complains that he is sold under sin. And here
he says, Romans 1.14.
that the flesh resists and rebelleth against the spirit. But because they
mortify the deeds of yt flesh by the spirit (as he says in an other place,
and also in the end of this chapter: They crucify the flesh with the
desires and lusts thereof): Galath. 5.24.
therefore these sins do not hurt them nor condemn them. But if they obey
the flesh in fulfilling the lusts thereof, then do they lose Faith and the
holy Ghost. And if they do not abhor their sin and return unto Christ
(who has given power to his church, to receive and raise up those that be
fallen, that so they may recover Faith and the holy Ghost) they die in their
sins. Wherefore we speak not of them which dream that they have Faith, and
yet continue still in their sins. These men have their judgment already:
They that live after the flesh shall die. Romans 8.12. Sentence pronounced
against such as obey the lusts of the flesh.
Also: The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, vvantonnes, idolatry, vvitchcraft, hatred, debate,
emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony and such like, whereof I tell you before, as also I have
told you, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of
God.

The true Saints of God.
Hereby we may see who be the very Saints in deed. They be not stocks and
stones (as the Monks and Scholemen dream) so that they are never moved with
any thing, never feel any lusts or desires of the flesh: but, as Paul says,
their flesh lusts against the spirit, and therefore they have sin, and both
can and do sin. And the.32. Psalm witnesses that the faithful do
confess their unrighteousness, Psalm. 32.5.6.
and pray that the wickedness of their sin may be forgeuen, where it says: I
will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest
the punishment of my sin. Therefore shall every one that is godly, make his
prayer unto thee, etc. Moreover the whole Church, which in deed is holy,
prays that her sins may be forgeuen her, and it believes the forgeuenes of
sins. And in the.143. Psalm David prays: O Lord enter not into judgment
with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. Psalm.
143.^.
And in the.130. Psalm. If thou O Lord should straightly mark iniquities,
Lord who shall stand in thy presence? But with thee is mercy, etc. Thus do
the cheifest saints and children of God speak and pray: as David, Paul. etc.
All the faithful therefore do speak and pray the same thing, and with the
same spirit. The popish Sophisters read not the Scriptures, or if they read
the^, they have a veil before their eyes: and therefore as they can not judge
rightly of any thing, so can they not judge rightly either of sin, or of
holiness.

Verse. 18. If ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the law.
Paul cannot forget his doctrine of Faith, but still repeateth it and beats
it into their heads: yea even when he treats of good works. Here some man
may object: How can it be that we should not be under the law? and yet thou
notwithstanding, O Paul, teach us that we have flesh which lusts against
the spirit, and fights against us, torme^teth us and brings us into
bondage. And in deed we feel sin, and can not be delivered from the feeling
thereof, though we would never so feign. And what is this else, but to be under
the law? But, says he: Let this nothing trouble you: To be led by the spirit.
only do your endeavor that ye may be led by the spirit, that is to say:
show your selves willing to follow and obey that will which resists the flesh,
and does not accomplish the lusts thereof (for this is to be led and to be
drawn by the spirit): then are ye not under the law. So Paul speaks of
himself. Romans 7. In my mind I serve the law of God, that is to say: In
spirit I am not subject to any sin: but yet in my flesh I serve the law of
sin. The faithful then are not under the law, that is to say, in spirit:
for the law can not accuse them, nor pronounce sentence of death against them,
although they feel sin, and confess them selves to be sinners: For the
power and strength of the law is taken from it by Christ: Galath. 4.4.
who was made subject to the law, that he might redeem them which were
under the law. Therefore the law cannot accuse that for sin in the
faithful, which is sin in deed and committed against the law.

So great then is the power and dominion of the spirit, that the law cannot
accuse the godly, though they commit that which is sin in deed. For Christ
is our righteousness, whom we apprehend by Faith: he is without all sin, and
therefore the law can not accuse him. As long as we cleave fast unto him, we are
led by the spirit, and are free from the law. And so the Apostle, What it
is to be led by the spirit.
even when he teaches good works, forgets not his doctrine concerning
Justification: but always shows that it is impossible for us to be justified
by works. For the remnants of sin cleave fast in our flesh, and therefore so
long as our flesh lives, it cease not to lust contrary to the spirit.
Notwithstanding there comes no danger unto us thereby, because we be free
from the law, so that we walk in the spirit.

And with these words: If ye be led by the spirit, ye be not under the
law, thou may greatly comfort thy self and others that be grievously
tempted. For it oftentimes comes to pass, that a man is so vehemently
assailed with wrath, hatred, impatiencie, carnal desire, terror and anguish
of spirit, or some other lust of the flesh, that he can not shake them of,
though he would never so feign. What should he do in this case? Should he
despair? No, God forbid: but let him say thus with him self: Thy flesh
fights and rages against the spirit. Let it rage as long as it lists:
only see thou, How a troubled mind is to be comforted.
that in any case thou consent not to it, to fulfill the lusts thereof, but
walk wisely and follow the leading of the spirit. In so doing thou art free
from the law. It accuses and terrifieth thee (I grant), but altogether in
vain. In this conflict therefore of the flesh against ye spirit, there is
nothing better, then to have the word of God before thine eyes, and therein to
seek the comfort of the spirit.

And let not him which suffers this temptation be dismayed, in that the Devil
can so aggrauate sin, that during the conflict, he thinks him self to be
utterly overthrown, and feels nothing else but the wrath of God and
desperation. Here in any wise let him not follow his own feeling and the
judgment of reason, but let him take sure hold of this saying of Paul: If
ye be led by the spirit, that is to wit, if ye raise up and comfort your
selves through faith in Christ, ye be not under the law. So shall he have a
strong buckler wherewith he may beat back all the fiery darts which that
wicked feende assaileth him withal. How much so ever then the flesh do boil
and rage, yet can not all her motions and rages hurt and condemn him, for as
much as he, following the guiding of the spirit, does not consent unto the
flesh, nor fulfill the lusts thereof. Now the lusts of the flesh must be
overcome.
Therefore when the motions of the flesh do rage, the only remedy is to take
to us the sword of the spirit, that is to say, the word of salvation (which
is, that God would not the death of a sinner, but that he convert and live) and
to fight against them: Which if we do, let us not doubt but we shall obtain
the victory, although so long as the battle endures, we feel the plain
contrary. But set the word out of sight, and there is no counsel nor help
remaining. Of this that I say, The great and vehement tentations of Luther.
I my self have good experience. I have suffered many great passions, and the
same also very vehement and great. But so soon as I laid hold of any place of
Scripture, and stayed my self upon it as upon my chief ankerhold, straight
ways my tentations did vanish away: which without the word it had been
impossible for me to endure any little space, and much less to overcome them.

The sum or effect therefore of all that which Paul has taught in this
disputation or discourse concerning ye conflict or battle between the flesh
and the spirit, is this, that the Saints and the elect of God can not
perform that which the spirit desires. For the spirit would gladly be
altogether pure, but the flesh being joined unto the spirit, will not suffer
that. Notwithstanding they be saved by the remission of sins, which is in
Christ Jesus. Moreover, because they walk in the spirit and are led by the
spirit, Not to be under the law.
they be not under the law, that is to say, ye law cannot accuse or terrify
the^: yea although it go about never so much so to do, yet shall it never be
able to drive them to desperation.

Ver. 19. Moreover the works of the flesh be manifest, which are. etc.
Math. 7.10.
This place is not unlike to this sentence of Christ: By their fruits ye shall
know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of brambles? So every
good tree brings forth good fruit, and an evil tree brings forth evil
fruit, etc. Paul teaches the very same thing which Christ taught, that is to
wit, that works and fruits do sufficiently testify whether the trees be
good or evil: whether me^ follow ye guiding of the flesh or of the spirit. As
if he should say: Lest some of you might lay for him self, that he
understands me not now when I treat of the battle between the flesh and the
spirit, I will set before your eyes first the works of the flesh, whereof
many are known even to the ungodly: and then also the works of the spirit.

And this does Paul, Hypocrites mingled amongst the godly.
because there were many hypocrites amo^gs the Galathians (as there are also at
this day among us) which outwardly pretended to be godly men, and boasted much
of the spirit, and as touching the words they understood the true doctrine of
the Gospel: but they walked not according to the spirit, but according to the
flesh, and performed the works thereof. Whereby Paul manifestly conuinceth
them to be no such holy men in deed as they boasted themselves to be. And lest
they should despise this his admonition, he pronounces against them this
dreadful sentence, yt they should not be enheritours of ye kingdom of heaven,
to ye end that being thus admonished they might amend. Every age even in the
faithful, has his peculiare temptations, as fleshly lusts assail a man most
of all in his youth, Every age of man has his peculiar temptations.
in his middle age ambition and vaineglory, and in his old age covetousness.
There was never yet any of the faithful, whom ye flesh has not often in his
life time provoked to impatientie, anger, vaineglory, etc. Paul therefore
speaking here of the faithful, says that the flesh lusts in them against
the spirit, etc: therefore they shall never be without the desires and battles
of the flesh: notwithstanding they do not hurt them. But of this matter we must
thus judge, that it is one thing to be provoked of the flesh and yet not
willingly to yield to the lusts and desires thereof, but to walk after the
leading of the spirit and to resist the flesh: and an other thing to assent
unto the flesh and without all fear or remorse to perform and fulfill the
works thereof and to continue therein, and yet notwithstanding to counterfeit
holiness and to brag of the spirit. The first he comfort when he says,
that they be led by the spirit and be not under the law. To the other he
threatens everlasting destruction.

Notwithstanding sometimes it happens that the Saints also do fall and
perform the lusts of the flesh: As David fell horribly into adultery. Also
he was the cause of the slaughter of many men when he would have Vrias to be
slain in the forefront of the battle: and thereby also he gave occasion to the
enemies to glory and triumph over the people of God, to worship their Idolles,
and to blaspheme the God of Israel. Peter also fell most grievously and
horribly when he denied Christ. But although these sins were great and
heinous, yet were they not committed upon any contempt of God or of a wilful
and obstinate mind, but through infirmity and weakness. Again, when they were
admonished, they did not obstinately continue in their sins, but repented.
Such he wills afterward in the.6. Chapter to be received, instructed and
restored, saying: If a man be fallen by occasion into any sin, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one with the spirit of meekenes, considering thy
self lest thou also be tempted. To those therefore which sin and fall
through infirmity, pardon is not denied, so that they rise again and continue
not in their sin: for of all things continuance in sin is the worst. But if
they repent not, but still obstinately continue in their wickedness and perform
the desires of the flesh: it is a certain token that there is That is, a
secret contempt of God, vvherof David speaks, Psalm. 3.2.
disceit in their spirit.

No man therefore shall be without lusts and desires so long as he lives in
the flesh, and therefore no man shall be free from temptations. Notwithstanding
some are tempted one way and some an other, Some are exercised with greater
tentations, and some with less.
according to the difference of the persons. One man is assailed with more
vehement and grievous motions, as with bitterness and anguish of spirit,
blasphemy, distrust and desperation: An other with more gross tentations, as
with fleshly lusts, wrath, envy, covetousness and such like. But in this case
Paul requires of us that we walk in the spirit and resist the flesh. But
who so obeys the flesh and continues without any fear of God or remorse of
conscience in accomplyshing the desires and lusts thereof: let him know that
he pertains not unto Christ: And although he brag of the name of a
Christian never so much, yet does he but deceive him self. For they which are
of Christ, do crucify their flesh with the affections and lusts thereof.

Who be rightly called Saints, and be so in deed.
This place, (as I have also forewarned you by the way) contains in it a
singular consolation: For it teaches us that the saints and most holy men in
this world live not without concupiscence and temptations of the flesh, nor yet
without sins. It warns us therefore to take heed that we do not as some
did, of whom Gerson writes, which labored to attain to such perfection, that
they might be without all feeling of temptations or sins: that is to say,
very stocks and stones.

The like imagination the Monks and Scholemen had of their Saints, as
though they had been very senseless blocks and without all affections. The
virgin Marie felt great grief and sorrow of spirit when she missed her
son. Luke. 2. Luke. 2.48.
David in the Psalms complains that he is almost swalowed up with
excessive sorrow for the greatness of his temptations and sins. 2. Cor. ^.5.
Paul also complains that he has battelles without, and terrors within:
and that in his flesh he serves the law of sin. Romans 7.2^.
He says that he is careful for all the Churches: and that God showed great
mercy toward him, in that he delivered Epaphroditus being at the point of
death, to life again, lest he should have had sorrow upon sorrow. Whom the
Stoickes counted wise me^.
Therefore the Saints of the Papists are like to the Stoickes, who imagined
such wise men, as in all the world were never yet to be found. And by this
foolish and Deuelish persuasion which proceeded of the ignorance of this
doctrine of Paul, the Scholemen brought both them selves and others without
number, into horrible desperation.

When I was a Monk I did oftentimes most heartily wish, that I might once be so
happy, as to see the conversation and life of some Saint or holy man. But in
the mean time I imagined such a Saint as lived in the wilderness abstaining
from meat and drink, and living only with roots of herbs and cold water:
and this opinion of those monstrous saints, I had learned not only out of
the books of the Sophisters and Scholemen, but also out of the books of the
fathers. For thus writes Hierome in a certain place. As touching meats and
drinks I say nothing, for as much as it is excess, that eue^ such as are
weak and feeble should use cold water, or eat any sodden thing, etc. But now
in the light of the Gospel we plainly see who they are whom Christ and his
Apostles call Saints: Who they be which Christ and his Apostles call sai^cts.
Not they which live a sole and a single life, or straightly observe days,
meats, apparel and such other things, or in outward appearance do other great
and monstrous works, (as we read of many in the lives of the fathers): but they
which being called by the sound of the Gospel and baptized, do believe that
they be justified and cleansed by the death of Christ. So Paul every where,
writing to Christians, calls them holy, the children and heirs of God, etc.
Who so ever then do believe in Christ, whether they be men or women, Who be
true Saints.
bond or free, are all Saints: not by their own works, but by the works of
God, which they receive by Faith: as his word, his Sacraments, the passion of
Christ, his death, resurrection, victory, and the sending of the holy Ghost.
To conclude, they are Saints through such a holiness as they freely receive,
not through such a holiness as they them selves have gotten by their own
industry, good works and merits.

So the ministers of the word, the Magistrates of commonweals, parents,
children, masters, servants, etc. are true Saints, if first and before all
things they assure themselves that Christ is their wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption: Secondly, if every one do his duty in his
vocation according to the rule of Gods word, and obey not the flesh, but
repress the lusts and desires thereof by the spirit. Now, where as all be
not of like strength to resist temptations, but many infirmities and offenses
are seen in the most part of men: this nothing hinders their holiness, so
that their sins proceed not of an obstinate wilfulnes, but only of frailty
and infirmity. For (as I have said before) the godly do feel the desires and
lusts of the flesh, but they resist them, to the end that they accomplish them
not. Also if they at any time unadvisedly fall into sin, yet notwithstanding
they obtain forgeuenes thereof, if by Faith in Christ they be raised up
again: who would not that we should drive away, but seek out and bring whom
the straying and lost sheep, The weakness of Faith.
etc. Therefore God forbid that I should straighte way judge those which are
weak in Faith and manners, to be profane or unholy, if I see yt they love and
reverence the word of God, to come to ye supper of the Lord, etc. For these God
has received, and counts them righteous thorough the remission of sins: to
him they stand or fall. etc.

Wherefore, with great rejoicing I give thanks to God, for that he has
abundantly and above measure granted that unto me, which I so earnestly
desired of him when I was a Monk: For he has given unto me the grace to see,
not one but many Saints, yea an infinite number of true saints: not such as
the Sophisters have devised, but such as Christ himself and his Apostles do
describe. Of the which number I assure my self to be one. For I am baptized,
and I do believe that Christ my Lord by his death has redeemed and delivered me
from all my sins, and has given to me eternal righteousness and holiness. And
let him be holden accursed, who so ever shall not give this honor unto
Christ, to believe yt by his death, his word, etc. he is justified and
sanctified.

Wherefore, rejecting this foolish and wicked opinion concerning the name of
Saints (which in the time of Popery and ignorance we thought to pertain
only to the Saints which are in heaven, and in earth to the Heremites and
Monks which did certain great and strange works): let us now learn by the
holy Scripture that all they which faithfully believe in Christ are Saints. The
world has in great admiration the holiness of Benedict, Gregory, Bernard, All the faithful be Saints.
Fraunces and such like, because it hears that they have done in outward
appearance and in the judgment of the world, certain great and excellent
works. Doutles Hyllarie, Cyrill, Athanasius, Ambrose, Augustine and others
were Saints also, which lived not so strait and severe a life as they did, but
were conversant amongs men, and did eat common meats, drunk wine, and used
clenly and comely apparel, so that in a manner there was no difference between
them and other honest men as touching the common custom, and the use of things
necessary for this life, and yet were they to be preferred far above the
other. These men taught the doctrine and faith of Christ sincerely and purely,
without any superstition: they resisted heretics, they purged the church from
innumerable errors: their company and familiarity was comfortable to many,
and specially to those which were afflicted and heavy hearted, whom they raised
up and comforted by the word of God. For they did not withdraw them selves
from the company of men, but they executed their offices even where most resort
of people was. Contrariwise, the other not only taught many things contrary to
the Faith, but also were themselves the authors and first inuentours of many
superstitions, errors, abominable ceremonies and wicked worshippings.
Therefore except at the hour of death they laid hold of Christ, and reposed
their whole trust in his death and victory, their strait and painful life
auailed them nothing at all.

These things sufficiently declare who be the true Saints in deed, and which
is to be called a holy life: A holy life.
Not the life of those which lurk in caves and dens, which make their bodies
lean with fasting, which wear hear, and do other like things with this
persuasion and trust, that they shall have some singular reward in heaven above
all other Christians: but of those which be baptized and believe in Christ,
which put of the old man with his works, but not at once: For concupiscence
and lust remains in them so long as they live: the feeling whereof does hurt
them nothing at all, if they suffer it not to reign in them, but subdue it to
the spirit.

This doctrine brings great consolation to godly minds, that when they feel
these darts of the flesh, wherewith Satan assaileth the spirit, they should
not despair: As it happens to many in the Papacy, which thought that they
ought to feel no concupiscence of the flesh, where as notwithstanding Hierome,
Gregory, Benedict, Barnard and others (whom the Monks set before them as a
perfect example of chastity and of all Christian virtues) could never come so
far as to feel no concupiscence or lust of the flesh. Yea they felt it and
that very strongly. Which thing they acknowledge and plainly confess in diverse
places of their books.

Therefore we rightly confess in the articles of our belief, that we believe
there is a holy Church. I believe that there is a holy Church.
For it is invisible, dwelling in spirit in a place that none can attain unto,
and therefore her holiness can not be seen: For God does so hide and cover her
with infirmities, with sins, with errors, with diverse forms of ye cross
and offenses, that according to the judgment of reason it is no where to be
seen. They that are ignorant of this, when they see the infirmities and sins
of those which are baptized, which have the word and believe it: are by and by
offended, and judge them not to pertain to the Church. And in the mean while
they dream that the Heremites, the Monks and such other shauelings are the
church: which honor God with their lips, and worship him in vain, because
they follow not the word of God, but the doctrines and commandments of men,
and teach others to do the same. And because they do certain superstitious
and monstrous works, which carnal reason magnifieth and highly estemeth:
therefore they judge them only to be Saints and to be the church: And in so
doing they change and turn this article of the Faith clean contrary: I
believe that there is a holy church. I do not see, but I believe.
etc. and in the steed of this word [I beleue] they put in [I see]. These
kinds of righteousness and holiness of man's own devising, Hypocritical holiness.
are nothing else but spiritual sorceries wherwt ye eyes and minds of me^ are
blinded and led from ye knowledge of true holiness.

But thus teach we, that the Church has no spot nor wrinkle, but is holy, and
yet through Faith only in Christ Jesus: Again, that she is holy in life and
conversation by abstaining from the lusts of the flesh, The church is holy.
and exercise of spiritual works: but yet not in such sort that he is
delivered from all evil desires, or purged from all wicked opinions and
errors. For the church always confesses her sins, The church prays that
her sins man be forgeuen.
and prays that her faults may be pardoned. Also she believes ye forgeuenes
of sins. The Saints therefore do sin, fall, and also err: but yet through
ignorance. For they would not willingly deny Christ, forsake the Gospel, etc:
therefore they have remission of sins. And if through ignorance they err
also in doctrine, yet is this pardoned: for in the end they acknowledge their
error, and rest only upon the truth, and the grace of God offered in
Christ, as Hierome, Gregory, Bernard and others did. Let Christians then
endeavor to avoid the works of the flesh: but the desires or lusts of the
flesh they can not avoid.

It is very profitable therefore for them to feel the unclean lusts of the
flesh, To feel the uncleanness of the flesh is profitable.
lest they should be puffed up with some vain and wicked opinion of the
righteousness of their own works, as though they were accepted before God for
the same. The Monks being puffed up with this opinion of their own
righteousness, thought themselves to be so holy, yt they sold their
righteousness and holiness to others, although they were co^uinced by the
testimony of their own hearts, yt they were unclean. So pernicious and
pestilent a poison it is for a man to trust in his own righteousness, and to
think himself to be clean. But the godly, because they feel ye uncleanness of
their own hearts, therefore they cannot trust to their own righteousness. This
feeling so makes the^ to stoop, and so hu^bleth them yt they cannot trust to
their own good works, but are constrained to fly unto Christ their Mercy
seat and only succor: who has not a corrupt and sinful, but a most pure and
holy flesh, which he has given for the life of the world: in him they find a
sound and perfect righteousness. Thus they continue in humility: not counterfeit
and Monkish, but true and unfeigned, because of the uncleanness which yet
remains in their flesh: for the which if God would straightly judge them, they
should be found guilty of eternal death. But because they lift not up the^
selves proudly against God, but with a broken and a co^trite heart humbly
acknowledging their sins, and resting wholly upon the benefit of the
Mediator Christ, they come forth into the presence of God, and pray that for
his sake their sins may be forgeuen them: God spreads over them an infinite
heaven of grace, and does not impute unto them their sins for Christ's sake.

This I say to the end that we may take heed of the pernicious errors of ye
Papists touching ye holiness of life, wherein our minds were so wrapped, that
without great difficulty we could not wind our selves out of them. Wherefore do
your endeavor with diligence, that ye may discern and rightly judge between
true righteousness or holiness, and that which is hypocritical: then shall ye
behold the kingdom of Christ with other eyes then carnal reason does, that is,
with spiritual eyes, and certainly judge those to be true Saints in deed
which are baptized and believe in Christ, and afterward in the same Faith
whereby they are justified and their sins both past and present are forgeuen,
do abstain from the desires of the flesh. But from these desires they are not
thoroughly cleansed: for the flesh lusts against the spirit. Notwithstanding
these unclean and rebellious lusts do still remain in them, to this end
that they may be humbled, and being so humbled, they may feel the sweetenes of
the grace and benefit of Christ. So these remnauntes of unclean lusts and
sins do nothing at all hinder, To the godly those things which are evil,
turn unto good.
but greatly further the godly: For the more they feel their infirmities and
sins, so much the more they fly unto Christ the throne of grace, and more
heartely crave his aid and succor: to wit, that he will cover them with his
righteousness, that he will increase their Faith, that he will endue them with
his holy spirit, by whose gracious leading and guiding they may overcome the
lusts of the flesh, that they rule and reign not over them, but may be subject
unto them. Thus true Christians do continually wrestle with sin, and yet
notwithstanding in wrestling they are not overcome, but obtain the victory.

This have I said, yt ye may understand, not by men's dreams, but by ye word of
God, Christian doctrine raises up and comfort vveake and troubled
consciences.
who be true Saints in deed. We see then how greatly Christian doctrine
helps to the raising up and comforting of weak consciences: which treats
not of coules, shauings, shearings, fraternities and such like toys, but of
high and weighty matters, as how we may overcome the flesh, sin, death and
the Devil. This doctrine, as it is unknown to all Iusticiaries and such as
trust to their own works, so is it impossible for them to instruct or bring
into the right way one poor conscience wandering and going astray: or to
pacify and comfort the same when it is in heaviness, terror, or desperation.

Verse. 19. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, vvantonnes, idolatry, vvitchcraft, etc.
Paul does not recite all the works of the flesh, but uses a certain number
for a number uncertain. First he reckeneth up the kinds of lusts, as
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, etc. Now, Now, not only carnal
lust is a work of ye flesh, as ye Papists dreamed, who called marriage also a
work of the flesh (so chaste and holy are these men) whereof God himself is the
author, which also they themselves reckened among their sacraments: but he
numbreth also amongst the works of the flesh (as I have said before)
idolatry, withcraft, hatred and such other, which hereafter follow. Wherefore
this place alone does sufficiently show what Paul means by the flesh. What
Paul means by flesh.
These words are so well known that they need no interpretation.

Idolatry.
All ye highest religions, the holiness and most fervent devotions of those
which do reject Christ ye Mediator and worship God without his word and
commandment, are nothing else but plain idolatry. As in Popery it was
counted a most holy and spiritual act, when ye Mo^ks being shut up in their
selles did must and meditate of God or of his works, and when they being
enflamed with most earnest devotions, kneeled down, prayed, and were so ravished
with the co^templation of heavenly things yt they wept for joy. There was no
thi^king of women or of any other creature, but only of god ye creator, and of
his wonderful works: and yet this most spiritual work (as reason estemeth it)
is, according to Paul, a work of ye flesh and plain idolatry. Wherefore all
such religion whereby God is worshipped without his word and commandment, is
idolatry. Idolatry or Idol service.
And ye more holy and spiritual it seems to be in outward show, so much ye
more dangerous and pernicious it is. For it turns men away from faith in
Christ, and causes the^ to trust to their own strength, works and
righteousness. And such is ye religion of ye Anabaptists at this day: albeit
they daily more and more bewray themselves to be possessed with the Devil, and
to be seditious and bloody men.

Therefore ye fasting, the wearing of hear, holy works, strait Rule,
Carthusians or charterhouse mo^k^.
and whole life of ye Carthusia^s or Charterhouse monks, whose order
notwtstanding is of all other the straitest and sharpest, be very works of the
flesh, yea plain idolatry. For they imagine the^ selves to be saints, and to
be saved, not by Christ (whom they fear as a severe and cruel judge) but by
obserui^g of their Rules and Orders. In deed they think of God, of Christ and
of heavenly things, but after their own reason and not after the word of God:
to wit, yt their apparel, their manner of living, and their whole conversation
is holy and pleases Christ: who^ not only they hope to pacify by this
straitnes of life, but also to be rewarded of him for their good deeds and
righteousness. Therefore their most spiritual thoughts (as they dreme of the^)
are not only most fleshly, but also most wicked: For they would wipe away their
sins, and obtain grace and life ever lasting, by ye trust and affia^ce they
have in their own righteousness, rejecting and despising the word, faith and
Christ. Al ye worshippings and services of God therefore and all religions
without Christ are idolatry and idol service. The false and true worshipping
of God.
In Christ alone the father is well pleased: who so hears him and does that
which he has commanded, the same is beloved because of the beloved. He
commands us to believe his word and to be baptized, etc. and not to devise
any new worshipping or service of God.

I have said before yt the works of ye flesh be manifest: as adultery,
fornication and such like be manifestly known to all men. But idolatry has
such a goodly show and is so spiritual, Idolatry is unknown to the world.
yt it is known but to very few, that is, to the faithful, to be a work of the
flesh. For ye Monk when he lives chastely, fasteth, prays or says Mass, is
so far from thinking himself to be an idolater, or yt he fulfilleth any work
of the flesh, yt he is assuredly persuaded yt he is led and governed by the
spirit, yt he walks according to the spirit, yt he thinks, speaks and
does nothing else but mere spiritual things, and yt he does such service unto
god as is most acceptable un to him. The Mass horrible idolatry and
blasphemy against Christ.
No man ca^ at this day persuade the Papists yt their Mass is a great
blasphemy against god and idolatry, yea and that so horrible as never was any
in ye church since the apostles time. For they are blind and obstinate and
therefore they judge so peruersly of god and of gods matters thi^ki^g idolatry
to be a true service of god, and contrariwise faith to be idolatry. But we
which believe in Christ and know his mind, are able to judge and to discern al
things, and cannot truly and before God be judged of any man.

Flesh.
Hereby it is plain yt Paul calls flesh whatsoever is in man, co^prehe^ding
all the.iii. powers of the soul, that is, the will that lusts, the will that
is inclined to anger, and the understanding. The works of yt will that lusts,
are adultery, fornication, uncleanness and such like. The works of yt will
inclined to wrath, are quarelings, co^tentio^s, murder, and such other. The
works of understanding or reason are errors, false religions, superstitions,
idolatry, heresies, that is to say, Sects and such like. It is very necessary
for us to know these things: for this word [flesh] is so darkened in ye whole
kingdom of the Pope, The works of the flesh as the Papists define them.
yt they have taken the work of the flesh to be nothing else but yt
acco^plishing of fleshly lust or ye act of lechery: Wherefore it was not
possible for them to understand Paul. But here we may plainly see that Paul
reckeneth idolatry and heresy amo^gs ye works of the flesh, which two (as
before we have said) reason estemeth to be most high and excellent virtues,
Reason estemeth idolatry and heresy for most excellent virtues.
wisedo^, religion, holiness and rightousnes. Paul Col. 2. calls it ye
religion of angels. But although it seem to be never so holy and spiritual,
yet is it nothing else but a work of the flesh, an abomination and idolatry
against the Gospel, against faith, and against the true service of God. This
do the faithful see, for they have spiritual eyes: but the Iusticiaries judge
the contrary. For a Monk can not be persuaded that his vows be works of ye
flesh. So the Turk believes nothing less then that his Alcaron, his washings
and other ceremonies which he observes, be works of the flesh.

VVitchcraft.
Of witchcraft I have spoken before in the.3. Chap. This vice was very common
in these our days before the light and truth of ye gospel was reveled. When I
was a child there were many witches and sorcerers which bewitched both cattle
and men, but specially children, and did great harm also otherwise. But now in
the light of the Gospel these things be not so commonly heard of, for the
Gospel thrusts the Devil out of his seat with all his illusions. But now he
bewitcheth me^ much more horribly, namely with spiritual sorcerie and
witchcraft.

Paul reckneth witchcraft among the works of the flesh, VVitchcraft.
which notwtstanding, as all me^ know, is not a work of fleshly lust or
lechery, but a kind of idolatry. For witchcraft couenanteth with the Devil:
Idolatry.
superstition or idolatry couenanteth with God, albeit not with the true God, but
with a counterfeit God. Wherefore idolatry is in deed a spiritual witchcraft. For
as witches do enchaunt cattle and men, so idolaters, that is to say, all
Iusticiaries or iustifiers of themselves go about to bewitch god, Iusticiaries
or iustifiers of themselves.
and to make him such a one as they do imagine. Now, they imagine him to be
such a one as will justify them, not of his mere grace and mercy and through
Faith in Christ, but in respect of their will worshipping and works of their
own choosing, and in recompense thereof will give them righteousness and life
everlasting. But whiles they go about to bewitch God, they bewitch themselves.
For if they continue in this wicked opinion which they conceive of God, they
shall die in their idolatry and be damned. The works of the flesh are well
known for the most part, therefore they shall not need any further declaration.

Sects.
By the name of Sects Paul means here, not those divisions or contentions
which rise sometimes in the government of housholdes or of commonweals for
worldly and earthly matters: but those which rise in the Church about doctrine,
Faith and works. Heresies, that is to say, Sects have always been in the
Church, as we have said before in diverse places. The Pope an Archheretike.
Notwithstanding the Pope is an Archhereticke and the head of all heretics:
for he has filled the world as it were with an huge flood of infinite Sects
and errors. What concord and unity was there in so great diversity of the
Monks and other religious Orders? No one sort or Sect of them could agree with
an other: for they measured their holiness by ye straitnes of their Orders.
Hereof it comes yt the Carthusian will needs be counted holier then the
Franciscane, No unity or concord in the Popish church.
and so likewise ye rest. Wherefore there is no unity of spirit, nor concord of
minds, but great discord in the papisticall church. There is no conformity in
their doctrine, faith, religion or serving of God, but all things are clean
contrary. Contrariwise, amongst the Christians the word, faith, religion,
sacraments, service, Christ, God, heart, soul, mind and understanding are all
one and common to all: and as touching outward conversation ye diversity of
states, degrees and conditions of life, hinders this spiritual concord and
unity nothing at all, as before I have said. And they which have this unity
of the spirit, can certainly judge of all Sects, which otherwise no man
understands: As in deed no divine in yt Papacy understood, that Paul in
this place condemns all ye worshippings, religions, co^tinencie, honest
conversation and holy life in outward appearance, of all ye Papists, Sectaries
and schismatikes: but they all thought that he speaks of the gross idolatry
and heresies of the Gentiles and Turks which manifestly blaspheme the name of
Christ.

Dronkennes, Gluttony.
Paul does not say that to eat and drink be works of the flesh, but to be
dru^ken and to surfeit, which of all other vices are most common at this day.
Who so are given to this beastly dissolutenes and excess, let them know that
they are not spiritual, how much so ever they boast them selves so to be, but
they follow the flesh and perform the filthy works thereof. Therefore is this
horrible sentence pronounced against them, yt they shall not be inheritours of
ye kingdom of God. Paul would therefore yt Christians should fly drunkenness
and surfeiting, Drunkards and surfetters.
living soberly and moderately without all excess, lest by pa^pering ye flesh
they should be provoked to wa^tonnes: As in deed after surfeiting and belly
cheer, the flesh is wont to wax wanton, and to be inflamed with outrageous
lust. But it is not sufficient only to restrain this outrageous wa^tonnes and
lust of the flesh which follows dru^kennes and surfeiting or any manner of
excess, but also ye flesh when it is most sobre and in his best te^perance
must be subdued and repressed, lest it fulfill his lusts and desires. For it
oftentimes comes to pass that eue^ they which are most sobre, The most sobre
and temperate are many times most assailed with tentations.
are tempted most of al: As Hierom writes of himself: My face says he, was
pale with fasting, and my mind was enflamed with fleshly desires in my cold body,
and although my flesh was half dead already, yet yt flames of unclean lust
boiled wtin me. Hereof I my self also had experience when I was a Monk. The
heat therefore of unclean lusts is not quenched by fasti^g only, but we must be
aided also by the spirit, that is, by ye meditation of Gods word, faith and
prayer. In deed fasting represseth the gross assaults of fleshly lust: How
the burning heat of lusts may be quenched.
but the desires of the flesh are overcome by no abstinence from meats an
drinks, but only by the meditation of the word of God and invocation of
Christ.

Verse. 21. And such like.


For it is impossible to reckon up all the works of the flesh.

Verse. 21. VVherof I tell you, as I have also told you before, that they
which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.


This is a very hard and a terrible saying, but yet very necessary, against
false Christians and careless hypocrites, which brag of the Gospel, of Faith
and of ye spirit, and yet in all security they perform ye works of the
flesh. But chiefly the heretics being puffed up with opinions of spiritual
matters (as they dream) are possessed of the Devil, and altogether carnal:
therefore they perform and fulfill the desires of the flesh, even with all the
power of the soul. An horrible sentence pronounced by Paul.
Therefore most necessary it was that so horrible and terrible a sentence should
be pronounced by the Apostle against such careless contemners and obstinate
hypocrites (namely that all they which do such works of the flesh as Paul has
recited, shall not inherit the kingdom of God), that yet some of them being
terrified by this severe sentence, may begin to fight against the works of the
flesh by the spirit, that they accomplish not the same.

Verse. 22. But the fruits of the spirit are love, joy, peace, long suffering,
svvetenes, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness or mekenes, temperance.
The Apostle says not, the works of the spirit, as he said the works of ye
flesh, but he adorneth these Christian virtues with a more honorable name,
calling them the fruits of the spirit. The fruits of the spirit.
For they bring with them most excellent fruits and commodities: for they that
have them give glory to God, and with the same do allure and provoke others to
embrace the doctrine and Faith of Christ.

Love.
It had been enough to have said [Loue] and no more: for love extends it
self unto all the fruits of the spirit. And in the. 1. Cor. 13. Paul
attributes to love all the fruits which are done in the spirit, when he
says: Love is patie^t, courteous, etc. Notwithstanding he would set it here by
it self amongs the rest of ye fruits of the spirit, and in the first place,
thereby to admonish the Christians, that before all things they should love one
an other, Romans 12.10.
giving honor one to an other, every man esteming better of an other then of
him self, and serving one an other, because they have Christ and the holy
Ghost dwelling in them, and because of the word, baptism, and other gifts of
God which christians have.

Joy.
This is the voice of the Bridegroom and of the Bride, that is to say, sweet
cogitations of Christ, holesom exhortations, pleasant songs or Psalms, praises
and thanks giving, whereby the godly do instruct, stir up and refresh them
selves. The scripture exhorts us to rejoice in God.
Therefore God loves not heaviness and doulfulnes of spirit: he hates
uncomfortable doctrine, heavy and sorrowful cogitations, and loves cheerful
hearts. For therefore has he sent his son, not to oppress us with heaviness
and sorrow, but to cheer up our souls in him. For this cause the Prophets, ye
Apostles, and Christ him self do exhort us, yea they commau^d us to rejoice
and be glad. The joy of the spirit.
Zach. 9. Rejoice thou daughter of Syon, be joyful thou daughter of Jerusalem,
for behold thy king comes to thee. And in the Psalms it is often said: Be
joyful in the Lord. Paul says: Rejoice in the Lord alvvaies, etc. And
Christ says: Rejoice because your names are vvrytte^ in heaven. Where this
joy of the spirit is, there the heart inwardly rejoices through faith in
Christ, with full assurance that he is our Savior and our bishop, and outwardly
it expresses this joy with words and gestures. Also the faithful rejoice
when they see that the Gospel spreads abroad, that many be won to the
Faith, and that the kingdom of Christ is enlarged.

Peace.
Both toward God and men, ye Christians may be peaceable and quiet: not
contentious, nor hating one an other, but one bearing an others burden through
long suffering or perseverance: Long suffera^ce or perseverance.
without ye which peace cannot continue, and therefore Paul puts it next
after peace.

Long suffering or perseverance.
Whereby a man does not only bear adversities, injuries, reproaches and such
like, but also with patience waits for ye amendme^t of those which have done
him any wrong. When the Devil cannot by force overcome those which are tempted,
then seeks he to overcome them by long continuance. For he knows yt we be
earthen vessels which can not long endure and hold out many knockes and violent
strokes: therefore with long continuance of temptations he ouercometh many. To
vanquish these his continual assaults we must use long sufferance, which
patie^tly looks, not only for the amendment of those which do us wrong, but
also for the end of those temptations which the Devil raises up against us.

Gentleness.
Which is when a man is gentle and tractable in his conversation and in his
whole life. For such as will be true folowers of the Gospel, must not be sharp
and bitter, but gentle, mild, courteous and fair spoken: which should
encourage others to delight in their company: which can wink at other men's
faults, or at least expound them to the best: which will be well contented to
yield and give place to others, contented to bear with those which are froward
and intractable, as the very Heathen said: Thou must know the manners of thy
friend, but thou must not hate the^. Such a one was our Savior Christ, The
gentleness and mildnes of Christ. Ex libro Clementis ad Iacobum fratrem Domini.
as every where is to be seen in yt Gospel. It is written of Peter that he
wept so often as he remembered the sweet mildnes of Christ which he used in
his daily conversation. It is an excellent virtue and most necessary in every
kind of life.

Goodness.
Which is, when a man willingly helps others in their necessity by giving,
lending, and such other means.

Faith.
When Paul here reckeneth faith amongs the fruits of the spirit, it is
manifest that he speaks not of Faith which is in Christ, but of the
fidelity and humanity of one man toward an other. Hereupon he says in
the.13. Chap. of the first to the Cor. that charity believes all things.
Therefore he that has this faith is not suspicious but mild, and takes all
things to the best. And although he be deceived and finds himself to be
mocked, yet such is his patiencie and softnes, that he lets it pass:
Briefly he is ready to believe al me^, but he trusts not all. On ye contrary,
where this virtue is lacking, there men are suspicious, froward, waiward,
dogged, and so neither will believe any thing, nor give place to any body. They
can suffer nothing. Whatsoever a man says or does never so well, they cavil
and sclander it, so yt who so serves not their humor, ca^ never please them.
Therefore it is impossible for the^ to keep charity, friendship, concord and
peace with men. But if these virtues be taken away, what is this life else, but
biting and devouring one of an other? Faith therefore in this place is, when one
man gives credit to an other in things pertaining to this present life. For
what manner of life should we lead in this world, if one man should not credit
an other?

Mekenes.
Which is when a man is not lightly moved or provoked to anger. There be
infinite occasions in this life which provoke men to anger, but the godly over
come them by meekenes.

Temperance, chastity or continency.
This is a sobriety or modesty in the whole life of man, which virtue Paul
sets against the works of the flesh. He would therefore that Christians
should live soberly and chastely, that they should be no adulterers, no
fornicatours, no wantons: and if they cannot live chastely, he would have them
to marry: Also that they should not be contentious or quarellers, Chastity.
yt they should not be given to drunkenness or surfeiting, but that they should
abstain from all these things. Chastity or continency contains all these.
Hierome expounds it of virginity only, as though they that be married could
not be chaste: or as though the Apostle did write these things only to
virgins. In the 1. and.2. Chapt. to Tit. he warns also Bishops, young women,
and married folks both man and wife to be chaste and pure.

Verse. 23. Against such there is no law.
The law is abolished to the beleuers in Christ.
In deed there is a law, but not against such: As he says also in an other
place. The law is not given to the righteous man. For the righteous lives in
such wise, that he has no need of any law to admonish or to constrain him:
but without constraint of the law, he willingly does those things which the
law requires. Therefore the law cannot accuse or condemn those that believe
in Christ. In deed the law troubles and terrifieth our consciences, but
Christ apprehended by Faith, vanquisheth it with all his terrors and
threatenings. To them therefore the law is utterly abolished, and has no power
to accuse them: for they do that of their own accord, which the law
requires. They have received the holy Ghost by Faith, who will not suffer them
to be idle. Although the flesh resist, yet do they walk after the spirit. So
a Christian accomplisheth the law inwardly by Faith (for Christ is the
perfection of the law unto righteousness, to all that do believe): outwardly by
works and by remission of sins. But those which perform the works or
desires of the flesh, the law does accuse and condemn both ciuily and
spiritually.

Verse. 24. For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof.
This whole place concerning works, shows that the true beleuers are no
hypocrites. Therefore let no man deceive him self. For whosoever (says he)
pertain unto Christ, have crucified the flesh with all the vices and lusts
thereof. For the Saints, in as much as they have not yet utterly put of the
corrupt and sinful flesh, are inclined to sin, and do neither fear not
love God so perfectly as they ought to do. Also they be provoked to anger, to
envy, to impatiencie, to unclean lusts, and such like motions, which
notwithstanding they accomplish not: What it is to crucify the fle^h.
for (as Paul here says) they crucify the flesh with all the affections and
lusts thereof. Which thing they do, not only when they repress the wantonness
of the flesh with fasting and other exercises, but also (as Paul said before)
when they walk according to the spirit: that is, when they being admonished
by the threatenings of God, whereby he shows that he will severely punish
sin, are afeard to commit sin: Also when they being armed with the word of
God, with faith, and with prayer, do not obey the lusts of the flesh.

When they resist the flesh after this manner, they nail it to the cross with
the lusts and desires thereof, so that although the flesh be yet alive, yet
can it not perform that which it would do, for as much as it is bound both
hand and foot, and fast nailed to the cross. The faithful then so long as
they live here do crucify the flesh, that is to say, they feel the lusts
thereof, but they obey them not. For they being furnished with the armor of
God, that is, with Faith, The armor of God.
hope and the sword of the spirit, do resist the flesh, and with these
spiritual nails they fasten the same unto the cross, so that it is
constrained to be subject to the spirit. Afterward when they die they put it
of wholly: and when they shall rise again from death to life, they shall have a
pure and vncorrupt flesh without all affections and lusts.

The sixth Chapter.
After the common division this is the.25. verse of the former chapter.
If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit.
THE Apostle reckened before amongst the works of the flesh heresy and envy,
and pronounced sentence against those which are envious, and which are authors
of Sects, that they should not inherit the kingdom of God. And now, as if he
had forgotten that which he said a little before, he again reproves those
which provoke and envy one an other. Why does he so? was it not sufficient to
have done it once? In deed he does it of purpose: for he takes occasion here
to inueigh against that execrable vice of vaineglory, Vaineglory a detestable
vice, and most pernicious to the church of God. Tit. 1.7.
which was the cause of the troubles that were in all the churches of Galatia,
and has been always most pernicious and hurtful to the whole Church of
Christ. Therefore in his Epistle to Titus he would not yt a proud man should
be ordained a Bishop. For Pride (as Augustine truly says) is the mother of all
heresies, or rather the headspring of all sin and confusion: Which thing all
histories as well holy as profane do witness.

How great a mischefe vain glory is.
Now, vainglory or arrogancy has always ben a common poison in the world,
which the very Heathen Poets and Hystorigraphers have always vehemently
reproved. There is no village wherein there is not some one or other to be
found, that would be counted wiser, and be more esteemed then all then rest. But
they are chiefly infected with this disease which stand upon their reputation for
learning and wisdom. In this case no man will yield to an other, according to
this saying: Ye shall not lightly find a man that will yield unto others the
praise of vvitte and skill: Ouide. Horace.
For it is a goodly thing to see men point at one, and say: this is he. But it
is not so hurtful in private persons, no nor in any kind of magistrate, as it
is in them that have any charge in the church. Albeit in civil government
(specially if it be in great personages) it is not only a cause of troubles
and ruins of commonweals, but also of the troubles and alteration of
kingdoms and Empires: Which thing the hystories both of ye Scripture and
profane writers do witness.

But when this poison creeps into the Church or spiritual kingdom, it can
not be expressed how hurtful it is. For there is no contention as touching
learning, wit, beauty, riches, kingdoms, Empires and such like: but as
touching salvation or damnation, eternal life or eternal death. Therefore Paul
earnestly exhorts the ministers of the word to fly this vice, saying: If we
live in the spirit, etc. As if he should say: If it be true that we live in the
spirit, let us also proceed and walk in the spirit. For where the spirit is,
it renews men, and works in them new motions: that is to say, whereas they
were before vaineglorious, wrathful and envious, it makes them now humble,
gentle and patient. Such men seek not their own glory, but the glory of God:
Romans 12.10.
they do not provoke or envy one an other, but give place one to an other,
and in giving honor prevent one an other. Contrariwise they yt be desirous of
glory and envy one an other, may bost yt they have the spirit and live after
the spirit: but they deceive themselves, they follow the flesh and do the
works thereof, and they have their judgment already, that they shall not
inherit the kingdom of God.

Now, Vaineglory a common vice in the church. Math. 9.^8. 2 Cor. 11 15.
as nothing is more dangerous to the Church then this execrable vice, so is
there nothing more common: For when God sends forth laborers into his
harvest, by and by Satan raises up his ministers also, who will in no case be
counted inferior to those yt are rightly called. Here straightwayes rises
dissension. The wicked will not yield one hears breadth to ye godly: For they
dream that they far pass them in wit, in learning, in godliness, in
spirit and other virtues. Much less ought the godly to yield to the wicked,
lest the doctrine of Faith come in danger. Moreover, such is the nature of the
ministers of Satan, The nature of false teachers.
that they can make a goodly show that they are very charitable, humble, lovers
of concord, and are endued with other fruits of the spirit: also they protest
yt they seek nothing else but the glory of God and the salvation of men's
souls: and yet are they full of vainglory, doing all things for none other end
but to get praise and estimation among men. To be short, they think that gain
is godliness, 1. Timo. ^.^. (...). ^.^0. Rom 10 1^.
and that the ministry of the word is delivered unto them that they may get
fame and estimation thereby. Wherefore they can not but be authors of dissension
and Sects.

Forasmuch then as the vaineglory of the false apostles was the cause that ye
Churches of Galatia were troubled and forsook Paul, therefore in this Chapter
specially his purpose was to suppress that execrable vice: yea this mischief
gave the Apostle occasion to write this whole Epistle. And if he had not so
done, all his travel bestowed in preaching of the Gospel among the Galathians
had been spent in vain. For in his absence ye false apostles, The authority
of the false apostles.
which were men in outward show of great authority, reigned in Galatia: who
besides yt they would seem to seek the glory of Christ and the salvation of
the Galathians, pretended also that they had been conversant with the Apostles,
and that they followed their footesteppes, The false apostles despised Paul.
saying that Paul had not seen Christ in the flesh, nor had been conversant
with the rest of the Apostles, and therefore they made no account of him, but
rejected his doctrine, and boasted their own to be true and sincere. Thus they
troubled ye Galathians and raised Sects among them, so that they provoked and
envied one an other: which was a sure token, that neither the teachers nor
hearers lived and walked after the spirit, but followed the flesh and fulfilled
the works thereof: and so consequently lost the true doctrine, Faith, Christ,
and all the gifts of the holy Ghost, and were now become worse then the
Heathen.

Notwithstanding he does not only inueigh against the false apostles which in
his time troubled the Churches of Galatia, but also he foresaw in spirit, that
there should be an infinite number of such even to the worlds end; which being
infected with this pernicious vice, should thrust them selves into the Church,
boasting of the spirit and heavenly doctrine, and under this pretense should
quite overthrow the true doctrine and Faith. Such as thrust them selves into
the ministry.
Many such have we also seen in these our days, who have thrust them selves
into the kingdom of the spirit: that is to say, into the Ministry of the word,
and by this hypocrisy they have purchased unto the^ selves fame and estimation
that they were great doctors and pillars of the Gospel, and such as lived in
the spirit, and walked according to the same. But because their glory
consisted in men's mouths and not in God, The end of vaineglorious teachers.
therefore it could not be firm and stable, but according to Paul's prophecy,
it turned to their own confusion, and their end was destruction. Phil. 3.19.
Psalm. 1.4.5.
For the wicked shall not stand in judgment, but shall be taken away like
chafe, and scattered abroad with the vvinde.

The same judgment remains for all such as in preaching the Gospel seek
their own profit and not the glory of Jesus Christ. For the Gospel is not
delivered unto us that we should thereby seek our own praise and glory, What
we ought to seek in the gospel.
or that the people should honor and magnify us which are the Ministers
thereof: but to the end that the benefit and glory of Christ might be preached
and published, and that the father might be glorified in his mercy offered unto
us in Christ his son, Romans 1.32.
whom he delivered for us all and with him has given us all things. Wherefore
the Gospel is a doctrine wherein we ought to seek nothing less than our own
glory. It sets forth unto us heavenly and eternal things: which are not our
own, which we have neither done nor deserved: but it offers the same unto
us, to us (I say) which are unworthy, and that through the mere goodness and
grace of God. Why should we then seek praise and glory thereby? He therefore
that seeks his own glory in the Gospel, speaks of him self: And he that
speaks of him self is a lier and there is unrighteousness in him. John. 7.1^.
Contrariwise he that seeks the glory of him that sent him is true, and there
is no unrighteousness in him. John. 7.

Paul therefore gives earnest charge to all the ministers of the word, saying:
If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit, that is to say: What
it is to walk in the spirit.
Let us abide in the doctrine of ye truth which has been taught unto us in
brotherly love and spiritual concord: let us preach Christ and the glory of
God in simplicity of heart, and let us confess that we have received all
things of him: let us not think more of our selves than of others: let us
raise up no Sects. For this is not to walk rightly, but rather to raunge out
of the way, and to set up a new and a perverse way of walking.

Hereby we may understand that God of his special grace makes the teachers of
the Gospel subject to the cross and to all kinds of afflictions for the
salvation of them selves and of the people: Why God lays the cross upon the
preachers of the gospel.
for otherwise they could by no means repress and beat down this beast
which is called vaineglory. For if no persecution, no cross or reproach
followed the doctrine of the Gospel, but only praise, reputation and glory
amongst men: then would all the professors thereof be infected and perish
through the poison of vainglory. Jerome says that he had seen many which
could suffer great inconveniences in their body and goods, but none that could
despise their own praises. For it is almost impossible for a man not to be
puffed up when he hears any thing spoken in the praise of his own virtues.
Paul notwithstanding that he had the spirit of Christ, says that there was
given unto him the messenger of Satan to buffette him, because he should not
be exalted out of measure through the greatness of his revelations. Therefore
Augustine says very well: If a minister of the word be praised, he is in
danger. If a brother despise or dispraise him he is also in danger. He that
hears a preacher of the word, ought to reverence him for the words sake: but
if he be proud thereof he is in danger. Contrariwise if he be despised, he is
out of danger: but so is not he which despises him.

Wherefore we must honor our great benefit, that is, Romans 14.16.
that is, of the preaching of the word and receiving of the Sacraments. We must
also reverence one an other according to that saying: Romans 12.10.
In giving honor one to an other, etc. But whersoeuer this is done, When men
be praised, the flesh waxes proud.
by and by the flesh is tickled with vaineglory and waxes proud. For there is
none (no not among the godly) which would not rather be praised than
dispraised, except perhaps some be so well stablished in this behalf, that he
will be moved neither with praises nor reproaches: As that woman said of David.
2. Sam. 14. My Lord the king is like an angel of God, 2. Sam. 14.17
which will neither be moved with blessing nor curssing. Likewise Paul
says: by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, etc. 2. Cor.
6.8,
Such me^ as be neither puffed up with praise, nor thrown down with
dispraise, but endeavor simply to set forth ye benefit and glory of Christ,
and to seek the salvation of souls, do walk orderly. Contrariwise they which
wax proud in hearing of their own praises, Who walk in order, and who do
not.
not seking ye glory of Christ but their own: also they which being moved with
reproaches and sclaunders do forsake the ministry of the word, walk not
orderly.

Wherefore let every one see yt he walk orderly, and specially such as boast of
the spirit. If thou be praised, know that it is not thou that is praised,
Galath. 1.5.
but Christ, to who^ all praise and honor is due. For in that thou teach ye
word purely and live godly, these are not thine own gifts, but the gifts of
God: therefore thou art not praised but God in thee. When thou do acknowledge
this, thou will walk orderly, and not be puffed up with vainglory (for what have
thou that thou have not received?) but wilt confess that thou have received
the same of God, 1. Cor. 4.7.
and wilt not be moved with injuries, reproaches, or persecution to forsake thy
calling.

God therefore of his special grace at this day covers our glory with
infamy, reproach, mortal hatred, cruel persecution, railing and cursing of ye
whole world: Privy and open enemies of the Gospel.
also with the contempt and ingratitude even of those among who^ we live, as well
ye common sort as also ye citizens, gentlemen and noble men (whose enimitie,
hatred and persecution against ye gospel, like as it is privy and inward, so
is it more dangerous then the cruelty and outrageous dealings of our open
enemies) yt we should not wax proud of ye gifts of God in us. This millstone
must be hanged about our neck, yt we be not infected with that pestilent poison
of vainglory. Some there be of our side which love and reverence us for ye
ministry of the word: but where there is one that reuerenceth us, there be on
ye other side an hundredth that hate and persecute us. These spiteful deali^gs
therefore, and these persecutions of our enemies, this great contempt and
ingratitude, this cruel and privy hatred of them among whom we live, are such
pleasant sights and make us so merry, that we easily for get vainglory.

Wherefore, rejoicing in ye Lord who is our glory, we remain in order. We must
not be proud of our spiritual gifts. Luke. 12.4^. Ephesians. 4.12.
Those gifts which we have, we acknowledge to be ye gifts of God and not our
own, given for ye edifying of ye body of Christ: Therefore we be not proud of
the^. For we know that more is required of the^ to who^ much is committed, then
of the^ which have received but little. Moreover we know yt there is no respect
of persons before God. Acts 10.34.
Therefore a pore artificer faithfully using the gift which God has given him,
pleases God no less than a preacher of the word: for he serves God in ye
same faith and with the same spirit. Wherefore we ought no less to regard ye
meanest Christians, than they regard us. And by this means shall we continue
free from the poison of vainglory, and walk in the spirit.

Contrariwise the fantastical spirits, which seek their own glory,
Vainglorious spirits.
the favor of men, the peace of the world, the ease of the flesh, and not the
glory of Christ, nor yet ye health of men's souls (although they protest yt
they seek nothing else) ca^ not choose but discover themselves in commending
their own doctrine and industry and dispraising other men's, and all to get
them a name and praise. These vaineglorious spirits do not rejoice and glory
in the Lord: but then do they glory, then are they stout and hardy when they
are magnified of the people. Whose hearts they win by wonderful sleights and
subtelties: for in their words, gestures and wrytings they can cou^terfet and
dissemble al things. But when they are not praised and commended of the people,
then be they the most fearful men in ye world: for they hate and shunney cross
of Christ and persecution. On the contrary, when they are praise and magnified
(as I said) none are so stout, no Hector, no Achilles so bold and hardy as they.

Such a sly and crafty beast therefore is flesh, that for no other cause it
forsakes his function, corrupts true doctrine, and breaks ye concord of
the church, then only upon this cursed vainglory. Therefore it is not without
cause that Paul so sharply inueigheth against it both here and in other
places, Galath. 4.17.
as before in the.4. Chap. They are (says he) ielous over you amiss: yea they
would exclude you from me, that ye should altogether love them: that is to
say, they would discredit me that they themselves might be famous. They seek
not Christ's glory and your salvation, but their own glory, my reproach and
your bondage.

Verse. 26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory.
Which is to glory, not in God (as I have said) but in lies, in the opinion,
liking and estimation of the people. Here is no right foundation of true glory,
but a false foundation, and therefore impossible long to stand. He that praises
a man as he is a man, is a lier: for there is nothing praise worthy in him, but
all things are worthy of co^de^natio^. Romans 3.25.
Therefore as touchi^g our person, this is our glory, yt all me^ have sinned and
are gilty of everlasting death before god. But ye case is otherwise when our
ministry is praised. The praise of the person and of the ministry.
wherefore we must not only wish, but also to the uttermost of our power
endeavor yt me^ may magnify it and have it in due reverence: for this shall
turn to their salvation. Paul warns ye Romans that they offend no man: Romans
14.16.
to the end, says he, that our commodity be not evil spoken of: And in an
other place: that our ministry be not reprehe^ded. 2. Cor. 6.3.
Therefore when our ministry is praised, we be not praised for our own persons
sake, but (as the Psalm says) we are praised in God and in his holy name.

Verse. 26. Provoking one an other, and envying one an other.
The effect and fruit of vaineglory.
Here he describes the effect and fruit of vaineglory. He that teaches any
error, or is an author of any new doctrine, ca^ not but provoke others: and
when they do not approve and receive his doctrine, by and by he begins to
hate them most bitterly. We see at this day with what deadly hatred the
Sectaries are inflamed against us, because we will not give place to them and
approve their errors. We did not first provoke them, nor spredde abroad any
wicked opinion in the world: but rebuking certain abuses in the church, and
faithfully teaching the article of Justification, have walked in good order.
Galath. 2.5.
But they forsaking this article, have taught many things contrary to the word
of God. Here, because we would not lose ye truth of the Gospel, we have set
our selves against them, and have condemned their errors: which thing, because
they could not abide, they did not only provoke us first without cause, but
also do still most spitefully hate us, and that upon no other occasion but
only upon vaineglory: for they would gladly deface us that they alone might
rule and reign: For they imagine that it is a great glory to profess ye
Gospel, whereas in deed there is no greater ignominy in ye sight of the world.

Chap. 6.1. Brethren if a man be overtaken by any fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such one with the spirit of mekenes.
He that diligently wayeth the words of the Apostle, may plainly perceive that
he speaks not of errors and offenses against doctrine, What offenses are to
be forgeuen.
but of far lesser sins, into the which a man falls not wilfully and of
set purpose, but of infirmity. And hereof it comes that he uses so gentle
and fatherly words, not calling it error or sin, but a fault. Again, to
the intent to diminish, and as it were to excuse the sin, and to remove the
whole fault from man, he adds: If any man be overtaken, that is to say, be
beguiled of the Devil or of the flesh. Yea and this term or name of Man
helps something also to diminish and qualify the matter. As if he should
say: What is so proper unto man as to fall, to be deceived, and to err? So
says Moises in Le. They are wont to sin like me^. Leuit. 6.3.
Wherefore this is a sentence full of heavenly comfort: Which once in a terrible
conflict delivered me from death. For as much then as the Saints in this life
do not only live in the flesh, Gal. 2.20.3.16.
but now and then also through the enticement of the Devil, fulfill the lusts
of the flesh, that is to say, fall into impatie^cie, envy, wrath, error,
doubting, distrust and such like: for Satan always assaileth both, that is,
as well the purity of doctrine, Satan lies in vvait both against purity of
doctrine and life.
which he labors to take away by Sects and dissensions, as also the
soundnes of life, which he corrupts with daily offenses. Therefore Paul
teaches how such men that are fallen should be dealt wtall, namely that they
which are strong, should raise up and restore them again with the spirit of
mekenes.

These things it behooves them specially to know which are in the ministry of
the word, How pastor^ ought to deal with them that are fallen.
lest whilst they go about to touch all things to the quick, they forget the
fatherly and motherly affection which Paul here requires of those that have
charge of souls. And of this precept he has set forth an example. 2. Cor. 2.
where he says that it was sufficient that he which was excommunicate was
rebuked of many, and that they ought now to forgive him and comfort him lest he
should be swalowed up with overmuch sorrow. Wherefore I beseech you (says he) use
charity toward him. Therefore the pastors and ministers must in deed sharply
rebuke those which are fallen, but when they see that they are sorrowful for
their offenses, then let them begin to raise them up again, to comfort them,
and to diminish and qualify their faults as much as they can, but yet through
mercy only, which they must set against sin, lest they that be fallen be
swalowed up with overmuch heaviness. As the holy ghost is precise in maintaining
and defending the doctrine of faith: so is he mild and pitiful in forbearing
and qualifying men's sins, if they which have committed them be sorrowful for
the same.

But as for ye Popes synagoge, The Pope and his bishops are torme^tors of men's
consciences.
like as in all other matters it has both taught and done clean contrary to
the commandment and example of Paul, even so has it done in this thing
also. The Pope with all his bishops have been very tyrants and butchers of
men's consciences. For they have burdened them from time to time with new
traditions, and for every light matter have vexed them with their
exco^munications: and that they might ye more easily obey their vain terrors,
they annexed thereunto these sentences of Pope Gregory. Sayings of Pope
Gregory.
It is the part and property of good minds to be afraid of a fault where no
fault is. And again: Our ce^sures must be feared, yea though they be unjust
and wro^gfull. By these sayings (which were brought into the Church by ye
Devil) they stablished their excommunication and this majesty of ye Papacy
which is so terrible to ye whole world. There is no need of such humility and
goodness of minds, to be afeard of a fault where none is. O thou Romish Satan
who gave thee this power to terrify and condemn men's co^scie^ces that were
terrified enough before with thy unjust and wro^gful se^te^ces? Thou ought
rather to have raised the^ up, to have delivered the^ from false fears, and to
have brought the^ from lies and errors to ye truth. This thou omittest, and
according to thy title and name: to wit, the man of sin and child of
perdition, 2. These. 2.3. By what means the Pope establishes his tyranny and
power.
thou imaginest a fault where no fault is. This is in deed ye craft and deceit
of Antichrist, whereby he has most mightily established his excommunication and
tyranny. For who so ever despised his unjust sentences, was counted very
obstinate and wicked: As some Princes did, howbeit against their consciences:
for in those times of darkness they did not understand that the Popes curses
were vain.

Let the^ therefore to whom ye charge of men's consciences is committed, How
they that are fallen ought to be entreated.
learn by this commandment of Paul how they ought to handle those that have
offended. Brethren (says he) if any man be overtaken with sin, do not trouble
him or make him more sorrowful: be not bitter unto him, do not reject or
condemn him, but amend him and raise him up again: and by ye spirit of
lenity and mildnes restore that which in him is lost by ye deceit of the Devil
or by ye weakness of the flesh. For the kingdom whereunto ye are called is a
kingdom not of terror or heaviness, but of boldness, joy and gladness. Therefore
if ye see any brother cast down and afflicted by occasion of sin which he
has committed, run unto him and reaching out your hand raise him up again,
comfort him with sweet words, and embrace him with motherly arms. As for those
yt be hard hearted and obstinate, which without fear continue carelessly in their
sins, rebuke the^ sharply. But on ye other side (as I said) they that be
ouertake^ with any sin, and are heavy and sorrowful for their fault which they
have committed, must be raised up and admonished by you that are spiritual, and
that in ye spirit of meekenes, and not in the zeal of severe justice: as some
have done, The spirit of mekenes.
who when they should have refreshed thirsty consciences with some sweet
consolation, gave the^ gall and vinegar to drink, as ye Jews did unto Christ
hanging upon the cross. Ezechiel says of the shepherds of Israel, Ezech.
34.4.
that they ruled the flock of God with cruelty and rigor: but a brother ought
to comfort his brother that is fallen, with a loving and a meke spirit. Again:
let him that is fallen hear the word of him that raises him up, and believe it.
For God would not have those yt are bruised to be cast away, but to be raised up
as the Psalm says. For God has bestowed more for them, than we have done,
that is to say, the life and blood of his own son. Wherefore we ought also to
receive, to aid and comfort such with all mildnes and gentleness.

Verse. 1. Considering thy self lest thou also be tempted.
This is a very necessary admonition to beat down the sharp dealing of such
pastors as show no pity in raising up and restoring again them which are
fallen. There is no sin (says Augustine) which any man has done, but an other
man may do ye same. We stand on a slipperie ground: therefore if we wax proud
and leave of our duty, there is nothing so easy unto us as to fall. Ex libro
de vitis patrum.
It was well said therefore of one in the book called ye lives of the fathers,
when it was told him that one of his brethren was fallen into whoredo^: He fell
yesterday (says he), and I may fall to day. Paul therefore adds this earnest
admonition that the pastors should not be rigorous and unmerciful toward the
offenders, or measure their own holiness by other men's sins: but yt they
should bear a motherly affection toward the^, and think thus with themselves:
This man is fallen: it may be yt I also shall fall more da^gerously and more
shamefully tha^ he did. And if they which be so ready to judge and condemn
other, would well consider their own sins, they should find the sins of
others which are fallen to be but motes and their own sins to be great
beams. Math. 7.3.


Let him therefore yt stands take heed lest he fall. 1. Cor. 10.12. 2. Sam. ^1.
If David which was so holy a man, full of faith and the spirit of god, which
had such notable promises of god, which also did so many and great things for
ye lord, did fall so grievously, and being now stricke^ in years was ouerthrown
with youthful lust after so many and diverse temptations wherwt God had exercised
him: why should we presume of our own co^stancy? And god by such examples does
show unto us, first our own weakness, yt we should not wax proud but stand in
fear: Then he shows unto us his judgment, yt he ca^ bear nothing less
than pride either against himself or against our brethren. Paul therefore says
not without cause: Considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. They that
be exercised with temptations do know how necessary this commandment is. On
the other side, they which be not tried therewith, do not understand Paul, and
therefore are not touched with any pity toward them that are fallen: as was to
be seen in Popery, where nothing else reigned but tyranny and cruelty.

Verse. 2. Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ.
This is a gentle commandment: to ye which he joins a great co^mendatio^.
The law of Christ is ye law of love. Christ after he had redeemed us, renewed us
and made us his church: gave us no other law but ye law of mutual love. John.
13. A new commandment give I to you, that ye love together, etc. And to love
is not (as ye Popish Sophisters dream) to wish well one to an other: but one
to bear an others burden, that is, to bear those things which he grievous
unto thee, and which thou would not willingly bear. Therefore Christians
must have strong shoulders and mighty bones that they may bear flesh, that is,
the weakness of their brethern: for Paul says yt they have burdens and
troubles. Love therefore is mild, courteous, patient, not in receiving but in
giving. Love. 1. Cor. 13.4.
For it is constrained to wink at many things and to bear them. Faithful
teachers do see in the church many errors and offenses which they are
compelled to bear. In ye common weal subjects are never so obedient to the
laws of the magistrates as they should be. Therefore unless ye magistrate can
wink and dissemble in time and place, he shall never be meet to rule the
common wealth. In household affairs there be many things done which displease
the master of ye house. But if we can bear and wink at our own vices and
offenses which we daily commit: let us also bear other men's faults, according
to that saying: bear ye one an others burden, Romans 13.9.
etc. Again: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Seeing then there be vices in every state of life and in all men, therefore
Paul sets forth the law of Christ unto ye faithful, whereby he exhorts
them to bear one an others burden. They which do not so, do plainly witness
that they understand not one jot of the law of Christ, which is the law of
love: which (as Paul says. 1. Cor. 13.) believes all things, hops all
things, and bears all the burdens of the brethern: yet always holding
notwithstanding the first commandment, wherein they that offend do not
transgress the law of Christ, that is to say, the law of charity, they do
not hurt nor offend their neighbor, but Christ and his kingdom which he has
purchased with his own blood. Whose burdens are to be borne.
This kingdom is not maintained by the law of charity, but by the word of
God, by Faith and by the holy Ghost. This commandment then of bearing one an
others burden, belongs not to them which deny Christ, and not only do not
acknowledge their sin, but also defend it: neither does it belong unto those
which continue still in their sins (who also do partly deny Christ): 1. Tim.
5.22.
but such must be forsaken lest we become partakers of their evil works. On
the contrary, they which willingly hear the word of God and believe, and yet
notwtsta^ding against their will do fall into sin, and after they be
admonished do not only receive such admonition gladly, but also detest their
sin and endeavor to amend: these I say are they which be overtaken with sin,
and have the burdens that Paul commands us to bear. In this case let us
not be rigorous and merciles: but after the example of Christ, who bears and
forbeareth such, let us bear and forbear them also: for if he punish not such
(which thing notwithstanding he might justly do) much less ought we so to do.

Verse. 3. For if any man think him self to be somevvhat, when in deed he
is nothing, he deceaueth himself.
Here again he reprehendeth the authors of Sects and painteth them out in
their right colors: to wit, that they be hard hearted, The authors of Sects
painted out i^ their right colors.
merciless and without compassion, such as despise the weak, and will not
vouchsafe to bear their burdens, but require all things straightly and precisely
(like waiward husbands and severe Scholemasters) whom nothing can please but
what they themselves do: who also will be always thy bitter enemies unless
thou commend what so ever they say or do, and in all things frame thy self
according to their appetite. Of all men therefore they are the proudest, and
dare take upon them all things. And this is it that Paul says here: they
think themselves to be somewhat, that is to say, that they have the holy
Ghost, that they understand all the mysteries of the Scriptures, that they ca^
not err, etc.

Wherefore Paul adds very well that they are nothing: but that they deceive
themselves with the foolish persuasions of their own wisdom and holiness.
They understand nothing therefore either of Christ or of ye law of Christ: For
if they did, they would say: Brother, thou art infected with such a vice, and I
am infected with an other. God has forgeuen me ten thousand talents, Mat.
18.24.^1.
and I will forgive thee an hundred pence. But when they will require all
things so exactly and with such perfection, and will in no wise bear the
burdens of the weak, they offend many with this their sharpnes and severity:
who begin to despise, hate and shun them, and seek not comfort or counsel at
their hands, nor regard what or how they teach: Whereas contrariwise Pastors
ought so to behave themselves toward those over whom they have taken charge,
that they might love and reverence them, not for their person, but for their
office and Christian virtues which especially ought to shine in them.

Paul therefore in this place has rightly painted out such severe and
merciless Saints, when he says: They think them selves to be somevvhat,
that is to say, being puffed up with their own foolish opinions and vain
dreams, they have a marvelous persuasion of their own knowledge and holiness,
and yet in very deed they are nothing, and do but deceive them selves.
Deceauers of themselves.
For it is a manifest beguiling when a man persuades him self that he is
somewhat, when in deed he is nothing Such men are well described in the.3. of
the Apocalips in these words: Thou say: Apoc. 3.17.
I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know
not how thou art vvretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Verse. 4. But let every man try his own work, and then he shall have
rejoicing in himself only, and not in an other.
He goes foreward in painting out those proud and vainglorious fellows.
Desire of vainglory.
For the desire of vainglory is an odious and cursed vice, it is the occasion
of all evils, and troubles both commonweals and consciences. And specially
in spiritual matters it is such an evil as is incurable. And albeit that this
place may be understand of the works of this life or civil conversation, yet
principally the Apostle speaks of the work of the ministry, and inueyeth
against those vaineglorious heads, which with their fantastical opinions do
trouble well enstructed consciences.

And this is the property of those which are infected with this poison of
vainglory, Vainglorious heads.
that they have no regard whether their work, that is to say, their ministry
be pure, simple and faithful or not: but this they only seek that they may
have the praise of the people. So ye false apostles, when they saw that Paul
preached the gospel purely to ye Galathia^s, and that they could not bring any
better doctrine, they began to find fault at those things which he had godly
and faithfully taught, and to prefer their own doctrine before the doctrine of
Paul, and by this subtlety they won ye favor of the Galathians, and
brought Paul into hatred among them. Therefore ye proud and vainglorious do
join these.iii. vices together. Three vices of the vaineglorious linked
together.
First they are greedy of glory. Secondly they are marvelous witty and wily in
finding fault with other men's doings and sayings, thereby to purchase ye love, the
well liking and praise of the people. And thirdly when they have once gotten a
name (though it be by other men's travail) they become so stout and full of
stomach that they dare venture upon all things. Therefore they are pernicious
and pestilent fellows, whom I hate even with my very heart: for they seek
their own, and not that which is of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.27.
etc.

Against such Paul speaks here. As if he should say: Such vaineglorious
spirits do their work, that is to say, they teach the Gospel to this end
that they may win praise and estimation among men, that is, that they may be
counted excellent doctors, with whom Paul and others might not be compared.
And when they have gotten this estimation, then begin they to reprehend the
sayings and doings of other me^, and highly commend their own: and by this
subteltie they bewitch ye minds of the people, who because they have itching
ears are not only delited with new opinions, The people delited with
novelties.
but also rejoice to see those teachers which they had before, to be abased and
defaced by these new vpstartes and glorious heads, and all because they are
come to a fulness and lothing of the word.

Thus it ought not to be (says he): but let every man be faithful in his
office: let him not seek his own glory, nor depend upon the praise and
commendation of ye people, but let his only care be to do his work truly,
that is, let him teach ye gospel purely. He shall lack no praise that
preaches the Gospel purely
And if his work be sincere and sound, let him assure him self that he shall
lack no praise either before God or among ye godly. In the mean space if he
be not commended of ye unthankful world, let this nothing move him: For he
knows that the end of his ministry is, not that he, but that Christ should
be glorified thereby. Wherefore, being furnished with the armor of righteousness on
the right hand and on the left, let him say: I began not to teach ye gospel to
the end that the world should magnify me, The end of the ministry of the
word. 2. Tim. 4.5.
and therefore I will not shrink from that which I have begun if the world hate,
sclau^der or persecute me. He that is such a one, teaches the word and
attends upon his office faithfully, without any worldly respect, that is,
without regard of glory or gain, without the strength, wisdom or authority
of any man. He leans not to the praise of other men, for he has it in him
self.

Wherefore he that truly and faithfully executes his office, cares not what
the world speak of him: he cares not whether the world praise or dispraise
him, but he has praise in himself, To have praise in himself.
which is the testimony of his conscience and praise or glory in God. He may
therefore say with Paul: This is our rejoicing, this is our praise and glory,
even ye testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity before
God and not in fleshly wisdom, but in ye grace of God we have had our
conversation in the world. This glory is vncorrupt and steadfast: for it
depends not on other men's judgments, but of our own conscience, which
bears us witness yt we have taught ye word purely, ministered ye sacraments
rightly, and have done all things well, and therefore it ca^ not be defaced or
taken from us.

The other glory which these proud spirits do seek, What is the glory of
heretics.
is uncertain and most perilous for that they have it not in themselves, but
it consists in ye mouth and opinion of ye people: Therefore can they not have
ye testimony of their own conscience, that they have done all things with
simplicity and sincerity for ye aduauncing of the glory of God only and the
salvation of souls. For this is it which they seek, that they may be counted
famous through the work and labor of their preaching, and be praised of men.
They have therefore a glory, a trust and a testimony, but before men, The glory
of the godly.
not in themselves nor before God. The godly do not desire glory after this
manner. If Paul had had his praise before men, and not in himself, he should
have been compelled to despair, when he saw many cities, countries and all
Asia fall from him: when he saw so many offenses or sclaunders, and so many
heresies to follow his preaching. Christ when he was alone, that is, when he
was not only sought for by the Jews to be put to death, John. 16.32.
but also was forsaken of his disciples, was not yet alone, but the father was
with him, for he had glory and rejoicing in him self.

So at this day if our trust, our glory and rejoicing did depend upon the
judgment and favor of men, we should die with very anguish and sorrow of
heart. For so far of is it that the Papists, Sectaries and the whole world
do judge us worthy of any reverence or praise, that they hate and persecute us
most bitterly: yea they would gladly overthrow our ministry and root out our
doctrine for ever. Phil. 4.4. The world dishonoreth the godly ministers of the
word.
We have therefore nothing before men but reproach: but we rejoice and we glory
in the Lord, and therefore we attend upon our office cherefully and faithfully,
which we know is acceptable to him. Thus doing we care not whether our work
do please or displease the Devil: whether the world love us or hate us. For
we knowing our work to be well done, and having a good conscience before God,
1. Cor. 6.3.
go forward by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, etc.
This says Paul is to have rejoicing or glory in thy self.

And this admonition is very necessary against that execrable vice of
vaineglory. The Gospel is the word of the cross and offense. 1. Cor. 1.18.
The Gospel is a doctrine which both of it self, and also by the malice of the
Devil brings with it the cross and persecution. Therefore Paul is wont to
call it the word of the cross and of offense. It has not always steadfast and
constant disciples. Many there be that to day make profession thereof and
embrace it, which to morrow being offended with the cross, The disciples of
the gospel.
will fall from it and deny it. They therefore that teach the Gospel to the end
that they may obtain the favor and praise of men, must needs perish and
their glory be turned unto shame when the people cease to reverence and
magnify them. Wherefore let all pastors and ministers of the word learn to
have glory and rejoicing in them selves, and not in the mouth of other men. If
there be any that praise them, as the godly are wont to do (By evil report
and good report says Paul): yet let them receive this glory but as a shadow
of true glory: and let them think the substance of glory to be in deed the
testimony of their own conscience. He that does so, proves his own workd,
that is, he regards not his own glory, but his only care is to do his office
faithfully, that is to say, to teach ye gospel purely, and to show the true
use of the Sacraments. What it is for a man to prove his own work.
When he thus proves his own work, he has glory and rejoicing in himself,
which no man can take from him: for he has it surely planted and grounded in
his own heart, and not in other men's mouths: whom Satan can very easily
turn away, and can make that mouth and tongue now full of curssing, which a
little before was full of blessing.

Therefore (says Paul) if ye be desirous of glory, seek it where it should be
sought, not in the mouth of other men, but in your own heart: which ye then
do when ye execute your office truly and faithfully. So shall it come to
pass that besides the glory which ye have in your selves, ye shall have praise
and commendation also before men. But if ye glory in other men and not in your
selves, that shame and confusion which ye have in your selves, shall not be
without reproach and confusion also before men. This have we seen in certain
fantastical spirits in these our days, which proved not their work: that
is, they did not seek only to preach the Gospel purely and simply, but
misvsed it to gain praise among men, contrary to the second commandment.
Therefore after their inward confusion, there followed also an outward confusion
and shame among men, according to that saying: Exodus 20 7. 1. Sam. 2.30.
The Lord will not hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain. And
again: They which despise me, shall be despised.

Contrariwise, if we seek first the glory of God by the ministry of the
word, then surely our glory will follow, according to that saying: Him that
honors me I will glorify. To conclude, 1. Cor. 4.2.
let every man prove his work: that is, let him do his endeavor that his
ministry may be found faithful: for this above all things is required in the
Ministers of the word. 1. Cor. 4. As if he should say: let every man endeavor
purely and faithfully to teach the word, and let him have an eye to nothing
else but ye glory of God and the salvation of souls: then shall his work be
faithful and sound: then shall he have glory and rejoicing in his own
conscience, so that he may boldly say: This my doctrine and ministry pleases
God. And this is in deed an excellent glory.

This sentence may also be well applied to those works which are done of the
faithful in every state of life. As if a Magistrate, The work of every man's
calling.
an householder, a servant, a scholemaster, a scholar abide in his vocation and
do his duty therein faithfully, not troubling him self with those works
which pertain not to his vocation, he may glory and rejoice in himself: for
he may say, I have done the works of my vocation appointed unto me by God,
with such faithfulness and diligence as I was able. Therefore I know that this
work being done in faith and obedience to God, pleases God. If other speak
evil of it, I pass little thereof. For there be always some which despise
and sclaunder the doctrine and life of the godly: but God has threatened to
destroy all lying lips and sclaunderous tounges. Therefore whilst such men
do greedely seek after vaineglory, and with lies and sclaunders go about to
deface the godly, Phil. 3.19. 2. Tim. 3.9.
it happens to them as Paul says: whose glory is their shame. And in an
other place: Their foolishnes shall be known to all me^. By whom? Even by God
the righteous judge, who as he will utter their false accusations and
sclaunders, so will he reveal the righteousness of the godly like the none day,
Psalm. 37.6.
as it is said, Psalm. 17.

This clause: in himself (to touch this also by the way) must so be understand
yt God be not excluded: That is, that every man may know, in what godly state
of life so ever he be, yt his work is a divine work: for it is the work of
his vocation having the commandment of God.

Verse. 5. For every man shall bear his own burden.
This is as it were the reason or confirmation of the former sentence, lest any
man should lean to other men's judgment in praising and commending of him. In
death, and in the day of judgment other men's praises profit not.
As if he said: It is extreme madness for thee to seek glory in an other and
not in thy self: for in ye agony of death and the last judgment it shall
nothing profit thee ye other men have praised thee: for other men shall not
bear thy burden, but thou shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ and
shall bear thine burden alone. There thy praisers shall nothing help thee.
For when we die these praises shall cease. And in that day when yt Lord shall
judge ye secrets of all hearts, the witness of thine own conscience shall stand
either with thee or against thee: Romans 2.16.
Against thee if thou glory in other men: with thee if thou have it in thy
self, that is to say, if thy conscience bear thee witness that thou have done
thy duty in the ministry of the word or otherwise according to thy calling
sincerely and faithfully, having respect to the glory of God only and the
salvation of souls. And these words Every man shall bear his own judgment,
are very vehement and ought so to terrify us that we should not be desirous of
vaineglory.

And this moreover is to be noted, yt we are not here in ye matter of
justification, where nothing avails but mere grace and forgeuenes of sins,
which is received by faith alone: where all our works also, yea even our best
works, and such as are done according to Gods calling, have need of forgeuenes
of sins. But this is an other case. He treteth not here of the remission of
sins, but co^pareth true works and hypocritical works together. These things
therefore ought thus to be taken, yt although yt work or ministry of a godly
pastor is not so perfect but yt he has need of forgeuenes of sins, yet in it
self it is good and perfect, A comparison betvene good works, and
hypocritical work.
in comparison of the ministry of the vainglorious man. So our ministry is
good and sound, because we seek thereby the glory of God and the salvation of
souls. But the ministry of these fantastical heads is not so, for they seek
their own praise. Albeit therefore that no works ca^ quiet ye conscience before
God: yet is it necessary yt we should persuade our selves that we have done our
work uprightly, truly, and according to Gods calling, that is, that we have
not corrupted the word of God, but have taught it purely and faithfully. This
testimony of conscience we have need of yt we have done our duty uprightly in
our function and calling, and led our life accordingly. So far ought we then
to glory as touchi^g our works, as we know the^ to be commanded of God, and
that they please him. For every one in ye last judgment shall bear his own
burden, and therefore other men's praises shall there nothing help or profit
him.

Hitherto he has spoken against that most pestilent vice of vainglory, for the
suppressing whereof no man is so strong, Vaineglory.
but that he has need of continual prayer. For what man almost even among the
godly is not delited with his own praises? Only ye holy Ghost can preserve us
that we be not infected with this vice.

Verse. 6. Let him that is taught in the word, make him that teaches him
partaker of all his goods.
Here he preaches to ye disciples or hearers of ye word, A commandment for
the nourishing of the ministers of the word of God.
commanding the^ to bestow al good things upon those which have taught and
instructed the^ in ye word. I have sometime marvelled why the Apostle commanded
the churches so diligently to nourish their teachers. For in Popery I saw yt
all men gave abundantly to the building and maintaining of goodly temples, to
the increasing of the revenues and livings of those which were appointed to
their idolatrous service. Hereof it came that ye estimation and riches of the
bishops and the rest of the Clergy did so increase, that every where they had
in possession the best and most fruteful grounds, Therefore thought I that Paul
had commanded this in vain, seeing that all manner of good things were not
only abundantly given to the Clergy, but also they ouerflowed in wealth and
riches. Wherefore I thought that men ought rather to be exhorted to withhold
their hands from giving, then encouraged to give any more: for I saw that by
this excessive liberality of men, the covetousness of ye Clergy did increase.
But now I know the cause why they had such abundance of all good things
heretofore, and now the pastors and ministers of the word do want.

The ministers of Satan have ple^tie, but the ministers of Christ do want.
Before time, when nothing else was taught but errors and wicked doctrine, they
had such plenty of all things, that of Peter's patrimony (which denied that he
had either silver or gold), and of spiritual goods (as they called them) the
Pope was become an Emperor, the Cardinals and Bishops were made kings and
Princes of the world. But now since the Gospel has been preached and
published, the professors thereof be as rich as sometime Christ and his
Apostles were. We find then by experience, how well this commandment of
nourishing and maintaining the pastors and ministers of Gods word is observed,
which Paul here and in other places so diligently repeateth and beats into
ye heads of his hearers. There is now no City, which is known unto us, that
nourishes and maintains her pastors and preachers: but they are all
entertained with those goods which were given, not unto Christ, to whom no man
gives any thing (for when he was borne he was laid in a maunger in steed of a
bed, because there was no room for him in the Inn: afterward being
conversant among men, he had not whereon to lay his head: and briefly being
spoiled of his garments and hanging naked on the cross between two thieves,
Luke. 2.7.
he died most miserably): but to the Pope for the maintenance of his
abominations, Luke. 9.58. John. 19.
and because he oppressing the Gospel, taught the doctrines and traditions of
men and set up idolatry.

And as often as I read the exhortations of Paul, whereby he persuades the
Churches that they should either nourish their pastors, or give somewhat to
the relief of the poor Saints in Iewrie: I do greatly marvel and am
ashamed that so great an Apostle should be constrained to use so many words
for the obtaining of this benefit of the congregations. ^. Cor. 8. and 9.
Writing to the Corrinthians he treats of this matter in two whole Chapters.
I would be loath to defame VVyttenberge, which in deed is nothing to Corinth,
as he defamed the Corrinthians in begging so carefully for the relief and
succor of the poor. But this is the lotte of the Gospel when it is preached,
that not only no man is willing to give any thing for the finding of ministers
and maintaining of scholars, but men begin to spoil, to rob and to steal,
and with diverse crafty means one to beguile an other. To be brief, men seem
suddenly to grow out of kind, and to be transformed into cruel beasts.
Contrariwise, 1. Tim. 4.1.
when the doctrine of Devils was preached, then men were prodigal, and offered
all things willingly to those that deceived them. The Prophets do reprove the
same sin in the Jews, which were loath to give any living to the godly
priests and Levites, but gave all things plentifully to the wicked.

Now therefore we begin to understand how necessary this commandment of Paul
is as touching ye maintenance of the ministers of the Church. For Satan can
abide nothing less then the light of the Gospel. Therefore when he sees that
it begins to shine, then does he rage and goes about with all maine and
might to quench it. And this he attempteth two manner of ways. Satan
oppresses the gospel two ways.
First by lying spirits and force of tyrannes: and then by poverty and
famine. But because he could not hitherto oppress the Gospel in this country
(praised be God) by heretics and tyrannes: therefore he attempteth to bring it
to pass the other way, that is, by withdrawing the livings of the ministers of
the word, to the end that they being oppressed with poverty and necessity
should forsake the ministry, and so the miserable people being destitute of
the word of God should become in time as savage and wild beasts. And Satan
helps forwards this horrible enormitie by ungodly Magistrates in the Cities,
and also by noble men and gentlemen in the country, who take away the church
goods whereby the ministers of the Gospel should live, and turn them to
wicked uses. M^^h. 1.7.
These goods (says the Prophet Micha) were gathered of the hire of a harlot,
and therefore to a harlottes hire they shall return.

Moreover, Satan turns men particularly also from the gospel by overmuch
fulness. Fulness of Gods word brings lothing.
For when the Gospel is diligently and daily preached, many being glutted
therewith begin to loath it, and by little and little become negligent and untoward
to all godly exercises. Again, there is no man that will now bring up his
children in good learning, and much less in the study of the holy Scripture,
but they employ them wholly to gainful arts or occupations. All these are
Satan's practices, to no other end but that he may oppress the Gospel in
this our country without any violence of tyra^nes, or subtle devises of
heretics.

It is not without cause therefore that Paul warns the hearers of the Gospel
to make their pastors and teachers partakers with them in all good things. If
we (says he to the Corinthians) have sovvne to you spiritual things, is it a
great matter if we reap your vvorldly things? 1. Cor. 9.11.
The hearers therefore ought to minister carnal things to the^ of whom they
have received spiritual things. But both husband men, Citizens and gentlemen
do at this day abuse our doctrine, The world lodeth the ministers of Satan
with all vvorldly good things.
that under the color thereof they may enrich themselves. Heretofore when ye
Pope reigned there was no man which paid not somewhat yearly to ye priests for
masses, diriges, trentals and such trash. The begging friars had also their
part. The marchau^dises of Rome likewise and daily offerings carried away
somewhat. From these and from an infinite number of such exactions our
countrymen are now delivered by the Gospel. But so far of is it that they
are thankful unto God for this liberty, that of prodigal geuers they are now
become stark thieves and robbers, and will not bestow one farthing upon the
Gospel or the ministers thereof, or give any thing for the relief and succor
of the poor Saints: which is a certain token that they have lost both the
word and faith, and that they have no spiritual goodness in them. For it is
impossible that such as are godly in deed, should suffer their pastors to
live in necessity and penury. But for as much as they laugh and rejoice when
their pastors suffer any adversity, and withhold their living or give it not
with such faithfulness as they ought: it is a plain token that they are worse
then the heathen.

But they shall feel ere it be long what calamities will follow this
unthankfulness. The punishment of unthankfulness.
For they shall lose both temporal and spiritual things. For this sin must
needs be grievously punished. And certainly I think that ye churches in
Galatia, Corinth, and other places were so troubled by the false apostles for
no other cause, but for that they little regarded their true pastors and
preachers. For it is good reason that he which refuses to give a penny to God
who offers unto him all good things and life everlasting, should give a piece
of gold to the Devil, the author of all evils and death everlasting. Who so
will not serve God in a little, and that to his own inestimable benefit, let
him serve yt Devil in much to his extreme and utter confusion. Now therefore
since ye light of the Gospel begins to shine, we see what the Devil is and
what the world is.

In all good things.
In that he says: in all his goods, it is not so to be taken that all men are
bound to give all that they have to their ministers, but that they should
maintain them liberally, and give them that whereby they may be well able to
live.

Verse. 7. Be not deceived, for God is not mocked.
The Apostle prosecuteth this place of the nourishing and maintaining of
ministers so earnestly, that to his former reprehension and exhortation he
adds now also a threatening, saying: God is not mocked. And here he touches
to the quick the property of our country men, which proudly despise our
ministry. For they think it to be but a sport and a game: Gentlemen,
citizens and husbandmen despisers of Gods ministers.
and therefore they go about (especially the Gentlemen) to make their pastors
subject unto them like servant and slaves. And if we had not so godly a
Prince, and one that so loves the truth, they had ere this time driven us out
of the country. When the pastors ask their duty or complain that they
suffer penury, they cry out: the priests be covetous, they would have
plenty, no man is able to satisfy their insatiable covetousness, if they were
true Gospellers they should have nothing of their own, but as poor men ought
to follow poor Christ, and to suffer all adversities, etc.

Paul horribly threatens here such tyrannes and such mockers of God, who so
carelessly and proudly do scorn the miserable preachers, and yet will seem to
be Gospellers, and not to be mockers of God, but to worship him very
devoutly. Be not deceived (says he), God is not mocked, that is to say, he
does not suffer him self to be mocked in his ministers. For he says: He that
despises you despises me. Luke. 10.^6.
Also he says unto Samuel: They have not cast thee away, but me. 1. Sam. 8.7.
Therefore, O ye mockers, although God differ his punishment for a season, yet
when he sees time he will find you out, and will punish this contempt of his
word and bitter hatred which ye bear against his ministers. Therefore ye
deceive not God but your selves, and ye shall not laugh at God, but he will
laugh at you, Psalm. 2. But our proud Gentlemen, citizens and common people
are nothing at all moved with this dreadful threatening. Nevertheless they shall
feel when death approaches, whether they have mocked themselves or us, nay
rather not us but God himself, as Paul says here. In the mean time, because
they proudly despise our admonitio^s with an intolerable pride, we speak these
things to our comfort, to the end we may know that it is better to suffer
wrong than to do wrong: for patience is ever innocent and harmles. Moreover,
Psalm. 34.10. Psalm. 37.19.
God will not suffer his ministers to starve for honger, but even when the rich
men suffer scarsitie and honger, he will feed them, and in the days of famine
they shall have enough.

Verse. 7. For whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap.
All these things tend to this purpose that ministers should be nourished and
maintained. For my part I do not gladly interpret such sentences: for they
seem to commend us, and so they do in deed. Moreover, if a man stand much in
repeting such things to his hearers, it has some show of covetousness.
Notwithstanding men must be admonished hereof, Reverence and necessary living
due to the ministers of the word.
that they may know that they ought to yield unto their pastors both reverence
and a necessary living. Our Savior Christ teaches the same thing in the.10.
of Luke. Eating and drinking such things as they have: for the labourer is
worthy of his revvard. 1. Cor. 9.13.14.
And Paul says in an other place: Do ye not know that they which sacrifice
in the temple, live of the sacrifices? and that they which serve at the
altar, are partakers of the altar? eue^ so has the lord ordained that they
which preach the gospel should live of the Gospel.

It is good that we also which are in the ministry, should know these things,
lest for our labor we might with evil conscience receive the stipend which is
given unto us of yt Popes goods. And although such goods were heaped together
by mere fraud and disceit: yet notwtstanding God spoiling the Egyptians, Exodus
3.^^.
that is to say, the Papists of their goods, turns them here amongst us, to
a good and holy use: not when noble men and gentlemen spoil them and abuse
them, but when they which set forth Gods glory, and bring up youth
virtuously are maintained therewith. Let us know then that we may with good
conscience (since God has ordained and commanded that they which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel) use those things that are given us of the
Church goods for the necessary sustentation of our life, to the end we may
attend upon our office the better. Let no man therefore make any scrupule
hereof, as though it were not lawful for him to use such goods.

Verse. 8. For he that sows in the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption: but he that sows in the spirit, shall of the spirit reap
everlasting life.
He adds a similitude and an allegory. And this general sentence of sowing
he applies to the particular matter of nourishing and maintaining the
ministers of the word, saying: He that sows in the spirit, What it is to
sovve in the spirit.
that is to say, he that chearisheth the teachers of Gods word, does a
spiritual work and shall reap everlasting life. Here rises a question
whether we deserve eternal life by good works? for so Paul seems to avouch
in this place. As touching such sentences which speak of works and the reward
of them, we have treated very largely before in the.5. chapter. And very
necessary it is, after the example of Paul, to exhort the faithful to good
works, that is to say, to exercise their faith by good works. For if they
follow not faith, it is a manifest token that their Faith is no true faith.
Therefore the Apostle says: He that sows in the flesh (some understand it,
in his own flesh), that is to say, he that gives nothing to the ministers of
Gods word, but only feeds and cares for him self (which is the counsel of
the flesh) that man shall of the flesh reap corruption, not only in this
present life, but also in the life to come. For the goods of the wicked shall
wast away, and they them selves also at length shall shamefully perish. The
Apostle would feign stir up his hearers to be liberal and beneficial
toward their pastors and preachers. But what a misery is it, that the
peruersenes and ingratitude of men should be so great, that the churches should
need this admonition?

The Encratites abused this place for the confirmation of their wicked opinion
against marriage, expounding it after this manner: The heretics called
Encratites: Whose error the Papists have revived as touching matrimony, and
therefore they may cruely be called new Encratites.
He that sows in the flesh shall reap corruption: that is to say, he that
marieth a wife shall be damned: Ergo a wife is a damnable thing, and marriage is
evil, for as much as there is in it a sowing in the flesh. These beasts were
so destitute of all judgment, that they perceived not whereabout the Apostle
went. I speak this to the end ye may see how easily the Devil by his
ministers can turn away the hearts of the simple from the truth. Germany
shall shortly have an infinite number of such beasts, yea and already has
very many: For on the one side it persecuteth and kills ye godly ministers,
and on the other side it neglects and despises them, and suffers them to
live in great penury. Let us arm our selves against these and such like
errors, and let us learn to know the true meaning of the Scriptures. For
Paul speaks not here of matrimony, but of nourishing the ministers of the
church, which every man that is endued but with ye common judgment of reason
may perceive. And although this nourishing is but a corporal thing, yet
notwithstanding he calls it a sowing in ye spirit. Contrariwise when men
greedely scrape together what they can, and seek only their own gain, he
calls it a sowing in ye flesh. He pronou^ceth those which sow in ye spirit,
to be blessed both in this life and in the life to come: and the other which
sow in the flesh to be accursed both in this life, and in the life to come.

Verse. 9. And let us not be vveery of doing good, for in due time we shall
reap without vveerines.
The apostle inte^ding to close up his Epistle, passes from ye particular to
the general, and exhorts generally to all good works. As if he should say:
let us be liberal and bountefull, not only toward the Ministers of the
word, but also toward all other men, and that without weerines. For it is an
easy matter for a man to do good once or twice: We must do good without
vveerines.
but to continue and not to be diseouraged through the ingratitude and
peruersenes of those to whom he has done good, that is very hard. Therefore he
does not only exhort us to do good, but also not to be weery in doing good.
And to persuade us the more easily thereunto, he adds: For in due time we
shall reap without vveerines. As if he said: wait and look for the
perpetual harvest that is to come, and then shall no ingratitude or perverse
dealing of men be able to pluck you away from well doing: For in the harvest
time ye shall receive most plentiful increase and fruit of your seed. Thus
with most sweet words he exhorts the faithful to the doing of good works.

Verse. 10. Therefore while we have time, let us do good unto all men, but
specially to those that be of the household of Faith.
This is the knitting up of his exhortation for the liberal maintaining and
nourishing of the Ministers of the word, and giving of alms to all such as
have need. As if he had said: Let us do good while it is day, for when night
comes we can no longer work. In deed men work many things when the light of
ye truth is taken away, John. 9.4.
but all in vain: for they walk in darkness and wotte not whether they go,
and therefore all their life, John. 12.35.
works, sufferings and death are in vain. And by these words he touches the
Galathians. As if he should say: Except ye continue in the sound doctrine which
ye have received of me, your working of much good, your suffering of many
troubles, and such other things profit you nothing: as he said before in
the.3. chapter. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? And by a new kind of
speech he terms those the household of Faith which are joined with us in the
fellowship of Faith, The household of faith.
among whom the Ministers of the word are the chiefest, and then all the rest
of the faithful.

Verse. 11. Behold what a letter I have vvrytten to you with mine own hand.
He closes up his Epistle with an exhortation to the faithful, and with a
sharp rebuke or inuectiue against the false apostles: Behold (says he) what
a letter I have vvrytte^ unto you with mine own hand. The motherly affection
of Paul.
This he says to move them and to show his motherly affection toward them.
As if he should say: I never wrote so long an Epistle with mine own hand to any
other church as I have done unto you. For as for his other Epistles, as he
spoke other wrote them, and afterward he subscribed his salutation and name
with his own hand, as it is to be seen in ye end of his Epistles. And in these
words (as I suppose) he has respect to the length of the Epistle. Other some
take it otherwise.

Verse. 12. As many as desire to please in the flesh, compel you to be
circumcised, only because they would not suffer the persecution of the cross
of Christ.
Before he cursed the false apostles. Now as it were repeating yt same thing
again, but with other words, he accuses them very sharply, to the end he may
fear and turn away the Galathians from their doctrine, notwithstanding the
great authority which they seemed to have. The teachers which ye have (says
he) are such as first regard not the glory of Christ and the salvation of your
souls, Enormities in the false apostles.
but only seek their own glory: secondly, they fly the cross: thirdly,
they understand not those things which they teach.

These false teachers being accused of the Apostle for three such execrable
enormities, were worthy to be avoided of all men. But yet all the Galathians
obeyed not this warning of Paul. And Paul does the false apostles no wrong
when he so vehemently inueyeth against them: but he justly condemns them by
his Apostolic authority. In like manner when we call the Pope Antichriste, his
bishops and his shauelings a cursed generation, we sclaunder them not, but by
Gods authority we judge them to be accursed, according to that which is said
in the first Chapter: Galath. 1.8.
If we or an angel from heaven preach otherwise then we have preached unto
you, accursed be he: For they hate, persecute and overthrow the doctrine of
Christ.

Your teachers (says he) are vain heads, and not regarding the glory of
Christ and your salvation, they seek only their own glory. Again, because
they are afraid of the cross, they preach circumcision and the righteousness of
the flesh, lest they should provoke the Jews to hate and persecute them.
Wherefore, although ye hear them never so gladly and never so long: yet shall
ye hear but such as make their belly their God, Phil. 3.19.
seek their own glory, and shun the cross. And here is to be noted a
certain vehemency in this word compel. For circumcision is nothing of it
self: but to be compelled to circumcision, and when a man has received it to
put righteousness and holiness therein, and if it be not received to make it a
sin, that is an injury unto Christ. Of this matter I have spoken largely
enough heretofore.

Verse. 13. For they them selves that are circumcised do not keep the law:
but they would have you circumcised, that they might glory in your flesh.
Is not Paul here worthy to be called an heretic? For he says, that not
only the false apostles, but all the nation of the Jews which were
circumcised keep not the law, but rather that they which were circumcised, in
fulfilling the law fulfill it not. This is against Moises, who says that,
Genesis 17.10 14.
to be circumcised is to keep the law: and not to be circumcised is to make
the covenant void. Genesis 17. And the Jews were circumcised for none other
cause but to keep the law, Genesis 17.1^.
which commanded that every malechild should be circumcised the eight day.
Hereof we have before entreated at large, and therefore we need not now to
repeat the same again. Now, these things serve to ye condemning of the false
apostles, that the Galathia^s may be feared from hearing of them. As if he
should say: Behold, I set before your eyes what manner of teachers ye have.
First they are vaineglorious men, which seek nothing but their own profit,
Phil. 2.21.
and care for nothing but their own belly. Secondly they fly the cross: and
finally they teach no truth or certainty, but all their sayings and doings are
counterfeit and full of hypocrisy. Wherefore although they keep the law
outwardly: yet in keeping it they keep it not. For without the holy ghost, the
law can not be kept. But the holy Ghost can not be received without christ: and
where ye holy ghost dwells not, there dwells an unclean spirit, The law is
not accomplished with outvvard works.
that is to say, despising god, and seking his own gain and glory. Therefore
all that he does as touchi^g ye law, is mere hypocrisy and double sin. For an
unclean heart does not fulfill the law, but only makes an outward show
thereof, and so is it more confirmed in his wickedness and hypocrisy.

And this sentence is diligently to be marked, that they which are circumcised
keep not the law: that is to say, that they which are circumcised are not
circumcised. Romans 14.2^.
It may also be applied unto other works. He that works, prays, or
suffers without Christ, works, prays and suffers in vain: for all that
is not of faith is sin. Works done without faith are sins.
It profits a man therefore nothing at all to be outwardly circumcised, to
fast, to pray or to do any other work, if he be within a despiser of grace,
of forgeuenes of sins, of faith, of Christ, etc. and be puffed up with the
opinion and presumption of his own righteousness: which are horrible sins
against the first table: and afterward there follow also other sins against
the second table, as disobedience, whoredom, furiousnes, wrath, hatred, and
such other. Therefore he says very well, that they which be circumcised keep
not the law, but only pretend that they keep it. But this counterfetting, or
rather hypocrisy is double wickedness before God.

What mean the false apostles when they would have you to be circumcised? Not
yt ye might become righteous: although they so bear you in hand, but that they
may glory in your flesh. Now, who would not detest this most pestilent vice of
ambition and desire of glory, The peril that follovveth ambition and vain
glory.
which is sought with so great peril of men's souls? They are (says he)
disceitfull, shameless and vain spirits, which serve their own belly and hate
the cross. Again (which is worst of all) they compel you to be circumcised
according to the law, that they may thereby abuse your flesh to their own
glory, and in the mean season they bring your souls into danger of
everlasting destruction. For what gain ye else before God but damnation? and
what else before men, but that the false apostles may glory that they are your
teachers, and ye their disciples? and yet they teach you that which they them
selves do not. Thus does he sharply reprove the false apostles.

These words: That they may glory in your flesh, are very effectual. As if he
should say: they have not the word of the spirit: therefore it is impossible for
you to receive the spirit by their preaching. They do but only That is, they
do but keep your flesh in a servile and slavish exercise.
exercise your flesh, making you fleshly Iusticiaries or iustifiers of your
selves. Outwardly they observe days, times, sacrifices and such other things
according to the law, which are altogether carnal, whereby ye reap nothing
else but unprofitable labor and damnation. And on the other side, this they
gain thereby, that they boast that they are your teachers and have called you
back from the doctrine of Paul the heretic, unto their mother the Synagoge.
So at this day the Papists brag, that they call back those to the bosom of
their mother the holy church, whom they deceive and seduce. Contrariwise, we
glory not in your flesh, but we glory as touching your spirit, because ye have
received the spirit by our preaching, Galath. 3.2.

Verse. 14. But God forbid that I should glory but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ.
The Apostle closes up the matter with an indignation, and with great
vehemency of spirit he casts out these words: But God forbid, The glory of
the Christians.
etc. As if he should say: This carnal glory and ambition of the false
apostles is so dangerous a poison, that I wish it were buried in hell, for it
is the cause of the destruction of many. But let them glory in the flesh that
list, and let them perish with their cursed glory. As for me, I desire no other
glory but that whereby I glory and rejoice in the cross of Cbriste. After the
same manner speaks he also Romans 5. We glory in our afflictions. Also in
the.2. Cor. 12. Tvvill glory in mine infirmities. Here Paul shows what is
the glory and rejoicing of the Christians, namely to glory and to be proud in
tribulations, reproaches, infirmities, etc.

The world judges of the Christians, not only that they are wretched and
miserable men, but also most cruelly, and yet (as it thinks) with a true
zeal hates, persecuteth, condemns, and kills them as most pernicious
plages of the spiritual and worldly kingdom, that is to say, like heretics
and rebels. But because they do not suffer these things for murder, theft, and
such other wickedness, but for the love of Christ whose benefit and glory they
set forth, therefore they glory in tribulations and in the cross of Christ,
and are glad with the Apostles that they are counted worthy to suffer rebuke
for the name of Christ. Acts. 5.41.
So must we glory at this day when the Pope and the whole world most cruelly
persecute us, condemn us, and kill us, because we suffer these things, not for
our evil deeds, as thieves, murderers, etc. but for Christ's sake our Lord and
Savior, whose Gospel we truly preach.

Now, our glory is increased and confirmed principally by these two things:
First because we are certain that our doctrine is sound and perfect: Secondly,
because our cross and suffering is the suffering of Christ. Therefore when the
world persecuteth and kills us, The faithful suffer for Christ.
we have no cause to complain or lament, but we ought rather to rejoice and be
glad. In deed ye world judges us to be unhappy and accursed. But on the other
side, Christ, who is greater tha^ the world, and for whom we suffer,
pronou^ceth us to be blessed, and wills us to rejoice. Blessed are ye (says
he) when men revile you and persecute you, Math. 5.11.12.
and falsely say all manner of evil against you for my sake. Rejoice and be
glad. Our glory then is an other manner of glory then the glory of the world is,
The glory of the world.
which rejoices not in tribulation, reproach, persecution and death, etc. but
glories altogether in power, in riches, peace, honor, wisdom and his own
righteousness. But mourning and confusion is the end of this glory.

Moreover, The cross of Christ.
the cross of Christ does not signify that piece of wood which Christ did
bear upon his shoulders, and to the which he was afterward nailed, but
generally it signifies all the afflictions of the faithful, whose sufferings
are Christ's sufferings. 2. Cor. 1.5. Col. 1.24.
2. Cor. 1. The sufferings of Christ abound in us. Again: Now rejoice I in my
sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh for his bodies sake which is the Church, etc. The afflictions of the
godly are the afflictions of Christ Acts. 9.4.
The cross of Christ therefore generally signifies all ye afflictions of ye
church which it suffers for Christ: which he him self witnesses when he
says, Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me: Saul did no violence to Christ,
but to his Church. But he that touches it, touches the apple of his eye.
Zach. 2.1.
There is a more lively feeling in the head then in the other members of the
body. And this we know by experience: The feeling of the head is most sensible.
for the little toe or the least part of a man's body being hurt, the head
forthwith shows it self by the countenance to feel the grief thereof. So
Christ our head makes all our afflictions his own, and suffers also when
we suffer which are his body.

It is profitable for us to know these things, lest we should be swalowed up
with sorrow or fall to despair when we see that our adversaries do cruelly
persecute, excommunicate and kill us. But let us think with our selves, after
the example of Paul, that we must glory in the cross which we bear, not for
our own sins, The cross of the godly i^ svveete 2. Cor 1.5. Psalm. 44 22.
but for Christ's sake. If we consider only in our selves ye sufferings which
we endure, they are not only grievous but intolerable: but when we may say: Thy
sufferings O Christ abound in us: Or as is said in the Psalm. 44. For thy sake
are we killed all the day, then these sufferings are not only easy, Math.
11.30.
but also sweet, according to that saying: My burden is easy and my yoke is
svveete.

Now, it is well known that we at this day do suffer the hatred and
persecution of our adversaries for none other cause, but for that we preach
Christ faithfully and purely. If we would deny him and approve their
pernicious errors and wicked religion, they would not only cease to hate and
persecute us, but would also offer unto us honor, riches, and many goodly
things. Because therefore we suffer these things for Christ's sake, we may
truly rejoice and glory with Paul in ye cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: To
glory in the cross of Christ. Romans 5.3. 2. Cor. 7.5.
that is to say, not in riches, in power, in the favor of men, etc. but in
afflictions, weakness, sorrow, fightings in the body, terrors in the spirit,
persecutions and all other evils. Wherefore we trust it will shortly come to
pass, that Christ will say the same to us that David said to Abiathar the
priest: I am the cause of all your deaths. 1. Sam. 22.22. Zach. 2.^.
Again: He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. As if he had
said: he that hurts you hurts me. For if ye did not preach my word and
confess me, ye should not suffer these things. John. 15.19.
So says he also in John: If ye were of the world, the world would love
his own: but because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. But these things are treated of before.

Verse. 14. By whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.
This is Paul's manner of speaking. The world is crucified to me, that is, To be
crucified to the world.
I judge the world to be damned. And I am crucified to the world, that is: the
world again judges me to be damned. Thus we crucify and condemn one an
other. I abhor all the doctrine, righteousness and works of the world as the
poison of the Devil. The world again detesteth my doctrine and deeds, and
judges me to be a sedicious, a pernicious, a pestilent fellow, and an heretic.
So at this day the world is crucified to us, and we unto the world. We curse
and condemn all man's traditions concerning Masses, Orders, vows,
wil-worshippings, works, and all ye abominations of ye Pope and other
heretics, as the dirt of the Devil. They again do persecute and kill us as
destroyers of religion and troublers of the public peace.

The Monks dreamed that the world was crucified to them when they entered into
their Monasteries: but by this means Christ is crucified and not the world,
yea the world is delivered from crucifying and is the more quickened by that
opinion of holiness and trust which they had in their own righteousness that
entered into religion. Most foolishly and wickedly therefore was this sentence of
the Apostle wrested to the entering into Monasteries. The contrary judgment of
the faithful and of the world as concerning true doctrine.
He speaks here of an high matter and of great importance: that is to say,
that every faithful man judges that to be the wisdom, righteousness and power
of God, which the world condemns as the greatest folly, wickedness and
weakness. And contrariwise, that which the world judges to be the highest
religion and service of God, the faithful do know to be nothing else but
execrable and horrible blasphemy against God. So the godly condemn the world,
and again the world condemns the godly. But the godly have the right
judgment on their side: 1. Cor. 2.13.
for the spiritual man judges all things.

Wherefore the judgment of the world touching religion and righteousness before
God, is as contrary to the judgment of the godly, as God and the Devil are
contrary the one to the other. For as God is crucified to the Devil and the
Devil to God: that is to say, 1. John. 3.8.
as God condemns the doctrine and works of the Devil (for the Son of God
appeared, as John says, John. 8.44.
to destroy the works of the Devil): and contrariwise the Devil condemns
and overthrows the word and the works of God, for he is murderer and the
father of lies: so the world condemns the doctrine and life of the godly, The
world condemns the life and doctrine of the godly.
calling them most pernicious heretics and troublers of the public peace. And
again, the faithful call the world the son of the Devil, which rightly
follows his fathers steps, that is to say, which is as great a murderer and
lier as his father is. This is Paul's meaning when he says: whereby the
world is crucified to me and I unto the world. Now, the world does not only
signify in the Scriptures ungodly and wicked men, but the very best, the
wisest and holiest men that are of the world.

And here by the way he covertly touches the false apostles. As if he should
say: I utterly hate and detest all glory which is without the cross of Christ,
as a cursed thing: for the world with all the glory thereof is crucified to me
and I to the world. Wherefore accursed be all they which glory in your flesh
and not in the cross of Christ. Paul therefore witnesses by these words
that he hates the world with a perfect hatred of the holy Ghost: and again,
Psalm. 139.22.
the world hates him with a perfect hatred of a wicked spirit. As if he
should say: It is impossible that there should be any agreement between me and
the world. What shall I then do? shall I give place and teach those things
which please the world? No: but with a stout courage I will set my self
against it, and will as well despise and crucify it, as it despises and
crucifieth me.

To conclude, Paul here teaches how we should fight against Satan (which not
only tormenteth our bodies with sundry afflictions, but also wounds our hearts
continually with his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16.
that by this continuance, when he can no otherwise prevail, he may overthrow
our faith, and bring us from ye truth and from Christ), namely that like as we
see Paul him self to have stoutly despised the world: so we also should
despise the Devil the Prince thereof, with all his force, deceits and hellish
furies, and so trusting to the aid and help of Christ, should triumph
against him after this manner: O Satan, the more thou hurtest and go about
to hurt me, the more proud and stout I am against thee, and laugh thee to
scorn. The more thou terrifiest me, and seek to bring me to desperation, so
much the more confidence and boldness I take, and glory in the midst of thy
furies and malice: not by mine own power, but by ye power of my Lord and
Savior Christ, whose strength is made perfect in my weakness. 2. Cor. 1^.^.
Therefore when I am weak then am I strong. On the contrary, when he sees his
threatenings and terrors to be feared, he rejoices, and then he terrifieth
more and more such as are terrified already.

Verse. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.
This is a wonderful kind of speech which Paul here uses when he says:
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision prevails any thing. It may seem that
he should rather have said: either circumcision or uncircumcision avails
somewhat, seeing these are two contrary things. But now he denies that either
the one or ye other do any thing avail. As if he should have said: Ye must
mount up higher: for circumcision and uncircumcision are things of no such
importance that they are able to obtain righteousness before God. True it is yt
they are contrary ye one to ye other: Christian righteousness.
but this is nothing as touching christian righteousness, which is not earthly
but heavenly, and therefore it consists not in corporal things. Therefore,
whether thou be circumcised or uncircumcised, it is al one thing: for in Christ
Jesus neither ye one nor the other avails any thing at all.

The Jews were greatly offended when they heard that circumcision auailed
nothing. They easily granted ye uncircumcision auailed nothing. But they could
not abide to hear yt so much should be said of circumcision: for they fought
even unto blood for ye defense of the law and circumcision. The Papists also
at this day do vehemently contend for the maintenance of their traditions as
touching ye eating of flesh, single life, holy days and such other: and they
excommunicate and curse us which teach yt in Christ Jesus these things do
nothing avail. But Paul says that we must have an other thing which is much
more excellent and precious, whereby we may obtain righteousness before God. In
Christ Jesus (says he) neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, 1. Cor. 1.^.
neither single life nor marriage, neither meat nor fasting do any whit avail.
Meat makes us not acceptable before God. We are neither yt better by
abstaining, nor the worse by eating. All these things, yea the whole world with
all the laws and righteousness thereof, avail nothing to Justification.

Reason and the wisdom of the flesh does not understand this: for it
perceives not those things which are of the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 2.14.
Therefore it will needs have righteousness to stand in outward things. But we
are taught out of the word of God, that there is nothing under the son which
avails unto righteousness before God, but Christ only, Without Christ there
is no salvation.
or (as Paul says here) a new creature. Politic laws, men's traditions,
ceremonies of the church, yea and the law of Moises are such things as are
without Christ: therefore they avail not unto righteousness before God. We may
use them as things both good and necessary, but in their place and time. But if
we talk of the matter of justification, they avail nothing, but hurt very
much.

And by these two things: Circumcision and uncircumcision, Paul rejects al
other things what so ever, and denies that they avail any thing in Christ
Jesus, that is, in the cause of faith and salvation. For he takes here a part
for the whole, that is, Uncircumcision signifies all the Gentiles,
Circumcision all the Jews.
by uncircumcision he understands all the Gentiles, by circumcision all the
Jews with all their force and all their glory. As if he said: whatsoever the
Gentiles can do with all their wisdom, righteousness, laws, power, kingdoms,
Empires, it avails nothing in Christ Jesus. Also, whatsoever the Jews are
able to do, with their Moises, their law, their circumcision, their
worshippings, their temple, their kingdom and priesthood, it nothing avails.
Wherefore in Christ Jesus or in the matter of Justification we must not dispute
of the laws either of the Gentiles or of the Jews, but we must simply
pronounce that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing.

Are the laws then of no effect? Not so. They be good and profitable: Laws
be good.
albeit in their place and time, that is, in corporal and civil things, which
without laws cannot be guided. Moreover we use also in the churches certain
ceremonies and laws: The use of ceremonies and laws. 1. Cor. 14.40.
not that the keeping of them avails unto righteousness, but for good order,
example, quietness and concord, according to that saying: Let all things be done
comely and orderly. But if laws be so set forth and urged as though ye keeping
of them did justify a man, or the breaking thereof did condemn him, they
ought to be taken away and to be abolished: for then Christ loses his office
and his glory, Gal. 3.5.
who only justifies us, and gives unto us the holy Ghost. The Apostle
therefore by these words plainly affirms that neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails any thing, but the new creature, etc. Now, since that
neither the laws of ye Gentiles nor of the Jews avail any thing, the Pope
has done most wickedly, in that he has constrained men to keep his laws
with the opinion of righteousness.

Ephesians. 4.24. A new creature.
Now, a new creature whereby the image of God is renewed, is not made by any
color or cou^terfaiting of good works (for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision) but by Christ, by whom it is created
after ye image of God in righteousness and true holiness. When works are done,
they bring in deed a new show and outward appearance wherewith the world and
the flesh are delited, but not a new creature: for the heart remains wicked
as it was before, full of the contempt of God and infidelity. Therefore a new
creature is the work of the holy Ghost, Acts. 15.9.
which cleanses our heart by faith, and works the fear of God, love,
chastity and other christian virtues, and gives power to bridle the flesh and
to reject the righteousness and wisdom of the world. Here is no coloring or
new outward show, but a thing done in deed. Here is created an other sense and
an other judgment, that is to say, altogether spiritual, which abhors
those things that before it greatly esteemed. The Mo^kish life and Order did so
bewitch us in time past, that we thought there was no other way to salvation.
But now we judge of it far otherwise. We are now ashamed of those things
which we adored as most heavenly and holy, before we were regenerate into this
new creature.

The renewing of the members of the body follow the renewing of the mind.
Wherefore the changing of garments and other outward things is not a new
creature (as the Monks dream): but it is the renewing of the mind by the
holy Ghost: after the which follows a change of the members and senses of the
whole body. For when the heart has conceived a new light, a new judgment and
new motions through ye Gospel, it comes to pass that the inward senses are
also renewed: for the ears desire to hear the word of God, and not the
traditions and dreams of men. The mouth and tongue do not vaunt of their own
works, righteousness and Rules: but they set forth the mercy of God only
offered unto us in Christ. These chaunges consist not in words, but are
effectual, and bring a new spirit, a new will, new senses and new operations
of the flesh, so that the eyes, ears, mouth and tongue do not only see,
hear and speak otherwise than they did before, but the mind also approves,
loves and follows an other thing than it did before. For before being blinded
with popish errors and darkness, it imagined God to be a merchant, The Papists
imagined God to be a merchant, and to sell his grace for works and merits.
who would sell unto us his grace for our works and merits. But now in the
light of the Gospel it assures us that we are counted righteous by faith
only in Christ. Therefore it now rejects all wilworkes and accomlisheth the
works of charity and of our vocation commanded by God. It praises and
magnifieth God: it rejoices and glories in the only trust and confidence of
Gods mercy through Jesus Christ. If it must suffer any trouble or affliction,
it endures the same cherefully and gladly, although the flesh repine and
grudge thereat. This Paul calls a new creature.

Verse. 16. And to as many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them
and mercy.
This he adds as a conclusion. A right rule.
This is the only and true rule wherein we ought to walk, namely the new
creature, which is neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, Ephesians. 4.24.
but the new man created unto the image of God in righteousness and true
holiness, which inwardly is righteous in the spirit, and outwardly is holy and
clean in the flesh. The Monks have a righteousness and holiness, The
righteousness of Monks.
but it is hypocritical and wicked, because they hope not to be justified by
only faith in Christ, but by the keeping of their Rule. Moreover, although
outwardly they counterfeit an holiness, and refrain their eyes, hands, tongue
and other members from evil: yet they have an unclean heart, full of filthy
lust, envy, wrath, lechery, idolatry, contempt and hatred of God, blasphemy
against Christ, etc. for they are most spiteful and cruel enemies of the
truth. Wherefore the Rule and religion of the Monks is most wicked, and
accursed of God.

But this rule whereof Paul speaks in this place, is blessed, by the which
we live in the Faith of Christ, and are made new creatures, that is to say,
righteous and holy in deed by the holy ghost, without any coloring or
cou^terfetting. To them which walk after this rule belongs peace, Peace.
Mercy.
that is, the favor of God, forgeuenes of sins, quietness of conscience, and
mercy: that is to say, help in afflictions and pardon of the remnantes of
sin which remain in our flesh. Yea although they which walk after this rule
be overtaken with any sin, yet for that they are the children of grace and
peace, mercy vpholdeth them, so that their sin and fall shall not be laid
unto their charge.

Verse. 16. And upon the Israel of God.
Here he touches the false apostles and Jews, which gloried of their fathers,
Romans 9.4.5.
bragged that they were the people of God, that they had the law, etc. As if
he said: They are the Israel of God, which with faithful Abraham believe the
promises of God offered already in Christ, Romans 9.7 8.
whether they be Jews or Gentiles, and not they which are begotten of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob after the flesh. This matter is largely handled before in the
third Chapter.

Verse. 17. From hence forth let no man put me to business.
He concludes his Epistle with a certain indignation. As if he said: I have
faithfully taught the Gospel as I have received it by the revelation of Jesus
Christ: Who so will not follow it, let him follow what he will, so that
hereafter he trouble me no more. At a word, this is my censure, that Christ
which I have preached is the only high Priest and Savior of the world.
Therefore either let the world walk according to this rule, of which I have
spoken here and thorough out all this Epistle, or else let it perish for ever.

Verse. 17. For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.
This is the true meaning of this place: The marks that be in my body do show
well enough whose servant I am. If I sought to please men, requiring
circumcision and the keeping the law as necessary to salvation, and rejoicing
in your flesh as the false apostles do, I needed not to bear these marks in
my body. But because I am the servant of Jesus Christ, and walk after a true
rule: that is, I openly teach and confess that no man can obtain the favor
of God, righteousness and salvation but by Christ alone, therefore it behooves
me to bear the badges of Christ my Lord: which be not marks of mine own
procuring, but are laid upon me against my will by the world and the Devil,
for none other cause but for that I preach Jesus to be Christ.

He calls therefore the stripes and sufferings which he did bear in his
body, marks: also the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 1.16.
anguish and terror of spirit, etc. Of these sufferings he makes mention
every where in his Epistles: As Luke also does in the Acts. 1. Cor. 4.9.
I think (says he) that God has set forth us the last Apostles as men
appointed to death: For we are made a gasing stock unto the world, and to
the angels, and to men. Again: 1. Cor. 4.11.12.13.
Unto this hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted,
and have no certain dwelling place, and labor vvorking with our own
hands: We are reviled, we are persecuted, we are evil spoken of, 2. Cor.
6.4.5.6.
we are made as the filth of the world, the ofscouring of all things. Also in
an other place. In much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in prisonmentes, in tumultes, in labors, by
watchings, by fastings, etc. And again: 2. Cor. 11.2^.24.25.^^.
In labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison more
plenteously, in death often. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes
save one. I was thrice beaten with rods, I was once stoned, I suffered
thrice shippevvracke, night and day have I been in the deep sea. In
iourneyings I was often, in perilles of waters, in perilles of robbers, in
perilles of mine own nation, in perilles among the Gentiles, in perilles in
the City, in perilles in the wilderness, in perilles in the sea, in perilles
among false brethren, etc.

These be the true marks and imprinted signs, The marks which we bear at
this day.
of which the Apostle speaks in this place. The which we also at this day by
the grace of God, bear in our bodies for Christ's cause. For the world
persecuteth and kills us, false brethren deadly hate us, Satan inwardly in
our heart with his fiery darts terrifieth us, Ephesians. 6.16.
and for none other cause but for that we teach Christ to be our righteousness
and life. These marks we choose not of any devotion, neither do we gladly
suffer them: but because the world and the Devil do lay them upon us for
Christ's cause we are compelled to suffer them, and we rejoice in spirit with
Paul (which is always willing, Math. 26.41.
glories, and rejoices) that we bear them in our body: for they are a seal
and most sure testimony of true doctrine and faith. These things Paul spoke
(as I showed before) with a certain displeasure and indignation.

Verse. 18. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit, Amen.
This is his last farewell. He ends the Epistle with the same words
wherewith he began. As if he said: I have taught you Christ purely: I have
entreated you: I have chidden you, and I have let pass nothing which I
thought profitable for you. I can say no more, but that I heartely pray, that
our Lord Jesus Christ would bless and increase my labor, and govern you
with his holy spirit for ever.

Thus have ye the exposition of Paul's Epistle to the Galathians. The Lord
Jesus Christ, our iustifier and Savior, who gave unto me the grace and power
to expound this Epistle and to you likewise to hear it, preserve and stablish
both you and me (which I most heartily desire), that we daily growing more and
more in the knowledge of his grace and Faith unfeigned, may be found unblameable
and without fault in the day of our redemption. To whom with the father and the
holy Ghost be glory world without end. AMEN.

1. TIMOT. 1. Unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only
wise be honor and glory for ever and ever. AMEN.


FINIS.

