A DIALOGVE between LVCIAN and DIOGENES of the life hard and sharp, and of
the life tender and delicate.

Lucian and Diogene^
LVCIAN. What meaneste thou by this? thou haste a berde and a long busshe, and
nere a cote / but naked and bare legged / choosing a wandrynge beastely life /
and besides that against al others custom, thou abusest thyn own body, thou
wandrest hither and thither / and slepest more over upon the bare yerthe. In so
much that this foul, torn / coourse, and thredebare clooke often times
reports it.


DIOGENES. I need none other: for if there be any thing that may lightly be
gotten and trouble leest the owner, that suffiseth me. But tell me for gods
sake / thynkeste thou that there is vice in waste?


LV. ye very greatte.


DIO. And in temperaunce virtue?


LV. What else?


DIO. Sins thou ^ live more temperately than the common sort of men / and them
more wastfully: why than dooste thou blame me and not them?


LV. By god by cause me thinks thou lyueste not more temperately, but more
nedely, ye and that most nedy and wretched. For thou semeste no better tha^ a
beggar that beggeth his daily meat.


DIO. Wolte thou then (sins we are gone so far) that we see what thing
skarsite is, and what plenty is?


LV. ye if thou wolt.


DIO. Than is not that enough for every man / that satisfies his need? or wolt
thou say any other thing?


LV. Be it so.


DIO. And skarsite that that wants to fournyshe need?


LV. That same.


DIO. Therefore in my gear there wants nothing. For there is nothing in them
that fornyssheth not my need.


LVCI. How prouest thou that?


DIO. Thou shalt know / if thou consydre to what purpose e^^^^^^ those
things was ordained, whereof we have need, as a house, is it not for to cover?


LV. It is true.


DIO. And a gown for what purpose? is it not also for to cover?


LV. Of a suertie.


DIO. And by thy truth wherefore needs coueryng, is it not that it should be
the better, that is covered?


LV. Me thinks so.


DIO. Whither then seem unto the these fete the worse for that they are bare?


LV. I can not tell.


DIO. Thou shall know it by this way / whereto serves fete?


LV. For to go.


DIO. Do thou think than my fete go worse than others feet.


LV. I think not.


DIO. But whyther they be better or worse / can they not do that that they were
ordained for?


LV. I think well.


DIO. Seems it than my feet be no worse than others?


LV. It seems well.


DIO. And wat my body / ^^y worse than others? if hit were any worse, it should
be weker / for the virtue of the body is strength: is mine than weaker?


LV. It seems not.


DIO. Than seems hit that another my feet nor my body needs any covering.
For if they neded / they should be the worse. For need is evermore ylle, and
makes them the worse / with whom hit dwells. Nor it seems that my body is
the worse nourysshed, for that it is nourysshed with all manner of meats.


LV. It is clear.


DIO. For it should another be nymble nor strong, if it were ylle nourysshed,
for ill nourysshementes weaken the body.


LV. All this is of suertie.


DIO. Syns it is so, wherefore doste thou rebuke me, and blamest my life, and
call it wretched?


LV. By god because that syns Nature (whom thou worshippest) and the goddis
have ordined the yerthe in common, and out of it have brought many and good
things / that we should have all things plenteously, not only for need, but
also for delyght: yet thou of all these things, or at the lest of the most
part, lesist thy part, and use none of them no more than bestes. For thou
drinkest water, and so do bestes: thou eatest what so ever thou fyndeste, as do
dogs: and thy bed is no better than a dogs kenell, for straw suffiseth
the / as well as them: and thou wearist a cloak no better than a beggars. And if
it be so, that it be wisely done, to be content with these things, truly god
has not done well. First in making fat sheep, than vinis to bear sweet
wine / and all other stuff of marvelous diversity / both oil and honye, and
other things, that we should have all things, that we should have all manner of
meatis, that we should have sweet drinks, money, and soft beds, and also
fair howses, and all other things ordined after a marvelous sort. For the
fruits of crafts be also the gifts of the goddis. But to live wantynge all
these goods, truly were wretchedness, ye if thou sholdest want any of them. As
they that are kept in prison: and much more wretched / if a man would byreue
him self of all good things. For that is plain madness.


DIO. It is well said perauenture. But tell me this, when a rich man makes a
gladsome and a gentyle long feast, and receives many guestes of all sorts /
some weak, sum strong, and sets before them many things, and of all
sorts, if any man would snatche all thing / and devour all thing / not
only that that is next him, but that also that is ferder from him / ordined
for sike men / and he him self hole / sens he has but one bealy / and nedith
not many things to nourishe him / and yet tarieth longer than many other, what
manner of man thynkest thou such a one? is he good?


LV. I think not.


DIO. Is he temperat?


LV. Another.


DI. But what if another that sittith at the same table / and regards not
those many diverse dishes, chosinge some one of those that is next him, when
it is enough for his need, eatith that honestly / and not looks upon the other
things / wolt thou not think him more temperate / and better than the other?


LV. I would in deed.


DIO. Doste thou understand me than / or must I tell the?


LV. What?


DI. That god is like him, that makes the goodly feast / as he that has
prepared, many, diverse, and all manner of things / that every man should have
that that were mete for him / some things for hoole men, other things for
sick men / some things for strong men, and other for weke men / not that
every man should use every thing / but that each man should use those things
that are mete for his nature, and those / whereof he shall have need. But you
resemble him, that by gredines and vntemperance snatcheth all thing / as men
that would use all things / gotten every where, not content with that only,
that is before you / wenynge that your own countreye and see can not suffyse
you, but bringing delyghtes from the ferdest end of the world, preferringe
strange things before things of your own country / wastefull things before
measurable things, and those things that are hard to be gotten / before those
that are easy. And at a word ye choose rather cares and troubles / than to live
without trouble. But this diverse, precious, and fortunate prouisyons, wherein
ye tryumphe, bring unto you great wretchedness and mischieffe. Considre if thou
list that same gold and silver, considre these costly houses, consydre this
goodly wrought apparel, and all kind of such things, with what business they
are bought, with how many labors, peryls, ye and with blood and slaughter,
and with how many dethis of man kind / not only that in saylinge many do
perish for these things, and in seeking them suffer grievous things / but
also that they bread fyghtynges / and that for them one lith in awaite to an
other, friends to friends, children to their fathers, and wives to their
husbands. So I think Eriphyles for gold did betray her husbonde. And al
these things is thus, though that diverse apparel makes one no whytte warmer,
and those gylted buyldinges couers not the better, nor those cups of silver.
Nor yet those beds of gold, and of yuery, gives not a sweter sleep / ye
thou shall se often times, in an yuery bed and under a costly coueringe, those
blessed folk can take no sleep at all. More over those diverse dreslinges of
meatis / nourysshe not the more / but weken the body rather, and engenders
sickenessis. What needs it to show what troubles men both do and suffer / for
their lust? and yet it is easy to remedy this desire, outcept one would give him
self to favor delites. But yet this madness and naughtines suffices not to
me^ / but now they misuse the use of things / vsinge every thing to that
purpose that it was lest ordined for / as though a man would use a bed for a
carte.


LVC. Who does so?


DIO. you I say / that use men like beasts / for ye make them carry your
litters like carts in their necks: and you sytte alofte delicate, and drive
men like assis, commandinge them hider and thider / and ye that most do these
things, seem most happy. And they also that use fishes not only for meatis /
but also devise certain dyinges out of them / those I say that dye purple, do
not they use these things against nature, that are ordined of god?


LV. Why no for god, for the purpure fish serves also to dye / and not only
to eat.


DIO. But yet it was not ordained for that. For so a man may writh a gredierne
to make it serve instead of a pot / but it was not therefore ordained: but
how may any manne ouersee all their unhappiness / that is so great? And yet
thou accusest me for that I woll be no partiner of it. yet I live as does that
same sobre man, that is to say, eatinge only that that is set before me, and
using most necessary things: and not gapinge after those diverse things of
all sorts. And so where I need little and use not many things, the seems I
led a bestly life. And by this reason there is doubt, that the goddis be not
worse than beasts, as they that need nothing. But to the end thar thou may
better understand / what manner of thing, each of these is, that is to say to
need few things / or many things / considre first that children need more
than yongemen / and women more than men, than sick men more than hole, and
always in conclusyon lower things need more tha^ their betters. Therefore the
goddis need nothing / and they that are next unto the goddis, need lest.
Hercules that was the chiefist of al men / a godly manne, and of right,
thought to be a god, think thou / that he was than wretched, when he went up
and down naked, wearynge only a skin, nothing couetinge of our things? But
truly he was not wretched / for he put wretchedness from other: nor yet was he
poor, for he ruled both upon see and land. For where so ever he did
assault, he overcame on every side, nor in his time he chanced upon none /
that might other match him, or overcome him, while he lived. And thynkest thou
that he wanted apparel or shows? and that therefore he wandredde abroode in
the world? Truly it can not be said: but he was constaunt and strong, and
would live temperately, and not give him to delytes.

What was Theseus his companion? Was he not king of all the Atheniens? and as
they say, son of Neptunus, and noblist of his time? ye he also would go
barefote and naked, and it pleased him to norisshe his berde and his busshe /
nor him only / but it plesed all thauncient men, and they were better than
you, and they would not have suffered any such thing / no more than a lion
would suffer him self to be clypped. For they thought tendrenesse of flesh
and smothenes becam women / and they as they were me^, so they would seem / and
thought a berd to be the aparell of a man, as a maane for a horse / and a berde
for a lion / god has given for a beauty of a certain goodlynes of apparel,
so unto men he has given a berde. Therefore them I follow, those ancient men I
say woll I follow: and I envy not the men of this age, in their name of
marvelous blessedness, which they have in meat and apparel, sins they polyshe
and smothen all the parts of their body / and suffer not so much as that
that should be secret, to grow according to nature. But I would wyshe my self
to have horse fete, as they say Chiron had: and that need no more apparel
than lions, nor more delycate meat than dogs. Let me more over be in that
case, that every manner of bare earth, suffyse me for my bed / and that I may
take the world for my house / and that I may choose such meats / that may
easily be gotten. But gold and silver let me never desire, another I nor and of
my friends. For all mischiffes comes unto men out of the desires of them,
both tresons, wars / awaytes / and mourders. All these things spring out of
the well of desire of more. But god save us from these things / and that never
I desire more than enough: and when I have less, that I may suffer with even
mind. our things be of this sort / of a suerte these things are fer from
the comen opinion. And it is not to be meruiled, if we differ from them in
apparel / from whom we differ so far in order of life. But I wonder of the,
that where thou a lowest unto a minstrell / his certain facion and aparell,
and unto a tabretor his, and unto a player his / unto a good man thou alowest
no proper facion and aparell. And if it be so, that there be any facion or
custom of good men / what is more meter than this that I use / that unto wast
full folk is most shameful? and unto which they are most against? My custom
and fascion tha^ is, to be swetye / and rough / to were an old cloak / to let
my here grow / and to go barefote. And yours is most like unto the facion of
these bougerons / and a man can not know you from them, another by your apparel
/ nor by tendrenesse, nor in change of shirtes, nor in clokes / nor in pretty
shows / nor in trymyng of your here, nor in savor. For ye are perfumed like
them, even you that are so blessed. But what when a man smell like a bougeron?
ye and in suffrans of lalabour ye are no better than they: and with delights
ye are ouercommen as well as they, ye feed as they do / ye sleep and go on the
same facion / ye you wol not go, but rather be carried / as though ye were
ferdels, some upon men, some upon beasts. And me my fete do carry whyther so
ever I need. And I can suffer cold and hete, and that that god sends
withouten grudge, that is to say because I am a wretch. And you, because of
this blessedness, are content with no fortune, but ye ar weary of all things /
and can not suffer that that now is, and desires that that is to come, in
winter wishinge for summer, and in heat for cold / and again in cold for
heat, waiward and plaininge as sick men / which thing is caused by sickness
in them, and by condycyons in you. And though it be thus, yet ye think it mete
/ to bring us unto your life / and to corrupt ours, where as oftetymes the
things that ye do, ar ill counselid, and you your self in your own
businessis are not all of the best prouiders / and do nothing of them by
judgment and reason / but by custom of desire. Wherefore of troth ye differ
nothing from them that are carried with the streme. For they are carried whither
so ever the flood wolle / and you whither as lustis woll. And it is like with
you as with him, that had lepte upon a wild horsis back, the horse ran
carienge the manne away: And he might not now a light / the horse runninge /
one met with him, and asked him whider he went? He answered, whither as he
woll / and pointed the horse: so if any man ask you, whither are ye carried /
if ye woll say truth, ye shall say in general, thider as affections led
me, and particularly some time thider as lust leads me, sometime thider as
desire of glory, and sometime thider as desire of gaingne: sometime also anger,
sometime fere / sometime such other like seems to carry you away. For ye lepe not
only upon an horse, but upon many / now upon this, now upon the other ye are
carried away, and all are wild. And yet before ye fall ye know not that ye shall
fall, but this old clooke / that ye mock / and my here / and my facion, is
of such power, that it gives me a quiet life / that I may do what I woll, and
company with whom I woll. For of foolysshe and unlearned folk none woll come
unto me: for by cause of this fascion. And they that ye are of te^dre life /
withdraw them far from me. We mete to gyder men of knowledge and temperate
folk / and they that desire virtue, they chieffly company with me / and in
these men's company I delight. I wait not at their doors / that are but callid
men: and crowns of gold and purpull, I take for pride, and mock those men.
But that thou may understand / that this fascion is not only mete for good
men, but also for the goddis, and thanne mock it if thou list, considre the
images of the goddis / whither they be lyker you than me, and look not only,
in the chirches of the Greeks / but in those also of other countries, if the
goddis be painted and made busshed / and berded as I am / or else shaven as you
ar. And thou shalt se many of them coteles as I am now. How dare thou from
hens forth disprayse this facion, when it seems to be mete also for the
gods.


The end.

