THE WOMAN HATER.

As it has been lately Acted by the Children of Paul's.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by John Hodgets in Paul's Churchyard. 1607.

The Prologue.
GEntlemen, Inductions are out of date, and a Prologue in Verse is as stale, as
a black Velvet Cloak, and a Bay Garland: Therefore you shall have it plain
Prose thus: If there be any amongst you, that come to hear lascivious Scenes,
let them depart: for I do pronounce this, to the utter discomfort of all two
penny Gallerie men, you shall have no bawdrie in it: or if there be any lurking
amongst you in corners, with Table books, who have some hope to find fit
matter to feed his -- malice on, let them claspe them up, and slinke away, or
stay and be converted. For he that made this Play, means to please Auditors
so, as he may be an Auditor himself hereafter, and not purchase them with
the dear loss of his ears: I dare not call it Comedy, or Tragedy; it is
perfectly neither: A Play it is, which was meant to make you laugh, how it will
please you, is not written in my part: For though you should like it to day,
perhaps your selves know not how you should digest it to morrow: Some things
in it you may meet with, which are out of the common Road: a Duke there is,
and the Scene lies in Italy, as those two things lightly we never miss. But
you shall not find in it the ordinary and ouer-worne trade of ieasting at
Lords and Courtiers, and Citizens, without taxation of any particular or new
vice by them found out, but at the persons of them: such, he that made this,
thinks vile; and for his own part vows, That he did never think, but that
a Lord borne might be a wise man, and a Courtier an honest man.

The Woman Hater.
ACTVS I. SCENA I.
Enter Duke of Millaine, Arrigo, Lucio, and two Courtiers. It Is now the sweetest
time for sleep, the night is scarce spent; Arrigo, what is a clock?

Arr. Past four.


Duk. Is it so much, and yet the morn not up?
See yo^der where the shamfac'd maide^ comes
Into our sight, how gently does she slide,
Hiding her chaste cheeks, like a modest Bride,
With a red veil of blushes; as is she,
Even such all modest virtuous women be.
Why thinks your Lordship I am up so soon?

Lucio. About some weighty State plot.


Duk. And what thinks your knighthood of it?


Arr. I do think, to cure some strange corruptions in the common wealth.


Duk. You Are well conceited of your selves, to think
I choose you out to bear me company
In such affairs and business of state:
But am not I a pattern for all Princes,
That break my soft sleep for my subjects good?
Am I not careful? very provident?

Luc. Your grace is careful.


Arri. Very provident.


Duk. Nay knew you how my serious working plots,
Concern the whole estates of all my subjects,
I and their lives; then Lucio thou would swear,
I were a loving Prince.

Lucio. I think your grace intendes to walk the public streets disguised,
to see the streets disorders.


Duke. It is not so.


Arrig. You secretly will cross some other states, that do conspire against
you.


Duke. Waightier far:
You are my friends, and you shall have the cause;
I break my sleeps thus soon to see a wench.

Lucio. You Are woundrous careful for your subjects good.


Arrig. You are a very loving Prince in deed.


Duke. This care I take for them, when their dull eyes,
Are closed with heavy slumbers.

Arr. Then you rise to see your wenches?


Lucio. What Millaine beauty has the power, to charm her Sovereigns eyes,
and break his sleeps?


Duke. Sister to Count Vaelore: She Is a maid
Would make a Prince, forget his throne and state,
And lowly kneel to her: the general fate
Of all mortality, is hers to give;
As she disposes, so we die and live.

Luc. My Lord, the day grow's clear, the Court will rise.


Duke. We stay too long, is the the Vmbranoes head as we commanded, sent to
the sad Gondarino, our general?


Arr. It Is sent.


Duk. But stay, where shines that light?


Arrig. It Is in the chamber of Lazarello.


Duke. Lazarello? what is he?


Arrig. A Courtier my Lord, and one that I wonder your grace knows not: for he
has followed your Court, and your last predecessors, from place to place, any
time this seven year, as faithfully as your Spits and your Dripping-pans have
done, and almost as greasely.


Duke O we know him as we have heard: he keeps a kallender of all the famous
dishes of meat, that have bin in the Court, ever since our great Graundfathers
time; and when he can thrust in at no Table, he makes his meat of that.


Lucio The very same my Lord.


Duke. A Courtier cal'st thou him?
Believe me Lucio, there be many such
About our Court, respected, as they think,
Even by our self; with thee I will be plain:
We Princes do use, to prefer many for nothing, and to take particular and free
knowledge, almost in the nature of acquaintance of many; whom we do use only
for our pleasures, and do give largely to numberes; more out of policy, to be
thought liberal, and by that means to make the people strive to deserve our
love; then to reward any particular desert of theirs, to whom we give: and do
suffer our selves to here Flatterers, more for recreation

Then for love of it, though we sildome hate it:
And yet we know all these, and when we please,
Can touch the wheel, and turn their names about.

Lu. I wonder they that know their states so well, should fancy such base
slaves.


Duke. Thou wondrest Lucio,
Do not thou think, if thou were Duke of Millaine,
Thou should be flattered?

Lucio I know my Lord, I would not.


Duke. Why so I thought till I was Duke, I thought I should have left me no
more Flatterers, then there are now plaine-dealers; and yet for all this my
resolution, I am most palpably flattered: the poor man may loath covetousness
and flattery; but Fortune will alter the mind when the wind turns: there may
be well a little conflict, but it will drive the byllowes before it.

Arrigo it grow's late, for see fair Thetis has undone the bares
To Phoebus teame; and his vnriual'd light,
Has chased the mornings modest blush away:
Now must we to our love, bright Paphian Queen;
Thou Cytherean goddsse, that delights
In stirring glaunces, and art still thy self,
More toying then thy teame of Sparrowes be;
Thou laughing Errecina O inspire
Her heart with love, or lessen my desire.

Exeunt. SCENA II.
Enter Lazarello and his Boy. Laz. Go run, search, pry in every nooke and
Angle of the kitchins, larders, and pasteries, know what meate's boiled, baked,
roast, stewed, fri'de, or sows'd, at this dinner to be served directly, or
indirectly, to every several table in the Court, be gone.


Boy. I run, but not so fast, as your mouth will do upon the stroke of
eleven.


Exit Boy. Laz. What an excellent thing did God bestow upon man, when he did
give him a good stomach? what unbounded graces there are powered upon them,
that have the continual command of the very best of these blessings? It Is an
excellent thing to be a Prince, he is served with such admirable variety of
fare; such innumerable choice of delicates, his tables are full fraught with
most nourishing food, and his cupbords heavy laden with rich wines; his Court
is still filled with most pleasing varieties: In the Summer, his palace is full
of green geese; and in Winter, it swarmeth woodcockes, O thou Goddess of
plenty
Fill me this day with some rare delicates,
And I will every year most constantly,
As this day celebrate a sumptuous feast,
If thou will send me victuals in thine honor;
And to it shall be bidden for thy sake,
Even all the valiant stomachs in the Court:
All short-cloak'd Knights, and al crosse-garter'd gentlemen;
All pumpe and pantofle, foot-cloth riders;
With all the swarming generation
Of long stocks, short pained hose, and huge stuffed dublets:
All these shall eat, and which is more then yet
Has ere been seen, they shall be satisfied.
I wonder my Ambassador returns not!



Enter Boy Boy. Here I am Master.


Laza. And welcome:
Never did that sweet Virgin in her smock,
Fair cheek'd Andromeda, when to the rock
Her yuorie limbs were chain'de, and straight before
A huge Sea monster, tumbling to the shore,
To have devoured her, with more longing sight
Expect the coming of some hardy Knight,
That might have quel'd his pride, and set her free,
Then I with longing sight have looked for thee.

Boy. Your Perseus is come Master, that will destroy him,
The very comfort of whole presence shuts
The monster hunger from your yelping guts

Laza. Brief boy, brief, discourse the service of each several Table
compendiously.


Boy. Here Is a Bill of all Sir.


Laza. Give it me. A Bill of all the several services this day appointed for
every Table in the Court:
I, this is it on which my hopes rely;
Within this paper all my joys are clos'de:
Boy open it, and read it with reverence.

Boy. For the Captain of the Guards Table, three chynes of Beef, and two jolls
of Sturgeon.


Laza. A portly service, but gross, gross, proceed to the Dukes own Table,
dear boy to the Dukes own Table.


Boy. For the Dukes own Table, the head of an Vmbrana


Laza. Is It possible! can Heaven be so propitious to the Duke?


Boy. Yes, I Will assure you Sir, it is possible, Heaven is so propitious to him.


Laza. Why then he is the richest Prince alive:
He were the wealthiest Monarch in all Europe,
Had he no other Territories, Dominions, Provinces, Seats,
Nor Palaces, but only that Vmbranaes head.

Boy. It Is very fresh and sweet sir, the fish was taken but this night, and the
head as a rare novelty appointed by special commandment for the dukes own
Table, this dinner.


Laza. If poor unworthy I may come to eat Of this most sacred dish, I here do
vow (If that blind huswife Fortune will bestow But means on me) to keep a
sumptuous house, A board groaning under the heavy burden of the beasts that
cheweth the cudde, and the Foul that cutteth the air: I shall not like the
table of a country Justice, besprinckled over with all manner of cheap
Sallets, sliced Beef, Giblets, and Pettitoes, to fill up room, nor should
there stand any great, combersome, uncut up pyes at the nether end filled with
moss and stones, partly to make a show with, and partly to keep the lower
mess from eating, nor shall my meat come in sneaking like the Cittie-seruice,
one dish a quarter of an hour after one another gone, as if they had appointed
to meet there, and had mistook the hour, nor should it like the new Court
service come in, in have, as if it feign would be gone again, all courses at
once, like a hunting breakefast, but I would have my several courses, and my
dishes well filled, my first course should be brought in after the ancient
manner, by a score of old bleere-ey'de Seruingmen, in long blewe coats, (marry
they shall buy silk, facing, and buttons themselves) but that is by the way.


Boy. Master the time call's on, will you be walking.


Exit Boy. Laza. Follow boy, follow, my guts were half an hour since in the
privy kitchen.


Exeunt. SCENA TERTII.
Enter Count and his sister Oriana. Oria. Faith brother I must needs go
yonder.


Count. And in faith sister what will you do yonder.


Oria. I know the Lady Honoria will be glad to see me.


Count. Glad to see you, faith the Lady Honoria cares for you as she does for
all other young Ladies, she is glad to see you, and will show you the privy
Garden, and tell you how many gowns the Duchess had: Marry if you have ever an
old uncle, that would be a Lord, or ever a kinsman that has done a murder, or
committed a robbery, and will give good store of money to procure his pardon,
then the Lady Honoria will be glad to see you.


Oria. I, but they say one shall see fine fights at the Court.


Count. I Will tell you what you shall see, you shall see many faces of man's
making, for you shall find very few as God left them: and you shall see many
legs too; amongst the rest you shall behold one pair, the feet of which,
were in times past sockelesse, but are now through the change of time (that
alters all things) very strangely become the legs of a Knight and a
Courtier: another pair you shall see, that were heir apparent legs to a
Glouer, these legs hope shortly to be honorable; when they pass by they
will bow, and the mouth to these legs, will seem to offer you some
Courtship; it will swear, but it will lie, hear it not.


Oria. Why, and are not these fine sights?


Count. Sister, in seriousness you yet are young And fair, a fair young maid
and apt.


Oria. Apt?


Count. Exceeding apt, apt to be drawn to.


Oria. To what?


Count. To that you should not be, it is no dispraise,
She is not bad that has desire to ill,
But she that has no power to rule that will:
For there you shall be woed in other kinds
Then yet your years have known, the chiefest men
Will seem to throw themselves
As vassailes at your service, kiss your hand,
Prepare you banquets, maskes, shows, all inticements
That wit and lust together can devise,
To draw a Lady from the state of grace
To an old Lady wyddowes Gallery;
And they will praise your virtues, beware that,
The only way to turn a woman whore,
Is to commend her chastity: you will go?

Oria. I would go, if it were but only to show you, that I could be there, and
be moved with none of these tricks.


Cont. Your servants are ready?


Oria An hour since


Cont. Well, if you come off clear from this hot service,
Your praise shall be the greater. Farewell Sister.

Oria. Farewell Brother.


Cont. Once more, if you stay in the presence till candlelight, keep on the
foreside oth' Curtain; and do you hear, take heed of the old Bawd, in the
cloth of Tissue-sleeues, and the knit Mittins. Farewell Sister. Exit Oria. Now
am I idle, I would I had bin a Scholar, that I might a studied now: the
punishment of meaner men is, they have too much to do; our only misery is,
that without company we know not what to do; I must take some of the common
courses of our Nobility; which is thu^: if I can find no company that likes
me, pluck off my Hatband, throw an old Cloak over my face, and as if I would
not be known, walk hastily through the streets, till I be discovered; then
there goes Count such a one, says one; there goes Count such a one, says
another: Look how fast he goes, says a third; there is some great matters in
hand questionless, says a fourth; when all my business is to have them say
so: this has been used; or if I can find any company, I Will after dinner to
the Stage, to see a Play; where, when I first enter, you shall have a murmr
in the house, every one that does not know, cries, what Noble man is that; all
the Gallants on the Stage rise, veil to me, kiss their hand, offer me their
places: then I pick out some one, whom I please to grace among the rest, take
his seat, use it, throw my cloak over my face, and laugh at him: the poor
gentleman imagines himself most highly graced, thinks all the Auditors
esteem him one of my bosom friends, and in right special regard with me.
But here comes a Gentleman, that I hope will make me better sport, then either
street and stage fooleries. Enter Lazarello and Boy. This man loves to eat good
meat, always provided he do not pay for it himself: he goes by the name of
the Hungary Courtier; marry, because I think that name will not sufficiently
distinguish him, for no doubt he has more fellows there, his name is
Lazarello, he is none of these same ordinary eaters, that will devour three
breakfasts, and as many dinners, without any prejudice to their beauers,
drinkings or suppers; but he has a more courtly kind of hunger, and does hunt
more after nouelty, then plenty, I Will ouer-heare him.


Laza. O thou most itching kindly appetite,
Which every creature in his stomach feels;
O leave, leave yet at last thus to torment me.
Three several Sallets have I sacrifiz'de,
Bedewed with precious oil and vinegar
Already to appease thy greedy wrath. Boy.

Boy. Sir.


Laza. Will the Count speak with me.


Boy. One of his Gentlemen is gone to inform him of your coming Sir.


Laza. There is no way left for me to compass this Fish head, but by being
presently made known to the Duke.


Boy. That will be hard Sir.


Laza. When I have tasted of this sacred dish,
Then shall my bones rest in my fathers tomb
In peace, then shall I dye most willingly,
And as a dish be served to satisfy
Deaths hunger, and I will be buried thus:
My Beer shall be a charger borne by four,
The coffin where I lie, a powdring tubbe,
Bestrew'd with Lettice, and cool sallet herbs,
My winding sheet of Tanseyes, the black guard
Shall Be my solemn mourners, and in stead
Of ceremonies, wholesome burial prayers:
A printed dirge in ryme, shall bury me
In stead of tears, let them pour Capon sauce
Upon my hearse, and salt in stead of dust,
Manchets for stones, for other glorious shields
Give me a Voyder, and above my hearse
For a Trutch sword, my naked knife stuck up.

The Count discouers himself. Boy. Master, the Count is here.


Laza. Where? my Lord I do beseech you.


Count. You Are very welcome sir, I pray you stand up, you shall dine with me.


Laza. I do beseech your Lordship by the love I still have borne to your
honorable house.


Count. Sir, what need all this? you shall dine with me, I pray rise.


Laza. Perhaps your Lordship takes me for one of these same fellows, that do
as it were respect victuals.


Count. O sir, by no means.


Laza. Your Lordship has often promised, that whenever I should affect
greatness, your own hand should help to raise me.


Count. And so much still assure your self of.


Laza. And though I must confess, I have ever shun'de popularitie by the
example of others, yet I do now feel my self a little ambitious, your
Lordship is great, and though young, yet a privy Counselor.


Count. I pray you sir leap into the matter, what would you have me do for
you?


Laza. I would entreat your Lordship to make me known to the Duke.


Count. When sir?


Laza. Suddenly my Lord, I would have you present me unto him this morning.


Count. It shall be done, but for what virtues, would you have him take notice
of you?


Laza. Your Lordship shall know that presently. It Is pity of this fellow, he
is of good wit, and sufficient understanding, when he is not trobled with this
greedy worm.


Lazar. Faith, you may entreat him to take notice of me for any thing; for
being an excellent Farrier, for playing well at Span-counter, or sticking
knives in walls, for being impudent, or for nothing; why may not I be a
Favorite on the sudden, I see nothing against it.


Count. Not so sir, I know you have not the face to be a favorite on the
sudden.


Laz. Why the^ you shall present me as a ge^tlema^ well qualified, or one
extraordinary seen in diverse strange mysteries.


Count. In what Sir? as how?


Laz. Marry as thus --


Enter Intelligencer. Count. Yonder Is my old Spirit, that has haunted me
daily, ever since I was a privy Counselor, I must be rid of him, I pray you
stay there, I am a little buisie, I will speak with you presently.


Lazar. You shall bring me in, and after a little other talk, taking me by
the hand, you shall utter these words to the Duke: May it please your grace,
to take note of a gentleman, well read, deeply learned, and thoroughly grounded
in the hidden knowledge of all Sallets and pothearbs whatsoever.


Count. 'Twill be rare, if you will walk before Sir, I will overtake you
instantly.


Lazar. Your Lordships ever.


Count. This fellow is a kind of Informer, one that lives in Alehouses, and
Tauerns, and because he perceiues some worthy men in this land, with much
labor and great expense, to have discovered things dangerously hanging over
the State; he thinks to discover as much out of the talk of drunkards in
Taphouses: he brings me informations, picked out of broken words, in men's
common talk, which with his malicious misapplication, he hopes will seem
dangerous, he does besides bring me the names of all the young Gentlemen in
the City, that use Ordinaries, or Tauerns, talking (to my thinking) only as
the freedom of their youth teach the^, without any further ends; for dangerous
and seditious spirits, he is besides an arrant whore-master, as any is in
Millaine, of a lay man. I will not meddle with the Clergy, he is parcel
Lawier, and in my conscience much of their religion, I must put upon him some
piece of service; come hither Sir, what have you to do with me?


Int. Little my Lord, I only come to know how your Lordship would employ me.


Cont. Observed you that gentleman, that parted from me but now.


Int. I saw him now my Lord.


Cont. I was sending for your, I have talked with this man, and I do find him
dangerous.


Int. Is your Lordship in earnest?


Cont. Hark you sir, there may perhaps be some within care-shot.


He whispers with him. Enter Lazarrello and his Boy. Laz. Sirrah will you
venture your life, the Duke has sent the fish head to my lord?


Boy. Sir if he have not, kill me, do what you will with me.


Laz. How uncertain is the state of all mortal things? I have these Crosses
from my Cradle, from my very Cradle, in so much that I do begin to grow
desperate: Fortune I do despise thee, do thy worst; yet when I do better gather
my self together, I do find it is rather the part of a wise man, to prevent
the storms of Fortune by stirring, then to suffer them by standing still, to
power themselves upon his naked body. I will about it.


Cont. Who Is within there? Enter a Seruing-man Let this Gentleman out at the
back door, forget not my instructions, if you find any thing dangerous;
trouble not your self, to find out me, but carry your informations to the
Lord Lucio, he is a man grave and well experienced in these businesses.


Int. Your Lordships Servant.


Exit Intelligencer and Seruingman. Laz. Will it please your worship walk?


(...) Sir I was coming, I will ouer-take you.


Lazar. I will attend you over against the Lord Gonderinoes house.


Count. You shall not attend there long.


Laz. Thither must I to see my loves face, the chaste virgin head
Of a dear Fish, yet pure and vnderflowred,
Not known of man, no bred rough country hand,
Has once touched thee, no Pandars withered paw,
Nor an vn-napkind Lawyers greasy fist,
Has once slubberd thee: no Ladies supple hand,
Washed over with urine, has yet seized on thee
With her two nimble talents: no Court hand,
Whom his own natural filth, or change of air,
Has bedeckt with scabs, has mard thy whiter grace:
O let it be thought lawful then for me,
To crop the flower of thy virginity.

Exit Lazar. Count. This day I am for fools, I am all theirs,
Though like to our young wanton cockerd heirs,
Who do affect those men above the rest,
In whose base company they still are best:
I do not with much labor strive to be
The wisest ever in the company:
But for a fool, our wisdom often amends,
As enemies do teach us more then friends.

Exit. Count. Finis Actus p^im^.
ACTVS II. SCENA I.
Enter Gondarino and his servants. SEru. My Lord:


Gond. Ha.


Seru. Here Is one has brought you a present.


Gond. From whom, from a woman? if it be from a woman, bid him carry it back,
and tell her she is a whore: what is it?


Seru. A Fish head my Lord.


Gond. What Fish head?


Seru. I did not ask that my lord.


Gond. W^ence co^es it?


Ser. From the Court.


Gond. O it is a Cods-head.


Seru. No my Lord, it is some strange head, it comes from the Duke.


Gond. Let it be carried to my Mercer, I do owe him money for silks, stop his
mouth with that. Exit Seru. Was there ever any man that hated his wife after
death but I? and for her sake all women, women that were created only for the
preservation of little dogs.


Enter Seru. Ser. My Lord, the Counts sister being overtaken in the streets,
with a great haile-storme, is light at your gate, and desires Rome till the
storm be ouerpast.


Gond. Is she a woman?


Seru. I my Lord I think so.


Gond. I have none for her then: bid her get her gone, tell her she is not
welcome.


Seru. My Lord, she is now coming up.


Gond. She shall not come up, tell her any thing, tell her I have but one
great room in my house, and I am now in it at the close stool.


Seru. She Is here my Lord.


Gond. O impudence of women, I can keep dogs out of my house, or I can defend
my house against thieves, but I cannot keep out women. Enter Oriana, a waiting
woman, and a Page. Now Madam, what has your Ladyship to say to me?


Oria. My Lord, I was bold to crave the help of your house against the storm.


Gond. Your Ladyships boldness in coming, will be impudence in staying, for
you are most unwelcome.


Oriana. Oh my Lord!


Gond. Do you laugh, by the hate I bear to you, it is true.


Orian. You Are merry my Lord.


Gond. Let me laugh to death if I be, or can be whilst thou art here, or
live, or any of thy sex.


Oriana. I commend your Lordship.


Gond. Do you commend me? why do you commend me? I give you no such cause:
thou art a filthy impudent whore; a woman, a very woman.


Oria. Ha, ha, ha.


Gond. Begot when thy father was drunk.


Orian. Your Lordship has a good wit.


Gond. How? what have I good wit?


Orian. Come my Lord, I have heard before of your Lordships merry vain in
jesting against our Sex, which I being desirous to hear, made me rather
choose your Lordships house, then any other, but I know I am welcome.


Gond. Let me not live if you be: me thinks it does not become you, to come to
my house, being a stranger to you. I have no woman in my house, to entertain
you, nor to show you your chamber; why should you come to me? I have no
Galleries, nor banqueting houses, nor bawdy pictures to show your Ladyship.


Orian. Believe me, this your Lordships plainnes makes me think my self more
welcome, then if you had sworn by all the pretty Court oaths that are, I had
been welcomer then your soul to your body.


Gond. Now she is in talking, treason will get her out, I durst sooner
undertake to talk an Intelligencer out of the room, and speak more then he
durst hear, than talk a woman out of my company.


Enter a Servant. Seru. My Lord, the Duke being in the streets, and the storm
continuing, is entered your gate, and now coming up.


Gond. The Duke! now I know your arrant Madame; you have plots and private
meetings in hand: why do you choose my house, are you ashamed to go to it in
the old coupling place, though it be less suspicious here; for no Christian
will suspect a woman to be in my house, yet you may do it cleanlier there, for
there is a care had of those businesses; and wheresoever you remove, your
great maintainer and you shall have your lodgings directly opposite, it is but
putting on your night-gowne, and your slippers; madame, you understand me?


Orian. Before I would not understand him, but now he speaks riddles to me
indeed.


Enter the Duke, Arrigo, and Lucio. Duke. It Was a strange haile-storme.


Lucio. It Was exceeding strange.


Gond. Good morrow to your grace.


Duke. Good morrow Gondarino.


Gond. Justice great Prince.


Duke. Why should you beg for justice, I never did you wrong; what is the
offender?


Gond. A woman.


Luke. O I know your ancient quarrel against that sex; but what heinous
crime has she committed?


Gond. She has gone abroad.


Duke. What? it cannot be.


Gond. She has done it.


Duke. How? I never heard of any woman that did so before.


Gond. If she have not laid by that modesty
That should attend a virgin, and quite void
Of shame, has left the house where she was borne,
As they should never do; let me endure
The pains that she should suffer.

Duke. Has she so? which is the woman?


Gond. This, this.


Duke. How Arrigo? Lucio?


Gond. I then it is a plot, no Prince alive
Shall force me make my house, a brothel house;
Not for the sins, but for the woman's sake,
I will not have her in my doors so long:
Will they make my house as bawdy as their own are?

Duke. Is it not Oriana?


Lucio. It is.


Duke. Sister to Count Valor?


Arri. The very same.


Duke. She that I love?


Lucio. She that you love.


Duke. I do suspect.


Lucio. So do I.


Duke. This fellow to be but a counterfeit,
One that does seem to loath all woman kind,
To hate himself, because he has some part
Of woman in him; seems not to endure
To see, or to be seen of any woman,
Only, because he knows it is their nature
To wish to taste that which is most forbidden:
And with this show, he may the better compass
(And with far less suspicion) his base ends.

Lucio. Upon my life it is so.


Duke. And I do know,
Before his slain wife gave him that offense,
He was the greatest servant to that sex,
That ever was; what does this Lady here
with him alone? why should he rail at her to me?

Lucio. Because your grace might not suspect.


Duke. It Was so: I do love her straingely;
I would feign know the truth: counsel me. They 3. whisper

Enter Count, Lazarello, and his boy. Count. It falls out better then we could
expect Sir, that we should find the Duke and my Lord Gondarino together, both
which you desire to be acquainted with.


Lazar. It Was very happy: Boy, go down into the kitchen, and see if you can
spy that same; I am now in some hope: I have me thinks a kind of fever upon
me, Exit Boy. A certain gloominesse within me, doubting as it were, betwixt
two passions; there is no young maid, upon her wedding night, when her husband
sets first foot in the bed, blushes, and looks pale again, oftener then I
do now. There is no Poet acquainted with more shakings and ^^akinges, toward
the latter end of this new play, when he is in that case, that he stands
peeping betwixt the curtains, so fearfully, that a bottle of Ale cannot be
opened, but he thinks some body hisses, then I am at this instant.


Count. Are they in consultatio^, if they be, either my young Duke has gotten
some bastard, and is persuading my knight yonder, to father the child, and
marry the wench, or else some Cockpit is to be built.


Laza. My Lord? what noble mann's that?


Count. His name is Lucio, it is he that was made a Lord at the request of some
of his friends for his wives sake, he affects to be a great Statesman, and
thinks it consistes in night cappes, and jewels, and tooth-pikes?


Laza. And what is that other?


Count. A Knight Sir, that pleases the Duke to favor, and to raise to some
extraordinary fortunes, he can make as good men as himself, every day in
the week and does --


Laza. For what was he raised.


Count. Truly Sir, I am not able to say directly, for what; but for wearing
of red breeches as I take it, he is a brave man, he will spend three
Knighthoodes at a Supper without trumpets.


Laza My Lord i will talk with him, for I have a friend, that would gladly
receive the humor.


Count. If he have the itch of Knighthood upon him, let him repair to that
Physician, he will cure him: but I will give you a note; is your friend fat or
lean?


Laza. Something fat.


Count. It Will be the worse for him.


Laza. I hope that's not material.


Cont. Very much, for there is an imposte set upon Knighthoodes, and your
friend shall pay a Noble in the pound.


Duke. I do not like examinations,
We shall find out the truth more easily,
Some other way less noted, and that course,
Should not be vs'de, till we be sure to prove
Some thing directly, for when they perceive
Themselves suspected, they will then provide
More warily to answer.

Luc. Does she know your Grace does love her.


Duke She has never heard it.


Luc. Then thus my Lord; They whisper again.


Laza. What Is he that walks alone so sadly with his hands behind him?


Count. The Lord of the house, he that you desire to be acquainted with, he
does hate women for the same cause that I love them.


Laza. What Is that?


Cont. For that which Apes want: you perceive me Sir?


Laza. And is he sad, can he be sad, that has so rich a gemme under his
roof, as that which I do follow? What young Ladies that?


Count. Which: Have I mine eye sight perfect, It Is my sister, did I say the Duke
had a bastard? what should she make here with him, and his Council; she has
no papers in her hand, to petition to them, she has never a husband in
prison, whose release she might sue for: That's a fine trick for a wench; to
get her husband clapped up, that she may more freely, and with less suspicion,
visit the private studies of men in authority. Now I do discover their
consultatio^, yon fellow is a Pandar without al salvation; But let me not
condemn her too rashly, without waying the matter; she is a young Lady, She
went forth earelie this morning with a waiting woman, and a Page, or so: This
is no garden house, in my conscience she went forth with no dishonest intent;
for she did not pretend going to any sermon in the further end of the City:
Neither went she to see any odd old Gentlewoman, that mournes for the death
of her husband, or the loss of her friend, and must have young Ladies come to
comfort her: Those are the damnable Bawdes, It Was no set meeting certainly:
for there was no wafer-woman with her, these three days, on my knowledge: I Will
talk with her: Good mor^ow my Lord.


Gond. You Are welcome Sir: here is her brother come now to do a kind office for
his sister, is it not strange?


Count. I am glad to meet you here Sister.


Oria. I thank you good Brother: and if you doubt of of the cause of my
coming, I can Satisfy you.


Count. No faith, I dare trust thee, I do suspect thou art honest, for it is
so rare a thing to be honest amongst you, that some one man in an age, may
perhaps suspect some two women to be honest, but never believe it verily.


Luci Let your return be sudden.


Arri. Unsuspected by them.


Duk. It shall, so shall I best perceive their Love, if there be any, Farewell.


Count. Let me entreat your grace to stay a little,
To know a Gentleman, to whom your self
Is much beholding, he has made the sport
For your whole Court these 8. years, on my knowledge.

Duk. His name?


Count. Lazarello.


Duk. I heard of him this morning, which is he?


Count. Lazarello, pluck up thy Spirits, thy fort^nes are now raising, the Duke
calls for thee, and thou shall be acquainted with him.


Laza. He Is going away, and I must of necessity stay here, upon business.


Count. It Is all one, thou shall know him first.


Laza. Stay a little, if he should offer to take me away with him, and by
that means I should loose that I seek for; but if he should, I will not go
with him.


Count. Lazarello the Duke stays, will thou loose this opportunity?


Laza. How must I speak to him?


Count. It Was well thought of: you must not talk to him, as you do to an
ordinary man, honest plain sense; but you must wind about him: for example,
if he should ask you what a clock it is, you must not say; if it please your
grace, it is nine, but thus; thrice three a clock, so please my Sovereign, or
thus; look how many muses there does dwell,
Upon the sweet banckes of the learned Well;
And just so many strokes the clock has struck,
And so forth, and you must now and then enter into a de^scription.

Laza. I hope I shall do it.


Count. Come: May it please your grace to take note of a gentleman, well seen,
deeply read, and thoroughly grounded in the hidden knowledge of all sallets and
pothearbs whatsoever.


Duk. I shall desire to know him more inwardly.


Laza. I kiss the Oxe-hide of your Graces foot.


Count. Very well: will your grace question him a little?


Duk. How old are you?


Laza. Full eight and twenty several Almanackes
Has been compyled, all for several years,
Since first I drew this breath, four prentiships
Have I most truly served in this world:
And eight and twenty times has Phoebus carre
Run out his yearly course since.

Duk. I understand you Sir.


Luci. How like an ignorant Poet he talks.


Duk. You are eight and twenty year old? what time of the day do you hold it
to be?


Laza. About the time that mortals whet their knives
On thresholds, on their shoe soles, and on stayres:
Now bread is grating, and the testy cook
Has much to do now, now the Tables all.

Duk. It Is almost dinner time?


Laza. Your grace does apprehend me very rightly.


Count. Your grace shall find him in your further co^fere^ce Grave, wise,
courtly, and scholar like, vndersta^dingly read In the necessities of the life
of man. He knows that man is mortal by his birth; He knows that men must
dye, and therefore live; He knows that man must live, and therefore eat, And
if it shall please your grace, to accompany your self with him, I doubt not,
but that he will at the least, make good my commendations.


Duk. Attend us Lazarello, we do want
Men of such Action, as we have received you
Reported from your honorable friend.

Laza. Good my Lord stand betwixt me and my overthrow, you know I am ti'd
here, and may not depart, my gracious Lord, so weighty are the business of mine
own, which at this time do call upon me, that I will rather choose to die,
then to neglect them.


Count. Nay you shall well perceive, besides the virtues that I have already
informed you off, he has a stomach, which will stoop to no Prince alive.


Duk. Sir at your best leisure, I shall thi^st to s^e you.


Laza. And I shall hunger for it.


Duk. Till then farewell all.


Genesis Count. Long life attend your Grace.


Duk. I do not taste this sport, Arrigo, Lucio.


Ar. Luci. We do attend.


Exeunt Duke, Arrigo, Lucio. Gond. His grace is gone, and has left his Hellen
with me, I am no Pander for him, neither can I be won with the hope of
gain, or the itching desire of tasting my Lords lechery to him, to keep her
at (my house) or bring her in disguise, to his bed Chamber.

The twynes of Adders, and of Scorpions
About my naked breast, will seem to me
More tickling then those claspes, which men adore;
The lustful, dull, ill spirited embraces
Of women; the much praised Amazones,
Knowing their own infirmities so well,
Made of themselves a people, and what men
They take amongst them, they condemn to die,
Perceiving that their folly made them fit
To live no longer, that would willingly
Come in the worthless presence of a woman.
I will attend, and see what my young Lord will do with his sister.

Enter Lazarelloes Boy. Boy. My Lord; the fish head is gone again.


Count. Whither.


Boy. I know whither my Lord.


Count. Keep it from Lazarello: Sister shall I confer with you in private,
to know the cause of the Dukes coming hither, I know he makes you acquainted
with his business of State.


Oria. He satisfy you brother, for I see you are jealous of me.


Gond. Now there shall be some course taken for her conuei^^ce.


Laza. Lazarello, thou art happy, thy carriage has begot love, and that love
has brought forth fruits, thou art here in the company of a man honorable,
that will help thee to taste of the bounties of the Sea, and when thou have so
done, thou shall retire thy self unto the Court, and there taste of the
delicates of the earth, and be great in the eyes of thy Sovereign: now no more
shall thou need to scramble for thy meat, nor remove thy stomach with the
Court; but thy credit shall command thy hearts desire, and all nouilties shall
be sent as presents unto thee.


Count. Good Sister, when you see your own time, will you return home.


Oria. Yes brother, and not before.


Laza. I will grow populer in this State, and overthrow the fortunes of a
number, that live by extortion.


Count. Lazarello, bestirre thy self nimbly and suddenly, and here me with
patience. to hear.


Laza. Let me not fall from my self; speak I am bound


Count. So art thou to revenge, when thou shall hear the fish head is gone,
and we know not whither.


Laz. I will not curse, nor swear, nor rage, nor rail,
Nor with contempteous tongue, accuse my Fate;
Though I might justly do it, nor will I
Wish my self uncreated for this evil:
Shall I entreat your Lordship to be seen
A little longer in the company
Of a man crossed by Fortune.

Count. I hate to leave my friend in his extremities.


Laza. It Is noble in you, then I take your hand,
And do protest, I do not follow this
For any malice, or for private ends,
But with a love, as gentle and as chaste,
As that a brother to his sister bears:
And if I see this fish head yet unknown,
The last words that my dying father spoke,
Before his eye-strings brake, shall not of me
So often be remembered, as our meeting,
Fortune attend me, as my ends are just,
Full of pure love, and free from servile lust.

Count. Farewell my Lord, I was entreated to inuit your Lordship to a Ladies
vpsitting.


Gond. O my ears, why Madame, will not you follow your brother, you are waited
for by great me^, heel bring you to him.


Oria. I Am very well my Lord, you do mistake me, if you think I affect greater
company then your self.


Gond. What madness possesses thee, that thou can imagine me a fit man to
entertain Ladies; I tell thee, I do use to tear their hair, to kick them,
and to twindge their noses, if they be not careful in avoiding me.


Oria. Your Lordship may descant upon your own behauior as please you, but I
protest, so sweet and courtly it appears in my eye, that I mean not to leave
you yet.


Gond. I shall grow rough.


Oria. A rough carriage is best in a man, I Will dine with you my Lord.


Gond. Why I will starve thee, thou shall have nothing.


Oria. I have heard of your Lordships nothing, I Will put that to the venture.


Gond. Well, thou shall have meat, I Will send it to thee.


Oria. I Will keep no state my Lord, neither do I mourn, I Will dine with you.


Gond. Is such a thing as this allowed to live:
What power has let thee loose upon the earth
To plague us for our sins? out of my doors.

Oria. I would your Lordship did but see how well
This fury does become you, it does show
So near the life, as it were natural.

Gond. O thou damned woman, I will fly the veangeance
That hangs above thee, follow if thou dare.

Exit Gondarino. Oria. I must not leave this fellow, I will torment him to
madness,
To teach his passions against kind to move,
The more he hates, the more I Will seem to love.

Exeunt Oriana and Maid. Enter Pandar and Mercer a citizen. Pand. Sir, what may
be done by art shall be done,
I wear not this black cloak for nothing.

Mer. Perform this, help me to this great heir by learning, and you shall
want no black cloakes, taffaties, silkegrogerams, sattins and veluets are
mine, they shall be yours; perform what you have promised, and you shall make me
a lover of Sciences, I will study the learned languages, and keep my
shop-booke in Latin.


Pand. Trouble me not now, I will not fail you within this hour at your shop.


Mer. Let Art have her course.


Exit Mercer. Enter Curtezan. Pand. It Is well spoken, Madona.


Mad. Have thou brought me any customers.


Pan. No.


Ma. What the devil do thou in black.


Pa. As all solemn professors of settled courses, do cover my knavery with it:
will you marry a citizen, reasonably rich, and unreasonably foolish, silks in
his shop, money in his purse, and no wit in his head?


Ma. Out upon him, I could have bin otherwise then so, there was a Knight swore
he would have had me, if I would have lent him but forty shillings to have
redeemed his cloak, to go to Church in.


Pan. Then your wastcoate wayter shall have him, call herin?


Ma. Francessina?


Fr. Anon?


Ma. Get you to the Church, and shriue your self,
For you shall be richly married anon.

Pan. And get you after her, I will work upon my citizen whilst he is warm, I
must nor suffer him to consult with his neighbors, the openest fools are
hardly cousened, if they once grow jealous.


Exeunt. Finis Actus secun.
ACTVS III. SCENA I.
Enter Gondarino flying the Lady. Gond. Save me ye better powers, let me not
fall
Between the loose embracements of a woman:
Heaven, if my sins be ripe grown to a head,
And must attend your vengeance: I beg not to divert my fate,
Or to repriue a while thy punishment
Only I crave, and hear me equal heavens,
Let not your furious rodd, that must afflict me,
Be that imperfect piece of nature,
That art makes up, woman, unsatiate woman.
Had we not knowing souls, at first infused
To teach a difference, twixt extremes and goods?
Were we not made ourselves, free, vnconfin'd
Commanders of our own affections:
And can it be, that this most perfect creature,
This image of his maker, well squared man,
Should leave the handfast, that he had of grace,
To fall into a woman's easy arms.

Enter Oriana. Orian. Now Venus be my speed, inspire me with all the several
subtle temptations, that thou have already given, or have in store hereafter
to bestow upon our sex: grant that I may apply that Physic that is most apt
to work upon him: whether he will soonest be moved with wantonness,
singing, dancing, or being passionate, with scorn, or with sad and serious
looks, cunningly mingled with sighs, with smiling, lisping, kissing the hand,
and making short cursies; or with whatsoever other nimble power, he may be
caught: do thou infuse into me, and when I have him, I will sacrifice him up
to thee.


Gond. It comes again; new apparitions,
And tempting spirits: Stand and reveal thy self,
Tell why thou followest me? I fear thee
As I fear the place thou camst from: Hell.

Orian. My Lord, I am a woman, and such a one --


Gond. That I hate truly, thou had better bin a devil. women.


Orian. Why my impatient Lord?


Gond. Devils were once good, there they excelled you


Orian Can ye be so uneasy, can ye freeze, and
Such a summers heat so ready
To dissolve, nay gentle Lord, turn not away in scorn,
Nor hold me less fair then I am: look on these checks,
They have yet enough of nature, true complexion,
If to be red and white, a forehead hie,
An easy melting lip, a speaking eye,
And such a tongue, whose language takes the ear
Of strict religion, and men most austere:
If these may hope to please, look here.

Gond. This woman with entreaty would show all,
Lady there lies your way, I pray ye farewell.

Orian. You Are yet to harsh, to dissonant.
There Is no true music in your words, my Lord.

Gond. What shall I give thee to be gone?
Hears ta, and tha wants lodging, take my house, it is big enough, it is shine
own, it will hold five lecherous Lords, and their lackies without discovery:
there is stoues and bathing tubbes.

Oria. Dear Lord: you are too wild.


Gond. Shat have a Doctor too, thou shat, 'bout six and twenty, it is a
pleasing age; or I can help thee to a handsome usher: or if thou lack'ft a
page, i will give thee one, preethe keep house, and leave me.


Oria. I do confess I am to easy, too much woman,
Not coy enough to take affection,
Yet I can frown and nip a passion
Even in the bud: I can say
Men please their present heates; Then please to leave us.
I can hold off, and by my Chimmick power
Draw Sonnets, from the melting lovers brain.
Aymees, and Elegies: yet to you my Lord
My Love, my better self, I put these off,
Doing that office, not befits our sex,
Entreat a man to love;
Are ye not yet relenting, ha'ye blood and Spirit
In those veins, ye are no Image, though ye be as hard.
As marble, sure ye have no liver, if ye had,
'T would send a lively and desiring heat
To every member; is not this miserable,
A thing so truly formd, shapt out by Symetry,
Has all the organs that belong to man,
And working to, yet to show all these
Like dead motions moving, upon wyers,
Then good my Lord, leave off what you have been,
And freely be what you were first intended for: a man.

Gond. Thou art a precious piece of sly damnation,
I will be deasfe, I will lock up my ears,
Tempt me not, I will not love; if I do,

Oria. Then i will hate you.


Gond. Let me be nointed with honey, and turned into the Sun,
To be stung to death with horse-flies,
Heart thou, thou breeder, here i will sit,
And in despite of thee I will say nothing.

Oria. Let me with your fair patience, sit beside you?


Gond. Maddam, Lady, tempter, tongue, woman, air,
Look to me, I shall kick; I say again,
Look to me I shall kick.

Oria. I cannot think your better knowledge can use a woman so uncivilly.


Gond. I cannot think, I shall become a coxcombe,
To have my hare curled, by an idle finger,
My cheeks turn Tabers, and be played upon,
Mine eyes looked babies in, and my nose blowd to my hand, mind
I say again I shall kick, sure I shall.

Oria. It Is but your outside that you show: I know your
Never was guilty of so great a weakness,
Or could the tongues of all men joined together
Possess me with a thought of your dislike
My weakness were above a woman's, to fall off
From my affection, for one crack of thunder,
O would you could love my Lord.

Gond. I wod thou would sit still, and say nothing: what madman let thee
loose to do more mischief then a dousen whirlwinds, keep thy hands: in thy
muffe, and warm the idle worms in thy fingers ends will ye be doing still,
will no entreating serve ye, no lawful warning, I must remove and leave your
Ladyship; nay never hope to stay me, for I will run, from that Smooth,
Smiling, witching, Cousening, Tempting, Damning face of thine, as far as I
can find any land, where I will put my self into a daily course of Curses for
thee, and all thy Family.


Oriana. Nay good my Lord sit still, i will promise peace
And fould mine Arms up, let but mine eye discourse,
Or let my voice set to some pleasing cord, sound out
The sullen strains of my neglected love.

Gond. Sing till thou crack thy treble string in pieces,
And when thou have done, put up thy pipes and walk,
Do any thing, sit still and tempt me not.

Oria. I had rather sing at doors for bread, then sing to this fellow, but for
hate: if this should be told in the Court, that I begin to woe Lords, what a
troop of the untrust nobility should I have at my lodging tomorrow morning.

Come sleep, and with thy sweet deceiving,
Lock me in delight a while,
Let some pleasing Dreams beguile
All my fancies that from thence, Song.
I may feel an influence,
All my powers of care bereauing.
Though but a shadow, but a sliding,
Let me know some little Joy,
We that suffer long anoy
Are contented with a thought
Through an idle fancy wrought
O let my joys, have some abiding.

Gond. Have you done your wassayle, it is a handsome drowsy dittie i will assure
ye, now I had as leeue here a Carte cry, when her tail is cut off, as hear
these lamentations, these lousy loue-layes, these beway lements, you think
you have caught me Lady, you think I melt now, like a dish of May butter, and
run, all into brine, and passion, yes, yes, I am taken, look how I cross my
arms, look pale, and dwyndle, and wooed cry, but for spoiling my face, we
must part, nay we will avoid all Ceremony, no kissing Lady, I desire to know your
Ladyship no more; death of my soul the Duke.


Oria. God keep your Lordship.


Gond. From thee and all thy sex.


Oria. I Will be the Clarke and cry Amen,
Your Lordships ever assured enemy Oriana.

Exit Oriana, Manet Gondarino. ACTVS III SCENA II.
Enter Duke, Arrigo, Lucio. Gond. All the days good, attend your Lordship.


Duke. We thank you Gonderino, is it possible,
Can belief lay hold on such a miracle,
To see thee, one that has cloystred up all passion,
Turned wilful votary, and forsworn, converse with women in company and fair
discoure, with the best beauty of Myllaine?

Gone. It Is true, and if your Grace that has the sway
Of the whole State, will suffer this lewd sex,
These women, to pursew us to our homes,
Not to be praid, nor to be railed away,
But they will woe, and dance, and sing,
And in a manner, looser then they are
By nature (which should seem impossible)
To throw their arms, on our unwilling necks.

Duk. No more, I can see through your vissore, dissemble it no more,
Do not I know thou have used all Art,
To work upon the poor simplicity
Of this young Maid, that yet has known none ill?
Think that damnation will fright those that woo
From oaths, and lies? but yet I think her chaste,
And will from thee, before thou shall apply
Stronger temptations, bear her hence with me.

Gond. My Lord, I speak not this to gain new grace,
But howsoever you esteem my words,
My love and duty will not suffer me
To see you favor such a prostitute,
And I stand by dumb; without Rack, Torture,
Or Strappado, I Will vnrippe my self,
I do confess I was in company, with that pleasing piece of frailty, that we
call woman; I do confess after along and tedious seige, I yielded.

Duk. Forward.


Gond. Faith my Lord to come quickly to the point, the woman you saw with me is
a whore; an arrant whore.


Duk. Was she not Count Valores Sister?


Gond. Yes, that Count Valores Sister in naught.


Duk. Thou dare not say so.


Gond. Not, if it be distasting to your Lordship, but give me freedom, and I
dare maintain, she has embraced this body, and grown to it as close, as the
hot youthful vine to the elm.


Duk. Twice have I seen her with thee twice my thoghts were prompted by mine
eye, to hold thy strictness false and imposterous: is this your mewing up,
your strict retirement, your bitterness and gaul against that sex: have I not
heard thee say, thou would sooner meet the Basilisks dead doing eye, then
meet a woman for an object: look it be true you tell me, or by our countries
Saint your head goes off: if thou prove a whore, no woman's face shall ever move
me more.


Exeunt. Manent Gondarino. Gond. So, so, it is as it should be, are women grown
so mankind? Must they be wooing, I have a plot shall blow her up, she flies,
she mounts, I Will teach her Ladyship to dare my fury, I will be known and
feared, and more truly hated of women then an Eunuch. Enter Oriana. She Is here
again, good gaul be patient, for I must dissemble.


Oria. Now my cold frostie Lord, my woman Hater, you that have sworn an
everlasting hate to all our sex: by my troth good Lord, and as I am yet a maid,
my thought 'twas excellent sport to hear your honor swear out an Alphabet,
chafe nobly like a General, kick like a resty jade and make ill faces: Did
your good Honor think I was in love? where did I first begin to take that
heat? from those two radiant eyes, that piercing sight? oh they were lovely, if
the balls stood right; and there is a leg made out of a dainty staff, Where
the Gods be thanked, there is calfe enough.


Gond. Pardon him Lady that is now a conuertite,
Your beauty like a Saint has wrought this wonder.

Oriana. A less, has it been pricked at the heart, is the stomach come
down, will it rail no more at women, and call 'em Devils, she Cattes, and
Gobblins.


Gond. He that shall marry thee, had better spend the poor remainder of his
days in a Dung-barge, for two pence a week, and find himself: Down again
Spleen, I preethee down again, shall I find favor Lady? shall at length my
true unfeigned penetence get pardon for my harsh unseasoned follies? I am no
more an Athiest, no, I do acknowledge, that dread powrefull Deity, and his
all quickening heats, burn in my breast: oh be not as I was, hard, unrelenting;
but as I am, be partner of my Fires.


Oria. Sure we shall have store of Larkes, the Skies will not hold up long, I
should have looked as soon for frost in the dog days, or an other
Inundation, as hoped this strange conversion above miracle: let me look upon
your Lordship; is your name Gondarino, are you Millaines General, that great
Bug-beare bloodie-bones, at whose very name all women, from the Lady to the
Landresse, shake like a cold fit.


Gond. Good patience help me, this Fever will inrage my blood again: Maddam I
am that man; I am even he, that once did owe unreconciled hate to you, and all
that bear the name of woman: I am the man, that wronged your honor to the
Duke, I am he that said you were unchaste, and prostetute; yet I am he, that
dare deny all this.


Oria. Your big Nobility is very merry.


Gond. Lady it is true that I have wronged you thus,
And my Contrition is as true as that,
Yet have I found a means to make all good again,
I do beseech your beauty, not for my self,
My merrits are yet in conception,
But for your honors safety, and my zeal
Retire a while, whilst I unsay my self unto the Duke,
And cast out that evil Spirit, I have possessed him with,
I have a house conveniently private.

Ori. Lord, thou have wronged my innocence, but thy confession has gained thee
faith.


Gond. By the true honest service, that I owe those eyes, strangely,
My meaning is as spotles as my faith.

Oria. The Duke doubt mine honor? a may judge
'Twill not be long, before i will be enlarged again.

Gond. A day or two.


Orian. Mine own servants shall attend me.


Gond. Your Ladyships command is good.


Orian. Look you be true.


Exit Oriana Gond. EIse let me lose the hopes my soul aspires to: I will be a
scourge to all females in my life, and after my death, the name of Gondarino
shall be terrible to the mighty women of the earth; they shall shake at my
name, and at the sound of it, their knees shall knock together; and they shall
run into Nunneries, for they and I are beyond all hope irreconcilable: for if
I could endure an ear with a hole in it, or a pleated lock, or a bare-headed
Coachman, that sits like a sign, where great Ladies are to be sold within;
agreement betwixt us, were not to be despaired of; if I could be but brought
to endure to see women, I would have them come all once a week and kiss me,
where Witches do the devil in token of homage: I must not live here, I will to
the Court, and there pursue my plot; when it has took, women shall stand in
awe, but of my look.


Exit. ACTVS III. SCEN. III.
Enter two Intelligencers, discovering treason in the Courtiers words. 1.
Intel. There take your standing, be close and vigila^t, here will I set my
self, and let him look to his language, a shall know the Duke has more ears
in Court than two.


2. Int. I Will quote him to a tittle, let him speak wisely, and plainly, and as
hidden as a can, or I shall crush him, a shall not escape charracters, though a
speak Babel, I shall crush him: we have a Fortune by this service hanging over
us, that within this year or two, I hope we shall be called to be examiners,
wear politic gowns guarded with copper lace, making great faces full of
fear and office, our labors may deserve this.


1. Int. I hope it shall: why has not many men bin raised from this worming
trade, first to gain good access to great men, then to have commissions out
for search, and lastly, to be worthily named at a great Arraignment: yes, and
why not we? they that endeavor well deserve their Fee. Close, close, a comes:
mark well, and all goes well.


Enter Count, Lazarello, and his Boy. Laz. Farewell my hopes, my Anchor now is
broken,
Farewell my quondam joys, of which no token
Is now remaining, such is the sad mischance,
Where Lady Fortune leads the slippry dance.
Yet at the length, let me this favor have,
Give me my wishes, or a wished grave.

Count. The gods defend so brave and valiant mawe,
Should slip into the never satiate jawe
Of black Despair; no, thou shall live and know
Thy full desires, hunger thy ancient foe,
Shall be subdued, those guts that daily tumble
Through air and appetite, shall cease to rumble:
And thou shall now at length obtain thy dish,
That noble part, the sweet head of a fish.

Laz. Then am I greater then the Duke.


2. Int. There, there is a notable piece of treason, greater then the Duke,
mark that.


Count. But how, or where, or when this shall be compas'd, is yet out of my
reach.


Laz. I am so truly miserable, that might I be now knocked ath' head, with all
my heart I would forgive a dog killer.


Count. Yet do I see through this confusednes some little comfort.


La. The plot my Lord, as er'e you came of a woman discover.


1. Int. Plots, dangerous plots, I will deserve by this most liberally.


Count. It Is from my head again.


Laz. O that it would stand me, that I might fight, or have some venture for
it, that I might be turned loose, to try my Fortune amongst the whole fry in a
College, or an Inn of Court, or scra^ble with the prisoners in the dungeon;
nay were it set down in the owter court,

And all the Guard about it in a ring,
With their knives drawn, which were a dismal sight,
And after twenty leisurely were told,
I to be let loose, only in my shirt,
To try the valor, how much of the spoil,
I would recover from the enemies mouths:
I would accept the challenge.

Count. Let it go: have not thou been held
To have some wit in the Court, and to make fine jests
Upon country people in progress time, and
Will thou loose this opinion, for the cold head of a Fish?
I say, let it go: I Will help thee to as good a dish of meat.

Lazar. God let me not live, if I do not wonder
Men should talk so profanely:
But it is not in the power of loose words,
Of any vain or misbeleeuing man,
To make me dare to wrong thy purity,
Show me but any Lady in the Court,
That has so full an eye, so sweet a breath,
So soft and white a flesh: this does not lie
In almond gloves, nor ever has bin washed
In artificial bathes; no traveler
That has brought doctor home with him, has dared
With all his waters, powders, Fucusses,
To make thy lovely corpse sophisticate.

Count. I have it, it is now infused, be comforted.


Laz. Can there be that little hope yet left in nature? shall I once more erect
up Trophies? shall I enjoy the sight of my dear Saint, and bless my palate
with the best of creatures, ah good my Lord, by whom I breath again, shall I
receive this being?


Count. Sir, I have found by certain calculation, and settled revolution of the
stars, the Fish is sent by the Lord Gondarino to his Mercer, now it is a
growing hope to know where it is.


Laz. O it is far above the good of women, the Pathicke cannot yield more
pleasing tittylation.


Count. But how to compass it, search, east about, and bang your brains,
Lazarello, thou art to dull and heavy to deserve a blessing.


Laz. My Lord, I will not be idle; now Lazarello, think, think, think.


Count. Yonder Is my Informer
And his fellow with table books, they nod at me
Upon my life, they have poor Lazarello that beats
His brains about no such weighty matter, in for
Treason before this --

Laz. My Lord, what do you think, if I should shave my self, Put on midwiues
apparel, come in with a hand-kercher, And beg a piece for a great bellied
woman, or a sick child?


Count. Good, very good.


Laz. Or corrupt the waiting prentise to betray the reuersion.


1. Inte. There Is another point in's plot, corrupt with money to betray: sure
it is some Fort a means: mark, have a care.


Laz. And 'twere the bare vinegar it is eaten with, it would in some sort
satisfy nature: but might I once attain the dish it self, though I cut out
my means through swords and fire, through poison, through any thing that may
make good my hopes.


2. Int. Thanks to the gods, and our officiousnes, the plots discovered, fire,
steel, and poison, burn the Palace, kill the Duke, and poison his privy
Counsel.


Co. To the mercers, let me see: how if before we can attain the means, to make
up our acquaintance, the fish be eaten?


Laz. If it be eaten, here a sta^ds, that is the most dejected, most
unfortunate, miserable, accursed, forsaken slave, this Province yeeldes: I will
not sure outliue it, no I will die bravely, and like a Roman; and after death,
amidst the Elizian shades, I Will meet my love again.


1. In. I will die bravely, like a Roman: have a care, mark that: when he has
done all, he will kill himself.


Count. Will no thing ease your appetite but this?


Laz. No could the sea throw up his vastness, And offer free his best
inhabitants: 'twere not so much as a bare temptation to me.


Count. If you could be drawn to affect Beef, Venison, or Foul, two^ld be
far the better.


Laza. I do beseech your Lord^hips patience,
I do confess that in this heat of blood,
I have contemned all dull and grosser meats,
But I protest, I do honor a Chine of beef,
I do reverence a loyne of veale,
But good my Lord, give me leave a little to adore this:
But my good Lord, would your Lordship under color
of taking up some silks, go to the Mercers, I would in
all humility attend your honor, where we may be invited,
if Fortune stand propitious.

Count. Sir you shall work me as you please.


Laza. Let it be suddenly, I do beseech your Lordship, it is now upon the point
of dinner time.


Count. I am all yours.


Exeunt Lazarello and Count. 1. In. Come let us confer, Inprimis a says like
a blasphemous villain, he is greater the^ the Duke, this pepers him, and there
were nothing else.


2. In. Then a was naming plots; did ye not hear?


1. In. Yes but a fell from that, unto discovery, to corrupt by money, and so
attain.


2. In. I, I, a meant some Fort, or Syttadell the Duke has, his very face
betrayed his meaning, O he is a very subtle and a dangerous knave, but if a
deal a Gods name we shall worm him.


1. In. But now comes the Stroke, the fatal blow, Fire, sword, and Poison, O
Canibal, thou bloody Canibal.


2. In. What had become of this poor state, had not we been?


1. In. Faith it had lain buried in ^his own ashes; had not a greater hand
been in it.


2. In. But note the Rascals resolution, after th'acts done, because a would
avoid al fear of torture, and cosen the Law, a would kill himself? was there
ever the like danger, brought to light in this age? sure we shall merit much,
we shall be able to keep two men a piece, and a two hand sword between us, we
will live in favor of the State, betray our ten or twelve treasons a week,
and the people shall fear us: come, to the Lord Lucio, the Sun shall not go
down till a be hanged.


Exeunt. ACTVS 3. SCENA. 4.
Enter Mercer. Mer. Look to my shop, and if there come ever a Scholar in
black, let him speak with me, we that are shopkeepers in good trade, are so
pestered, that we can scarce pick out an hour for our mornings meditation: and
howsoever we are all accounted dull, and common jesting stocks, for your
gallants; there are some of us, do not diserue it: for for my own part, I do
begin to be given to my book, I love a scholar with my heart; for
questionles there are marvelous things to be done by Art: why sir, some of
the^ will tell you what is become of horses, and silver spones, and will make
wenches dance naked to their beds: I am yet unmarried, and because some of our
neighbors are said to be Cuckoldes, I will never marry without the consent of
some of these scholars, that know what will come of it.


Pan. Are you busy sir?


Enter Pandar. Mer. Never to you sir, nor to any of your coat. Sir is there
any thing to be done by Art, concerning the great heir we talked on?


Pan. Will she, will she? she shall come running into my house at the
farther corner, in Sa. Marks street, betwixt three and four.


Mer. Betwixt three and four? she is brave in clothes; is she not?


Pan. O rich! rich! where should I get clothes to dress her in? help me
invention: Sir, that her running through the street, may be less noted, my
Art more shown, and your fear to speak with her less, she shall come in a
white wastcote, And --


Mer. What shall she?


Pan. And perhaps torn stockings, she has left her old wount else.


Enter Prentise. Pren. Sir my Lord Gonde. has sent you a rare fish head.


Mer. It comes right, all things suit right with me, since I began to love
scholars, you shall have it home with you, against she come: carry it to this
Gentleman's house.


Pan. The fair white house at the farther Corner at S. Marks street, make
have, I must leave you too Sir. I have two hours to studdie; buy a new
Axidens, and plye your book, and you shall want nothing, that all the
scholars in the Town can do for you.


Exit Pandar. Mer. Heaven prosper both our studdies, what a dull slave was I,
before I fell in love with this learning? not worthy to tread upon the earth,
and what fresh hopes it ^ath put into me? I do hope within this twelve month,
to be able by Art, to serve the Court with silks, and not undo my self; to
trust knights, and yet get in my money again; to keep my wife brave, and yet
she keep no body else, so. Enter Count, and Lazarello. Your Lordship is most
honorably welcome, in regard of your Nobility, but most especially in regard
of your schollership: did your Lordship come openly?


Count. Sir this cloak keeps me private, besides no man will suspect me to
be in the company of this Gentleman, with whom, I will desire you to be
acquainted, he may prove a good customer to you.


Laza. For plain silks and veluets.


Mer. Are you scholasticall?


Laza. Something adicted to the Muses.


Count. I hope they will not dispute.


Mer. You have no skill in the black Art?


Enter a Pren. Pren. Sir yonder is a Gentleman, enquires hastily for Count Valor.


Count. For me? what is he?


Pren. One of your followers my Lord I think.


Count. Let him come in.


Mer. Shall I talk with you in private Sir?


Enter a Messenger with a Letter to the Count. he reads. Count. CountCome to
the Court, your business calls you thither, I will go, farewell Sir, i will see your
silks some other time: Farewell Lazarillo.


Mer. Will not your Lordshippe take a piece of Beef with me?


Count. Sir I have greater business then eating; I will leave this gentleman
with you.


Exeunt Count. and mes. Laza. No, no, no, no: now do I feel that straind
struggling within me, that I think I could prophecy.


Mer. The Gentleman is meditating.


Laza. Hunger, valor, Love, ambition, are alike pleasing, and let our
Philosophers say what they will, are one kind of heat, only hunger is the
safest, ambition is apt to fall; Love and valor are not free from dangers,
only hunger, begotten of some old limber Courtier, in pan'd hose, and nursed
by an Attorneys wife, now so thryuen, that he need not fear to be of the great
Turks guarde: is so free from al quarrels, and dangers, so full of hopes,
joys, and ticklings, that my life is not so dear to me, as his acquaintance.


Enter Lazarelloes Boy. Boy. Sir, the fish head is gone.


Laza. Then be thou henceforth dumb, with thy ill boding voice
Farewell Millaine, fare well noble Duke,
Farewell my fellow Courtiers all, with whom,
I have of yore made many a scrambling meal
In corners, behind Arasses, on stairs,
And in the action often times have spoild,
Our Dublets and our hose, with liquid stuff:
Farewell you lusty archers of the Guard,
To whom I now do give the bucklers up,
And never more with any of your coat
Will eat for wagers, now you happy be,
When this shall light upon you, think on me:
You Sewers, caruers, vshers of the Court
Surnamed gentle, for your fair demean,
Here I do take of you my last ferewell,
May you stand stiffly in your proper places,
And execute your offices aright.
Farewell you maidens, with your mother eke,
Ferewell you courtly Chaplains that be there,
All good attend you, may you never more
Marry your Patrons Ladies wayting-woman,
But may you raised be; by this my fall
May Lazarillo suffer for you all.

Merc. Sir, I was harkening to you.


Laz. I will hear nothing; I will break my knife, the ensign of my former
happy state, knock out my teeth, have them hung at a Barbers, and enter into
Religion.


Boy. Why Sir, I think, I know whether it is gone.


Laz. See the rashness of man in his nature; whither? whither? I do unsay ^^
that I have said, go on, go on: Boy, I humble my self and follow thee;
Farewell sir.


Mer. Not so Sir, you shall take a piece of Beef with me.


Laz. I cannot stay.


Mer. By my fay, but you shall Sir; in regard of your love to learning, and
your skill in the black Art.


Laz. I do hate learning, and I have no skill in the black Art; I would I had.


Mer. Why your desire is sufficient to me, you shall stay.


Laz. The most horrible, and detested curses that can be imagined; light upon
all the professors of that Art; may they be drunk, and when they go to
co^jure, and reele in the Circle, may the Spirits by them raised, tear am in
pieces, and hang their quarters on old broken walls, and Steeple tops.


Mer This speech of yours, shows you to have some skill in the Science,
wherefore in civility, I may not suffer you to depart empty.


Laz. My stomach is up, I cannot endure it, I will fight in this quarrel, as
soon as for my Prince. Room, make way: Draws his Rapier Hunger commands, my
valor must obey.


Exeunt Om. Finis Act. 3.
ACTVS IIII SCENA I.
Enter Count, and Arrigo. Count. Is the Duke private?


Arr. He is alone, but I think your Lordship may enter.


Exit Count. Enter Gondarino. Gond. Who Is with the Duke?


Arr. The Count is new gone in, but the Duke will come forth, before you can
be weary of waiting.


Gond. I will attend him here.


Arr. I must wait without the door.


Exit Arrigo Gond. Does he hope to clear his sister, she will come no more to
my house, to laugh at me: I have sent her to a habitation, where when she shall
be seen, it will set a gloss upon her name; yet upon my soul I have bestowed
her amongst the purest hearted creatures of her sex, and the freest from
dissimulation; for their deeds are all alike, only they dare speak, what the
rest think: the women of this age, if there be any degrees of comparison
amongst their sex, are worse then those of former times; for I have read of
women, of that truth, spirit, and constancy, that were they now living, I
should endure to see them: But I fear the writers of the time, belied them,
for how familiar a thing is it with the Poets of our age, to extol their
whores, which they call mistresses, with heavenly praises? but I thank their
furies, and their crazed brains, beyond belief: nay how many that would feign
seem serious, have dedicated grave works to ladies tooth-lesse, hollow ei'd,
their hair shedding, purple faced, their nails apparently coming off; and
the bridges of their noses broken down; and have called the^ the choice handy
works of nature, the patterns of perfection, and the wonderme^t of women. Our
women begin to swarm like Bees in Summer: as I came hither, there was no pair
of stayers, no entry, no lobbey, but was pestred with them: me thinks there
might be some course taken to destroy them.


Enter Arrigo, and an old deaf country gentlewoman suter to the Duke. Arrigo.
I do accept your money, walk here, and when the Duke comes out, you shall
have fit opportunity to deliver your petition to him.


Gentlew. I thank you heartily, I pray you who is he that walks there?


Arr. A Lord, and a Soldier, one in good favor with the Duke; if you could get
him to deliver your Petition --


Gentlew. What do you say Sir?


Arr. If you could get him to deliver your petition for you, or to second you,
'twere sure.


Gentlew. I hope I shall live to requite your kindness.


Arrig. You have already.


Exit Arrigo Gentlew. May it please your Lordship --


Gond. No, No.


Gentlew. To consider the estate --


Gond. No.


Gentlew. Of a poor oppressed Country Gentlewoman.


Gond. No, it does not please my Lordship.


Gentlew. First and foremost, I have had great injury, then I have been
brought up to the Town three times.


Gond. A pox on him, that brought thee to the Town.


Gentlew. I thank your good Lordship heartily; though I cannot hear well, I
know it grieves you; and here we have been delai'd, and sent down again,
and fetched up again, and sent down again, to my great charge: And now at
last they have fetched me up, and five of my daughters --


Gond. Enough to damn five worlds.


Gentlew. Handsome young women, though I say it, they are all without, if it
please your Lordship, I Will call them in.


Gond. Five women! how many of my senses should I have left me then? call in
five Devils first.

No, I will rather walk with thee alone,
And hear thy tedious tale of injury,
And give thee answers; whisper in thine ear,
And make thee understand; through thy French-hood:
And all this with tame patience.

Gentlew. I see your Lordship does believe, that they are without, and I
perceive you are much moved at our injury: here is a paper will tell you more.


Gond. A way.


Gentlew. It may be you had rather here me tell it viua voce, as they say.


Gond. O no, no, no, no, I have heard it before.


Gentlew. Then you have heard of enough injury, for a poor Gentlewoman to
receive.


Gond. Never, never, but that it troubles my conscience, to wish any good to
those women; I could afford them to be valiant, and able, that it might be no
disgrace for a Soldier to beat them.


Gentlew. I hope your Lordship will deliver my petition to his grace, and yoo
may tell him withal --


Gond. What, I will deliver any thing against my self, to be rid on thee.


Gentlew. That yesterday, about three a clock, in the after noone, I met my
adversary.


Gond. Give me thy paper, he can abide no long tales.


Gentlew. It Is very short my Lord, and I demanding of him --


Gond. I Will tell him that shall serve thy turn.


Gentlew. How?


Gond. I Will tell him that shall serve thy turn, be gone: man never does
remember how great his offenses are, till he do meet with one of you, that
plagues him for them: why should women only above all other creatures that were
created for the benefit of man, have the use of speech? or why should any deed
of theirs, done by their fleshly appetites, be disgraceful to their owners?
nay, why should not an act done by any beast I keep, against my consent,
disparage me as much as that of theirs?


Gentlew. Here Is some few Angels for your Lordship.


Gond. Again? yet more torments?


Gentlew. Indeed you shall have them.


Gond. Keep off.


Gentlew. A small gratuit for your kindness.


Gond. Hold away.


Gent. Why then I thank your Lordship, I Will gather the^ up again, and I Will be
sworn, it is the first money, that was refused, since I came to the court.


Gond. What can she devise to say more?


Gentlewo. Truly I would have willingly parted with them to your Lordship.


Gond. I believe it, I believe it.


Gentlew. But since it is thus --


Gond. More yet.


Gentlew. I will attend without, and expect an answer.


Gond. Do, begone, and thou shall expect, and have any thing, thou shall have
thy answer from him; and he were best to give thee a good one at first, for
thy deaf importunity, will conquer him too, in the end.


Gent. God bless your Lordship, and all that favor poor distressed country
gentlewoman.


Exit Gentlewoman. Gond. All the diseases of man, light upon them that do, and
upon me when I do; a week of such days, would either make me stark mad, or
tame me: yonder other woman that I have sure enough, shall answer for thy
sins: dare they incense me still, I will make them fear as much to be
ignorant of me and my moodes, as men are to be ignorant of the law they live
under. Who Is there? My blood grew cold, I began to fear my Suitors return; it is
the Duke.


Enter the Duke and the Count. Count. I know her chaste, though she be young and
free,
And is not of that forced behavior
That many others are, and that this Lord,
Out of the boundless malice to the sex,
Has thrown this scandal on her.

Gond. Fortune, befriended me against my will, with this good old country
gentlewoma^; I beseech your grace, to view favorably the petition of a wro^ged
gentlewoma^.


Duke. What Gondarino, are you become a petitioner for your enemies?


Gond. My Lord, they are no enemies of mine, I confess the better to cover my
deeds, which sometimes were loose enough, I pretended it, as it is wisdom, to
keep close our incontinencie; but since you have discovered me, I will no more
put on that vizar, but will as freely open all my thoughts to you, as to my
Confessor.


Duke. What say you to this?


Count. He that confesses, he did once dissemble,
I Will never trust his words, can you imagine
A maid, whose beauty could not suffer her
To live thus long vntempted, by the noblest,
Richest, and cunningst masters in that Art,
And yet has ever held a fair repute;
Could in one morning, and by him be brought,
To forget all her virtue, and turn whore?

Gond. I would I had some other talk in hand,
Then to accuse a sister to her brother;
Nor do I mean it for a public scandal,
Unless by urging me, you make it so.

Duke. I will read this at better leisure: Gondarino, where is the Lady?


Count. At his house.


Gond. No, she is departed thence.


Count. Whither?


Gond. Urge it not thus, or let me be excused,
If what I speak betray her chastity,
And both increase my sorrow, and your own.

Count. Fear me not so, if she deserve the fame
Which she has gotten, I would have it published,
Brand her my self, and whip her through the city:
I wish those of my blood that do offend,
Should be more strictly punished, then my foes.
Let it be proved.

Duke. Gondarino, thou shall prove it, or suffer worse then she should do.


Gond. Then pardon me, if I betray the faults
Of one, I love more dearly then my self,
Since opening hers, I shall betray mine own:
But I will bring you, where she now intends
Not to be virtuous: pride and wantonness,
That are true friends indeed, though no in show,
Have entered on her heart, there she does bath,
And sleeke her hair, and practice cunning looks,
To entertain me with; and has her thoughts
As full of lust, as ever you did think
Them full of modesty.

Duk. Gondarino, lead on, we will follow thee.


Exeunt. ACTVS IIII. SCEN. II.
Enter Pandar. Pan. Here hope I to meet my citizen, and here hopes he to meet
his scholar; I am sure I am grave enough, to his eyes, and knave enough to
deceive him: I am believed to conjure, raise storms, and devils, by whose
power I can do wonders; let him believe so still, belief hurts no man: I have
an honest black cloak, for my knauerie, and a General pardon for his
foolerie, from this present day, till the day of his Breaking. Is It not a
misery, and the greatest of our age, to see a handsome, young, fair enough,
and well mounted wench, humble her self, in an old stammell petticoate,
standing possessed of no more fringe then the street can allow her: her upper
parts so poor and wanting, that ye may see her bones through her bodies:
shoes she would have, if her captain were come over, and is content the while
to deuote her self to antie^t slippers. These premises well considered,
gentlemen will move, they make me melt I promise ye, they stir me much; and
were it not for my smooth, soft, silken Citizen, I would quit this transitory
trade, get me an everlasting robe, fear up my conscience, and turn Serieant.
But here a comes, is mine as good as prize: Sir Pandarus be my speed, ye are
most fitly met sir.


Enter Mercer. Mercer. And you as well encountered, what of this heir? has your
books been propitious?


Pan. Sir, it is done, she is come, she is in my house, make your self apt for
Courtship, stroke up your stockings, loose not an inch of your legs
goodness; I am sure ye wear sockes.


Merc. There your books fail ye Sir, in truth I wear no sockes.


Pand. I would ye had Sir, it were the sweeter grace for your legs; get on
your gloves, are they perfumed?


Merc. A pretty wash I Will assure you.


Pand. 'Twill serve: your offers must be full of bounty, veluets to furnish a
gown, silks for petticoats and foreparts, shag for linings; forget not some
pretty jewel to fasten, after some little complement: if she deny this
courtesy, double your bounties, be not wanting in abundance, fullness of
guiftes, linckt with a pleasing tongue, will win an Anchorite. Sir, ye are
my friend, and friend to all that professes good letters; I must not use this
office else, it fits not for a scholar, and a gentleman: those stockings are
of Naples, they are silk?


Merc. Ye are again beside your text; sir, they are a the best of wool, and
they cleeped jersey.


Pan. Sure they are very dear?


Merc. Nine shillings, by my love to learning.


Pan. Pardon my judgment, we scholars use no other objects, but their books.


Mercer. There is one thing entombed in that grave breast, that makes me
equally admire it with your schollership.


Pan. Sir, but that in modesty I am bound not to affect mine own commendation,
I would inquire it of you?


Merc. Sure you are very honest, and yet ye have a kind of modest fear to
show it: do not deny it, that face of yours, is a worthy learned modest face.


Pan. Sir, I can blush.


Mer. Virtue and Grace are always paird together: but I will leave to stir
your blood Sir, and now to our business.


Pan. Forget not my instructions.


Mer. I apprehend ye Sir, I will gather my self together, with my best
phrases, and so I shall discourse in some sort takingly.


Pan. This was well worded Sir, and like a Scholar.


Mer. The Muses favor me as my entents are virtuous; Sir ye shall be my tutor,
it is never to late Sir to love learning: when I can once speak true latin --


Pan. What do you intend Sir?


Mer. Marry I will then beggar all your Bawdy writers, and undertake at the
perrill of my own invention, all Pageants, poesies for Chimnies, Speeches for
the Dukes entertainment, whenever and whatsoever; nay I will build at mine
own charge, an Hospital, to which shall retyer, all diseased opinions, all
broken Poets, all Prose-men that are fallen from small sense, to mere letters;
and it shall be lawful, for a Lawyer, if he be a civil man, though a have
undone others and himself by the language; to retire to this poor life, and
learn to be honest.


Pan. Sir ye are very good, and very charitable: ye are a true pattern for the
City Sir.


Mer. Sir, I do know sufficiently their shop-bookes cannot save them, there is
a further end --


Pan. Oh: Sir much may be done by manescript.


Mer. I do confess it Sir, provided still they be canonicoll, and have some
worthy hands set to vm for probation: but we forget our selves.


Pan. Sir enter when you please, and all good language typpe your tongue.


Mer. All that love learning pray for my good success.


Exit Mercer. ACTVS IIII SCENA III.
Enter Lazarello and his Boy. Laz. Boy, where abouts are we?


Boy. Sir by all tokens this is the house, bawdy I am sure by the broken
windows, the fish head is within, if ye dare venture, here you may surprise it.


Laza. The misery of man may fitly be compared to a Didapper, who when she
is under water past our sight, and indeed can seem no more to us, rises
again, shakes but her self, and is the same she was; so is it still with
transsitorie man, this day: oh but an hour since, and I was mighty, mighty in
knowledge, mighty in my hopes, mighty in blessed means, and was so truly
happy, that I durst a said, live Lazarello, and be satisfied: but now --


Boy. Sir ye are yet a flote and may recover, be not your own wrack, here
lies the harbor, go in and ride at ease.


Laza. Boy I am received to be a Gentleman, a Courtier, and a man of Action,
modest, and wise, and be it spoken with thy reverence Child, abounding
vertous; and would thou have a man of these choice habits, covet the cover
of a baudy house? yet if I go not in, I am but --


Boy. But what Sir?


Laza. Dust boy, but dust, and my soul unsatisfied shall haunt the keepers of
my blessed Saint, and I will appear.


Boy. An Ass to all men; Sir these are no means, to stay your appetite, you
must resolve to enter.


Laza. Were not the house subject to Martial law --


Boy. If that be all, Sir ye may enter, for ye can know nothing here, that the
Court is ignorant of, only the more eyes shall look upon ye, for there they
winck one at another faults.


Laza. If I do not,


Boy. Then ye must beat fairly back again, fall to your physical mess of
porridge, and the twice sacked carease of a Capon, Fortune may favor you so
much, to send the bread to it: but 'its a mere venture, and money may be put
out upon it.


Laza. I will go in and live; pretend some love to the gentlewoman, screw my
self in affection, and so be satisfied.


Pan. This fly is caught, is masht already, I will suck him, and lay him by.


Boy. Muffle your self in your cloak by any means, it is a received thing
among gallants, to walk to their leacherie, as though they had the rhume,
'twas well you brought not your horse.


Laza. Why boy?


Boy. Faith Sir it is the fashion of our gentry, to have their horses wait at
door like men, while the beasts their masters, are within at rack and
mainger, 'twould have discovered much.


Laza. I will lay by these habits, forms, and grave respects of what I am, and
be my self; only my appetite, my fire, my soul, my being, my dear appetite
shall go along with me, armed with whose strength, I fear les will attempt the
greatest danger dare oppose my fury: I am resolved where ever that thou art,
most sacred dish, hid from vnhollowed eyes, to find thee out.

Be thou in hell, raped by Proserpina,
To be a Rival in black Plutoes love:
Or moves thou in the heavens, a form divine:
Lashing the lazy Spheres:
Or if thou be returned to thy first being,
Thy mother Sea, there will I seek thee forth,
Earth, Air, nor Fire,
Nor the black shades below, shall bar my sight,
So daring is my powerful appetite.

Boy. Sir, you may save this long voyage, and take a shorter cut, you have
forgot your self, the fish head's here, your own imaginations have made you
mad.


Laza. Term it a jealous fu^ie good my boy.


Boy. Faith Sir term it what you will, you must use other terms ere you can
get it.


Laza. The looks of my sweet love are fair, Fresh and feeding as the Air.


Boy. Sir, you forget your self.


Laz. Was never seen so rare a head, Of any Fish alive or dead.


Boy. Good Sir remember, this is the house Sir.


Laz. Cursed be he that dare not venture.


Boy. Pity your self sir, and leave this fury.


Laz. For such a prize, and so I enter.


Exit Lazarello, and Boy. Pan. Dun's in the mire, get out again how a can: My
honest gallant, I Will show you one trick more Then ere the fool your father
dreamd of yet. Madona Iulia?


Enter Madona Iulia, a whore. Iulia. What news my sweet rogue, my dear sins
broker, what? good news?


Pan. There is a kind of ignorant thing, much like a Courtier, now gone in.


Iul. Is a gallant?


Pan. A shines not very gloriously, nor does a wear one skin perfumed to
keep the the other sweet; his coat is not in or, nor does the world run yet on
wheels with him; is rich enough, and has a small thing follows him, like to a
boat tied to a tall ships tail: give him entertainment, be light and flashing
like a Meteor, hug him about the neck, give him a kiss, and lisping cry,
good Sir; and is thine own, as fast as a were tied to thine arms, by
Indentures.


Iul. I dare do more then this, if a be a the true Court cut; I Will take him
out a lesson worth the learning: but we are but their Apes; what is he worth?


Pan. Be he rich, or poor, if he will take thee with him, thou may use thy
trade free from Constables, and Marshals: who has bin here since I went out?


Iul. There is a gentlewoman sent hither by a Lord, she is a piece of dainty
stuff my rogue, smooth, and soft, as new Satin; she was never gumb'd yet
boy, nor fretted.


Pan. Where lies she?


Iul. She lies above, toward the street, not to be spoke with, but by the
Lord that sent her, or some from him, we have in charge from his servants.


Pan. Peace, a comes out again upon discovery; up with all your canuas, hale
him in; and when thou have done, clap him a board bravely, my valiant Pinnace.


Iul. Be gone, I shall do reason with him.


Laz. Are you the special beauty of this house?


Iul. Sir, you have given it a more special regard by your good language, then
these black brows can merit.


Laz. Lady you are fair.


Iul. Fair sir? I thank ye; all the poor means I have left to be thought
grateful, is but a kiss, and ye shall have it Sir.


Laz. Ye have a very moving lip.


Iul. Prove it again Sir, it may be your sense was set too high, and so over
wrought it self.


Laz. It Is still the same: how far may ye hold the time to be spent Lady?


Iul. Four a clock sir.


Laz. I have not eat to day.


Iul. You will have the better stomach to your supper; in the mean time, I Will
feed ye with delight.


Laz. It Is not so good upon am empty stomach: if it might be without the
trouble of your house, I would eat?


Iul. Sir, we can have a Capon ready.


Laz. The day?


Iul. It Is Friday Sir.


Laz. I do eat little flesh upon these days.


Iul. Come sweet, ye shall not think on meat; I Will drow^ it with a better
appetite.


Laz. I feel it work more strangely, I must eat.


Iul. It Is now too late to send; I say ye shall not think on meat: if ye do,
by this kiss I Will be angry.


Laz. I could be far more sprightfull, had I eaten, and more lasting.


Iul. What will ye have Sir? name but the Fish, my maid shall bring it, if it
may be got.


Laz. Me thinks your house should not be so unfurnished, as not to have some
pretty modicum?


Iul. It is so now: but could ye stay till supper?


Laz. Sure I have offended highly and much, and my inflictions make it
manifest, I will retire henceforth, and keep my chamber, live privately, and die
forgotten.


Iul. Sir I must crave your pardon, I had forgot my self; I have a dish of
meat within, and it is fish, I think this Dukedom holds not a daintier: it is
an Vmbranoes head.


Laz. Lady, this kiss is yours, and this.


Iul. Hoe? within there? cover the board, and set the fish head on it.


Laz. Now am I so truly happy, so much above all fate and fortune, that I
should despise that man, durst say, Remember Laz^rello, thou art mortal.


Enter Intelligencers with a Guard. 2. Int. This is the villain, lay hands on
him.


Laz. Gentlemen, why am I thus entreated? what is the nature of my crime?


2. Int. Sir, though you have carried it a great while privately, and (as you
think) well; yet we have seen your Sir, and we do know thee Lazarello, for a
traitor.


Laz. The gods defend our Duke.


2. Int. Amen. Sir, Sir, this cannot save that stiff neck from the halter.


Iul. Gentlemen, I am glad you have discovered him, a should not have eaten
under my roof for twenty pou^ds; and surely I did not like him, when a called
for Fish.


Laz. My friends, will ye let me have that little favor --


1. Int. Sir, ye shall have law, and nothing else.


Laz. To let me stay the eating of a bit or two, for I protest I am yet fasting?


Iul. I Will have no traitor come within my house.


Lazar. Now could I wish my self, I had been Traitor, I have strength enough
for to endure it, had I but patience: Man thou art but grass, thou art a
bubble, and thou must perish.

Then lead along, I am prepared for all.
Since I have lost my hopes, welcome my fall.

2. Int. Away sir.


Laz. As thou have hope of man, stay but this dish this two hours, I doubt not
but I shall be discharged: by this light I will marry thee.


Iul. You shall marry me first then?


Laz. I do contract my self unto thee now, before these gentlemen.


Iul. I Will preserve it till you be hanged, or quitted.


Laz. Thanks, thanks.


2. Int. Away, away, you shall thank her at the gallows.


Laz. Adieu, adieu.


Exeunt Lazar. 2. Intell. and Guard. Iul. If he live, I Will have him; if he be
hanged, there is no loss in it.


Exit. Enter Oriana and her waiting woman: look out at a window. Orian. Have
thou provided one to bear my letter to my brother?


Wait. I have inquired, but they of the house will suffer no letter nor message
to be carried from you, but such as the Lord Gondarino shall be acquainted
with: Truly Madam, I suspect the house to be no better then it should be.


Orian. What do thou doubt?


Wait. Faith, I am loath to tell it Madam.


Oria. Out with it, it is not true modesty to fear to speak that thou do
think.


Wait. I think it be one of these same bawdy houses.


Oria. It Is no matter wench, we are warm in it; keep thou thy mind pure,
and upon my word, that name will do thee no hurt: I cannot force my self yet
to fear any thing; when I do get out, I Will have another encounter with my Woman
Hater. Here will I sit, I may get sight of some of my friends, it must needs
be a comfort to them to see me here.


Enter Duke, Gondarino, Count, Arrigo. Gond. Are we all sufficiently
disguised? for this house where she attendes me, is not to be visited in our
own shapes.


Duke. We are not our selves.


Arri. I know the house to be sinful enough, yet I have bin heretofore, and
durst now, but for discovering of you, appear here in my own likeness.


Duke. Where Is Lucio?


Arri. My Lord, he said, the affairs of the Commonwealth, would not suffer him
to attend always.


Duk. Some great ones questionless that he will handle.


Count. Come, let us enter?


Gond. See how Fortune strives, to revenge my quarrel upon these women, she is
in the window, were it not to undo her, I should not look upon her.


Duk. Lead us. Gondarino.


Gond. Stay, since you force me to display my shame,
Look there, and you my Lord, know you that face?

Duk. It Is she?


Count. It is.


Gond. It Is she, whose greatest virtue ever was
Dissimulation, she that still has strove
More to sin cunningly then to avoid it:
She that has ever sought to be accounted
Most virtuous, when she did deserve most scandale:
It Is she that itches now, and in the height
Of her intemperat thoughts, with greedy eyes
Expects my coming to allay her lust:
Leave her, forget she is thy sister.

Count. Stay, stay.


Duke. I am as full of this, as thou can be,
The memory of this will easily
Hereafter stay my loose and wandering thoughts
From any woman.

Count. This will not down with me, I dare not trust this fellow.


Duke. Leave her here, that only shall be her punishment, never to be fetched
from hence; but let her use her trade to get her living.


Count. Stay, good my Lord, I do believe all this, as great men as I have had
known whores to their sisters, and have laughed at it, I would feign hear how
she talks, since she grew thus light: will your grace make him show himself
to her, as if he were now come to satisfy her longing? whilst we unseen of
her, ouer-heare her wantonness, let us make our best of it now we shall have good
mirth.


Duk. Do it Gondarino.


Gond. I must; fortune assist me but this once.


Count. Here we shall stand unseen, and near enough.


Gond. Madame, Oriana.


Oria. Whose that? O! my Lord?


Gond. Shall I come up?


Oria. O you are merry, shall I come down?


Gond. It is better there.


Ori. What is the confession of the lie you made to the Duke, which I scarce
believe yet you had impudence enough to do? did not gain you so much faith
with me, as that I was willing to be at your Lo. bestowing, till you had
recovered my credit, and confessed your self a liar, as you pretended to do? I
confess I began to fear you, and desired to be out of your house, but your
own followers forced me hither.


Gond. It Is well suspected, dissemble still, for there are some may hear us.


Ori. More tricks yet, my Lord? what house this is I know not, I only know my
self, it were a great conquest if you could fasten a scandale upon me: 'fayth
my Lord, give me leave to write to my brother?


Duk. Come down.


Count. Come down.


Arr. If it please your grace there is a back door.


Count. Come meet us there then?


Duk. It seems you are acquainted with the house.


Arr. I have bin in it.


Gond. She saw you, and dissembled.


Duke. Sir, we shall know that better.


Gond. Bring me unto her, if I prove her not
To be a strumpet, let me be contemned
Of all her sex.

Exeunt. Finis Act. 4.
ACTVS V. SCENA I.
Enter Lucio. Lu. Now whilst the young Duke follows his delights,
We that do mean to practice in the State,
Must pick our times, and set our faces in,
And nod our heads, as it may prove most fit
For the maine good of the dear Commonwealth:
Whose within there?

Enter a Servant. Seru. My Lord?


Luc. Secretary, fetch the gown I use to read petitions in, and the standish I
answer French Letters with, and call in the gentleman that attends: Exit Seru.

Little know they that do not deal in State,
How many things there are to be observed,
Which seem but little; yet by one of us
(Whose brains do wind about the Commonwealth)
Neglected, cracks our credits utterly. Enter Gentleman and a seru.
Sir, but that I do presume upon your secrecy,
I would not have appeared to you thus ignorantly attir'de without a
tooth-picke in a ribban, or a ring in my bandstrings.


Gent. Your Lordship sent for me?


Luc. I did: Sir your long practice in the state under a great man has led you
to much experience.


Gent. My Lord.


Luc. Suffer not your modesty to excuse it, in short and in private I desire
your direction, I take my study already to be furnished after a grave and wise
method.


Gent. What will this Lord do?


Lu. My book-strings are suitable and of a reaching color.


Gent. How Is this?


Lucio. My Standish of Wood strange and sweet, and my fore-flap hangs in the
right place, and as near Machiauels, as can be gathered by tradition.


Gent. Are there such men as will say nothing abroad. and play the fools in
their lodgings? this Lord must be followed: and has your Lordship some new
made words to scatter in your speeches in public, to gain note, that the
hearers may carry them away, and dispute of them at dinner?


Luc. I have Sir: and besides my several gowns and caps agreeable to my
several occasions.


Gent. It Is well, and you have learned to write a bad hand, that the Readers may
take pains for it.


Luc. Yes sir: and I give out I have the palsy.


Gent. Good, 'twere better though, if you had it, your Lo. has a Secretary,
that can write fair, when you purpose to be understood.


Luc. Faith sir I have one, there he stands, he has bin my secretary this 7.
years, but he has forgotten to write.


Gent. If he can make a writing face, it is not amiss, so he keep his own
counsel: your Lo. has no hope of the gout?


Luc. Vh, little sir, since the pain in my right foot left me.


Genesis 'Twill be some scandale to your wisdom, though I see your Lo. knows
enough in public business.


Luc. I am not imploy'de (though to my desert) in occasion foreign, nor
frequented for matters domestical.


Gent. Not frequented? what course takes your Lordship?


Luc. The readiest way, my door stands wide, my Secretary knows I am not
denied to any.


Gent. In this (give me leave) your Lordship is out of the way: make a back
door to let out Intelligencers; seem to be ever busy, and put your door under
keepers, and you shall have a troop of clients sweating to come at you.


Luc. I have a back-dore already, I will henceforth be busy, secretary run and
keep the door.


Exit Secretary. Gent. This will fetch am?


Luc. I hope so.


Enter Secretary. Secr. My Lord, there are some require access to you about
weighty affairs of state.


Luci. All ready.


Gent. I told you so.


Luci. How weighty is the business.


Secr. Treason my Lord.


Luci. Sir, my debts to you for this are great.


Gent. I will leave your Lordship now.


Luci. Sir my death must be sudaine, if I requite you not; at the back door
good Sir.


Gant. I will be your Lordships intelligencer for once.


Exit Gentleman, Enter Secretary. Secr. My Lord.


Luci. Let'am in, and say I am at my study.


Enter Lazarello, and two Intelligensers. Lucio being at his study. 1. In.
Where is your Lord?


Secr. At his study, but he will have you brought in.


Laza. Why Gentlemen, what will you charge me withal?


2. In. Treason, horrible treason, I hope to have the leading of thee to
prison, and prick thee on 'ith arse with a halbert: to have him heng'd that
salutes thee, and call all those in question, that spit not upon thee.


Laza. My thread is spunne, yet might I but call for this dish of meat at the
gallous, in stead of a Psalm, it were to be endured: the Curtain opens, now
my end draws on.


Secretary draws the curtain. Luci. Gentlemen I am not empty of weighty
occasions at this time; I pray you your business.


1. In. My Lord, I think we have discovered one of the most blodie Traitors,
that ever the world held.


Luci. Signior Lazarillo, I am glad ye'are one of this discovery, give me your
hand.


2. In. My Lord that is the Traitor.


Luci. Keep him off, I would not for my whole estate have touched him.


Laz. My Lord.


Luci. Peace Sir, I know the devil is at your tongues end, to furnish you with
speeches? what are the particulars? you charge him with. They deliver a paper
to Lucio, who reads.


both In. We have conferred our notes, and have extracted that, which we will
justify upon our oaths.


Lucio. That he would be greater then the Duke, that he had cast plots for
this, and meant to corrupt some to betray him, that he would burn the City,
kill the Duke, and poison the privy Council; and lastly kill himself. Though
thou deseru'st justly to be hanged, with silence yet I allow thee to speak,
be short.


Laza. My Lord, so many my greatest wish succeed,
So may I live, and compass what I seek,
As I had never treason in my thoughts,
Nor ever did conspire the overthrow
Of any creatures, but of brutish beasts,
Fowls, Fishes, and such other human food
As is provided for the good of man,
If stealing Custards, Tarts, and Florentines
By some late Statute be created treason;
How many fellow Courtiers can I bring,
Whose long attendance, and experience,
Has made them deeper in the plot then I.

Luci. Peace, such has ever been the clemency of my gracious master the
Duke, in all his proceedings, that I had thought, and thought I had thought
rightly; that malice would long ere this, have hid her self in her den, and
have turned her own sting against her own heart: but I well now perceive;
that so forward is the disposition of a depraved nature; that it does not only
seek revenge, where it has received injuries; but many times thirst after
their destruction, where it has met with benefits.


Laz. But my good Lord --


2. In. Lets gagge him.


Luci. Peace again, but many times thirst after destruction, where it has met
with benefits; there I left: Such, and no better are the business, that we have
now in hand.


1. In. He Is excellently spoken.


2. In. He Will wind a Tratour I warrant him.


Luci. But surely me thinks, setting aside the touch of Conscience, and all
other inward convulsions.


2. In. He Will be hanged, I know by that word.


Laza. Your Lordship may consider --


Luci. Hold thy peace: thou can not answer this speech: no Tratour can
answer it: but because you cannot answer this speech; I take it you have
confessed the Treason.


1. In. The Count Valor was the first that discovered him, and can witness it,
but he left the matter to your Lordships grave consideration.


Luci. I thank his Lordship, carry him away speedily to the Duke.


Laza. Now Lazarillo thou are tumbled down
The hill of Fortune, with a violent arm;
All plagues that can be, Famine, and the sword
Will light upon thee, black despair will boil
In thy dispairing breast, no comfort by,
Thy Friends far off, thy enemies are nie.

Luci. Away with him, I Will follow you, look you pynion him, and take his money
from hurt, least he swallow a shilling and kill himself.


2. In. Get then on before.


Exeunt. ACTVS 5. SCENA. 3.
Enter the Duke, the Count, Gondarino, and Arrigo. Duke. Now Gondarino, what
can you put on now
That may again deceive us,
Have ye more strange illusions, yet more mists,
Through which the weak eye may beled to error:
What can ye say that may do satisfaction
Both for her wronged honor, and your ill?

Gond. All I can say or may is said already,
She is unchaste, or else I have no knowledge,
I do not breath, nor have the use of sense.

Duke. Dare ye be yet so wilful, ignorant,
Of your own nakedness, did not your servants
In mine own hearing confess
They brought her to that house, we found her in;
Almost by force: and with a great distrust
Of some ensuing hazard.

Count. He that has begun so worthily,
It fits not with his resolution
To leave of thus: my Lord I know these are but idle proves.
What says your Lordship to them?

Gond. Count, I dare yet pronounce again, thy Sister is not honest.


Coun. You are your self my Lord, I like your setel'dnes.


Gond. Count thou art young, and unexperienced, in the dark hidden ways of
women. Thou dare affirm with confidence a Lady of fifteen may be a maid.


Cont. Sir if it were not so, I have a Sister would set near my heart.


Gond. Let her sit near her shame, it better fits her: call back the blood
that made our stream in neerenesse, and turn the Current to a better use,
it is too much mudded, I do grieve to know it.


Duke. Dare thou make up again, dare to turn face, knowing we know thee,
have thou not been discovered openly: did not our ears hear her deny thy
courtings? did we not see her blush with modest anger, to be so overtaken by a
trick; can ye deny this Lord?


Gond. Had not your Grace, and her kind brother
Been within level of her eye,
You should have had a hotter volley from her
More full of blood and fire, ready to leap the window, where she stood.
So truly sensual is her appetite,

Duke. Sir, Sir, these are but words and tricks, give me the proof.


Count. What need a better proof then your Lordship, I am sure ye have lain
with her my Lord.


Gond. I have confessed it Sir.


Duke. I dare not give thee credit without witness.


Gond. Does your Grace think, we carry seconds, with us, to search us, and
see fair play: your Grace has been ill tutord in the business; but if you
hope to try her truly, and satisfy your self what frailty is, give he the
Test: do not remember Count she is your Sister; nor let my Lord the Duke
believe she is fair; but put her too'it without hope or pity, then ye
shall see that goulden form fly off, that all eyes wonder at for pure and
fixed, and under it, base blushing copper; metal not worth the meanest honor:
you shall behold her then my Lord Transparent, look through her heart, and
veiw the spirits how they leap, and tell me then, I did belie the Lady.


Duke. It shall be done: come Gondarino bear us company,
We do believe thee she shall die, and thou shall see it.
Enter Lazarello, 2. Intelligensers, and Guard. How now my friends, whom have
ye guarded hither.

2. In. So please your Grace we have discovered a a villain and a Traitor:
the Lord Lucio has examined him, and sent him to your Grace for Judgment.


Count. My Lord, I dare absoule him from all sin of Treason: I know his most
ambitions is but a dish of meat; which a'hath hunted, with so true a sent,
that he deserves the Collar, not the Halter.


Duke. Why do they bring him thus bound up? the poor man had more need of
some warm meat, to comfort his cold stomach.


Count. Your grace shall have the cause hereafter, when when you may laugh more
freely. But these are called Informers: men that live by Treason; as
Rat-chatchers do by poison.


Du. ^^^ld there were no heavier prodigies hung over us, then this poor
fellow, I durst redeem all perils ready to power themselves upon this state,
with a cold Custard.


Cou. Your grace might do it, without danger toy our person.


Laza. My Lord, if ever I intended Treason against your person, or the state,
unless it were by wishing from your Table, some dish of meat; which I must
needs confess, was not a subjects part: or coveting by stealth, supp^ from
those noble bottles, that no mouth keeping allegiance true, should dare to
taste: I must confess with more then covetous eyes, I have be held those dear
concealed dishes, that have been brought in, by cunning equipage, to wait upon
your graces palate: I do confess out of this present heat, I have had
stratagemes, and ambuscadoes: but God be thanked they have never took.


Duke. Count, this business is your own; when you have done, repair to us.


Exit Duke. Coun. I will attend your grace: Lazarello, you are at liberty, be
your own man again; and if ye can be master of your wishes, I wish it may be
so.


Laz. I humbly thank your Lordship: I must be unmannerly, I have some present
business, once more I heartily thank your Lordship.


Exit Lazarillo. Count. Now even a word or two to you, and so farewell; you
think you have deserved much of this state, by this discovery: y' are a
slavish people, grown subject to the common course of all men. How much
unhappy were that noble spirit, could work by such baser gains? what misery
would not a knowing man put on, with willingness, ere he see him self grown
fat and full fed, by fall of those you rise by? I do discharge ye my
attendance; our healthful state needs no such Leeches to suck out her blood.


1 Intel. I do beseech your Lordship.


2 Int. Good my L.


Count. Go learn to be more honest, when I see you work your means from
honest industry, Exeunt Informers.
I will be willing to accept your labors:
Till then I will keep back my promised favors:
Here comes an other remnant of folly: Enter Lucio.
I must dispatch him too. Now Lord Lucio, what business bring you hither?


Lucio. Faith Sir, I am discovering what will become of that notable piece of
Treason, intended by that varlet Lazarello; I have sent him to the Duke for
judgment.


Count. Sir you have performed the part of a most careful statesman, and let
me say it to your face, Sir of a Father to this state: I would wish you to
retire, and insconce your self in study: for such is your daily labor, and
our fear, that the loss of an hour may breed our overthrow.


Lucio. Sir I will be commanded by your judgment, and though I find it a
trouble scant to be waded through, by these weak years, yet for the dear
care of the Commonwealth, I will bruise my brains, and co^fine my self to
much vexation.


Count. Go, and may thou knock down Treason like an Ox.


Lucio. Amen.


Exeunt. Enter Mercer, Pander, Francisina. Mer. Have I spoke thus much in the
honor of learning? learned the names of the seven liberal Sciences, before my
marriage; and since, have in have written Epistles congratulary, to the ^9.
Muses: and is she proved a whore and a Beggar?


Pan. It Is true, you are not now to be taught, that no man can be learned of a
sudden; let not your first project discourage you, what you have lost in
this, you may get again in Alcumie.


Fran. Fear not husband, I hope to make as good a wife, as the best of your
neighbors have, and as honest.


Mer. I will go home; good sir do not publish this, as long as it run's amongst
our selves; it is good honest mirth: you will come ho^e to supper; I mean to have
al her friends and mine as ill as it goes.


Pan. Do wisely sir, and bid your own friends, your whole wealth will scarce
feast all hers, neither is it for your cedit, to walk the streets, with a
woman so noted, get you home, and provide her clothes: let her come an hour
hence with an ha^d-basket and shift her self, she will serve to sit at the upper
end of the Table, and drink to your customers.


Mer. Art is just, and will make me a mendes.


Pan. No doubt Sir.


Mer. The chief note of a Scholar you say, is to govern his passions;
wherefore I do take all patiently; in sign of which my most dear wife, I do
kiss thee: make have home after me, I shall be in my Study.


Exit Mer. Pan. Go, a vaunt, my new City dame, send me what you promised me
for consideration; and may thou prove a Lady.


Fran. Thou shall have it, his silks shall fly for it.


Enter Lazarello and his Boy Exeunt Lazarello. How sweetis a calm after a
tempest, what is there now that can stand betwixt me and felicity? I have
gone through all my crosses consta^tly; have confounded my enemies, and know
where to have my longings satisfied; I have my way before me, there is the
door, and I may freely walk into my delights. knock Boy.


Iulia. Who Is their?

within
Laz. Madona my love, not guilty, not guilty, open the door.


Enter Iulia Iulia Art thou come sweet heart?


Laz. Yes to thy soft embraces, and the rest of my ouerflowing blisses; come
let us in and swime in our delights: a short grace as we go, and so to meat.


Iulia. Nay my dear love, you must bear with me in this; we will to the Church
first.


Laza. Shall I be sure of it then.


Iulia By my love you shall.


Laz. I am content, for I do now wish to hold off longer, to whet my appetite,
and do desire to meet with more troubles, so I might conquer them.

And as a holy lover that has spent
The tedious night, with many asigh and tears;
Whilst he pursued his wench: and has observed
The smiles, and frowns, not daring to displease;
When at last, has with his service wone
Her yielding heart; that she begins to dote
Upon him, and can hold not longer out,
But hangs about his neck, and woes him more
Then ever he desired her love before:
Then begins to flatter his desert,
And growing wanton, needs will cast her off;
Try her, pick quarrels, to breed fresh delight,
And to increase his pleasing appetite.

Iul. Come Mouse, will you walk?


Laz. I pray thee let me be delivered of the joy I am so big with; I do feel
that high heat within me, that I begin to doubt whether I be mortal?

How I contemn my fellows in the Court,
With whom I did but yesterday converse,
And in a lower and an humbler key
Did walk, and meditate on grosser meats:
There are they still poor rogues, shaking their chops,
And sneaking after cheeses, and do run
Headlong in chase of every jacke of Beer
That crosses them, in hope of some repast,
That it will bring them to; whilst I am here,
The happiest wight, that ever set his tooth
To a dear novelty: approach my love,
Come let us go to knit the true loves knot,
That never can be broken.

Boy. That is to marry a whore.


Laz. When that is done, then will we taste the gift,
Which Fates have sent, my fortunes up to lift.

Boy. When that is done, you will begin to repent, upon a full stomach; but I
see, it is but a form in destiny, not to be altered.


Exeunt Enter Arrigo, and Oriana. Orian. Sir, what may be the current of your
business, that thus you single out your time and place?


Arrigo. Madame, the business now imposed upon me, concerns you nearly; I
wish some worser man might finish it.


Or. Why are ye changed so? are ye not well sir?


Arr. Yes madam, I am well, would you were so.


Orrian. Why sir? I feel my self in perfect health.


Arr. And yet ye cannot live long, madam.


Oria. Why good Arrigo?


Arr. Why, ye must die.


Oria. I know I must, but yet my fate calls not upon me.


Arr. It does; this hand the Duke commandes shall give you death.


Orian. Heaven, and the powers divine, guard well the innocent.


Arr. Lady, your prayers may do your soul some good,
That sure your body cannot merit by'vm:
You must prepare to die.

Orian. What Is my offense? what have these years committed,
That may be dangerous to the Duke or State?
Have I conspired by poison? have I given up
My honor to some loose vnsetl'd blood
That may give action to my plots?
Dear sir, let me not die ignorant of my faults?

Arr. Ye shall not.
Then Lady, you must know, you are held dishonest;
The Duke, your brother, and your friends in court,
With too much grief condemn ye: though to me,
The fault deserves not to be paid with death.

Orian. Who is my accuser?


Arr. Lord Gondarino.


Orian. Arrigo, take these words, and bear them to the Duke,
It is the last petition I shall ask thee:
Tell him the child, this present hour brought forth
To see the world, has not a soul more pure, more white,
More virgin then I have. Tell him Lord Gondarinoes
Plot, I suffer for, and willingly: tell him it had bin a greater
honor, to have saved then killed: but I have done: strike,
I am armed for heaven. Why stay you? is there any hope?

Arr. I would not strike.


Orian. Have you the power to save?


Arr. With hazard of my life, if it should be known?


Orian. You will not venture that?


Arr. I will: Lady, there is that means yet to escape your death, if you can
wisely apprehend it.


Orian. Ye dare not be so kind?


Arr. I dare, and will, if you dare but deserve it.


Orian. If I should slight my life, I were too blame.


Arr. Then madam, this is the means, or else you die: I love you.


Orian. I shall believe it, if you save my life.


Arr. And you must lie with me.


Orian. I dare not buy my life so.


Arr. Come ye must resolve, say yea or no.


Orian. Then no; nay look not ruggedly upon me,
I am made up too strong, to fear such looks.
Come, do your Butchers part: before I would win life,
with the dear loss of honor, I dare find means to free my self.

Arr. Speak, will ye yield?


Orian. Villain, I will not; murderer do thy worst, thy base unnoble thoughts
dare prompt thee to; I am above thee slave.


Arr. Will thou not be drawn to yield by fair persuasions?


Orian. No nor by --


Arr. Peace, know your doom then; your Ladyship must remember, you are not now
at home, where you dare jest at all that come about you: but you are fallen
under my mercy, which shall be small: if thou refuse to yield, hear what I have
sworn unto my self; I will enjoy thee, though it between the parting of thy
soul and body. Yield yet and live.


Orian. I Will guard the one, let heavens guard the the other.


Ar. Are ye so resolute then? Duk. from above. Hold, hold, I say.


Oria. What have I? yet more terror to my tragedy?


Arr. Lady, the scene of blood is done; ye are now as free from scandal, as
from death.


Enter Duke, Count, and Gondarino. Duke. Thou woman which were borne to teach
vert^^
Fair, sweet, and modest maid forgive my thoughts,
My trespass was my love. Seize Gondarino, let him (...) doomes.

Gond. I do begin in a little to love this woman; I could endure her already
twelve miles off.


Count. Sister, I am glad you have brought your honor off so fairly, without
loss: you have done a work above your sex, the Duke admires it; give him
fair encounter.


Duk. Best of all comforts; may I take this hand, and call it mine?


Oria. I am your Graces handmaid.


Duk. Would ye had sed my self: might it not be so Lady?


Count. Sister, say I: I know ye can affoard it.


Orian. My Lord, I am your subject, you may command me, provided still, your
thoughts be fair and good.


Du. Here, I am yours; and when I cease to be so,
Let heaven forget me: thus I make it good.

Ori. My Lord, I am no more mine own.


Count. So: this bargain was well driven.


Gond. Duke, thou have sold away thy self to all perdition; thou art this
present hour becoming cuckold: me thinks I see thy gaul grate through thy
veins, and jealousy seize thee with her talents: I know that woman's nose
must be cut off, she cannot escape it.


Duk. Sir, we have punishment for you.


Or. I do beseech your Lordship, for the wrongs this ma^hath done me, let me
pronounce his punishment.


Duk. Lady, I give to you, he is your own.


Gone. I do beseech your grace, let me be banished with all the speed that may be.


Count. Stay still, you shall attend her sentence.


Orian. Lord Gondarino, you have wroug'd me highly, yet since it sprung from no
peculiar hate to me, but from a general dislike unto all women, you shall thus
suffer for it; Arrigo, call in some Ladies to assist us: will your Grace take
your State?


Gone. My Lord I do beseech your Grace for any punishment saving this woman,
let me be sent upon discovery of some Island, I do desire but a small
Gundele, with ten Holland Cheeses, and i will undertake it.


Oria. Sir ye must be content, will ye sit down? nay do it willingly. Arrigo
tie his arms close to the chair, I dare not trust his patience.


Gond. Mai'st thou be quickly old and painted; mai'st thou dote upon some
sturdy Yeoman of the wood-yarde, and he be honest; mai'st thou be barred the
lawful lechery of thy Coach for want of Instruments; and last, be thy womb
vnopen'd.


Duke. This fellow has a pretty gaul.


Count. My Lord, I hope to see him purged ere a part.


Enter Ladies. Oria. Your Ladyships are welcome: I must desire your helps,
though you are no Physicians, to do a strange cure upon this Gentleman.


Ladies. In what we can assist ye Maddam, ye may command us.


Gond. Now do I fit like a Coniurer within my circle, and these the Devils that
are raised about me, I will pray that they may have no power upon me.


Oria. Ladies fall off in couples, then with a soft still march with low
demeanures, charge this Gentleman: i will be your leader.


Gond. Let me be quartered Duke quickly, I can endure it: these women, long for
man's flesh, let them have it.


Duke. Count, have you ever seen so strange a passion? what would this fellow
do, if a should find himself in bed with a young Lady?


Count. Faith my Lord, if a could get a knife, sure a would cut her throat, or
else a would do as Hercules did by Lyeas, swing out her soul: has the true
hate of a woman in him.


Oria. Low with your curseyes Ladies.


Gond. Come not too near me, I have a breath will poison ye, my lungs are
rotten, and my stomach raw; I am given much to belching: hold off, as you love
sweet aires; Ladies by your first nights pleasure, I conjure you, as you would
have your husbands proper men, strong backs, and little legs, as you would
have 'um hate your waiting women.


Oria. Sir we must court ye till we have obtained some little favor from
those gracious eyes, it is but a kis a piece.


Gond. I pronounce perdition to ye all; ye are a parcel of that damned Crew,
that fell down with Lucifer, and here ye stayed on earth, to plague poor men;
vanish, auaunt, I am fortified against your charms; heaven grant me breath and
patience.


1. Lady. Shall we not kiss then?


Gond. No, fear my lips with hot irons first, or stitch them up like a
Ferrets: O that this brunt were over.


2. Lad. Come, come, little rogue, thou art too maidenly by my troth, I think
I must box thee, till thou be boulder; the more bold, the more welcome: I
pre thee kis me, be not afraid?

She sits on his knee.
Gond. If there be any here, that yet have so much of the fool left in them,
as to love their Mothers, let them look on her, and loath them too.


2. Lad. What a slouenly little villain art thou, why do thou not stroke up
thy hair? I think thou never comb'st it: I must have it lie in better order;
so, so, so, let me see thy hands, are they washed?


Gond. I would they were loose for thy sake.


Duke. She tortures him admirably.


Count. The best that ever was.


2. Lad. Alas how cold they are poor golls, why do thee not get thee a
musse?


Arr. Maddam, here is an old Country gentlewoman at the door, that came nodding
up for Justice, she was with the Lord Gondarino to day, and would now again
come? to the speech of him; she says.


Oria. Let her in, for sports sake, let her in.


Gond. Mercy O Duke, I do appeal to thee: plan^ Cannons there, and discharge
them against my breast rather: nay first, let this she fury sit still where
she does, and with her nimble fingers stroke my hair, play with my fingers
ends, or anything, until my panting heart have broken my breast.


Duke. You must abide her censure.


The Lady rises from his knee. Enter old Gentlewoman. Gond. I see her come,
vnbutton me, for she will speak.


Gentlew. Where is he Sir?


Gond. Save me, I hear her.


Arri. There he is in state, to give you audience.


Gentlew. How does your good Lordship?


Gond. Sick of the spleen.


Gentlewo. How?


Gond. Sick.


Gentlew. Will you chew a Nutmeg, you shall not refuse it, it is very comfortable.


Gond. Nay now thou art come, I know it is the Devils Iubile, hell is broke
loose:
My Lord, If ever I have done you service,
Or have deserved a favor of your Grace,
Let me be turned upon some present Action,
Where I may sooner die, then languish thus;
Your Grace has her petition, grant it her, and ease me now at last.

Duke. No Sir, you must endure.


Gentlew. For my petition; I hope your Lordship has remembered me.


Oria. Faith I begin to pity him, Arrigo take her off, bear her away; say
her petition is granted.


Gentlew. Whether do you draw me Sir? I know it is not my Lords pleasure I
should be thus used, before my business be dispatched?


Arr. You shall know more of that without.


Oria. Unbind him Ladies, but before he go, this he shall promise; for the
love I bear to our own sex, I would have them still hated by thee, and inioyne
thee as a punishment, never herafter willingly to come in the presence or fight
of any woman, nor never to seek wrongfully the public disgrace of any.


Gond. It Is that I would have sworn, and do: when I meddle with them, for
their good, or their badde; may Time call back this day again, and when I come
in their companies, may I catch the pox, by their breath, and have no other
pleasure for it.


Duke. Ye are too merciful.


Oria. My Lord, I showed my sex the better.


Count. All is ouer-blowne Sister, you are like to have a fair night of it, and
a Prince in your arms: lets go my Lord.


Duke. Thus through the doubtful Streams of Joy and True love does wade, and
finds at last relief.


Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
(virtue, teach men thoughts, him wait our


