Brief Conclusions of Dancers and Dancing.

Condemning the profane use thereof; and commending the excellency of such
Persons which have from Age to Age, in all solemn Feasts, and victorious
Trumphs, used that (no less) Honorable, Commendable and laudable Recreation:

As also true Physical observations for the preservation of the body in
health, by the use of the same Exercise. Written by I. L. Roscio.

SIC CREED


Imprinted at London, for John Orphinstrange, and are to be sold at his shop
by the Cock and Katherine-wheele near Holbourne bridge. 1609.

THE PRINTER TO the Reader.
LEt me now entreat thee, courteous and tractable Reader, not to stay thy
mind upon the word, Dances: but to make thy recourse through the matters, which
are deduced under that title. For what cause? Otherwise the subject of this
purpose, as I think, shall seem unto thy judgment, to be vain and
frivolous, whereas of it self, it is altogether serious, and of a great
moment. Hear me a little. The Author of this Treatise concerning Dances, does
not lay the foundation of his arguments upon his own opinion, nor upon the
fantastical imaginations of some others: but upon the word of GOD it self,
which is comprehended in the Holy Books of the Old and New Testaments. The
which thing may very plainly be discerned, by the union, or congruitie of
this small Treatise, being not framed according to the pleasure of the eye, but
for the comfort of the heart: In which comfort these holy men and women (which
he has named, and before our eyes here erected) magnified the most mighty
Creator of all visible and invisible creatures, holding it to be their duty,
not only privately to laud and rejoice in him for the victories they received:
but also to stir up the people (which they ruled,) by the actiuenes and
agilitie of their bodies in Dances, to praise and laud the immortal worker of
their triumphs: Therefore be thou instructed by the doctrine herein
contained: and the Lord have thee always under his protection.

Your friend JOHN ORPHINSTRANGE.

CONCLVSIONS UPON DANCES, BOTH OF THIS AGE AND OF THE OLD.
Three diverse opinions of learned men, concerning Dances.
CReat is the diversity of opinions about the usage of dances, even as it is
about a thousand other matters of no slender importance. Some men of good
understanding and litterature, do affirm dances to be holy of themselves:
and their chief allegation regards the sixth Chapter of the second book of
Samuel, where it is written, that the Prophet David danced before the Ark of the Lord, when it was carried from the house of Obed-Edom to the City of
David, with shouting and sound of Trumpet. Many others do maintain, that such
an exercise is profane: and do principally infer out of the 32. chapter of
Exodus, that the corrupted Israelites did dance in their idolatry about the
molten Calfe, which they compelled Aaron to make. But after the judgment of
the greater number, it is a thing altogether indifferent: and their highest
argument does embrace one speech of Christ in the 7. chap. of the Gospel
according to Saint Luke, which is this, They are like unto little children
sitting in the market place, and crying one to another, and saying, We have
piped unto you, and ye have not danced: we have mourned unto you, and you have
not wept. Let the hearers and readers open their minds unto us, or unto
others, upon such diversities.

It may easily be perceived, in marking some places of the Old and New
Testaments, that the holiness, profanation, and indifferency of dances, must
be considered upon the causes of dancing. Wherefore we are minded to set
down, by the permission of the Almighty, some instructiue observations
touching that purpose.

Of the Dances used in the Old Age, and formerly of the holy.
THat Dance was holy, which, as we read in the 15. chap. of Exodus, was
effected by Miriam the Prophetess, sister of Aaron and Moses, with all the
other Israelitish women, when God had miraculously destroyed their deadly foes
the Egyptians, to wit, King Pharao and his mighty host, in overthrowing and
drowning them all at once in the red Sea. For they danced in singing praises
unto God for their deliverance: and so the cause of their dancing was godly,
and consequently the dance it self was holy. That Dance was holy likewise,
which the Scripture shows us in the 11. chap. of Judges, when Iptah had
vanquished his adversaries the Ammonites, and returned to his house: which
Ammonites had been very cruel oppressors of the Israelits eighteen years. For
the daughter of Iaphtah with her compapanions went out to meet her father, and
danced in magnifying the Lord, because he had given him the victory over his
enemies.

Is not the like argument to be framed upon the like subject, in the 18. chap.
of the first book of Samuel? We see there, how that the women of Israel came
out of all their Cities, to honor David returning from the slaughter of
Goliath the Philistim: and how that they danced in giving glory to the
Almighty, because he had avenged his people Israel of their foes the
Philistims, which were slaundering and blaspheming idolaters. And the 15.
Chapter of the book of Judith does confirm this matter of dancing, in that it
manifests the Dances of that most virtuous, godly, and valiant widow Judith,
after she had saved the City of Bethulia, and discomfited the Persians, Medes,
and all the rest, by smiting off, with her heroical hand, the head of
Olofernes, chief Captain of Nabuchodonosor King of the Assyrians.

Upon what occasions, in the Old Age, the dances were used.
NOw every man may learn by those premises, that the godly women of Israel
did dance publikly, after some great victory, in praising and glorifying the
name of the Lord for the same: and that they did not use that kind of exercise
with any mind toward some worldly pleasure. But was it only about victories?
It was also about the celebration of some solemn feast consecrated unto God:
as we have the example thereof in the 21. Chap. of Judges. For the Elders of
Israel having no wives for two hundredth men of Benjamin had them go to Shiloh,
where a feast of the Lord was celebrated every year: saying, Go and lie in
wait in the Vineyards, and when ye see the daughters of Shiloh come out to
dance in Dances, then come ye out of the Vineyardes, and catch you every man a
wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go into the land of Benjamin. So ye may
clearly see, that the usage of dancing was not only ordained for victories,
but also for solemn feasts: and that a conclusion may be gathered out of it,
to be lawful to rejoice with dances, at the time of marriages, and of all other
holy and great occasions. But it were meet and convenient, ye should always
remember one thing: that whenever the occasions of dancing are holy, then the
form of dancing ought to represent holiness, as the indifferent do require
indifferency: the discerning whereof must be left to the judgment of godly and
well learned persons.

We do not add to this place the history contained in the sixth chap. of the
second book of Samuel, which says, That the Prophet David danced before the
Ark of God: because a doubt may rise thereupon, whether that motion of David
was a dance, or not. For as in the 82. Psalm, and in other doctrines of the
holy Bible, Princes and Magistrates are called Gods, because in a manner they
be like unto God: so that motion of David might be taken in the number of
dances, because it had some likeness with them. What is that, which compels
us to argue in this sort? I pray you, hearken a little. Dances are motions
composed with measure: but that motion of David was without measure: as it is
not difficult to be comprehended, in that he discovered himself before his
maids, whereupon he was mocked of his wife Michal. What might have been the
cause of such a motion in him? His mind was transported and carried away,
through the great vehemency of the burning zeal, wherewith he was altogether
inflamed.

Of the Unlawful Dances, which are commonly called profane.
AS touching profane Dances, that Dance which the Apostle Saint Matthew in the
14. Chapter of his Gospel, writes to have been danced before Herod by the
daughter of Herodias, may be a sufficient testimonial. There it clearly
appears to all persons endued with some discretion, that in her Dance she had
no regard unto God, but only unto Herod: that she might most excellently
please the said Herod, to the intent that he should make her some
extraordinary high promise, whereby she might purchase to her self the head
of Saint John Baptist, for to carry it to her mother Herodias, which did hate
that good Prophet with a deadly hatred. And we conclude thereupon that every
dancer and danceresse, which in their dances have no remembrance of God, are
greatly culpable before the eyes of God himself, although they seem to be
without fault in the sight of men.

We do not bring hither the dancing mentioned in the 23. Chap. of Exodus:
because those stubborn and stiffehearted Israelites, which danced about the
molten Calfe, were become Idolaters. For it might be in that consideration,
that such dances were part of their religion.

Of such Dances, as by reason are esteemed to be indifferent.
But for the indifferency of Dances, we have the 15. Chapter of the
Evangelist S. Luke: where our Savior Jesus Christ speaking of the Prodigal
Son, which had wasted abroad all his portion of Goods, and afterward was
returned to his Father, with humble confession of his offense, says in good
part, and in the narration of a godly deed, that they made great mirth for his
sake in the house, with Bankers, Melody, and Dances. And there that
indifferency of Dancing, is to be more plainly seen in these words, Let us
eat, and be merry. King Solomon among many indifferent things, which he
sets down for our instruction, in the 3. Chapter of his Ecclesiastes, does
also teach us this: That as there is a time to mourn, so there is a time to
Dance. And such a thing may also serve us here, for the proof of the
indifferency of Dances: concluding besides that, by the last example and
doctrine now deduced, that it is not any action displeasant unto God, to use
Dances for an honest recreation, in the joyful meetings of faithful friends,
or dear kinsfolks; and in all other occasions like unto that same.

We do not use here, that comparison of the little Children, inuiting other
little Children to Dance, comprehended in the 7. Chap. of the Gospel according
to S. Luke, which comparison the Lord Jesus uttered for himself, and for the
Prophet S. John Baptist, against the Pharisees and Expounders of the Law. For it
is well known every where, that many things are to be tolerated in Children,
which are not to be tolerated in other persons: as the ryding upon Sticks,
and the playing with Babies; with such other foolish pastimes.

What sort of Dancing is more convenient for the health.
AMong the indifferent Dances, those Dances as we think, must be numbered,
which are practiced for the exercise of the body, that thereby the bodily
health may be better preserved. Wherefore in regarding the druersitie of
dispositions, which is found at all times in the human kind, it will not
be amiss, to set down one word in this purpose, to declare what sort of
Dancing is more convenient for these, and what for those.

Such Dances as do strongly stir the body, ought to be chosen of them, which
have some obstructions in the ways of the Urine, or some other like
impediment. And the contrary must be used of such persons, as do perceive
their own Brains to be weak, or the like infirmity to be in some other
part. But to the others that Dancing is fitter, which exercises the body in a
mean measure of agitation. Therefore let all those persons, which do
ordinarily exercise them selves in Dances, carefully observe and regard the
constitutions of their bodies: to the intent, that they should not use any kind
of Dancing, which by repugnancie might be hurtful to their complxions:
Remembering assidually within them selves, and so much the more in this matter,
to acknowledge God to be the Author of all good things: because the Apostle S.
Paul in the 4. Chap. of his first Epistle to Timotheus does condemn the bodily
exercise, when it is not accompanied with godliness.

Of the ordinary Dances, used cuerie where, in these days.
NOw that we have handled the Dances of the old Age, shall we make evident in
few lines, what we think of the Dances of our days? These Dances (I speak
of the greater part of them) do seem unto our judgment, to be partly vain,
and partly profane. Vain, because neither men nor women are able to attain
unto the knowledge and practice of the art of such Dancing, without vexation of
the Spirit, and loss of time. Profane, because in the old age, the women
Danced to this intent, that thereby their spiritual Songs and Divine praises
should wax more fervent; and consequently become more acceptable unto GOD:
whereas now very often, in a great many places, among the Christians
themselves, not only the Women, but also the Men, do Dance to please the
world. Notwithstanding God alone is he, which sees their hearts and
intentions: and without difficulty it may be, that our conjectures are not
sufficiently judicious.

The vexation of the Spirit is so much spoken against, by that wise Solomon in
his Book of Eccesiastes, that it is a wonderful thing, to see so many, and so
many again, that never keep them selves from the tearing claws of that
monster. And the loss of Time, might be better avoided, if men would but note
the admonition of the Apostle S. Paul, in the 5. Chap. of his Epistle to the
Ephesians, where he bids them Redeem the time: when he admonishes them,
To walk circumspectly, not as Fools; but as Wise, and to understand what the
will of the Lord is.

Moreover, many of these Dances are so much artificial (at the least within
our cogitations, and within the cogitations of some other persons, which have
also observed in the holy Histories of the old Testament, the manner of Dancing
practiced among the Israelitish women, that lived in the fear of God) many of
these Dances (I say) are so much artificial, that the human minds can not
be intended nor attentive to the Art of Dancing, and to the praise of God
together.

Whether it be lawful for men to dance with women.
MAny men do argue, that it is lawful for them, to dance with women: because
(say they) the Prophet David exhorts us in one of his Psalms, to praise God
in Dances. But that argument cannot be strong enough. For besides that the
Hebrewe word does carry diverse significations, the later and riper
Translations, both in English and in other Languages, do not name any Dance.
Therefore we would rather counsel them to take an other way, and send them to
that Text of the Prophet Jeremy in the 31. Chapter, The Virgin shall rejoice
in the Dance, and the young men and the old men together: for I will turn
their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and give them joy for their
sorrows.

Here many others do endeavor themselves, to make an opposition in this
manner. As the flowing of milk and honey (say they) is taken in the Scripture,
for the abundance of all things necessary to the humane life; so the Dance is
put in that Text for the greatness of joy. But let them mark, or remember one
thing: The words must be understood in an other sense, when they are repugnant
unto reason: but the word Dance, is not repugnant unto reason, in that text of
Jeremy above recited.

To what estates the Dances are thought to be more becoming.
IF we will but mark meanly well a little part of the 15. Chap. of Exodus
already mentioned, it shall be sufficiently manifest unto us, that the
Israelitish women Danced with Miriam the Prophetess, for that they were moved
and brought to it by the said Miriam, which began to Dance, and was the leader
of them. Whereby we shall remain fully persuaded, that those women did not
embolden themselves toward that exercise, in the presence of her, which was
above them in dignity, until they were bidden and invited to it by her
example. And this does cause the opinions of many Learned men to be, that such
an exercise is rather appertayning to the Nobility and Gentilitie, then to the
other estates: and that the inferiors ought not to use it among the
superiors, nor in the presence of them, except the superiors do bid or
inuit the inferiors to the same, whether it be by speech, or otherwise.
Concluding thereupon, that same Art to be much abused in our age, because (say
they) it is practiced by a great many without any diseretion at all.

Let us give some insight to a few words of the 11. Chap. of Judges, which we
have alleged in another line of this Treatise. No mention is made of any
person in those Dances, but of the daughter of Iephtah, which was Captain over
the people of Israel, Does not this argue with great probability, that the
said daughter of Iephtah, was the moouer and guider of that dancing, as she
was the highest in estate and condition among her fellows? And does it not by
consequence come to agree with that purpose, which now we have holden in a
brief deduction, a very little before, about the dancing of Miriam the
Prophetess with the other women of Israel? None extraordinary sharpness, or
viuacitie of wit is necessary, to make it enter into the comprehension of that
point.

We have already touched the fiftenth chapter of the Book of Iudeth, which we
must touch again at this present time, upon the discourse which we have in
hand. For these words are written in the end of it, concerning the said most
honorable Iudeth, They also crowned her with Olives, and her that was with her,
and she went before the people in the Dance, leading all the Women. Which
words do greatly augment, without any part of doubt, the strength and vigor of
our argumentation: to wit, that the Dances do not seem to become so well the
lower sort, as the higher: and that we may think according unto reason, to be
somewhat inconvenient for the lower, to have the exercitation of dancing near
the higher, unless some leave he given of these unto those, one way or other.
And hereunto this very short addition, as we do persuade our selves, cannot be
but fitly applied: that by the Histories of daunces contained in the holy
Scripture, it seems unto the consideration of many godly persons, that the
practice of Dancing is more becoming unto women, then unto men.

Why Dances are forbidden in some places among the Christians.
THe prohibition of Dances in Geneua, and in some other Territories, which do
keep all the orders of the same in matters of Religion, and Ecclesiastical
Discipline, was made because of the great abuses of them: to cut off the
pernicious evils, which oftentimes happened thereby. Is not this a sufficient
argument, to prove such an action to be good? Behold, our Messiah in the 18.
Chap. of the Gospel according to S. Matthew, does command every one of us, to
cast away his hand, or his foot, or his eye; if they cause him to offend:
saying, that it is better, to enter into life, with one hand, or with one
foot, or with one eye, then having two hands, or two feet, or two eyes, to be
cast into everlasting fire. Therefore if in that case we must needs be deprived
of things, which are so much profitable and necessary: why should those
nations have refused to suppress a thing, which among them was become
altogether vain and profane?

We read in the 21. Chap. of Numbers, that Moses by the commandment of God,
did make a Serpent of Brass, and erected it for a sign unto the Israelites.
And we read in the 18. Chap. of the second Book of Kings, that the religious
King Hezekiah did beat down, and break in pieces the said Brazen Serpent,
because he saw that the people of Israel continued yet to adore the same, in
burning Incense unto it. If then it have been lawful, to abolish the Sacrament
of God, in consideration that it was abused; why should it not be lawful, to
put away the inventions of men for the like cause?

Me thinks it were enough, to make us leave and forsake the usage of such
Dances, as are only effected for the pleasure of our eyes, to observe and
consider with studious diligence one thing in the 14. chap. of the Apostle S.
Matthew, How that through the means and occasion of a Dance, S. John Baptist
was put to death: which was a most excellent Prophet, and a most faithful
forerunner of our Savior Jesus Christ. To whom, with the Father, and the
Spirit, be all magnificence, and glory perpetually. Amen.

FINIS.

