AN EXHORTATION TO YOUNG men, perswadinge them to walk in the pathe way that
leads to honest and goodness: written to a friend of his by Thomas Lupsete
Londoner. 1534



To my vvithipol.
IT happens at this time (my hearty beloved Edmonde) that I am in such
place, where I have no manner of books with me, to pass the time after my manner
and custom. And though I had here with me plenty of books: yet the place
suffrethe me not to spend in them any study. For you shall understand, that I
lie waiting on my lord Cardinal, whose hours I must observe, to be always
at hand, lest I be called, when I am not bye: the which should be straight
taken for a fault of great negligence. Wherefore, now that I am well satiated
with the beholdynge of these gaye hangynges, that garnissheth here every wall:
I will turn me and talk with you. For you must know, that my mind has
long coueted, to show what affecte I bear to ward you: the which hitherto
parauenture I never uttered unto yon so playnelye, that you might take thereof
any perfect knowledge. And that I so did keep in, such outward tokyns, whereof
when you were with me, you should have perceived my love: the cause was none
other, but that in deed, How masters hurt their scholars most.
I loved you. For long I have been taught, that the master never hurtethe his
scholar more, than when he utters and shewethe by cheryshyng and cokerynge
the love that he bearethe to his scholars. I think you lacked with me no
cheryshinge, but of cokerynge you had very lyttel: because I was loath to hurt
you: the which lothnesse came I say, of that I loved you. But now in as much
you be of age, and also by the common board of houselynge admytted into the
nombre of men, to be no more in the company of children, and specially for as
much as my rule over you is cessed, I will not defer any longer the
expressing of mine heart, that no less louethe and fauourethe you, than if
nature had made you, either my son or my brother. For this always is my mind,
if I have a friend, in whom I find such feythe, and honesty, that I inwardly
joy in heart with him: I reken straight, that al his be mine with out any
exception: True frendshyp
So that in very deed I take to my care, as mine own, all things that be in my
friends care. This mind had I to my friend Andrewe Smythe, whose son,
Christofer your fellow, I ever took for my son, and now I think plainly,
that he is so in very deed. This strength has true love in frendshyp, the
which has likewise joined your father in such manner to my heart, that one
think you should be no more his son then you be mine. And though I can
suffer your father to take the rule of you, more then I do: Yet I can not
suffer, that he should care more for your profit then I do. For as I desire
and wish, that you never have need of me: so surely if you ever should have,
it should well then appear, that as nature has given you one father, so your
fathers frendshyppe has provided for you an other father. Wherefore good
Edmonde, reken no less affecte in me to do you good than is in your own
father, whose only study and care is, to se you grow and prosper toward the
state of an honest man: and I to further you to the same, am as desirous as he
is, and as much as I can, I will help you both with my counsel and power,
such as I have.

If you will call to your mind all the frayes, that have benne between you and
me, or between me and Smythe, you shall find, the causes ever depended of a
care I had for your and his maniers.

When I saw certain fantasies in you or him, that iarred from true opinions,
the which true opinions, True opinions.
above al lernyng, I would have masters ever tech their scholars. But now that
you be of better habilite to take counsel, I will begin to show you my
mind, in stayinge you for the hole course of your life, that you may in time
learn what is to be done, to be a good and an honest man. You be yet in the
first entree of your life, and now is the time to have a guide, that may
faithfully conducte you in the right way: For there be so many by paths, and
for the most part, all by paths be more worn with the steps of your fore
goers tha^ is the very true path of living: that if you go alone, you may
paraduenture long wandre out of the streyghte way. Wherefore as nere as I can, I
will in few words appoynte unto you certain marks, upon the which if you
dilygentlye look, you can not err nor fail of the way, that leads to the
reward of an honest good man, whose virtue sauoureth plesantly to heaven,
pleseth the world, and nourishes him self, with an incomperable delight and
gladness, that continually reygneth in his clean and pure conscience. With these
marks and tokens, the which I would you looked still upon, I will assign you
certain auctors, in whose works I would you should bestow your lesure, when you
may have time to read, yt by them you may at the full be instructed in all
things apperteining to virtue: and in all your life I would you meddled not
greatly with any other books, then with these, yt I shall name unto you: it is
not the reding of many books, Reding of many books.
that gets increace of knowledge and judgment: for the most part of them,
that redeth al indifferently, confou^d their wits and memory without any
notable fruit of their redyng. It must be a diligent reder, that shall take
the profit of his labor and diligence. No man (specially of them that have
other occupations) can use redinge but in very few works, the which I would
should be piked out of the best sort: that the fruit of the reders diligence
may be the greatter. I se many lose their time, when they think to bestow
their time best, because they lack judgment or knowelege, to pyke out the
books, the which be worthy to be studied. And in every thing an order well
observed, brings more profitte then any labor or peine beside. Wherefore my
good Withipolle, take heed to my lesson. I am in doubt, whether you have any
other lover, that can and will show you a like tale: but well I am
assured, that you have none, that can thus teach you with a better will, to
have you take profit by him, then I do: and of me how long you shall have
this use, it is in gods will to determyne: As much as lies in me, I will now
procure and provide, that these letters shall keep to your use the sum of my
council, by the which if you order your will, I put no doubt, but first
the grace of god shall be rooted in you, and next you shall live with a merry
heart, and finally never to lack the commodities requisite for the short time
in this world, in the which case you shall opteyne the worship and dignity
of a good and an honest man, whose conditions I had rather se you have with
pouerte, than in great abundance to be a man of small honest. You may be good,
honest, and rich, and so study to be, or else think never of riches: for other
wise you shall deceive your self, and do contrary to yt way, that as well
worldly wisdom as the troth of our faith shows you. But now here what I
say.

First and last (mine own good Withipol) remember ernestly to have in your
mind.iii. certain things, the which be of such valor, that he that
forgets either their dignity and nature, orles the degrees and order of
them: he can not please another god, nor him self, nor the world. I say, in
all the course of your life there be.iii. things to be looked so upon, that the
first of them must be first of you regarded: the second enext after, and the
third in his place after the.ii. Beware, as of dedly poison, that you ruffil
not them without care, one before the other, as to take the.iii. in the place
of the first, or the second after the third, or both the second and the third
before the first. In this conclusion you shall (as I have said) both offend god,
and displese your self, and also nothing content the world. Like as the most
part of men now a days trespass al for the rechfulnes and negligence in not
keeping these.iii. things, under the dignite and degree according as they ought
to be observed and kept. And what be we (my good Edmond) if we be out of goddis
favor? odious to our self, and dispiteful to men. Therefore again I exhort
you, to thentent you may eschew this abominable condycion, and grow to be
admitted in the blessed nombre of them that rest in the grace of god, in the
clennes of their conscience, and in the favor of the world, to be judged a
good, a wise, and an honest man. For this final end mine exhortation is now,
that you in all your acts in the hole course of your life, remember these three
things, that I will rehearse unto you. But I say to you, yt you must not only
remember these three things, but also specially have in mind the degres of
them: so that ever the first of them be chiefly in your thought above al
other: and then in his place put the second, and let not the third be regarded,
but as his place requires, that is, when you have done with the first, and
also with the second. There lies more weight and valor upon the knowing and
keeping of this tale, that I shall tell you: then if I could show you the way
within few months, to be a man of great power, both in exceeding abundance
of riches, and also in passing authority of rule. Therefore as well for the
fruit, that follows, if you do after mine exhortation, as for the infinite
hurtes, that you can not escape, if you should forgette that I say: I warn
and warn you again, here this lesson with a glad ear, and print the same in
your mind, to execute with lively diligence the effect of this counseyl, wherein
is contained your life and death, your joy and sorrow, as well in this
world, as in that shall be here after: These.iii. things, be the soul, the
body, and the substance of this world. Soul.
The first place has by good reason the soul, seeing hit is a thing
immortal, that is created and made after the figure and shape of almyghtye god.
Body.
The next and second rome has the body, as the caas and sepulture of the
soul, and nereste servant to the secretis of the spirit. The.iii. rome
occupies ye riches and goodis of this world, Goods of this world.
as the necessary instruments or toles for the body, the which can not want
nor lack such things. Let then the eye of your inward mind first and
chiefly ever behold the first thing in you that is your soul: Next thereto
have a respect to your body: and thirdely considre the world: Care for your
soul, as for your chief jewel and only treasure.

Care for your body, for the souls sake. Care for the world for the bodis
sake. Beware above al things, that you go not backewarde, as he doothe, that
carethe first to be a rich man: next to be an helthye manne, and thyrdely to
be a good manne: where he should do clean contrary, first to study for
goodness, next for health, and then for welthe. You se so great blindness among
men, that some folk so cares for riches, that very littel they look for the
health of the body, and nothing at al they mind the state of the soul. I say
to you, some folks do thus: I would to god I might not truly report, that for
the most part al me^ in manner now a days do no another wise. Look upon either
the spiritual sort or the temporal: and much a do you shall hauein the great
swarmyng multitude of this blind sort, to find out them, that first above
all things care for their soul, next for their body: and thirdly for goods
of this world. You shall se marchantes spare no travail nor ieopardie of the
body, to get these goods. They be (to sey the troth) so occupied in the study
of this third thing, that scant they have time to care for the second, and as
for the first, they pass nothing there upon, it seems a thing least in
their thought, where, of conueniencye the same care, study, and thought, that
they give to the opteynynge of these worldly goods: they should spend it al in
the mainteynaunce of the first thing, that is the soul: and the small
lyttelle regard, that they take for the first, should be bestowed for the
third: and more than they do, they should cherishe the second. The same
co^fusio^ is with us scholars: scholars.
for our first study is to get promotion, to get these goodis, to live
welthily. In this care we busely be occupied continually. Somewhat more we
cheryshe our bodies then does the merchant: but our cherysshynge is for the
longer use of these goods, not as it should be for the souls sake. And as for
ye soul we have as lyttel regard as other men have, although we speak thereof
more then paraue^ture other me^ do. This ouerthwarte confusion of these three
things marreth all. And plainly I may say, that all mischief comes only of
this misorder, that we put the chyefe care of our study to the third thing,
and not to the first, as of duitye, we ought to do the contrary.

If my purpose were to show you, what other men do, and not rather what I
would have you do: I would farther proceed to express unto you, how far out
of square our life is now a days: and how blessed a life we should have in
this traunsitorie world, if the care of our soul were first and chiefly in
men's minds, like as the care of the worldly substance occupies our hartis
above all other things. If it were as it ought to be, yt in our fantasy
reigned the study for the soul, the^ should be here that celestial kyngedom,
the which Christ techeth us to pray for in our pater noster, where we crave
of god, that his rule and reygne may come among us. But as I despair that
commonly this study and care can not be changed from these worldly riches to
the soul: so I am full of good hope, that you will take heed to your life, to
order therein your desires, in this dew manner, more regarding what should be
done, then what is done. When you se and know the right path, I trust you will
not walk in the crooked hye way. The troth shall more draw you to love and to
follow virtue, then the common ensample shall entice you to follow vice, the
which no man can love, not the sinner him self.

But now mine own good Edmonde, here of these three things somewhat more you
must prynte in your mind, with a perfect persuasion, that your soul is the
chief treasure, that you have: whereupon your continualle thought and care
must be, to keep hit, to defend it, to norishe it, to comfort it by all ways
and means possible for you. In this study you must spend all your wits:
night and day you must think on this thing, what so ever you do, you must
direct your act to this thing. If you be occupied in the state of your body,
either to drive away syckenes, or to sustain health, let it be for the service
your bodi owes to ye soul. If you travail for goods of this world, to get
your own living, or to help your friend, orels to provide for your children,
when god shall send you them: let your travail be for the necessyties of the
body, and so finally for the soul. Consydre what the goods of the world be,
how they be but instruments for the body. Use then the world in his kind.
Look again upon your body, how it is preciouser then the goods: use him the^
in his worthynes, and hurt not your body for a thing of less valu. And as ye
have nothing, another your body nor your goods, to be compared with the
dignite of your soul: so my sweet withipol, let nothing be in your reputation
above this chief and principal jewel, the which must only for him self be
cared for, and al other things in this life, must be cherished for it. I
stick much with you in repetinge one thing, but maruayle not, though I so
do: For I se us al in this world so blinded, partly by a use and custom from
ye cradil, in the magnifienge of these goodis, partli by the^sa^ple of them,
with whom we be daily conuersa^t: that scant after long crieng it can now be
hard, yt the soul must be chiefly cared for. And except grace work with you,
that you your self will consent to the troth, it is not possible to persuade
you, that the very true way of living is this, to care chiefly for the soul,
and to care for all other things only for the souls sake. This saying
though it be true, yet I say, hit can not be hard: in as much the lives of
all them, with whom ye shall be continuallye conuersaunt, shall cry out clean
contrary against my saying. For on al sides you shall se men sweating in a
contynuall work, both of body and of mind, to get these worldly goods,
without any mention made of the souls state: the which the very friars care
lyttel for: as it openly appears. But ever I say to you, look what Christen
men should do, and if you se men so do, be glad of that sight, and follow the
same: if you se the contrary, fle from the ensample, and cleue ever fastly to
the truth, with a sorrowful heart for the loss of other men, that so blyndely
rushe forth in the train of a vicious living, where the soul is so lyttel
cared fore.

That this first thing may be ye better in your study, I will brefely touch
some what of tho things that appertein hereto: to have you know what
nourishes and comfort the soul, and what hurts and noyeth the same. The
soul can not but ever live, it has no end of living, yet we may say, that
the soul lives and dies: It lives in the grace of god, and dies in the
malice of the devil. The souls life is the light of virtue: his death is the
derkenes of sin. You have a free will given you, whereby you may either
quicken or slaye at your own pleasure, your soul in ye bright Paradise of
life, and you may set your soul in the black dungeon of death. Let therefore
this will of yours ever study to procure for the souls life, the which is
your own life: and in the same study you shall deliver the soul from his
death, the which is the perpetualle pain ordained for sin, that seperateth
the image of god from his patron. I say syn plucketh your soul from god,
whose image your soul should bear. Therefore in all your actis so do, that you
wyllyngely displease not god: who can not be pleased but with a pure and
clean conscience, pure and clean if you suffer no sin to remaygne so long
in your desire and mind, that hit cankerethe the thought. Your thought is
cankered with the long resydence of sin: when either you be weak in the
study of virtue, orelles make very littelle of a fault, or defend your
vice, or nowselle your self in a custom of an inordynate desire. The
fraylenes of our flesh is so greatte, that it can not be, but that syn
shall come to our desire: but it is our blame, if sin tarry and abide within
us. God has given us a mighty power over our self: we may when we will
correct our desires, and drive out all sin. If you know not what is sin,
nor what is virtue: by the fear and love of god, you shall know boothe.

The fear of god will teach you to flee sin and follow virtue. Fear of
god. Love of god.
The love of god will teach you to follow virtue and flee sin: whereby your
priuey and secret conscience shall better and more clearly perceive, what is
to be done, and what is not, than any diffinition or descryption can appoint
out to you. Therefore my dear Withipoll, enwarpe your self fast and sure in
the fere and love of god, from your first rysynge to your rest, draw forth
the day in all your business, as this loving fear and fearful love shall
secretly admonish and warn you: and dye rather than you would pursue any
lust against your knowledge of gods pleasure.

What merchandise so ever you occupy: remember, it is the busynes of the
third care, for the which you may not leave any point of this first care,
that belongs to the soul. Like wise if ye be occupied about the body:
remember, it is the warke of the second care, the which also must be ordered
under the first, the which first must alwey stick in your mind, sturred up
and led in all desires and appetites by the said fear and love of god. Do
never that thing, wherein you fear goddis displeasure.

More partycularlye in wrytinges you shall learn this lesson, New testamente.
if you would sometime take in your hands the new testamente, and read it with
a dew reverence. For I would not have you in that book forgette, with whom you
talk, hit is god that there speakethe, hit is you a poor creature of god that
redeth. Consider the match, and meke down your wits. Presume not in no case
to think, that there you understand ought: leave deuisinge thereupon: submit
your self to the expositio^s of holy doctors: and ever conform your consent
to agree with Christ's church. This is the surest way that you ca^ take, both
before god and man. Your obedience to the universal faith shall excuse you
before god, although it might be in a false belefe: and ye same obedience shall
also keep you out of trouble in this world, where you se, how folishe medlars
be daily sore punyshed, both to their own undoing, and also to their great
sorrow and lamenting of their lovers and friends. Surely the truth is as I
have said, that it is your part to obey, and to follow the church: so that
both for your souls sake, and for your bodily quietness, with the comfort of
your friends, I exhort you to meddel in no point of your faith, other wise
then the church shall instruct and teach you. In the which obedience read for
your increase in virtue, the story of our master Christ, that lively
expressethe the hole course of a virtuous life. Mat. 6.
And there you shall here the holy gooste command you, Luc. 12.
to seek first before all things, the kingedome of heaven, and than (says the
spirit of god) al other things apperteyninge to the body and world, shall
by them self follow without your care.

In reding the gospels, Redynge ye gospels Chrysostom. Ierom
I would you had at hand Chrysostom and Ierom, by whom you might surely be
brought to a perfect understanding of the text. And hereafter at leisure, I
would you read the Ethikes of Aristotell, Ethica.
either under some expert philosopher, Arist.
orels with comment of Futtiratius.

And let Plato Plato
be familiar with you, specially in the books that he writes De re publica.
Also you shall find much for your knowelege in the moral philosophy of Cic.
Cicero.
as in his books De officiis, de senectute, de fato, de finibus, de Achademicis
question. de Thust. Specially read with diligence the works of Seneca: Seneca.
of whom ye shall learn as much of virtue as man's wit can teache you. These
works I think sufficient, to show you what is virtue, and what is vice: and
by redynge of these, you shall grow in to a high courage to rise in a
judgment above the commen sort, to esteem this world according to his
worthiness, that is far under the dignity of the virtues, the which the
mind of men conceyueth and reioycethe in these books, shall lift you up from
the claye of this earth, and set you in a hill of high contemplacion: from
whence you shall look down and despise the vanite, that folishe men take, in
the deceyteful pomp of this short and wretched life. Mobokes, I will not
advise you, for your souls study, to read, thanne these: except hit be
Enchiridion, that Erasmus wrytethe, a work doubtless, that in few leaves
conteynethe an infynite knowledge of goodness. Think not my good Edmond, that I
over charge you. For I know what pleasure you have in redinge: and in better
books you can not bestow your pleasure, than in these, the which be in no^bre
but few, and yet they shall do you more good tha^ the reding here and there of
many other. I would to Jesus I had in your age followed like cou^seil in redinge
only these works, the which now at last by a great loss of time in redyng
of other, I have chosen out for my purpose, to refreshe with them the rest of
my life. And I council you now to begynnne to do the same, when time and
conueniente leyser shall be given you to read any book.

The second care is for the body, the which you must cherish as much as may
stand with the service of your former thought and study for your chief
treasure. Have a resspecte to keep your body in good health, Bodilye health.
the which rests in the aier and in your diete. Abide not where ruption or
infection is: Corrupt aier.
Eat not, nor dri^k not out of time or mesure: nor yet of such meats and
drynkes, Diete.
as be more delicate and pleasant, then wholesome. Know the measure of your
stomach before you ouerlade your bealye. Choke not your appetite, but feed
your honger.

Drown not your lust, but quench your thirst, and ever for your souls sake,
Fast.
keep you from glottony. Fast sometime boothe for devotion and also for your
health: Sleep Sleep.
rather to little then to much, as much as you take from sleep, so much
you add to your life. For sleep is death for the time. Exercise Exercise.
you continually: for in labor your body shall find strength: and lustynesse
is gotten by the use of your lymmes. Let never the son rise before you: you
shall have to all your affairs the longer day: Ydlenes.
And ever for your souls sake, flee from ydlenes, the which is not only in
him that does nothing, but also in him that does not well: and ydell you be,
when you be not well occupied. Temperance.
Be temperate in your lusts, touching the bodyly pleasure: the time shall not
belong till your friends by goddis grace, will provide you of an honest mate.
In the mean season let the fear and love of god keep you in chastity, the
which apperteyneth to your chief care: for needs you must so do, saying yt
other wise lechery shall sore defoyle your soul, ye which you must regard be
fore ye bodis appetite. For this part I would you read, as your leiser shall be,
Gale. De bona bale tud. tuen.
a littel work of Galen De bona valetudine tuenda. And in the works before
named, you shall find many things, that shall instruct you well for this part
also, and like wise for the third, the which third ever has occupied men's
stomachs more the^ either the first or the second. Wherefore as well in holy
scripture, as in the other philosophers, and specially in Seneca, Seneca.
you shall find many lessons, that apperteine to the third care. This third
care is for the goods in this world. In this part I can give you small advise
of my self, because I have had but small experience here in: yet ever I se,
that you may not in the study of gettyng these goods, leave or slake the chief
care, for the first thing, nor yet the seco^darye care for the body. Labor
you must for your living in a dew order, as in the third degree of your
things. If matens, mass, or a sermon be to be hard, set your marcha^dise
aparte for the season, and prefer the mattens of your soul, yt looks to have
such gostly fode. If the time require to have you take a mele, either a diner
or a supper for your refection, let not your marcha^dise defer the going thereto
in a dew time. For remember, that business is one degree above your
merchandise. Alms deed.
If you epsy a poor man to be in need of your help, have to help him before
any ear of making a bargayne, for yt work of mercy perteyneth to your chief
jewel: and therefore your soul shall grow in the grace of god. Break not
much, to the hurt of your health the convenient time of going to bed for any
occupatio^s or rekeninges in your study for these goods. For remember, that
rest and sleep Sleep.
perteine to the.ii. thing, where your conting books belong to the third.
Bargyne.
In making your bargain keep faith and promise: deceive no man with any gyle
or false color. For let it be ever in your fantasy, how the gains that you
should get with such untrue dealyng, be contained under your.iii. yt is to sey
under your lest care, where ye breking of faith and propmise, with false deceit
and untrue deling, sore hurts your soul: in whom rests your chief thought.
And by falshed, you could not get so much of riches, as by ye same you should
lose of honesty and goodness. wherefore travail ever as the degres of
these.iii. things shall req^re. If an infinite hepe of worldly goods might be
got with a small hurt and damage of ye soul, forsake rather that great heap,
than you would suffer this small hurt. There can be no comparison between the
souls health and the riches: the least drop that can be of your souls
part, must pondre and weye more in your thought, the^ all this world beside can
do.

Let not any similitude Similitudes.
deceive your indgement. As if par cas a man would reason, that the goods of
the soul be all gold, the goods of the world be all lead: all though that
gold is ever better than led, yet there may be a great qua^tite of lead, yt
shall be valured above the small portion of gold. So in your phantasy a great
gains and lucre of the worldly goods may seem better than a small point of our
souls substance. Wherefore, he will conclude, that with a lyttel loss of
honesty or goodness, we may venture to get a great advantage in this
world: and some littel small portion we may borowe of our soul, to win by
that means a great sum of riches. Beware good withipoll, of such
reasonnyng, and to the death, to gain all the hole royalte of this hole world,
never trespass against your soul in the smallest jot that can be imagined. As
if ye might be made a lord of great might and power with abundance of
possessions and goods, only for the speaking in wyttenesse of one word
against the truth, with grudge of your conscience: for sake you all that
offer, rather then you would feel the priuey bytte of your offense. For if you
look well, you shall see, that there is a greatter valu of gaynes in the
smallest jot of virtue, then is in the most were of riches: and yt ye loss of
ye smallest mote, perteining to your souls state, is more hurt and damage,
the^ the refusing or forgoing of al yt is under heaven. So that I say, it is not
like between the souls goodis and the goods of this world, as it is between
gold and lead valured above a penny weight of gold: where there is no title so
small of virtue, that is not to be valured without comparison above the hole
power of the earth and sees, through out Asia, Africa, and Europa. The proof
of my saying depends here upon, that every jot, every title, every mote of
virtue, wherein is contained ye souls welthie state, has appointed his propre
state and place in the heaven and kingdom of god: and all the spiritual goods,
both small and great be under god, of whom virtue receives her reward: Of the
which reward he yt leseth any manner portion, loses more than the loss of the
hole dominion and rule of this world, whose prince is the devil, Devil.
yt reineth over al them, as over his bond servants, the which can find in
their hearts to forsake virtue to win these false and vain goods, that
stand to us in no erthily stead: but for the short time of a few years in
this life, where ye possessions of virtue be everlasting. Thus I show you good
Edmond, that your care to get these worldly goods must be subdued under due
order, as in his third place. But what be these goods, and what wey you may
laufully get them, I doubt not, but your father will in time conuenint show
you. He is of that sort of men, the which has by long approved honesty
purchased him a good name, and is thereby beloved and regarded of good men:
whose steps if you follow, you shall by gods grace come to like worship,
and be of like or more ability to leave to your children sufficient to pass
this life with. Here remember, the more your father loves you, the less is
your third care: and the less that your third care is, the more leiser you
have to think upon your chief jewel, the which god has given you to be
ordered after your will, in the which jewel you shall after this life well
passed, have the fruition of goddis presence, wherein rests the joy
ineffable of the blessed lammes. The gotis, that is to say, the gredie souls
of this third care, the which never mendeth, or very lyttel and weakly
mendeth, the first care, shall remain for ever more, in the peineful darkness,
where is nothing but cryeng out and lamenting with frettyng of stomakes, and
snarrynge of teth, as the gospel shall teach you: In the which book of god,
you shall here what an hard thing it is for a rich man to enter in to heaven:
because that most commonly rich men spend al their care and thought out of
order, only for this world, and seldom or never they think of their soul:
and whenne they think thereof, they so think, that they put that care far
under the care of these worldely business, doing clean contrary to this order.
The which god would have us to keep. The which order thouh you shall se very
litel regarded of al sorts of men, yet good Edmonde regard you it, and have
pite of them yt regard it not. Mat. 20. et. 22.
It is the son of god, the which says, many be called to heaven, but few be
chosen. Enforce your self to be among the few, and forsake ye multitude. Be
not drawn to an yuel opinion, neither with the ensample of popis, cardinals,
and priests, nor with ye ensample of princes, lords, knights, gentilmen, and
marcha^tes, nor yet with ye ensa^pe, of monks, friars. You may by your self
know, what is the right path, follow you coragiously ye same, and forsake the
common hie way of si^ners. Yet before I leave this.iii. care, I will show you my
mind, what is chiefly in this perte to be cared fore: as the best portion of
worldely riches. Surely I reken no possession of lands, nor yet no substance
of marcha^dise, nor yet no abundance of money, to be co^parable to a good
fre^d. A good friend.
Therefore above all things in this world, procure to have ple^tie of fre^des,
and make of them your co^pte, as of your best and most p^cious goods. Alweys
your friend shall be more profitable to you, then any tresure or power beside
can be. Now you shall know them yt be worthy to be your frendis, and by what
menes, and what wey friends be both gotten and also kept, ye shall best learn
in Ciceros littell book De amicitia. Cicero de amicitia.
I ca^ not say in this thing any point that is left of him. wherefore I remit
you to yt work. An other point touching this care of worldly goods is to use
accordingly your wife, when ye time shall come, that you shall have one. For to
opteyne substance of goods, it lies as much in the wife, to keep that you
bring home, House wife.
as in your travail to bring home. And surely onelesse she be the keeper and
sparer, the husband shall littel go forward in his labor of getting: And the
very troth is, that there is no yuelle houswyfe, but for her fautes the good
man is to be blamed. For I am utterly of this opinion, that the man may make,
shape, and form the woman, as he will. I would go farther with you in this
thing, and show somewhat of ye wey to order your householde, if I saw not this
matter so largelye intreatedde of diverse phylosothers, of whom ye shall here
as much, as may be said in this thing. Specially I would you red with most
diligence, the propre book, yt Xenophon Xenoph.
writes hereof, it is called oeconomia, oeconomi.
that is to say, the craft to order and keep an house, where this auctour
gives such counsel, for all the course of an honest man's life in this
world to grow in riches, under the means of discretion and wisdom, that
no man in my mind can sey more therein, or better: the which judgment of
mine I doubt not but you will approve, whenne you have read the said work:
it is translated out of greek in to latin by one Raphaelle, but in his
translation the work leseth a greatte part of the grace, that hit has in the
greek tongue, and also his translation in many places is false: and it plainly
appears, that Raphaell understood not well, what Xenopho^ wrote in greek. I have
therefore, for diverse of my friends sake translated the same work out of greek
tongue in to english, and you shall have the same with my good will, when your
pleasure is to read it.

I would also for some part of this third care, have you read the vii. and
the.viii. book of Aristot. Aristot.
politikes, Politic.
for to here his counsel concerning the bryngyng up of children, and the use
of other certain things.

This is the effect and some, mine own good Edmond, of my counsel, touching
the.iii. said things: in ye which I reken to rest the hole course of your
life, and if you observe and keep them in their degrees and order accordingly,
you shall surely content god, next please your self, and thyrdly satisfy the
world. On ye contrary part, misorder these caris, and you shall ru^ne in to
the vengeance of god, into the hate of your self, and in to the indignation of
al men. Be hold I pray you these hungry and gredy wretches, that make of the
third thing their first thought and care, what life lead they in the
sclander of al their acqueinta^ce? what death have they in the sight of their
privy conscience, when they remember their false swearinges, their deceitful
bargains, their plain robberies, their pollinges, their cruelle exactions,
their oppressinges of ye poor men? what hope have they of gods favor, wha^
they remember al their care and thought has be^ for the wealth of this world?
ye which when they leave and forsake, they despeire of al other welthines: in as
much their mi^des never ernestly cared for that wealth, the which ever endures.

This remembrance of their misorder, is an heavy burden to their conscience.
It can not be otherwise. Consider now again, how clear and light his mind
is, that in all his life has ever chiefly studied for the souls wealth, that
remembers ever how his care has been for the reward of virtue? Of this man
how well does every manne speak? what joy and comfort enbraceth the
conscience of this man, when the hand of god calls him from his short
life, to that perpetualle life, for the which he has so much labored. The
the other be he never so rich, is called a false fellow a wretched knave. This man
be he never so pore, is called an honest person, a good man, for whom the
heaven gatis stands open, whilste the the other falls to endless turmentes. This
is thend of misorder, and this is the^d of good order, in breaking and keeping
the degres of the forsaid three things. Wherefore I can not warn you to often,
to take heed of this council: and you can not to often here the same. The
ieoperdie is not small, if you should forgette this tale, hit is no less
peril then utter shame in this world, with death everlasting. where so ever
is scla^der, there is shame: greater sclander there can be none, than follows
on all sides the unjust rich man. And he ever, where some ever he be,
gathers uniustely riches, that cares chiefly for these worldely promotions,
the which man has (I say) both in his life extreme shame, and also after
this life extreme punishment. You be not forboden to get riches, but the
inordinate desire of geting riches is abominable both in ye sight of god and
man: your desire is inordinate, if it be not ordered under the degree of your
chif care, as now often enough has be^ repeted. I would now leave you and make
an end of these.3. cares and studies, apperteini^g to your soul, body, and
goods: sauinge yt because I somewhat know your disposition, and will
particularly touch one thing or two that you must most ernestly beware of:
because you be much naturallye inclyned otherwise to fall in to certain
points, that sore disquieteth the mind, hurts the body, and hinders the
profits of this life: so that friendly I will admonish you of one or two
things, that perteyne to all your three charges.

Take heed my good Withipoll of your passion toward wrath, wrath, ire, and
anger.
ire, and anger: resist as much as you can the prouocatio^ of your stomach to
this vehement pa^ge. Be not light ered in hering a word of displesure: Consider
the kind of life that you take: you must be co^uersante with many and diverse
marchantis, among whom every one thinks him self both lord and master. In
such company chances to be often dysdayneful lokes, proud cou^tena^ces,
scorns, mockes, scoffs, co^parisons, bytyng tauntes, odyous checkes,
spytefull reproaches, with frettinge envy, and with many other corrupt
affections, whereby ryseth much debate, and some time there follows plain
fury, that makes men more like wild beasts, for the time of their madness,
than to reasonable creatures. It is a great grace in him yt feleth his heart
agreued, Furrie.
and yet shows not outwardly his grefe. This prudent dissimulation more
auengeth his quarrel, tha^ any re^dring of any words could do. Patience.
For it is a deedly stroke, that the pacient manne gives in this soft and
mylde suffering the ragis of an angry fool. Look well upon them both, he that
suffrethe and says naught, is like a man, the rayler or taunter is like a
beast or a fool. The sufferer always both in his time of sufferynge and also
afterward, when all fumes be cessed, has a great praise of all that beholds
him: and ever he has cause of reioising and gladness, where the the other fretteth
with him self: and scant the next day after he can show his face: behind
whose back his company reports the folly of his hastynes, and sore they
blame him for his uncomely behauour. Let ye quarrel be what you lust, ever by
your patience and suffera^ce, you shall have advantage of him that provoke
you, and finally, for your often forbearynge, a name of sobrenes, wisdom, and
discretion: whereof shall follow great credence, and a love of al honest persons
toward you, where he yt will suffer naught, but will ease his stomach, in
gyuinge mock for mock, check for check, shall be taken for a wrangler, a
brauler: and few or noone honest men will gladlye meddyll with him.

To rule this passion of ire, you shall be much more stronger tha^ min
exhortation ca^ make you, if you will (as I have councelled you before) have
Plato Plato.
your familiar. And Seneca Seneca*
shall be a mere physician for to help your mind against these grievous pa^ges.
The best is not to be angry, the next is not to show in words or
cou^tena^ce your anger, but remember, if it chance that you be angered, and that
you have in showing your anger moved and sturred some other to be displesed:
beware that you nourisshe not this grefe, spit out of your stomach all
peuishnes, and seek atonme^t as soon as it ca^ be possible. If the perty speak
not to you, speak you to him, it is no shame to be agreed, it is a foul shame
to continue in anger: and in the mean season your prayer to god is void. For
out of charity, and out of favor and grace of god. It is ye ground and only
stay of our religion, to love to gether like brotherne, al under one fader yt
looks over us in heaven, for whose sake, se yt you never sleep with grudge
against any person: in so doing you shall finally opteine, yt no man will bear
you grudge, and for your love you shall have love plentifully of god and of ye
world: Begin mine own good withipoll to over throw this bestely passion of
wroth, before your age make your stomak stubborn. Overcome now in time
sullines, before men have regard of your displesure: accustom your self with
mildenes, softnes, patience, suffera^ce, and specially with gentilnes, that can
not abide an heart mindefulle of any grefe. To your enferior be pitiful,
buxome, and ready in offering your self, both to take and keep frendeshyp with
your fellow and companion. Strive not, compare not: but always study to
increase familiarity by louinge manners, and easly forget injuries. Let no
displesure be taken of you, how many someuer dyspleasures be given you. To
your better and superior if you obey and give place, it shall be reputed to
your comme^dation and praise. There is no man so vile, but his love may stand
instead to you, and of the pooreste man's hatred, you may have some time hurt.

Thus I say both for the worldly wisdom, and also for the bonds of your
faith, you must take heed to this warning: and the more ye be enclyned not
only to be quickly angry, but also to nourysshe long your anger: the more
diligence you must bitimes take, to correct and amend your nature,
remembrynge always your chief care, that perteyneth to the first thing, the
which is with nothing more hurted and hyndered, in his way to grace ward,
then with the breaking of love and charity. And as often as you be angry, so
often pluck you your soul from the presence of god, by the same passion. Also
you disquiete your body, and often times follow diseses by ye fires pursuinge of
a grefe, and sometime by rages chances plain bataile, and thereof your body
stands ever in ieoperdye. Also nothing more hyndreth ye gains of your.iii.
care, the^ does impatient chiding with other. For it causes many to forbear
company: and by that ever follows loss of occupienge. And sometime a good
word behind your back may aua^tage you more the^ a long sailing in to
Spain, and an yuel word likewise may do you more hurt than a loss of a
ship: Let no man have cause to be angrye with you, and ever you be sure to be
well reported by.

One other thing or two I would warn you of, with as many words as I have
done of the said passion, if I thought not yt by ye reding of the said works,
you shall much better than I can show you, not only fle from al misbehauors,
and corrupt uses of ill fa^tasies, but also follow ye clean piked virtues, and
by your own study grow to be a perfect man, in ye favor of god and al other. No
man shall counsel you better, then you shall do your own self, if in reding
you will examine secretly your conscience, whether such propretis be in you as
you read, or no. If they be in you and be dispreised, determine with your self
to amend them: if they be not in you, and be good, determyne with your self to
get them. As in reding you shall here above all other fautes dispraised, an
untrue tongue, Untrue tongue.
which brings a man out of crede^ce, a thing very hurtful for marcha^tes,
whose craft you be like to exercise: and beside it sore offe^deth ye ears of
god, to here his best beloved creature make yt noise against his knowledge and
priuey conscience: where nothing garnisheth man's voice better the^ troth of
his tale. This thing chiefly apperteineth to the care of the soul, yt is your
first charge. It makes also for the.ii. and for the.iii. care. For surely when
the mind is disquieted with the remembrance of the offense in lyenge, the
body has his part of ill rest: And by the same untrue speaking much hurt
and damage ensues against your credence, a thing I say most necessary to be
kept and maynteyned of al them, yt seek by marcha^dise any lucre or gaynes.
Therefore let your mind my good Withipol never delight to utter any lie. Either
speak not, or speak truly. what fault so ever you may do, let it not be
defended with a false tale: for yt were to fle out of the smoke in to ye fire,
as to do a worse fault in choking an ill, and in the mean season your soul
suffers a sore stroke. This ever as you read of this matter, have mind of
your self to take fruit of your redynge.

In consideration also of al three parts, that is to say, both for the defense
of your souls state, and for the wealth of your body, and also for the worldly
goods sake, use in all your acts a certain commendable wisdom, never to be
none of these busy medlers: Leave other men's fautes, leave correcting, that you
have no power in, leave teachinge of that you know not. Let the gospel be
ordered by them, that be admitted for doctors thereof.

Let the prestes be blamed of them that have the rule of the order. Let common
ceremonies and all old customs alone. Put ever your trust in the power and
will of god, and obey to he consent of the church, without quarellynge or
resystynge. Go you fourth your way after the meke steps of a true christen
man. Let the world bluster and blow as hit will, be you none of the blowers.
Scurge who will, be you none of the scourgers. For believe me, sooner shall the
rod, than the child yt is beaten, be cast in to the fire. In eschewinge all
medlyng, you shall save your goods, you shall keep your body from travail, and
by the same means you shall best provide a sure buckeler for your soul.
Obedience.
For under the clooke of obedience, chance what chance shall, your soul is
ever sure for taking any hurt: the justice of god will keep you harmless,
how some ever the tempeste of enormities ouerfloweth this world. If you
should be malaperte, malapert.
and presume to be a doer: report me to you, what may in this world happen to
your undoing both in goods and body, and by the same trouble you shall be cast
from the succor of god, who abides not any presu^tion. You fall in to
presumption, presumption.
when you grudge against your rulers, though they be worthy of all disprayses.
You presume, when you meddel with them, that be not under you. You presume,
when you take in hand to amend this or that, where your part is not to
speak. And specially you be presumptuous, when you dare crake, that you know
gods will. Leave therefore my good Edmond, al manner of medlynge, and pray to
god to accept your obedience. Pray also bitterly, that his will may be
fulfilled in this world among us, as the angels fulfille in heaven.

Thus pray, and meddille no farther. For I assure you, it is so to be done.

Many my things might be said for these.iii. cares, but to you I reckon it
enough this much that I have here touched. yet one word or.ii. more shall not
be superfluous. For I would not have you deceived by any word that I have here
used: As perauenture you might be, if I should thus leave you. Saying that I
have bed you first to care for your soul, next to care for your body, and
thyrdely to care for the goods of this world. Moreover I said, there be
goods of the soul, goods of the body, goods of this life. But let these
words be to you as not spoken in their exact and propre signification. For to
speak truly, there is no care but one, nor there be no goods but of one.
We must have a certain slyght regard to our body, and a slighter regard to
the world: but care we may not for neither of these two. You know, that to
care were to take an inward weyghty thought: the which must not be taken,
but for a thing of great worthynes, and also of more surety, than is either
our body, or the world. Only our soul is the thing to be cared fore: and
these small commodities, with certain praty pleasures of the body, and the
world, can not truly be named goods: for in very deed they be not good. For
this word good includethe a dignity in him that sauoureth of god and heaven:
So that tho things be only worthy to be called goods, the which have a
perpetuity and steadfastness of godly substance: Other things variable,
chaungable, flytterynge, such as may be taken from us mawgree our heed, be
not worthy of this high name. Neither the body nor yet fortune has any
goods: our spirit and mind only has things, that truly be called goods,
ye which be so constantly and surely ours, that ever they remain with us in
spite of all chances, and all our adversaries. Mercy, pity, devotion,
mekenes, sobrenes, patience, faythefulnes, charity, and such other virtues be
the very true goods, the which we may justly reken ours, and for them we
should continually labor. For these be the substance that our soul must
have, to be with them rychely decked and garnished, that we may have our holy
day array, and our nuptial vesture according, to com to the great feast, that
Christ says we shall ones be called to.

All these false goods of the bodies lustynges, false goods.
beauty, fayrenes, strength, health: and also these trifling goods of
Fortune, royal houses, large heritance, great rentes, implementis, costly
apparayle, gold, silver, honor, power, frendshyppe, nobility, and what you
will else in this world: All these vain things, both of body and fortune,
can make but a raggyd garmente for our soul, the which shall be with extreme
shame drawn from the said feast, if hit come in gods presence with these
beggerlye rags. This saying good Wythipolle, I speak to ease and comfort
your mind: for by this tale that is true, you now learn, that al though
before I said you should have three cares in this life, yet in deed you have but
one care, the which is to care for the true goods, that be to be purchased
for the souls welthy state. Wherefore of your three cares, stryke of two, if
you will speak of ernest care. Yet I will stick a little more with you in this
point: for feign I would you should se a true mark, whereby you may govern
and rule all your fantasies and opinions. If your fantasy be well directed
to the true mark, you ca^ not miss of the right pathe to virtue, the which
brings man thither, where he shall receive the inestimable reward for his
travail. I say your soul only must be cared for: and this only care must be
to get and keep the true goods, that be only the goods of the mind: Other
goods be not called proprely goods. you se how these praty commodities of
the body, and also these small gifts of fortune, mawgree our heed be taken
from us, as I ca^ not escape always sykenes, I ca^ not escape misfortunes: I can
not flee from the cruel hands of tyra^tes, I may be cast into tortures, I may
rotte in fetters, I may lose al my substance, by water, by fire, by thieves, or
by other violent robberye. Against these chances no man ca^ resist, no care nor
thought preuayleth to assure us, either of our bodies or of such goods.

Wherefore learn you, that I say before god, we have no goods, but only the
goods of the spirit and mind, the which goods (as I have said) be so sure
ours, yt they can not be taken from us, but with our own will consenting to
the loss of them. In this spirytualle possession, every man is an invincible
emperor. We may despise al violence of princis, al worldly cha^ces touching
the keeping of virtue, maugre the holle power of the devil, and all his retinue.
Here of learn and mark mine Edmonde, wherein you may be hurted, that your care
may the better be bestowed.

For to care where you have no hurt it is nedeles: or not to care, where you be
hurted, is a blind ignorance.

We be hurted wha^ we lose any part of goddis favor, we lose goddis favor,
when we lose any goods of the mind: we lose the goods of the mind, when we
either rejoice of ye having bodily and worldly goods, or make sorrow of the
lacking the same. we be not hurted, wha^ god continues his favor, when we
decay not in the stre^gthis of mind: we decay not in the stre^gthes of mind
when we be not overcome, neither with the gladness of the bodis and worlds
prosperity, nor with bewailing of their aduersite. Thus you se, another in the
goods of the body, nor in the goods of the world, you ca^ other take or
escape hurt: it is only the virtue of your mind, wherein you must search,
wheder you be safe or hurted.

Now when you know the place of your hurt, know also what may do you hurt,
that you may be more charie of your hurter.

You se ones, the place wherein you may be hurted, is your secret mind, a
very sure place. For it is not fire nor water: nor thief that can come there:
it is no princis sword, that ca^ perce into this place it is no misslucke of
fortune that can light upon your spirit: finally there is no devil of hell,
that can fasten a stroke upon you, to do you in this place any hurt. This
should be a greatter gladness unto you to considre, in how strong a tower you
be from all hurt: but se then again, who hit is that may hurt you. For
surely you ca^ not be hurted but of one, in who^ is power to do hurt: this is
your own free will. This will of yours and nothing else, has power to hurt you.
Se shortly in ensample, how your lands be taken from you, you be spoiled of
your goods, fire burns up your house, you be haled to prison, you be beaten,
you be torn with whips, you be drawn upon ye rackes, you lie in chains, you
come forth to open shame, you suffer cold, you be gnawen with hunger and
thyrste, finallye you be put to death. what of all this? yet I can not say,
that you be hurted: I se that with all this the favor and grace of good may
continue with you, as it did with the holy martyrs. And also before Christis
passion holy Job suffered all this, and was not hurted. This is a great comfort
for you, to se that nothing ca^ hurt you but only your own self. This is the
high grace of god, that so has made man to be over al a mighty conqueror,
that can take no hurt but of him self. Wherefore I trust you will live ever
safe and sownd. For I will not think, that ever you will be so mad, as to hurt
your self. Than for these trifles of the body and world, take no care: it it
is neither the second thing nor the third thing, that can be so unto you,
that in either of them you can de hurted. Marie take heed, lest by the
displeasures done in the second and in the third, you of madness take occasion
to be hurted, and wyllyngelye hurt your self in the first thing, the which
only is the place, where you may be hurted. And none beside your own will has
power to hurt you there: as if in the time of the loss of worldly goods, you
will fret in anger, you will despise god, you will curse and ban, you will enforce
to be aue^ged, you cry out in fury and madness: now take you thought and care,
for surely you be hurted, and your chief jewel has a great loss. For god
withdraws from your soul a great part of his grace: so that this hurt you do
to your own self by this frowardenes. Likewise whylste your body is turme^ted,
either with sykenes or otherwise: if you therefore forsake patience, and swelle
in wroth: you be than hurted in deed, but of noone other person beside your
self only.

Thus you may take from the second and the third, in the which two you can
not be hurted, an occasion to hurt your self, and to have thereof a greatte
cause of a sore and an erneste care, for the peril that your soul thereby
falls in.

To confirm you the faster in these right opinions, I would you read the
little book of Epictetus, Epicteus.
entitled his Enchiridion, well translated into latyne by Angelus Politiane:
But to say the troth the work is so briefly and darkely written, that
without a coment or a good master, you shall not perceive the fruit of the
text. I am in mind, if I may have thereto leisure, to translate the comment
of Simplicius upon the said work: and then shall you find such swetenes in
that book, that I believe hit will rauishe you in to an higher contemplation,
than a greatte sort of our religious men come to. And one thing believe me, my
good withipol, that in redynge of these old substanciall works, the which I
have named unto you, shall beside the perfection of knowledge, gender a certain
judgment in you, that you shall never take delight nor pleasure in the trifles
and vain inventions that men now days write, to the inquietinge of all good
order: by reason that the most part of men that read these new flittering
works, lack perfect judgment to dyscryue a weyghtye sentence fro me a
light clause, the which judgment can not be gotten, but by a long
exercysynge of our wits with the best sort of writers.

And to me it is a pitiful thing, to behold the folishe dremes of these young
clerks in men's hands: and to se these noble old works of the holy fathers
and philosophers lie untouched. Where if these new writers speak any thing
well, it is piked out of this aunciente books. But what so ever these petye
clerks pike out now a days, for the most part it is defaced and brought
out of good fashion with their yuel handelynge.

I will now make an end, it is sufficient to a willing mind, such as I
trust is in you, to have with a friends finger the way appointed, where you
must walk, if you will proceed in virtue: the which is only the thing, that
makes a man boothe happy in this world, and also blessed in the world to
come. Believe you my counsel, and use the same, orels hereafter you will
paraduenture bewail your negligence. Fare ye well.

At More a place of my lord cardinals, in the feast of saint Bartholomew.
1529.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELET.

ANNO. M.D.XXXV.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


